# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1946-ray-theravada-buddhism-in-burma.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:28
# Total Pages: 328
# File Size: 34.04 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 225.3 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA 
ARCHEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA 
CENTRAL 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 
ACCESSION  NO.  7357 
CALL  No. 
D.G.A.  79.

--- PAGE 2 ---
CENTRA!,  a ROT!  AEOT, OHIO  A& 
NKW  DELHI. 
Arc'-  No 
D;i1-P.  ..  ■ 
n-ill  No..

--- PAGE 3 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 4 ---
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA

--- PAGE 5 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 6 ---
AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
A   STUDY  IN  INDO-BURMESE  HISTORICAL  AND 
CULTURAL  RELATIONS  FROM  THE  EARLIEST 
TIMES  TO  THE  BRITISH  CONQUEST 
BY 
NIHARRANJAN  RAY 
M.A.  (Cal.),  D.Lett.  &   Phil.  (Leiden),  Dip.  Lib.  (Lond.),  F.L.A. 
Premchand  Roychand  Scholar 
University  of  Calcutta 
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALCUTTA 
1946

--- PAGE 7 ---
First  Edition  :  1946 
CENTRAL  ARCHAEO,  O^oAl 
L  IBRARY,  NEW  DE-  HI. 
Ace.  No.  13  Si 
Dace   
Call  No.  ..SL^.9.:  3 /a 
PRINTED  IN  INDIA 
TRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  N1SH1TCHANDRA  SEN, 
SUPERINTENDENT  (OFFG, ) 
,  CALCUTTA  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
48,  HAZRA  ROAD,  BALLYGUNGE,  CALCUTTA 
I445B— August,  1946— E,

--- PAGE 8 ---
To 
PROFESSOR  BENIMADHAV  BARUA 
WHO  INITIATED  ME  INTO 
1NDO-BURMESE  STUDIES 
IN  DEEP  ESTEEM  AND  ADMIRATION

--- PAGE 9 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 10 ---
OjiNTk.'.  , 
 .OtHOAL 
libra. i i 
 .sislhl 
Ago.  No..,,.     
Date     
    
   
Call  No     
CONTENTS 
Subjects  Paces 
CHAPTER  ONE 
EARLY  TRACES  :   FROM  THE  ALLEGED  ASOKA-  1-87 
MISSION  TO  THE  PALL  OP  THATON 
I.  The  Background  ..  ..  1-7 
II.  The  Asoka-Mission :  Legend  and 
History  . . 
 . . 
 . . 
 7-13 
III.  Buddhism  in  the  Kirata  country  . .  14-18 
IV.  Buddhism  in  Lin- Yang  . .  18-24 
V.  The  Buddhaghosa  Tradition : 
Legend  and  History  . .  24-33 
VI.  Buddhism  in  Old  Prome  ..  33-46 
VII.  Buddhism  in  Old  Prome  ( eontd .)  . .  46-55 
VIII.  Buddhism  in  Old  Prome  ( eontd .)  . .  55-57 
IX.  Buddhism  in  Old  Prome  {eontd.)  . .  57-73 
X.  Buddhism  in  Pegu  . . 
 . .  73-75 
XI.  Buddhism  in  Thaton  . . 
 . .  76-83 
XII.  A   Resume  . . 
 . . 
 . .  ■  83-87 
CHAPTER  TWO  88-168 
EFFLORESCENCE  :   FROM  THE  INTRODUCTION 
OF  THERAYADA  BUDDHISM  IN  RAGAN  IN  1057 
TO  THE  FALL  OF  THE  PAGAN  DYNASTY, 
C.  1287  A.D. 
III.  Maramma  Samgha  and  Sihala 
Samgha  . . 
 . . 
 . .  110-118 
IV.  The  Religion  in  the  Taking  country  118-122 
VI,  Monastic  Scholarship  . , 
 , .  125-132 
%

--- PAGE 11 ---
viii  CONTENTS 
Subjects 
VII.  
Durenidana  and  Avidurenidana 
Stories 
III.  
Further  Corroborative  Archaeologi- 
cal Evidence 
X.  
Religious  Eclecticism  of  Pagan 
.  
Inscriptions  of  Pagan  :   A   Postscript 
CHAPTER  THREE 
THE  GREAT  REFORMATION  AND  ITS  PREAMBLE  : 
FOURTEENTH  AND  FIFTEENTH  CENTURIES 
  
The  Fourteenth  
Century 
.  
Religion  and  Scholarship  in  the 
Talaing  
country 
III.  The  Fifteenth  Centuiy ' 
IV.  Dhammaceti’s  Reformation  of  the 
Samgha  . . 
 
 Monastic  
Library 
CHAPTER  
FOUR 
CLOUDS  GATHER  :  SIXTEENTH  AND  SEVEN- 
TEENTH CENTURIES 
 
Marammarattha 
CHAPTER  FIVE 
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY  :  EIGHTEENTH  CEN- 
TURY AND  AFTER 
I.  The  Background 
II.  Beginning  of  the  Controversy 
III.  The  Crushing  of  the  Talaings 
IV.  The  Peak  of  the  Controversy 
V.  Re-organisation  of  the  Samgha 
CHAPTER  SIX 
Burma’s  return  gifts  to  ceylon  :   nine- 
teenth CENTURY  AND  AFTER  :  THE 
“   AMARABURA  SAMGHA  ”   OF  CEYLON 
Pages 
133-141 
142-147 
147-151 
151-168 
160-105 
160-174 
174-176 
177-182 
182-192 
192-195 
196-216 
196-204 
204-216 
217-236 
217-218 
219-223 
223-226 
226-233 
233-236 
237-249

--- PAGE 12 ---
COSTTEOTS 
Subjects 
CHAPTER  SEVEN 
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
.  Summary  
. . 
I.  
Character  and  Ideal  of  the  Religion 
III.  What  Buddhism  has  done  for  Burma 
IV.  The  Samgha  and  the  Society 
.  
The  Samgha  and  the  King  :   Political 
Activities 
I.  
The  Samgha  and  its  Constitution  : 
Samgharaja 
.  
The  New  Conditions 
Select  
Bibliography 
Bibliographical  
Index 
General  
Index 
Additions  
and  
Corrections 
,  ix 
Pages 
250-277 
250-260 
260-262 
262-266 
266-269 
269-272 
272-276 
276-277 
279-288 
289-292 
293-302 
303-306 
B-1446B

--- PAGE 13 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 14 ---
CENTRA  »j  ' -   JH  AEOLOHICAL 
L’BUAR'l  N-TV  DELHI. 
A co.  No   
Date     
Call  No   
PREFACE 
This  book  was  written  in  1934,  in  part  fulfilment  of 
the  scheme  of  Indo-Burmese  studies  in  which  I  had 
engaged  myself  since  1928.  For  reasons  beyond  my 
control  and  of  no  particular  interest  to  the  reader,  the 
book  could  not  be  published  earlier.  But  this  delay  has 
enabled  me  to  alter  the  text  and  make  additions  to  it 
from  time  to  time  in  such  way  as  to  incorporate  the 
results  of  latest  literary  investigations  and  archaeological 
finds,  to  the  extent  that  the  following  pages  may  be 
said  to  represent  our  up-to-date  knowledge  of  the  subject. 
Between  the  first  draft  and  what  appears  in  print,  the 
text  thus  suffered  so  many  additions  and  alterations 
that  I  am  afraid,  one  may  find  the  book  rather  loosely 
knit  and  unequal  reading  in  parts.  While  I  crave 
indulgence  of  my  readers  for  this  short- coming,  I  plead 
that  it  could  not  be  helped.  Since  1936  I  have  been 
drawn  to  other  fields  of  studies  and  academic  activities, 
and  inspite  of  repeated  attempts  I  have  not  been  able 
to  get  back  to  my  original  sphere  of  work.  Indeed, 
since  1934  I  have  not  been  given  the  opportunity  to 
visit  Burma,  not  even  to  check  the  draft  of  this  book 
on  the  spot  which  I  feel  was  so  very  necessary.  More- 
over, the  war  that  intervened  has  left  Burma  in  such 
a   state  as  not  to  allow,  I  am  afraid,  resumption  of  his- 
torical and  archaeological  activities  in  another  couple 
of  years  or  so,  I  have  therefore  thought  it  advisable 
to  present  my  study  of  the  subject  as  it  is,  that  is,  without 
trying  to  improve  upon  it.  Since  I  do  not  claim  this 
book  to  be  anything  more  than  a   mere  introduction  to

--- PAGE 15 ---
XU 
PBEFACE 
the  subjeco,  I  would  leave  that  to  scholars  more  favoured 
and  well-equipped  than  myself. 
Notwithstanding  the  wide  range  of  subjects  covered 
by  a   handful  of  European  and  Bucmese  scholars  and 
the  valuable  work  done  by  them  in  the  domain  of  Burmese 
history  and  archaeology,  there  has  yet  been  very  little 
study  in  the  history  of  Buddhism  and  the  extent  reached 
by  that  religion  in  Burma.  Yet  Buddhism  of  th.3  Thera- 
vada  school  has  been  for  centuries  and  is  even  to-day 
\   a   most  vital  factor  in  Burmese  life  and  a   great  social 
force  in  the  country.  Buddhism  indeed  is  the  tie  that 
binds  Burma  with  India,  and  whatever  is  of  any  account 
in  Burmese  life  and  society  is  derived  from  that  great 
religion.  Not  only  from  the  view  point  of  Burma  alone, 
but  from  that  of  the  history  of  the  religion  as  well  its 
career  in  Burma  where  it  is  still  a   living  faith  is  well- 
worth  a   study ;   for,  it  is  in  Burma  alone,  besides  Ceylon 
and  Siam,  that  we  can  yet  find  a   nearest  approach  to 
the  earliest  and  purest  form  and  expression  of  the  religion. 
But  to  this  subject  of  absorbing  interest  few  unfortunately 
$ 
have  devoted  their  time  and  attention.  An  admirable 
beginning  was  made  by  Dr.  Mabel  H.  Bode  by  her  edition 
of  the  Sasanavamsa  in  1897,  and  later  by  her  monograph 
on  the  Pali  Literature  of  Burma  in  1909.  Her  introduc- 
tion to  the  Sasanavamsa  may  well  be  regaided  as  an 
important  contribution  to  the  subject ;   no  less  remark- 
able is  her  later  monograph  which  incidentally  gives  an 
outline  of  the  history  of  the  religion.  But  her  scope 
was  admittedly  limited  and  it  was  outside  her  scheme 
to  give  a   systematic  study  of  the  career  of  the  religion 
through  centuries.  Moreover,  she  began  her  account 
with  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century  and  ignored 
the  earlier  centuries  altogether.  Besicfls  Dr.  Bode, 
notable  direct  and  indirect  contributions  to  the  subject 
have  been  made  by  Messrs.  Charles  Duroiselle,  G.  E.

--- PAGE 16 ---
PREFACE 
xiii 
Harvey,  Pe  Maung  Tin,  G.  H.  Luce,  C.  0.  Blagden  and 
a   few  others. 
To  all  these  scholars,  especially  to  Dr.  Bode,  my 
indebtedness  is  obvious.  I  have  fully  utilised  their 
valuable  publications  and  used  many  of  their  findings 
to  my  advantage  ;  these  I  have  everywhere  fully  acknow- 
ledged in  footnotes.  But  if  one  cares  to  read  the  follow- 
ing pages  he  will  find  in  them  much  that  is  entirely  new 
and  original.  He  will  see  that  the  early  history  of  the 
religion,  of  which  very  little  is  known  so  far,  has 
been  reconstructed,  as  far  as  possible,  from  epigraphic, 
archaeological  and  literary  sources.  This  has  been 
attempted  perhaps  for  the  first  time.  Here  I  have  laid 
under  examination  all  available  Pah  and  Sanskrit  ins- 
criptions relevant  to  the  subject  and  presented  well- 
known  traditions  in  a   new  perspective.  In  respect  of 
other  periods  as  well,  more  particularly  up  to  about 
1500,  I  humbly  claim  to  have  utilised  a   much  greater 
mass  of  materials  in  the  shape  of ,  epigraphic  records, 
native  chronicles  in  Burmese  and  Talaing,  Pah  texts, 
etc.,  in  a   much  more  comprehensive  manner  than  it  had 
been  within  the  scope  of  Dr.  Bode  or  any  body  else  to 
use  in  this  or  similar  connection.  For  the  rest  of.  the 
period  covered  I  have  depended  mainly  on  the  Sasana- 
vamsa  and  a   few  contemporary  European  accounts. 
I  have  been  able,  I  hope,  to  achieve  a   more  or  less  com- 
plete and  connected  narrative  which  it  has  always  been 
my  aim  to  present  in  a   new  maimer  and  perspective 
consistent  with  the  evidence  furnished  by  the  huge  mass 
of  materials.  I  have  critically  examined  my  sources 
and  have  cared  to  give  my  readers  an  idea  about  their 
nature  and  character.  The  more  important  events  in 
the  history  of  the  religion  have  been  elaborately  des- 
cribed and  the  significance,  as  I  understand,  of  the  reform 
movements  effected  in  the  church  clearly  brought  out.

--- PAGE 17 ---
xiv  PREFACE 
Throughout,  it  has  been  my  aim  to  bring  out  in  prominent 
relief  the  character  and  ideal  of  the  religion  in  Burma, 
the  relation  of  the  Samgha  and  the  king,  the  literary 
and  scholarly  activities  of  the  monks,  and  the  place  of 
the  Samgha  in  the  life  of  the  people.  All  these  I  have 
sought  further  to  summarise  in  the  concluding  chapter 
of  the  book. 
I  have,  however,  chosen  to  leave  out  any  interpreta- 
tion of  the  doctrines  of  the  religion  or  tracing  their 
evolution  and  transformation  as  may  have  taken  place 
in  Burma.  This  has  been  owing  partly  to  the  fact  that 
such  evolution  and  transformation  have  not  been  of  any 
very  great  consequence  in  the  history  of  Burmese 
Buddhism  nor  have  given  it  any  significant  orientation, 
and  partly  to  their  not  being  strictly  within  the  scope 
of  this  work. 
It  will  be  seen  too,  that  I  have  often  made  extensive 
quotations  from  inscriptions,  native  chronicles  and  con- 
temporary or  almost  contemporary  accounts.  This  has 
been  because  I  wanted  the  story  to  be  told  more  by  the 
people  of  the  land  than  by  myself ;   I  wanted  it  to  be 
more  of  the  soil,  and  to  instil  into  it  a   bit  of  the  atmos- 
phere of  old. 
I  never  entertain  the  vain  hope  that  all  my  findings 
and  conclusions  will  endure  and  stand  the  test  of  more 
scholarly  criticism  or  further  researches  in  the  field. 
What  I  have  attempted  is  to  fill  up  a   void  and  supply 
a   starting  point  on  a   subject  which  has  long  been  as 
good  as  not  worked  upon  hi  any  critical  and  compre- 
hensive manner.  If  I  have  succeeded  in  it  I  would 
•feel  myself  amply  justified  in  the  attempt. 
It  remains  for  me  to  acknowledge  my  obligations. 
I  acknowledge  with  thanks  and  gratitude  the  willing 
help  and  co-operation  I  have  received,  whenever  sought 
for,  from  Mr.  Charles  Duroiselle,  Dr.  C.  0.  Blagden,

--- PAGE 18 ---
PREFACE 
XV 
Prof.  G-.  H.  Luce,  Prof.  Pe  Maung  Tin,  Mr.  G.  E.  Harvey, 
Prof.  B.  M.  Barua,  Mr.  S.  N.  Mitra  and  the  Superintendent 
of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  Burma.  To  my  young 
friends  Mr.  Devaprasad  Guha  and  Mr.  Sukeschandra 
Chandra,  who  gave  me  ungrudging  help  in  reading  the 
proofs  and  in  preparing  the  Index,  my  affectionate  thanks 
are  due.  To  Dr.  Syamaprasad  Mookerjee  and  Dr. 
Bimala  Churn  Law  whose  active  interest  in  my  literary 
and  scholarly  pursuits  has  always  been  a   source  of  ins- 
piration to  me  my  moral  indebtedness  is  too  deep  and 
abiding  for  words. 
I  crave  the  indulgence  of  my  readers  for  the  many 
errors  and  misprints  that  escaped  my  eyes.  Such  errors 
and  misprints  as  are  of  grave  consequence  have  been 
corrected  in  the  Additions  and  Corrections. 
December  20,  1945. 
NIHARRANJAN  RAY

--- PAGE 19 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 20 ---
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
CHAPTER  ONE 
EARLY  TRACES 
From,  the  Alleged  Asoka-Mission  to.  the  Fall  of 
Thaton  in  1057  A.D. 
I 
THE  BACKGROUND 
On  the  map,  at  first  sight  Burma  looks  like  an  outstretched 
hand  of  the  Indian  continent,  but  a   little  closer  scrutiny 
shows  that  it  is  geographically  a   part  of  the  Indonesian 
peninsula  and  is  intimately  connected  with  Malayasia,  Siam 
and  Indo-China.  Ethnologically  also  the  peninsula  is  more 
closely  connected  with  Indonesia  than  with  India  proper. 
Lower  or  peninsular  Burma  which  forms  one  unit  with 
Malayasia  is  cut  off  from  the  Indian  continent  by  wide  seas, 
while  the  upper  or  continental  Burma  is  separated  from  the 
main  land  of  India  by  the  highly  inaccessible  Assam  and 
Manipur  hills  as  well  as  by  the  Arakan  hill  ranges ;   but 
neither  the  hill  ranges  nor  the  wide  sea  could  prove  to  be 
insuperable  barriers  to  the  early  Indian  traders  and  colonists. 
Lower  Burma  especially,  known  to  early  traditions  as  well 
as  in  early  Indian  literature  as  Suvannabhumi,  lay  open 
from  very  early  times  to  the  maritime  traffic  between  China 
on  the  one  hand  and  India,  Arabia,  Egypt,  Greece  and 
Rome  on  the  other.  In  fact,  the  geographical  position  of 
Suvannabhumi  along  with  Malayasia  invested  the  peninsula 
with  a   high  degree  of  commercial  importance,  nor  did  the

--- PAGE 21 ---
2 
 theravAda  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
hilly  regions  of  upper  Burma  remain  immune  from  onslaught 
from  either  the  Indian  side  or  Chinese  through  the 
difficult  mountain  passes.  ,We  have  now  more  or  less 
definite  evidences  of  occasional  though  difficult  intercourse 
between  India  and  Burma  through  Assam  and  Manipur. 
But  doubtless  the  sea  route  was  easier  and  more  popular. 
Regular  maritime  intercourse  between  India  and  the  Far 
East  is  testified  to  by  various  sources  from  at  least  as  early 
as  the  first  century  A.D.,  and  if  Pali  tradition  is  to  be  given 
any  credence  this  intercourse  goes  back  to  at  least  about 
6th  or  5th  century  B.C.  A   volume  of  literature  has  grown 
around  this  interesting  topic  of  early  Indian  maritime  inter- 
course between  India  and  the  Far  East  and  it  is  needless  to 
refer  to  it  in  detail.  It  is  sufficient  to  refer  our  readers  to 
the  author  of  the  Periplus  of  the  Erythrean  Sea  and  to  that 
celebrated  geographer,  Ptolemy,  who  have  preserved  for  us 
a   detailed  account  of  this  intercourse. 
It  is,  however,  necessary  to  speak  in  some  detail  about 
references  to  Suvannabhumi  in  early  Indian  literature  and 
tradition.  These  references  no  doubt  point  more  or  less 
exclusively  to  trade  and  commercial  activities  which 
undoubtedly  were  for  a   long  time  the  primary,  if  not  the  only 
incentive  to  these  difficult  maritime  adventures,  but  they  also 
help  to  serve  as  the  background  of  later  Indian  religious  and 
missionary  activities  through  which  Buddhism  flowed  into  the 
peninsula.  Traders  and  merchantmen  came  first  and  along 
with  their  merchandise  they  brought  also  elements  of  their 
culture.  And,  it  was  almost  always  later  when  adventurous 
Ksatriya  princes  came  to  seek  their  fortunes,  or  individual 
monk  or  bands  of  missionaries  came  to  propagate  their 
religious  doctrines.  We  have  evidence  of  both,  but  all  such 
evidences  point  to  a   later  period.  The  subsequent  history  of 
individual  colonies  show  that  this  peaceful  penetration  of  the 
Indians  resulted  in  the  fusion  of  Indians  with  diverse  races 
inhabiting  the  colonies  and  in  the  evolution  of  a   new  culture

--- PAGE 22 ---
THE  BACKGROUND 
3 
that  partook  of  elements  of  both.  The  dominant  race 
imposed  its  language,  religion  and  social  customs,  but  could 
not  efface  all  traces  of  indigenous  elements  in  respect  of 
any  of  these.  As  years  went  on  and  the  contact  with  India 
grew  less  and  less,  the  native  elements  again  asserted 
themselves,  but  could  not  wholly  supplant  the  imported  ones. 
That  lower  Burma  including  a   portion  of  the  Burmese 
hinterland  was  known  in  medieval  times  as  Suvannabhumi 
is  testified  to  by  the  KalyanI  inscriptions  of  king  Dhammaceti 
(1476  A. D.).1  The  same  inscription  gives  another  name  to 
Suvannabhumi,  namely  Ramannadesa  (Suvannabhumi  natta- 
samkhata  
nnadesa).2 3  
In  the  Po-U-Daung  
inscription 
(1774  A.D.)  of  Burma  we  have  reference  to  a   country 
called  Suvannaparanta  which  means  the  western  end  or 
extremity  of  Suvannabhumi.  Suvannaparanta  included  the 
country  between  the  lower  Irrawadi  and  Chindwin  and  the 
Arakan  Yoma.8  Suvannabhumi,  therefore,  seems  to  include 
a   large  portion  of  Burma,  both  inland  and  peninsular.  It  is 
convenient  here  to  refer  to  Ptolemy’s  account  of  this  part 
of  India  Extra-Gangem.  Ptolemy  refers  to  two  countries  : 
Chryse  Chora  =   golden  land  and  Chryse  Chersonesus  =   golden 
peninsula.  He  clearly  distinguishes  them  as  two  different 
regions,  both  adjoining  Besyngeitai.4  A   similar  distinction 
Dr.  R.  C.  Majumdar  has  shown  that  Ptolemy’s  Chryse 
Chersonesus  points  to  the  Malay  Peninsula  and  his  Chryse 
Chora  a   region  to  the  north  of  it,  that  is,  Suvannabhumi,® 
which  is  exactly  the  Sanskrit  counterpart  of  the  Greek  Chryse 
Chora  (Chryse  =   gold =su varna,  and  Chora  =   land  =   bhumi). 
1  EP.  Birm.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  II. 
*  Ibid. ;   also  Ind.  Ant,  XXII,  p.  151. 
3  Majumdar,  Suvarriadvtpa ,  VoL  I,  p;  47. 
*  Coedes,  Textes,  pp.  38-43,  53,  56,  60,  66. 
5  SchofFs  edn.,  paras.  56  and  63. 
6  Also  see  Majumdar,  ihid,t  pp.  38-48,

--- PAGE 23 ---
4 
 THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Suvannabhumi  or  the  land  of  gold  as  a   rich  source  of 
wealth  and  a   big  centre  of  commercial  enterprise  was  known 
to  Indians  from  very  ancient  times.  The  country  is  cele- 
brated in  several  Jataka  stories.  According  to  the  Maha- 
janaka  Jataka,  prince  Mahajanaka  led  a   band  of  merchants 
in  a   ship  to  Suvannabhumi.7  His  evident  object  was  to  gather 
riches  there.  According  to  the  Supparaka  Jataka  another 
band  of  merchants  had  come  to  Bharukacca  from  Suvanna- 
bhumi and  initiated  a   journey  of  Indian  merchants  to 
Suvamjabhuroi.8  Kautilya  in  his  Arthasastra  fl  also  refers 
to  this  land  of  gold  which  was  evidently  a   source  for 
the  valuable  product  of  aguru,  while  the  Milindapanha 
makes  an  interesting  reference  to  Suvannabhumi  across  the 
high  seas,  along  with  Takola  and  Cina.10  The  Maha1(arma- 
vibhanga  makes  a   reference  to  merchants  who  used  to  sail 
to  Suvannabhumi  from  Mahakosali  and  Tamralipti.11  The 
Divyavadana  describes  the  difficulties  one  has  to  face  to 
reach  the  great  Suvannabhumi  (Ed.  Cowell,  p.  107).  But 
the  most  important  reference  to  Suvannabhumi  is  to  be  found 
in  the  celebrated  Buddhist  work,  the  Mahaniddesa,  In 
giving  a   long  list  of  countries  and  islands  along  the  south- 
eastern seas  the  author  of  the  Niddesa  cites  the  name  of 
SiiVannabhumi  in  a   context  that  reveal  a   very  intimate 
knowledge  of  the  region  now  covered  by  Burma,  Malay asia, 
Indo-China  and  Insulindia.  The  ,  passage  of  the 
Mahaniddesa  has  been  elaborately  commented  upon  by 
M.  Sylvain  Levi 12  who  has  drawn  attention  to  the  points  of 
agreement  between  the  list  of  the  Mahaniddesa  and  that 
of  Ptolemy.  He  has  also  suggested  that  both  must  belong 
7  VoL  VI,  p.  22.  Jataka  references  are  to  the  Fausboll’s  edn. 
8  Vol.  IV,  p.  86;  also  read  along  with  it  Jatakamalat  No.  XIV,  and  Jataka  HI# 
p.  124. 
9  ArthaSastra ,  Bk,  II,  Chap,  XI.  • 
10  Milindapanha ,  p.  359;  S.B.E.,  XXXVI,  p.  269. 
11  Mahakarmavihhanga ,  Ed.  S.  Levi,  p.  50  iff. 
12  Etudes  Asiatiques ,  II,  pp.  1-55,  431.

--- PAGE 24 ---
THE  BACKGROUND 
5 
approximately  to  the  same  period.  But  Dr.  R.  C-  Majumdar  13 
thinks  that  the  list  of  the  Niddesa  must  have  been 
drawn  up  between  the  end  of  the  first  and  the  begin- 
ning of  the  third  century  A.D.  The  Arab  writers 
also  seem  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  name 
SuvarnabhGmi  along  with  Suvarnadvipa.  In  one  place 
Alberuni  says  that  “   The  island  of  the  Zabaj  is  called  by 
the  Hindus  Suvarnadvipa  that  is  the  gold-island,”  while  in 
another  he  says  :  “   The  island  of  the  Zabaj  is  called  the 
gold-country  (that  is,  Suvarnabhumi),  because  you  obtain 
much  gold  as  deposit  if  you  wash  only  a   little  of  the  earth 
of  that  country.”  Still  in  another  place  Alberuni  includes 
Suvarnabhumi,  evidently  following  the  Brhatsamhita,  in  the 
list  of  countries  in  the  South-East.14 
Dr.  Majumdar  has  rightly  drawn  pointed  attention 
to  the  fact  that  “   the  contrast  between  Suvarnabhumi  and 
Suvarnadvipa  that  is  gold-land  and  gold-island  which  we 
meet  with  in  the  Indian  sources  is  also  faithfully  reflected  in 
the  nomenclature  used  by  the  western  authors,  some  of  them 
calling  it  an  island  and  the  others,  either  a   land  or  a   penin- 
sula.’ 1   This  is  evident  not  only  in  the  account  of  Ptolemy  and 
in  the  Periplus  but  also  in  that  of  Alberuni.  These  accounts 
along  with  the  old  tradition  of  a   land  whose  soil  was  golden, 
lying  along  the  coast  of  the  eastern  sea,  were  no  doubt  derived 
from  India.  Not  only  the  Pur  anas  refer  to  a   country  outside 
Bharatavarsa  the  soil  and  mountains  of  which  consist  of 
gold,  but  the  Divyavadana  also  refers  to  a   region  beyond  the 
seas  where  the  soil  is  golden.  Suvannabhumi  was  thus  un- 
doubtedly the  generic  name  which  included  not  only  Suvarna- 
13  Suvarnadvipa ,  pp.  56-61,  where  there  is  an  excellent  analytical  summary  of 
Levi’s  discussion  as  well  as  a   discussion  of  the  extraordinary,  routes  leading  to 
Suvannabhumi  and  Suvannapura  culled  from  the  Purayas,  the  Vimanavatthu,  the 
Jatakas,  the  Milindapanha,  the  Niddesa,  the  Brhatkathaslokasamgraha,  the  Gana- 
pafha  on  Panini  and  Katyay ana’s  Vartika . 
 ' 
14  For  accounts  of  Arab  writers  on  this  topic,  see,  Ferrand,  J.A.,  XX, 
pp.  52  ff.

--- PAGE 25 ---
6 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
dvipa  but  also  places  like  Suvarnapura,  Suvarnakudyaka , 
and  other  places  connected  with  and  reminiscent  of  the 
tradition  of  the  golden  soil.  On  the  whole,  therefore, 
Dr.  Majumdar  seems  to  be  right  when  he  says  that  there  are 
"definite  evidences  that  Burma,  Malay  Peninsula  and 
Sumatra  had  the  common  designation  of  Suvarnabhumi,  and 
the  name  Suvarnadvipa  was  certainly  applied  to  Sumatra  and 
other  islands  in  the  Archipelago." 35  But,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  term  Suvannabhumi  or  SuvarnabhOmi  was  later 
on  applied  only  to  the  main  land  as  distinguished  from 
Suvarnadvipa  which  stood  for  the  island  or  islands  adjacent 
to  Suvarnabhumi  one  is  led  to  assume  that  a   time  came  when 
the  generic  term  Suvannabhumi  came  to  be  applied  in  a 
limited  sense  to  the  main  land  alone  to  distinguish  it  from 
Suvarnadvipa. 
The  story  of  the  evolution  of  this  relation  between  India 
and  countries  and  islands  beyond  the  seas  has  been  admirably 
summarised  by  Dr.  Majumdar  and  no  apology  is  needed 
to  quote  extracts  from  this  summary.10 
"   It  is  quite  clear  that  from  a   very  remote  time  the  Indians  possessed' a   vague 
idea  of  the  countries  in  the  Far  East  across  the  sea.  The  relation,  no  doubt, 
originated  in  trade,  and  the  tradition  of  fabulous  wealth  earned  by  that  trade  gave  rise 
to  all  sorts  of  mythical  stories  about  the  golden  land  *   *   * 
M   The  steady  development  of  this  trade  is  reflected  in  tjie  Jatakas,  Bfhatliaiha , 
Kautilya-ArthaSastra  and  Milindapanha,  where  we  have  not  only  a   more  definite 
idea  of  the  region,  now  called  Suvannabhumi,  but  also  a   knowledge  of  important 
localities  within  it.  This  intimate  intercourse  may  be  referred  to  the  two  or  three 
centuries  immediately  preceding  the  Christian  era. 
"   During  the  first  two  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  the  mercantile  relations  led 
to  colonisation  on  a   fairly  large  scale.  This  is  evidenced  both  by  the  various  stories 
as  well  as  by  Sanskrit  names  applied  to  many  localities  within  this  region.  Ptolemy 
and  Niddesa  represented  this  stage  of  development  which  may  thus  be  regarded  as 
an  accomplished  fact  of  the  second  century  AtD. 
**  The  literary  evidence  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  trade  was  the  chief  stimulus  of 
this  intercourse  between  India  and  the  Far  East.  Missionary  and  political  activities 
must  have  followed  in  the  wake  of  trade  *   *   * 
16  Suvarnadvipa ,  p.  48,  The  whole  chapter  indeed  is  very  interesting  and  is 
well-worth  close  study,  pp.  37-64, 
16  lbid.t  pp.  61-62.

--- PAGE 26 ---
ASOKA  MISSION 
7 
kt  Indeed  the  evidence  of  a   commercial  origin  of  this  intercourse  with  the  Far  East 
must  show  by  every  step  ..  Some  traditions,  no  doubt,  represent  Kshatriya  adventurers 
from  India  as  having  conquered  territories  in  the  Far  East,  but  they  must  have  followed 
in  the  wake  of  merchants/’ 
It  is  against  the  background  of  this  commercial  inter- 
course between  India  and  Suvannabhumi  going  to  as 
far  back  as  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B.  C.  that  we  have 
to  read  the  traditional  story  of  the  mission  of  Sona  arid 
Uttara,  alleged  to  have  been  sent  by  Asoka,  to  evangelise 
Suvannabhumi.  This  tradition,  loud  and  insistent,  is 
the  starting  point  of  the  history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma. 
II 
THE  ASOKA  MISSION  :   LEGEND  AND  HISTORY 
There  is  hardly  any  tradition  so  universal  in  the  Buddhist 
monastic  organisation  of  Burma  and  so  often  repeated  in  her 
chronicles  as  the  story  of  the  first  introduction  of  the  religion  of 
Gautama,  the  Buddha,  by  thera  Sona  and  thera  Uttara,  sent  by 
Moggaliputta  mahathera,  the  teacher  of  Asoka,  to  evangelise 
the  land.  The  tradition  rests  primarily  on  the  authority 
of  the  two  Sinhalese  chronicles,  the  DipaVamsa 17  and  the 
Mahavamsa ,18  the  latter  containing  a   more  detailed  version 
of  the  narrative.19 
"   When  the  thera  Moggaliputta,  the  illuminator  of  the  religion  of  the  Con- 
queror, had  brought  the  (Third)  Council  to  an  end,  when  looking  into  the  future, 
he  had  beheld  the  purging  of  the  religion  in  adjacent .  countries,  (then)  in  the 
month  of  Kattika  he  sent  forth  theras,  one  here  and  one  there.  The  thera  Majjhan- 
tika  he  sent  to  Ka&nira  and  Gandhara ;   the  thera  Mahadeva  he  sent  to  Mahisamandala. 
To  Vanavasa,  he  sent  the  thera  Rakkhita;  and  to  Aparantaka  the  Yona  named 
Dhammarakkhita ;   to  Maharattha  (he  sent)  the  thera  Mahadhammarakkhita;  but 
the  thera  Maharakkhita  he  sent  into  the  country  of  the  Yona.  He  sent  the  thera' 
Majjhima  to  the  Himalayan  country,  and  to  Suvannabhumi  he  sent  the  theias  Sona 
17  Geiger,  DipaVamsa,  VIII,  1-13. 
18  Geiger,  Mahavam8af  XII,  1-54. 
18  Ibid.,  XII.  The  chapter  on  "The  Converting  of  Different  Countries.”

--- PAGE 27 ---
8 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  Uttara.  The  great  thera  Mahinda,  the  theras  Itthiya,  Uttiya,  Sambala  and 
Bhaddasala,  his  disciples,  these  theras  he  sent  forth  with  the  charge  *  Ye  shall  found 
in  the  lovely  island  of  Lanka,. the  lovely  religion  of  the  Conquerer.”  20 
The  account  goes  on  into  details  regarding  each  of  the 
missions.  In  respect  of  Suvannabhumi  it  is  laid  down  : 
“Together  with  the  thera  Uttara,  the  thera  Sona  of  wondrous  might  go  to 
Suvannabhumi    Many  were  the  people  who  came  unto  the  (three)  refuges  and 
the  precepts  of  duty;  sixty  thousand  were  converted  to  the  true  faith.  Three  thousand 
five  hundred  sons  of  noble  families  received  it  likewise.  Thenceforth  when  a   prince 
was  bom  in  the  royal  palace,  the  kings  gave  to  such  the  name  Sonathera/*  21 
With  these  traditional  accounts  preserved  in  the  name 
and  to  the  credit  of  religious  teachers,  one  may  also  read 
the  accounts  of  missionary  activities  recorded  by  Asoka 
himself  to  his  own  credit.  Besides  organising  a   prosely- 
tising band  of  zealous  missionaries  to  carry  the  message  of 
the  Master  to  every  nook  and  comer  of  Jambudvlpa,  he  is 
said  to  have  sent  missionaries  “   to  Tambapanni  (Ceylon), 
as  well  as  to  all  his  neighbours  as  far  as  six  hundred 
leagues,  where  the  king  of  the  Greeks  named  Antiochus 
lives,  and  beyond  that  Antiochus  (where  live)  the  four 
kings  named  severally  (Turamaya)  Ptolemy,  ( Amtekina) 
Antigonos,  (Maga  or  Maka)  Magas,  and  (Alikasudara) 
Alexander   ” 
The  historicity  of  the  mission  to  the  Greek  countries  22 
and  Ceylon  28  has  hardly  been  doubted,  since  they  have  been 
recorded  by  Asoka  himself  in  his  Edicts  (RE.  V   and  XIII). 
The  story  of  the  missions  to  the  Himalayan  countries 
and  Kasmlra  is  also  generally  believed.24  Gandhara, 
20  MahaVamsa ,  p.  82. 
21  MahaVamsa,  p.  86. 
22  Rhys  Davids  doubted  the  authenticity  of  Asoka’s  missions  to  Greek  countries 
(Buddhist  India,  pp.  298-99)  ;   but  his  arguments  are  no  longer  seriously  advanced. 
23  Geiger  in  his  introduction  to  the  MahaVamsa  adduces  very  important  argu- 
ments not  only  in  favour  of  the  mission  to  Ceylon  but  of  the  general  historicity  of 
all  the  missions  referred  to  in  the  Ceylonese  chronicles. 
2*  MahaVamsa,  Introd,,  pp.  X1X-XX,  Rockhill,  Life  of  the  Buddha,  p.  167; 
Cunningham,  The  Bhiha  Topes ,  pp.*267,  289,  319.

--- PAGE 28 ---
ASOKA  MISSION 
9 
Mahisa-mandala,  Vanavasa,  Aparanta  and  Maharattha  were 
all  within  Asoka’s  dominions,  and  Asoka  himself  claims,  in 
his  edicts,  to  have  left  no  place  in  Jambudvipa  out  of  his 
missionary  campaigns  and  activities.  These  direct  and 
indirect  corroborations  from  independent  sources  of  practically 
all  the  missions  referred  to  in  the  Sinhalese  chronicles 
naturally  warrants  the  presumption  that  the  story  of  the 
one  mission  not  yet  upheld  by  any  independent  evidence,  i.e., 
the  one  to  Suvannabhumi,  is  also  true  in  its  main  outlines, 
it  is  admitted  that  the  account  of  the  Sinhalese  chronicles 
may  not  as  historical  evidence,  commend  itself  wholly  to 
scholars,  but  there  is  also  nothing  absurd  in  the  story  of 
Moggaliputta  Tissa’s  mission  to  Suvannabhumi  headed  by 
the  two  chief  theras,  Sona  and  Uttara. 
But  Vincent  Smith  dismissed  the  tradition  as  ‘  mythical,’ 
and  Kern  ‘  felt  grave  suspicions  ’  concerning  its  authenti- 
city.25 Kern  wrote  in  1 896  and  Smith  within  a   decade  of 
that  date.  Much  light  has  since  been  thrown  by  historical 
and  archaeological  researches  on  the  interesting  problem  of 
early  Indo-Burmese  commercial,  historical  and  cultural 
relations.  But  though  nothing  has  been  found  definitely 
to  establish  the  historicity  of  the  mission  itself,  the  force  of  the 
opposition  seems  to  have  subsided  to  a   considerable  extent. 
Kern’s  objections  are  easily  met.  He  suspects  the 
duumvirate  Sona-Uttara,  and  thinks  that  the  chroniclers 
confused  the  thera  Sonuttara  or  simply  Uttara  of  Duttha- 
gamanl’s  time  with  the  theras  alleged  to  have  been  sent 
by  Moggaliputta.  But  one  fails  to  understand  why  the 
chroniclers  should  confuse  any  one  of  the  two  thecas  or  both 
with  the  thera  Sonuttara  or  Uttara  living  in  the  time  of 
DutthagamanI  (101-77  B.C  ).  Sona  and  Uttara  of  Asoka’s 
time  were  removed  by  at  least  a   century  and  a   half  from 
26  Smith, ‘A aok.a  (1901),  p.  55;  Ind,  Ant,  1908,  pp.  198  ff;  Kern,  Manual  of 
Buddhism,  1896,  p.  117. 
2 — 1445B

--- PAGE 29 ---
10  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Sonuttara  or  Uttara  of  Dutthagamani’s  time  ;   and  there  is 
hardly  any  evidence  in  the  Sinhalese  chronicles  of  such  a 
curious  confusion.  As  to  the  later  name  Sonuttara  or  Uttara, 
it  is  not  unusual  to  adopt  names  of  earlier  theras,  sometimes 
of  single  individuals,  sometimes  of  two  jointly.  Kern 
further  argues  that  the  duumvirate  Sona  and  Uttara  are 
unknown  to  northern  Buddhists.  This  argument  is  at  best 
an  example  of  argamentum  ex  silentio.  Majjhima,  Kassapa 
and  Majjhantika  and  their  missions  are  also  equally  unknown 
to  northern  Buddhists,  nor  are  they  mentioned  in  any  of 
the  edicts  of  Asoka ;   but  there  is  no  more  any  room  for 
doubting  their  authenticity.  (See,  Geiger’s  Introduction, 
pp.  xix-xx,  to  his  edition  of  the  MahaVamsa.) 
Vincent  Smith’s  objections  are  more  substantial.  Much 
of  his  statements  and  arguments  would  not  have,  it  is  certain, 
been  repeated  to-day  had  he  lived  to  tackle  the  problem 
now  after  a   lapse  of  about  half  a   century.  What  remains 
to-day  of  his  long  discourse  may  be  summarised  in  two 
arguments :  (a)  Rock  £dict  Nos.  V   and  XIII  give  a   list 
of  the  countries  to  which  he  sent  missionaries  to  propagate 
the  religion,  but  there  is  absolutely  no  mention  in  this  list 
of  the  mission  to  Suvannabhumi.  “   The  silence  of  the  edicts 
concerning  the  alleged  fact  goes  a   long  way  towards  dis- 
proving its  reality,  for  Asoka  seems  to  have  intended  to 
give  a   complete  account  of  his  missionary  operations,  and 
if  he  had  really  sent  emissaries  to  Suvannabhumi  previous 
to  the  publication  of  the  Rock  Edicts,  it  is  inconceivable 
that  he  should  have  omitted  to  mention  in  them  an  event 
of  such  importance...”  Elsewhere  he  states,  ‘‘Facts  vouched 
for  by  the  inscriptions  of  Asoka  may,  therefore,  be  accepted 
without  question,  because  the  testimony  is  good  on  the  face 
of  it,  and  no  better  can  be  looked  for.  When  the  evidence 
of  the  inscriptions  differs  from  that  of  later  literary  traditions, 
the  epigraphic  authority  should  be  preferred  without  hesi- 
tation.” ( 
b ) 
  There  is  no  mention  of  the  mission  of  Sona

--- PAGE 30 ---
ASOKA  MISSION 
11 
and  Uttara  also  in  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  (1476  A.D.) 
which  give  a   summary  of  the  history  of  the  introduction 
and  progress  of  Theravada  Buddhism  in  Burma.  Of  the 
two  arguments  the  first  one  still  holds  good,  but  the  second 
is  practically  of  no  force  to-day.  For,  it  has  recently  been 
pointed  out  by  Dr.  Blagden,  the  learned  editor  of  the 
Kalyani  inscriptions,  that  a   reference  to  the  mission  of 
■Sona  and  Uttara  does  occur  in  the  celebrated  records. 
We  shall,  therefore,  meet  the  second  argument  first,  though 
it  is  less  material  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  story  of  the 
history  of  the  introduction  and  progress  of  Buddhism  in 
Burma  as  recorded  in  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  is  not  original 
and  independent,  but  seems  rather  to  have  been  brought  from 
Ceylon  by  the  monks  who  were  sent  by  king  Dhammaceti 
( 
1 460-9 1 )   to  the  •  island  to  re-introduce  a   canonically  valid 
monastic  succession  in  lower  Burma  where  the  Order  had 
long  been  split  up  into  schismatical  sects.  Moreover,  the 
evidence  of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions,  in  respect  of  its  historical 
value,  is  no  better  than  that  of  the  Ceylonese  chronicles ; 
it  is  also  about  nine  centuries  later  in  date.  The  crux  of  the 
question  rests  finally,  therefore,  on  the  value  of  the  Ceylonese 
chronicles  themselves. 
It  is  to  the  credit  of  king  Dhammaceti  of  Pegu  that  the 
present  Buddhist  Church  and  organisation  of  Burma  stands 
as  it  is  to-day.  This  reformer-king  caused  a   
-  long  detailed 
history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma  to  be  recorded  in  the  celebrated 
Kalyani  inscriptions  (1476  A.D.)  of  Pegu.  The  story  is 
prefaced  by  a   good  deal  of  historical  matter  relating  to  earlier 
periods  in  the  long  history  of  Buddhism  and  particularly  to  its 
vicissitudes  in  Ceylon  and  its  introduction  and  development 
in  Burma.26  These  interesting  details  are  introduced  by  a 
statement  regarding  Asoka’s  reformation  of  the  Buddhist 
church  and  the  mission  of  Sona  and  Uttara  to  Suvannabhumi, 
“   Ep.  Birm.,  Vo!.  Ill,  Part  II,  p.  82.

--- PAGE 31 ---
12 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
**  At  the  conclusion  of  this  Council  (the  Third  Buddhist  Council  convened 
by  Asoka)  Moggaliputta  Tissa  mahathera  reflected  that  in  the  future  the  religion 
would  be  established  in  neighbouring  foreign  countries  and  sent  such  theras  as 
Majjhantika  thera  with  the  injunction:  *'  Do  you  establish  the  religion  in  those 
neighbouring  foreign  countries  ?  Of  these  theras,  he  sent  out  lord  Mahinda  thera 
to  establish  the  religion  in  the  island  of  Tamhapanni,  and  Sonathera  and  Uttara- 
thera  to  establish  the  religion  in  the  Mon  country  which  was  a'so  called  Suvanna- 
bhumi.” 27 
Here  is  then  a   definite  mention  of  the  Asoka-mission 
otherwise  than  in  Ceylonese  chronicles.  Dr.  Blagden  would 
have  us,  therefore,  believe  the  statement  of  the  KalyanI 
inscriptions  to  be  not  *  altogether  devoid  of  any  founda- 
tion.’ “  Sona  and  Uttara,”  he  says,  “   have  long  been 
claimed  by  Burma  as  founders  of  their  branch  of  the 
church;  and  though  the  tale  has  been  embellished,  with 
many  legendary  accretions  in  the  course  of  ages,  it  can 
hardly  on  that  account  be  dismissed.  Evidence  is  gradually 
accumulating  from  various  different  quarters  which  tends 
to  show  that  Indian  influence  made  itself  felt  in  Indo-China 
from  about  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  or  possibly 
even  two  or  three  centuries  before  that  dale  ;   and  there  seems 
to  be  nothing  antecedently  improbable  in  the  story  of  a 
Buddhist  mission  being  sent  there  at  a   relatively  earlier  period, 
though  it  may  well  be  hazardous  to  fix  that  date  exactly.” 
We  now  turn  to  the  first  argument  of  Smith.  That 
argument  is  .convincing  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  does  not 
go  very  far.  There  is  no  gainsaying  the  fact  that  when 
‘  the  evidence  of  the  inscriptions  (of  Asoka)  differs  from  that 
of  later  literary  traditions,  the  epigraphic  authority  should 
be  preferred  without  hesitation.’  We,  therefore,  must  accept 
first  of  all  and  without  reserve  the  testimony  of  Asoka’s 
Rock  Edicts  V   and  XIII  in  respect  of  the  list  of  countries 
27  Ep.  Birm .,  Vol.  Ill,  Part  II,  p.  185,  Text  A,  lines  ?-6.  The  identification  of 
Suvannabhumi  with  the  Mon  country  rests  on  this  passage.  Dr.  Blagden  adds  a 
note  and  states,  “So  far  as  can  be  conjectured  from  the  fragmentary  remains  of 
the  Mon  text,  it  probably  expresses  itself  in  this  way—/n  Suvannabhumi  which  is 
the  Mon  country.

--- PAGE 32 ---
ASOKA  MISSION 
13 
where  missionaries  were  sent.  But,  we  may  go  also 
one  step  further,  for,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  tradition 
with  regard  to  at  least  two  of  the  countries,  namely,  Kasmira 
and  the  Himalayan  countries  lo  which,  according  to  the 
Sinhalese  chronicles,  Asoka  is  said  to  have  sent  missions,  are 
not  mentioned  in  the  list  as  supplied  by  the  Edicts,  but  is 
nevertheless  upheld  by  other  independent  sources,  already 
well-known.  The  evidence  of  the  chronicles  has,  therefore, 
some  claim  to  be  considered  at  least  as  supplementing  that  of 
the  Edicts.  The  other  side  of  the  argument  involves  a 
well-known  logical  fallacy.  That  ‘  the  silence  of  the  Edicts 
concerning  the  alleged  fact  ’  does  not  go  very  far  towards 
disproving  the  reality  of  any  of  the  missions  referred  to  in 
the  Dipavamsa  and  Mahavamsa  is  shown  by  the  historicity  of 
the  missions  to  Kasmira  and  the  Himalayan  countries  to 
which  no  reference  is  made  in  the  records  of  Asoka.  The 
omission,  therefore,  of  the  mission  of  Sona  and  Uttara  in  the 
records  of  Asoka  does  not  prove  or  disprove  the  authenticity 
of  the  Sinhalese  tradition.  Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  Asoka  claims  in  his  edicts  to  have  sent  missionaries  to 
other  countries  as  well  besides  those  which  he  chose  to 
mention  by  name. 
If  an  attempt  has  been  made  above  to  meet  the  argu- 
ments of  Kern  and  Smith,  it  is  not  intended  to  assert  that  the 
Sinhalese  story  of  the  mission  to  Suvannabhumi  is 
absolutely  certain,  or  to  say  that  it  is  definitely  estab- 
lished. All  that  is  suggested  is  that  once  the  general 
historicity  of  the  story  of  the  missions  listed  in  the 
Sinhalese  chronicles  is  accepted,  and  we  have  seen  that  there 
is  hardly  any  difficulty  in  accepting  it,  the  presumption  will 
always  be  in  favour  of  the  Sona-Uttara  tradition. 
28  “   The  scepticism  with  which  modern  scholars  have  received  it  is  perhaps 
unmerited,  but  the  preaching  of  these  missionaries,  if  it  ever  took  place,  cannot  at 
present  be  connected  with  other  historical  events.  Nevertheless,  the  statement  of 
the  Dipavamsa  (and  also  of  the  Mahavamsa )   is  significant.  The  Work  was  com-

--- PAGE 33 ---
14 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
III 
BUDDHISM  IN  THE  KIRATA  COUNTRY  :   3RD  CENTURY  A.D. 
An  interesting  side-light  on  the  probability  of  the  intro- 
duction of  Buddhism  in  Burma  towards  the  early  centuries 
of  the  Christian  era  seem  to  be  thrown  by  one  of  the  ins- 
criptions discovered  at  Nagarjunikonda  in  the  ancient 
Andhra  country  of  the  Deccan.  The  record  was  inscribed  in 
the  14th  regnal  year  of  a   king  Madhariputa  who  seems 
to  be  identical  with  king  Madhariputa  Sri  Virapurisa- 
data  of  the  Iksvaku  dynasty  (3rd  century  A.D.),  and  belonged 
to  a   shrine  stated  to  have  been  dedicated  1 4  for  the  benefit 
of  the  fraternities  (of  monks)  of  Tambapamna  who  had 
converted  Kasmira,  Gandhara,  Clna,  Cilata,  Tosali, 
Avaramta,  Vamga,  VanavasI,  Yavana  (?),  Damila(?) 
Palura  (?)  and  the  Isle  of  Tambapamni.”  20  It  will  be  seen 
that  some  of  these  countries  already  find  mention  in  the 
Sinhalese  chronicles  among  the  regions  won  over  to 
Buddhism  after  the  Third  Council ;   these  are  Kasmira, 
posed  in  the  fourth  century  A.D. ,  and  taken  from  older  chionicles.  It  may,  there- 
fore, be  concluded  that  in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era,  Burma  had  the  reputation 
of  being  a   Buddhist  country/*  Eliot,  Hinduism  and  Buddhism ,  
III,  pp,  50-51. 
M.  Louis  Finot,  who  is,  however,  gravely  suspicious  of  the  Buddhaghosa  tradi- 
tion, also  thinks  that  the  historicity  of  the  Asoka  mission  has  been  contested  with- 
out much  convincing  reason,  JA.t  XX,  1912,  pp,  121  ff.  In  this  connection, 
Taranatha’s  testimony  also,  I   think,  deserves  consideration.  According  to  him 
Hlnayanism  in  the  Koki  land  (which,  he  states,  included  Pukham- Pagan,  and 
Hamsavat!— Pegu)  was  preached  from  the  days  of  Asoka  onwards,  but  Mahayanism 
was  not  known  until  the  disciples  of  Vasubandhu  introduced  it. 
The  Mahakarma'tiibhahga  credits  a   mythical  hero  Gavampati  with  the  conver- 
sion of  Suvannabhumi  (p.  62)  ;   the  voyage  of  Gavampati  to  Suvannabhumi  is  also 
referred  to  in  the  Sasanavamsa ,  though  it  does  not  say  that  it  was  he  who  converted 
the  land  to  Buddhism  (p.  36) .  The  evidence  of  the  Maha,\arma-vibhahga  shows 
however  that  the  conversion  of  Suvannabhumi  to  Buddhism  was  known  to  early 
Buddhist  tradition^ 
29  Ep.  lnd.t  XX, ,  pp.  22-23,  Second  Apsidal  Temple,  Insc.  F,

--- PAGE 34 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  THE  KIRA T A   COUNTRY 
15 
Gandhara,  Vanavasa,  Aparantaka  and  Yona.30  Some  of 
these  regions  are  also  referred  to  in  two  passages  of  the 
Milindapanha  81  as  having  been  often  visited  by  Indian 
traders  for  purposes  of  trade.  In  the  Mahavamsa  as 
well  as  in  the  text  just  referred  to,  the  region  mentioned 
along  with  Clna  is  Cilata8'  which  is  important  for  our 
purpose. 
The  Cilatas  are  evidently  none  other  than  the  Kiratas,  well- 
known  to  Sanskrit  literature, particularly  to  the  authors  of  the 
Mahabharata,  Harivamsa  and  the  Puranas.  The  P ancatantra 
characterises  the  Kiratas  as  dishonest  traders.  They  seem 
also  to  have  been  known  to  Greek  and  Roman  traders  and 
geographers.  Ptolemy,  for  example,  locates  the  Cirrhadae 
“   beyond  the  Ganges  mouth  called  Antibolei  He  says: 
*  ‘  Beyond  this  (Dosarene ) 
,  the  course  tending  towards  the 
north  there  are  many  barbarous  tribes,  among  whom  are  the 
Cirrhadae,  a   race  of  men  with  flattened  noses,  very  savage.’’ 
The  Cirrhadae  of  this  passage,  are  evidently  none  other  than 
the  Kiratas.  In  another  passage,  included  in  his  chapter  on 
Trans-Gangetic  India,88  Ptolemy  describes  the  Tiladai 
(alternative  reading,  Piladai)  also  called  the  Saesadai,  as  hairy 
dwarfs,  with  a   flat  face  and  a   white  skin.  The  Tiladai  also 
are  none  other  than  the  Kiratas,  Tiladai  being  evidently  a 
rendering  in  Greek  of  the  word  Cilada  or  Cilata. 
The  Markandeya  Purana,  in  one  place,  locates  the  Kiratas 
in  a   region  lying  to  the  east  of  what  we  know  as  India,84 
while  in  another  place  they  are  referred  to  in  the  north, 
along  with  the  Jagudas,  Aupadhas,  Aupamadhas,  Tamasas, 
etc.,  all  of  whom  seem  to  have  inhabited  a   region  *  along 
30  Mahavamsa ,  XII ;   Dlpavamsa,  VIII. 
31  Trenckner’s  edn.,  pp.  327,  331. 
32  The  reading  in  the  Milinda  text  is  Vilapa,  hut  Prof.  L4vi  has  rightly  shown 
that  it  is  an  error  for  Cilata. 
33  Ptolemy,  VIII,  2,  15. 
3*  Mark  P.,  LVJI,  6-8.  See  also  in  this  connection  Pargiter’s  edn.^p.  284,  notes 
on  7-8.

--- PAGE 35 ---
16 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  greater  part  of  the  southern  side  of  the  Himalayas,’  85  and 
evidently  were  members  of  the  rude  Tibeto-Burman  group 
of  races.  In  a   third  place  they  appear  in  a   list  of  tribes 
‘  resting  against  the  mountains,’  obviously  the  Himalayas,80 
while  in  a   fourth,  among  the  tribes  inhabiting  the 
western  regions,  along  with  the  Barbaras,  Paradas,  etc. 
The  Kiratas  in  the  western  region  are  evidently  out  of  place ; 
but  their  location  along  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Himalayas 
as  well  as  in  north-east  India  along  with  some  other  rude 
little  known  tribes 37  may  be  taken  to  indicate  that  Indian 
tradition  used  to  designate  all  semi-barbarous  rude  Mongoloid 
people  under  the  composite  appellation  Kirata.  But  when 
the  Mark.andeya  Purana  locates  them  along  the  eastern 
boundary  of  India  they  at  once  come  to  be  invested  with  a 
wider  denotation  and  presumably  point  to  the  Mongoloid 
peoples  inhabiting  the  coastal  regions  of  Arakan  and  lower 
Burma.  And,  furthermore,  when  both  Epic  and  Puranic 
traditions  are  set  against  the  background  of  the  references 
made  by  Ptolemy,  and  specially  against  the  ethnic 
description  of  the  people  as  given  by  that  Greek  geographer, 
it  becomes  apparent  that  the  flat- faced,  flat-nosed  and  white- 
skinned Kiratas  are  none  other  than  the  members  of  the 
Mon-Khmer  group  of  peoples  of  the  Indonesian  sub- 
continent inhabiting  the  regions  contiguously  to  the 
east  of  Bharatavarsa  and  lying  along  the  coast.  We 
know  that  the  Pyus  and  the  Talaings,  the  earliest  known 
exponents  of  Indian  religion  and  culture  in  the  Burmese 
Peninsula  belonged  to  this  group  of  Mongoloid  races  with 
white  skin,  flat  nose  and  flat  face,  and  it  is  not  unreasonable  to 
think  that  Indian  tradition  knew  these  and  other  allied  tribes, 
rude  and  savage  in  Indian  eyes,  of  the  eastern  regions  as 
Kiratas.  That  the  realm  of  the  Kiratas  lay  along  the  eastern 
35  Pargiter,  op.  cH.t  p.  322,  note  on  Kiratas, 
36  Mark.  P.,LVII,  57. 
37  Mark'P.,  LVI1I,  50,

--- PAGE 36 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  THE  KIRATA  COUNTRY  1 7 
\ 
coastal  regions  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal  will  be  evident  from 
the  following  passage  of  the  Ramayana  : 
Amamlna6ana£capi  Kirata  dvlpavasinah  I 
antarjalacara  ghora  nara-vyaghra  iti  smratah  II 
The  Kiratas  are  here  described  as  dvlpavasinah,  i.e.,  island- 
dwellers,  but  in  view  of  the  references  in  Ptolemy  and  the 
Puranas  cited  above  in  this  section  and  elsewhere  in  a 
previous  one,  dvlpa  here  may  safely  be  taken  to  mean 
‘  
peninsular  region  ’  which  is  also  another  dictionary  meaning 
of  the  word  dvipa.  That  the  Kiratas  belonged  to  the  main 
land  of  the  peninsular  region  and  not  to  any  island 
will  also  be  evident  from  the  fact  that  both  in  the 
Milindapaiiha  and  the  Nagarjunikonda  inscription  referred  to 
above,  the  Cilata  country  is  invariably  mentioned  along  with 
Clna  with  whose  people  they  had  deep  racial  affinities  as 
well.  In  the  Kurmavibhaga  section  of  the  Brhatsamhita  also, 
the  Kiratas  are  mentioned  along  with  the  Cinas. 
Coming  back  to  the  passage  of  the  Nagarjunikonda  ins- 
cription, we  find  that  this  Kirata  or  Cilata  country  was 
along  with  other  countries  converted  to  the  faith  of  the 
Buddha  by  the  fraternities  of  monks  of  Tambapamna  which 
has  generally  been  taken  to  be  identical  with  Sihala  or 
Ceylon,  but  which  may  also  be  taken  to  mean  the  region 
in  southernmost  India  through  which  flowed  the  river 
Tamraparni,  i.e.,  the  Pandya  country.  The  fact  that  the 
fraternities  of  monks  of  Tambapamna  is  stated  to  have 
converted  the  isle  of  Tambapamni  seems  to  indicate 
that  Tambapamna  and  the  isle  of  Tambapamni  were  two 
different  regions.  Moreover,  one  may  also  point  out  the 
difference  in  spelling  between  the  two  words  Tambapamna 
and  Tambapamni  in  one  and  the  same  sentence,  besides 
between  mere  ‘  Tambapamna  ’  and  ‘  isle  of  Tambapamni, 
again  in  the  same  sentence.  We  know  that  there  was  a 
3-1445B

--- PAGE 37 ---
18 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
river  in  the  Tinnevelly  region  of  the  Far  South  called 
Tamraparn!  which  is  sometimes  identified  with  the  Tamba- 
pamni mentioned  in  the  R.  E.  II  and  XIII  of  Asoka.  It  is  not 
therefore,  unlikely  that  the  Tambapamna  of  the  Nagarjunikonda 
record  is  the  country  through  which  flowed  the  river  Tamra- 
parnl.  The  Tambapamni  of  Asoka  may  or  may  not  be  the 
region  of  the  Tamraparn!  river,  but  the  Nagarjunikonda  record 
seems  to  suggest  that  there  must  have  been  some  difference 
between  ‘Tambapamna’  and  the  ‘isle  of  Tambapamni,’ 
the  former  standing  for  the  Far  South  of  India  while  the 
latter  may  be  taken  to  be  identical  with  the  island  of  Ceylon. 
This  is  however  merely  a   suggestion ;   but  the  fact  remains 
that  as  the  inscription  is  dated  in  the  regnal  year  of 
the  Iksvaku  kings  of  the  eastern  Deccan  who  flourished 
in  the  third  century  A.D.,  the  conversion  of  the  Kirata 
country  by  the  fraternity  of  monks  of  Tambapamna  must 
have  taken  place  sometime  before  that  date. 
If  the  identification  of  the  Kirata  country  with  the  regions 
now  known  as  Arakan  and  lower  Burma  (i.e.,  Suvanna- 
bhumi  of  the  Pali  texts  and  medieval  tradition)  stand  to 
reason,  we  have  then  in  the  Nagarjunikonda  record  a   definite 
reference  to  the  prevalence  of  Buddhism  in  Burma  sometime 
before  the  third  century  A.D. 
IV 
BUDDHISM  IN  LIN- YANG  :   C.  250  A.D. 
Early  Chinese  texts  speak  often  of  a   country,  among 
others  of  Indo-China,  called  Chin-lin  or  “   Frontier  of  Gold.” 
Prof.  Pelliot  long  ago  drew  attention  of  scholars  to  these 
texts,  and  it  is  to  him  that  we  are  indebted  for  information 
from  Chinese  sources  regarding  the  islands  and  countries 
of  the  Far-East  including  Campa,  Kamboj,  Siam,  Laos, 
Java,  Sumatra,  Borneo  and  even  some  parts  of  Eastern 
India.  Here  we  shall  concern  ourselves  with  only  a   few

--- PAGE 38 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  LIN- YANG 
19 
references  from  Chinese  texts  that  directly  refer  to  our 
present  subject.118 
About  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  A.D.  Fii-nan, 
which  included  modern  Cambodia  and  the  major  portion  of 
Siam,  was  gradually  expanding  its  power.  One  of  its  kings, 
(Fan)-wan,  a   brave  and  capable  man,  attacked  and  subdued 
the  neighbouring  kingdoms  and  took  the  title  of  the  Great 
King  of  Fii-nan.  He  then  boarded  a   few  great  ships  and 
traversing  the  vast  ocean  attacked  more  than  ten  king- 
doms including  Ch’u-tu-kun,  Chin-chih  and  Tien-siin,  thus 
extending  the  kingdom  of  Fii-nan  five  or  six  thousand  li. 
Then  he  projected  a   subjugation  of  the  kingdon  of  Chin-lin 
or  Frontier  of  Gold ;   but  as  he  fell  ill,  he  could  not  achieve 
his  end.30  The  date  of  the  death  of  (Fan)-wan,  the  Great 
King  of  Fii-nan,  is  shown  by  Prof.  Pelliotto  have  been  c.225- 
30  A.D.40  Moreover,  in  the  time  of  Wu  (a.D.  222-80),  Chu 
Ying  and  K’ang  Y’ai,  Prof.  Pelliot  points  out,  were  sent  on 
an  embassy  to  the  country  of  (Fan)-hsun.  The  date  of  this 
embassy  is  fixed  by  him  to  have  been  c.  245-50  A.D.41 
“The  kingdoms,  which  they  passed  through  or  heard  of,  were 
a   hundred  and  several  tens 
42  but  the  evidence  as  given 
in  the  Liang  Shu  (ch.  54,  f.  2  recto  and  Verso)  does  not 
warrant  such  a   long  list.  It  includes  Tu-K’un,  Chu-li,  Tun- 
Hsun  and  Chin-lin  ;48  Tu-K’un  and  Chu-li  must  be  looked  for 
somewhere  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  Tun-Hsun  (Tien-siin) 
„  has  been  identified  with  Tennasserim,  and  Chin-lin  or  the 
Frontier  of  Gold  with  Suvannabhumi  of  Pali  literature.  The 
38  Pelliot’s  researches  are  mostly  contained  in  his  masterly  contribution,  Deux 
Itineraries,  published  in  the  BEFEO.,  IV,  1904.  See  also,  in  this  connection,  Luce, 
JBRS.,  XIV,  Part  2. 
39  BEFEO.,  1903,  pp.  256-57. 
«   Ibid.,  p.  303. 
41  Ibid.,  p,  303,  p.  430, 
**  Ibid.,  pp.  275-77. 
43  For  Pelliot’s  discussions  on  the  identifications  of  these  regions  see  Ibid.t 
pp.  263-69;  also  see  Laufer,  JA 
luin-Aovt,  1918,  pp. -24-31.

--- PAGE 39 ---
20 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
identification  of  the  last-named  country  is  generally  accept- 
ed.4'1 Chin-lin  thus  refers  to  the  region  of  the  gulf  of 
Martaban  which  is  certainly  the  same  as  the  ‘  
great  bay  of 
the  Frontier  of  Gold  ’  referred  to  in  the  Chinese  texts. 4B 
The  kingdom  of  Chin-lin  was  also  called  Chin-ch’en.  The 
T’ai-p-’ing  yu  lan  (ch.  790,  f.  23)  has  two  quotations,  Prof. 
Pelliot  points  out,  about  the  kingdom  of  the  Frontier  of  Gold. 
The  first  is  taken  from  Iwu  chih  according  to  which  Chin-lin 
is  called  Chin-ch’en.  It  is  above  2000  li  from  Fii-nan.  The 
second  extract  is  taken  from  the  Wat  kuo  ch'uan  according 
to  which  one  can  reach  Chin-ch’en  by  going  west  for  more 
than  2000  li  from  Fii-nan.  Prof.  Pelliot  sees  in  Chin-ch’en  a 
graphic  alteration  of  Chin-lin.10  That  the  two  are  identical  is 
also  proved  by  Prof.  Luce  who  points  out  that  “the  variants 
Chin-lin  and  Chin-ch’en,  both  perhaps  of  equal  antiquity, 
are  sufficiently  close  in  sound  to  suggest  that  the  name  may 
be  a   transcription,  and  not  a   translation,  of  the  native 
names ;   and  this  would  explain  the  variant  writings  of  lin, 
one  of  which,  Chin-lin  has  no  semantic  value...  If  the 
I  wu  chi  is  the  Nan  chou  i   wu  chih  of  Wan  chen,  the 
identification  of  Chin-ch’en  with  Chin-lin  is  as  old  as  the 
third  century ;   the  name  Chin-ch’en  is  also  said  to  occur  in 
the  Wai  Kuo  ch’uan  which  may  be  the  actual  work  of  K’ang 
M   Pelliot,  Ibid. ,  p .  266,  n.  5,  where  the  reader  would  End  his  arguments  in 
favour  of  the  identification. 
46  For  additional  arguments  in  support  of  the  identification  see  JBRS.j 
VoL  XIV,  Pt  II,  p.  153,  where  Prof.  G.  H.  Luce  remarks:  ‘‘Chin-lin,  quite 
irrespective  of  its  meaning  or  connection  with  Suvannabhumi,  might  be  placed  on 
geographical  grounds  on  the  Gulf  of  Martaban.  Chin-ch’en,  or  Chin-lin,  is  said 
to  be  more  than  2000  li  west  of  Fii-nan;  Pieu-ton,  Tu-Koun,  Chu-Ii  and  Pi-Sung 
are  3000  li  south  of  Chin-lin  on  the  one  hand  ;   Tu-K’un  and  Tun-hsiin  over  3000 
li  south  of  Fii-nan  on  the  other,  ft  seems  a   natural  conclusion  that  Tu-K*un» 
etc.,  were  somewhere  on  the  Malay  Peninsula,  roughly  equidistant  from  (the 
capital  of  ?)  Fii-nan  (Cambodia)  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Gulf  of  Martaban  on 
the  other.  The  mention  of  the  ‘great  bay’  is  a   strong  argument ;   and  the 
reference  to  the  white  population  of  these  parts  tallies  with  Ptolemy’s  similar 
account  of  Chryse.” 
46  Pelliot,  Ibid .,  p.  266,  n.  5.

--- PAGE 40 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  LIN-YANG  21 
Tai  (BEFEO.,  1904,  p.  270,  n.  3),  and  in  the  fifth  century 
Fii-nan  c/u  of  Chu  Chih.”47 
It  is  in  the  last-named  text,  i.e.,  the  Fti-nan  chi  of  Chu 
Chih  that  there  is  an  interesting  reference  to  what  may  be 
said  to  have  an  important  bearing  on  our  present  subject  of 
study.  Here  is  Prof.  Pelliot’s  version  of  the  portion  of  the 
text  as  quoted  in  the  Shui  Ching  Chu  (ch.  1,/,  7,  Verso)  : 
“   The  kingdom  of  Lin- Yang  (old  pronunciation:  Liem-(d) 
iang)  is  2000  li  by  land-route  from  that  of  Chin-ch’en.  One 
goes  there  by  carriage  or  on  horseback ;   there  is  no  route 
by  water.  All  the  people  worship  the  Buddha."  This 
kingdom  of  Lin- Yang  is  the  subject  of  a   paragraph  in  the 
T’ai  p’ing  yu  lari  (ch.  787,  f.  13);  it  is  mentioned,  according 
to  the  report  of  the  travels  of  K’ang  T’ai,  as  being  7000  li 
south-west  of  Fii-nan,  and  according  to  the  Nan  chou  i   wu 
chi  of  Wan  Chen,  as  being  the  same  distance,  but  west.  In 
the  time  of  K’ang  T’ai  there  were  already  in  this  country, 
according  to  his  report,  “   several  thousand  Sramanas."  48 
K’ang  T’ai,  according  to  Prof.  Pelliot,  should  be  referred  to 
the  middle  of  the  third  century  A.D.  It  is  thus  evident  that 
Buddhism  was  already  a   flourishing  religion  at  that  time  in 
the  kingdom  of  Lin-Yang.  But  which  is  the  region  referred 
to  as  Lin-Yang  in  the  Chinese  texts 
The  kingdom  of  Lin-Yang  is  said  to  be  2000  li  by  horse 
or  carriage  from  Chin-ch'en  or  Chin-Iin  which  is  Suvanna- 
bhOmi  or  Thaton  region  of  Burma  on  the  gulf  of  Martaban. 
Chin-lin  again  is  said  to  be  of  the  same  distance  to  the  west 
from  Fti-nan  that  included  modern  Cambodia  and  the  major 
w   JBRS.,  Vol.  XIV,  Part  II,  p.  153. 
48  How  unreliable  are  these  measurements  of  distances  as  given  in  these  texts 
is  apparent  in  this  statement.  From  Fii-nan  Chin  lin  is  described  to  be  2000  li 
and  from  Chin-lin  to  Lin-Yang  the  distance  is  the  same.  The  two  distance 
lines  thus  form  the  two  arms  or  sides  of  equal  length  of  a   triangle  whose  third 
side  may  be  said  to  be  supplied  by  the  distance  line  of  7000  It  from  Fii-nan  to 
Lin-Yang,  an  impossible  proposition  from  the  geometrical  point  of  view.  For  the 
third  side  (7000  li)  cannot  be  greater  in  any  case  than  the  other  two  sides  taken 
together,  viz.,  4000  li.

--- PAGE 41 ---
22 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
portion  of  Siam.  From  Fii-nan,  Lin-Yang  was,  however, 
7000  li  to  the  west  or  south-west.  From  these  data  as  well 
as  from  the  statement  that  it  could  not  be  reached  by  water, 
Prof.  Luce  infers  that  Lin-Yang  might  have  been  situated 
in  the  north  or  centre  of  Burma.'19  I   do  not  follow  why 
Lin-Yang  should  be  located  so  high  up  in  the  peninsula 
as  in  the  north,  though  one  may  possibly  be  disposed 
to  locate  it  in  the  centre.  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain 
from  where  all  distances  in  respect  of  Fii-nan  were  counted  ; 
was  it  from  the  capital  or  from  the  nearest  borderland — and 
what  again  should  be  our  attitude  with  regard  to  the  dis- 
tances and  directions  as  stated  in  the  texts  which  are  our  only 
source  of  information?  Should  we  interpret  them  literally 
or  accept  merely  their  sense?  That  they  are  sometimes 
absolutely  unreliable  is  well  known.  These  are  some  of  the 
difficulties  with  respect  to  any  identification  of  Lin-Yang; 
but  let  us  go  by  the  facts  as  they  are  stated.  If,  then,  the 
identification  of  Chin-ch’en  or  Chin-Iin  with  the  Thaton 
region  is  correct,  and  Prof.  Luce  admits  that  it  is  so,  the 
capital  of  Fii-nan  from  where  presumably  all  distances  in 
respect  of  that  country  were  counted  or  the  nearest  border 
region  of  that  kingdom,  must  be  situated,  on  the  authority 
of  the  I  vou  chih  as  quoted  in  the  T’ai  p'ing  yu  lan  referred 
to  above,  some  2000  li  east  of  Thaton.50  The  distance  of 
Lin-Yang  from  Chin-ch’en  is  also  stated  as  2000  li,  but  the 
direction  is  not  given.  It  cannot,  however,  be  southwards 
from  Chin-ch’en,  for  that  way  stretches  the  Malay  Peninsula 
which  borders  on  the  sea,  nor  can  it  be  direct  westwards 
«   JBRS.,  Vol.  XIV,  Part  II,  p.  154. 
The  capital  of  Fii-nan  was  at  T   e-mu,  and  was  500  li  from  the  sea,  evidently 
the  South  China  Sea.  We  should,  therefore,  search  for  it  somewhere,  probably  on 
the  Mekong  up  Vien  Tiane.  Pelliot  would,  however,  locate  it  between  Chandone 
and  Phnompenh,  perhaps  near  Vyadhapura  (Angkor  Borei).  BEFEO 
1902,  p.  128; 
1903,  p.  247,  269-90;  1904,  p.  214.  The  difficulty  with  regard  to  The  identification 
is  that  Chin-lin  is  not  due  west  from  such  a   location  ;   the  distance  too  is  more 
than  500  li.

--- PAGE 42 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  LIN- YANG 
23 
from  Thaton.  According  to  Cunningham’s  computation 
one  Chinese  li  in  Hsiian-Chuang’s  time  was  equivalent  to 
one-sixth  of  an  English  mile  if  it  is  assumed  that  Chinese 
li  measured  the  same  distance  in  the  third  century  as  well, 
we  have  roughly  over  300  English  miles  as  the  distance  from 
Chin-ch’en  or  Thaton  to  Lin-Yang.  But  this  distance  must 
not  be  measured  as  the  crow  flies,  for  cart  or  horse  tracks  in 
those  days  lay  necessarily  in  a   zigzag  course.  Nor  should 
they,  I   think,  be  taken  too  literally.  If  we  take  this  into 
consideration  and  allow  some  concession  as  to  the  measure- 
ment of  the  distance  in  li,  I   think,  we  cannot  go  higher  up 
northwards  than  Hmawza,  the  site  of  the  capital  of  the  old 
kingdom  of  Prome.  In  fact,  I   infer  that  the  kingdom  of 
Lin-Yang  may  be  the  same  as  the  kingdom  of  old  Prome 
that  lay,  even  in  those  days,  much  to  the  interior  at  con- 
siderable distance  from  the  coast,  and  could  not  be  reached 
by  water  especially  from  the  region  of  Chin-ch’en.  The 
identification  with  Prome  may  also  find  support  from  the  fact 
that  only  two  centuries  later  we  have  definite  evidence  of  the 
prevalence  of  Buddhism  in  the  capital  city  of  this  old  king- 
dom where  Pali  canonical  literature  was  studied  in  its  doctrinal 
and  most  intricate  aspects. 
But  whether  the  identification  of  Lin-Yang  with  Prome 
stands  or  is  just  a   mere  conjecture,  we  cannot  doubt  that  this 
kingdom  must  be  sought  for  somewhere  in  Burma,  either  in 
the  region  of  Prome  or  higher  up  in  the  central  districts  of 
the  peninsula,5'2  where  Buddhism  was  already  in  the  middle 
of  the  third  century  very  well  established  with  several 
thousand  sramanas  adhering  to  the  Faith,  and  the  whole 
people  subscribing  to  the  worship  of  the  Buddha.  If  the 
51  Cunningham's  Ancient  Geography  of  India,  App.  B.,  p.  571  ff. 
But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  entire  discussion  centering  on 
Lin-Yang  is  based  on  the  identification  of  Chin-lin  (Chin-ch’eri)  with  the  region 
bordering  on  the  gulf  of  Martaban,  which,  however,  is  generally  accepted.  But 
see  Luce,  JBRS>,  Vol.  XIV,  Part  II,  p.  155,  n.  f.

--- PAGE 43 ---
24  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
identifications  set  forth  above  are  correct,  and  it  seems  they 
are  quite  plausible,  then  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Buddhism 
was  already  an  established  faith  in  certain  places  in  Burma 
in  about  the  third  century  A.D.68  This  piece  of  evidence 
and  that  of  the  Nagarjunikonda  record  may  thus  be  said  to 
support  each  other  in  their  assertion  of  Buddhism  having 
been  a   prevalent  form  of  religion  in  Burma  in  the  third 
century  A.D. 
V 
THE  BUDDHAGHOSA  TRADITION  :   LEGEND  AND  HISTORY 
c.  400-450  a.d, 
Burmese  chronicles  preserve  to  this  day  a   strong 
and  insistent  tradition  current  everywhere  in  the  Buddhist 
hierarchy  of  Burma  that  Buddhaghosa,  the  celebrated  Buddhist 
■commentator  and  author  of  a   number  of  Buddhist  texts, 
was  a   native  of  Burma.  Born  in  Thaton,  he  is  said  to  have 
made  a   voyage  to  Ceylon  in  the  year  of  religion  943, 
f.e.,  400  A.D.64  The  Burmans  ascribe  a   new  era  in  their 
religion  to  the  time  when  the  great  scholar  reached  their 
country  back  from  Ceylon.65  He  succeeded  in  his  under- 
taking. He  made  use  of  the  Taking  characters  in  trans- 
cribing the  manuscripts  which  were  written  in  the  character 
of  Magadha.  The  Burmans  lay  much  stress  on  that  voyage, 
always  carefully  noting  down  the  year  it  took  place.  In 
53  In  Tun-hsiin  (z.e.,  Tennaseiim)  Brahmanism  was  at  this  time  at  least  one  of 
the  prevalent  forms  of  religion,  preached  evidently  by  Indian  colonists.  “   The 
kingdom  of  Tun-hsiin  depends  on  Fii-nan     In  this  country  there  are  500  families 
of  Hu  of  India,  two  Fo-t’u,  and  more  than  a   thousand  Brahmanas  of  India.  The 
(people  of;  Tun-hsiin  practice  their  doctrine  and  give  them  their  daughters  in 
marriage,  so  many  of  these  brahmanas  do  not  depart.  They  do  nothing  but  read 
the  holy  books  of  the  heavenly  spirits  and  constantly  offer  unto  them  white  bases  of 
perfumes  and  flowers  without  ceasing,  day  and  night.’’  BEFEO 
Ill,  p,  279  ff. 
54  Rogers,  Buddhaghosa' s   parables ,  p.  xvi,  n.  L 
55  Hardy,  Manual  of  Buddhi$mt  p.  532.

--- PAGE 44 ---
BUDDHAGHOSA  TRADITION 
25 
fact,  it  is  to  Buddhaghosa  that  the  people  of  the  shores  of 
the  gulf  of  Martaban  owe  the  possession  of  Buddhist 
scriptures."0  He  is  said  to  have  also  brought  over  from 
Ceylon  to  Burma  a   copy  of  Kaccayana’s  Pali  grammar 
which  he  translated  into  Burmese,  and  to  have  written  a 
commentary  as  well  upon  it.57  A   volume  of  parables  in 
Burmese  is  also  attributed  to  him.58  The  Burmese  Code 
of  Manu  is  said  to  have  been  introduced  into  Burma  from 
Ceylon  by  the  same  Buddhist  scholar,  though  the  Code 
itself  is  silent  on  the  point.50 
Here  is  an  example  how  the  tradition  is  recorded  in  the 
chronicles  of  the  country.  It  is  taken  from  the  Hmannan 
Yazawin  which,  like  most  other  Burmese  chronicles,  claims 
Buddhaghosa  to  have  been  a   native  of  Thaton  from  where  he 
is  said  to  have  crossed  over  to  a   seaport  called  Bhangiri  in 
the  Deccan.  Thence  he  reached  Ceylon  by  ship.  It  then 
proceeds  to  give  an  account  of  his  early  life  and  career,  and 
then  of  his  sojourn  in  Ceylon  including  the  story  of  the  writing 
of  the  commentaries  These  accounts  follow  on  the  whole 
those  of  the  Sinhalese  chronicles. 
44  Thus  when  the  great  elder  Ashin  Buddhaghosa  had  given  king  Mahanaman  a 
white  elephant  and  sought  leave  to  depart,  he  brought  one  out  of  the  three  copies 
of  the  Visuddhimagga  which  he  had  made  together  with  the  three  Pitakas ,  and 
crossed  over  to  Jambudvipa.  And  Sakka  came  to  him  and  said  :  *  In  Jambudvipa,  in 
the  middle  country,  there  is  no  standing  place  for  the  religion.  The  religion 
should  shine.  The  religion  shall  stand  and  shine  for  five  thousand  years  in  such 
places  as  the  distant  jungle  settlements  in  the  south-east  comer  of  the  middle  country, 
nine  hundred  (yojana)  in  circumference— Tharekhittara,  Thiripyissaya  (and) 
Ramannadesa.  Carry  it  thither  !   So  he  took  it  and  crossed  over  and  reached  the  city 
of  Thaton,  called  SudhammavatL  And  when  the  tidings  were  known,  there 
was  a   general  cry  throughout  all  the  kingdom  of  Ramanna,  and  king  and  queen, 
men  and  women,  monks  and  laymen,  all  welcomed  the  religion  with  diverse  festivals, 
assemblies,  celebrations,  and  almsgivings.  As  though  the  Lord  Omniscient  had 
56  Ibid . 
57  Ind.  Ant.,  xix,  1890,  p.  532. 
58  Ibid , 
5®  Ibid .  In  this  connection  see  also  Dr,  B.  C.  Law,  The  Life  and  Work  b/ 
Buddhaghosa ,  
II,  pp,  40-42. 
4— 1445 B

--- PAGE 45 ---
26  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
appeared  in  their  midst,  they  reverently  raised  the  Pitakas,  and  coming  to  the  city 
palace  they  built  a   tabernacle  in  a   lovely  place  in  front  of  the  golden  palace,  and  there 
they  laid  the  treasures  of  the  religion. 
“   At  the  time  the  chief  elder  of  the  religious  order  was  Ashin  Anomadassi. 
This  is  his  lineage  :  of  the  two  monks  of  the  Third  Council,  Sona  and  Uttara,  who 
came  to  Suvannabhumi  in  the  cause  of  religion,  Ashin  Sona  the  elder  had  ten 
pupils  who  abode  with  him,  the  chief  of  whom  wa9  Ashin  Mahisobhita 
his 
pupil  was  Ashin  Mahasomadatta ;   his  pupil,  Ashin  Sumantissa;  his  pupil, 
Ashin  Sobhaga;  his  pupil,  Ashin  *Somadatta;  his  pupil,  Ashin  Anomadassi. 
When  Ashin  Anomadassi  was  in  charge  of  the  religion,  diverse  saints  and 
monks  who  were  practising  piety  in  the  countries  of  Burma,  Mon,  Arakan, 
Shan  Yun,  Linzin  and  Sokkati,  came  one  by  one  and  studied  and  took 
away  the  sacred  Pali  and  the  commentary,  which  had  only  been  handed  down  by 
word  of  mouth  from  teacher  to  teacher ;   and  so  in  diverse  distant  places  even  now 
the  religion  spreads  and  shines.  This  agrees  with  the  Sasanavamsa  and  the  Thaton 
Chronicle.., 
**  ...The  Great  Chronicle  says  that  it  was  in  the  forty-second  year  after  the 
accession  of  King  Thinlikyaung  that  Ashin  Buddhaghosa  crossed  over  to  Ceylon. 
But  in  the  forty-fourth  (?)  year  of  the  reign  of  this  king,  being  the  930th  year  of  the 
religion  or  308,  Mahanaman  had  not  even  come  to  the  throne ;   there  is  a   gap  of  * 
sixteen  years.  So  il  was  not  in  the  reign  of  king  Thinlikyaung,  but  in  the  fifteenth 
year  of  the  reign  of  his  son  Kyaungdwit  that  Mahanaman  became  king,  in  the  946th 
year  of  the  religion  or  324.  This  is  found  in  the  Dipavamsa  and  agrees  with  the 
Kalyanl  inscriptions,. and  the  Sasanavamsa. 
ft  The  above  account  has  been  omitted  in  the  Great  and  Middle  Chronicles,  but 
is  here  inseited  with  extracts  according  to  the  books,  in  order  to  make  plain  the  story 
of  the  arrival  in  Burma  of  the  Pitakas,  of  the  religion.” 
Thus,  so  far  as  legend  is  concerned  here  obviously  is  an 
example  of  how  the  chroniclers  of  a   later  date  satisfied  their 
natural  vanity  by  claiming  as  many  celebrities  of  the  religion 
they  could  as  their  own.  Foulkes 00  and  Smith  G]  even 
doubted  if  there  was  ever  a   historical  personage  as  Buddha- 
ghosa. But  we  can  readily  ignore  that  argument  now,  for 
the  celebrated  Buddhist  scholar  has  long  been  proved  to  have 
been  a   real  historical  personage.  More  substantial  arguments 
in  opposition  are  offered  by  Prof.  Hackmann  G2  and  Prof. 
Louis  Finot. 
M 
60  "   Buddhaghosa, ”   Ind.  ^4nf.,  xix,  1889,  p.  122. 
€1  "   Asoka’s  alleged  mission  to  Pegu,”  Ind.  Ant.,  xxxiv,  1905,  pp.  185  86. 
62  Buddhism  as  a   Religion ,  p.  68.

--- PAGE 46 ---
BUDDHAGHOSA  TRADITION 
27 
“   There  is  ground  ”   says  Prof .  Hackmann,  “for  doubting  the  statement  that 
this  man  (Buddhaghosa)  brought  Buddhism  to  Burma.  The  chronicles  of  Ceylon 
to  which  we  owe  the  information  about  Buddhaghosa  and  which  must  have  been 
well-informed  on  the  subject,  give  no  account  of  his  journey  to  Further  India.  Indeed, 
one  of  the  most  important  inscriptions  in  Burma,  which  was  erected  at  the  end  of  the 
15th  century  A.D.  at  the  instance  of  the  king  of  Pegu  .  makes  no  mention  whatsoever 
of  Buddhaghosa.  The  Burmese  tradition  which  refers  to  him  does  so  on  account 
of  his  translations  and  writings  having  become  fundamental  in  the  country,  probably 
al«o  because  his  intellectual  influence  may  have  inaugurated  a   new  epoch  in  Burmese 
Buddhism.”  > 
Prof.  Finot,  the  distinguished  French  scholar,  also  speaks 
in  the  same  strain . 03 
M   In  Indo-China,  he  (Buddhaghosa)  passes  for  the  grand  apostle  who 
biought  to  those  peoples  the  treasure  of  the  sacred  books.  Each  country  of  the 
Peninsula  is  a   claimant ;   the  Burmese  make  him  a   monk  of  Thaton,  modern 
Cambodia  places  him  at  the  beginning  of  its  religious  tradition  and  has  kept  his 
name  as  one  of  the  most  elevated  titles  of  ecclesiastical  hierarchy   The  (Burmese) 
chronicles  either  secular  or  ecclesiastical  are  only  the  echo  of  Sinhalese  history, 
altered  by  an  insatiable  national  vanity.  As  they  make  Buddha  travel  in  the  valley 
of  the  Irrawady  for  predicting  the  foundation  of  diverse  capitals,  they  substitute 
Thaton  for  Magadha  as  the  point  of  departure  or  of  return  in  the  voyage  of  Buddha- 
ghosa to  Ceylon.  Not  only  is  this  tradition  apocryphal,  it  is  not  even  old ;   it  cannot 
go  back  in  any  case  further  than  the  16th  century.  We  have  a   decisive  proof  of  it 
in  the  inscriptions  of  FCalyanl  ..  ..If  the  belief  in  the  introduction  of  the  scriptures  to 
Pegu  by  Buddhaghosa  had  asserted  at  that  time,  the  pious  king  would  have  no 
doubt  reserved  to  it  a   place  of  h  onour  in  his  abridgement  of  the  history  of  the 
Church.  But  he  does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  great  commentator ;   thus  it 
follows  that  in  his  time  no  connection  had  yet  been  established  between  Buddha- 
ghosa and  Thaton.’* 
Who  would  deny  that  there  is  great  weight  in  these 
criticisms  which  are  just  and  reasonable  ?  The  character 
itself  of  the  tradition  is  such  as  to  raise  suspicion  in  a   critical 
mind ;   and  the  omission,  moreover,  of  any  account  of  the 
great  scholar’s  adventure  in  further  India  in  the  Ceylonese 
chronicles  as  well  as  in  the  Kalyanx  inscriptions  is  indeed  too 
serious  an  objection  to  overcome.  The  argument  of 
omission,  it  is  true,  does  not  go  very  far,  but  it  must  be 
The  Legend  of  Buddhaghosa,  translated  from  the  French  by  P,  C.  Bagchi, 
Cal  Rev.,  1923,  PP.  63-67.

--- PAGE 47 ---
28 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
admitted  that  in  the  present  instance  it  goes  a   great  way 
towards  confirming  the  suspicions  already  created  in  our 
minds  by  the  nature  of  the  tradition  itself.  The  omission 
in  the  Ceylonese  chronicles  may,  however,  be  ignored ; 
but  not  that  in  the  Kalyanl  inscriptions  where  the  pious 
and  zealous  king  Dhammaceti  made  it  a   point,  as  it 
were,  to  record  each  and  every  step  in  the  course  of  the 
progress  of  the  religion  in  the  Peninsula  up  till  his  reign, 
and  it  is  indeed  difficult  to  assume  that  he  forgot  to  record 
such  an  important  event. 
Furthermore,  Prof.  B.  M.  Barua,;l  has  recently  introduced  us 
to  a   second  Buddhaghosa,  a   Buddhist  scholar  and  divine,  and 
an  elder  contemporary  of  the  Buddhaghosa  of  the  Visuclclhi- 
magga  fame,  Evidence,  unfortunately,  is  so  meagre  on  the 
point  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  establish  his  identity;  we  only 
know  that  it  was  at  his  instance  that  the  younger,  but  the 
more  celebrated  Buddhaghosa  undertook  to  prepare  his 
famous  commentary  on  the  Vibhanga,  the  Sammohavinodini. 
It  may  be  argued  that  the  elder  Buddhaghosa  may  have 
been  a   native  of  Burma,  and  the  chroniclers  fathered  on  him 
all  that  passed  in  the  name  of  the  younger  and  the  more 
celebrated  one.  But  such  an  assumption  is  unwarranted; 
and  if  all  that  is  claimed  by  the  tradition  current  in  Burma  is 
to  be  believed,  it  is  certain  that  none  else  than  the  younger 
and  the  more  celebrated,  the  scholar  Buddhaghosa,  is 
meant.06 
64  "   Two  Buddhaghosas,”  Indian  Culture,  I,  No,  2,  pp.  294-95. 
65  “   The  Burmese  tradition  that  Buddhaghosa  was  a   native  of  Thaton  and 
returned  thither  from  Ceylon  merits  more  attention  than  it  has  received.  It  can 
easily  be  explained  away  as  patriotic  fancy.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Buddhaghosa’s 
object  was  to  invigorate  Hlnayanism  in  India  the  result  of  his  really  stupendous 
labours  was  singularly  small,  for  in  India  his  name  is  connected  with  no  religious 
movement.  But  if  we  suppose  that  he  went  to  Ceylon  by  way  of  the  holy  places 
in  Magadha  and  returned  from  the  Coromandal  coast^Lo  Burma  where  Hlnayanism 
afterwards  flourished,  we  have  at  least  a   coherent  narrative.”  Eliot,  Hinduism  and 
Buddhism ,  
III,  p.  32,

--- PAGE 48 ---
BUDDHAGHOSA  TRADITION 
29 
But  all  this  is  more  destructive  or  speculative.  The 
tradition  so  loud  and  persistent,  may  .not  be  without  a 
meaning,  a   significance.  Is  it  not  possible  to  suggest  some- 
thing constructive,  something  that  may  help  us  to  see  the 
indication  of  history  through  the  thick  mass  of  legends  ?  We 
may  not  be  able  to  hit  upon  any  positive  evidence,  but  we 
may  be  able  to  throw,  though  in  a   small  measure,  some  light 
on  a   tradition  that  has  vexed  scholars  for  long . 
Recent  archaeological  finds  mainly  at  Hmawza,  a   small 
village  rich  in  ancient  ruins,  five  miles  south  of  the  present 
town  of  Prome,  and  the  oldest  seat,  so  far  known,  of  king- 
ship  in  lower  Burma,  have  decisively  proved  that  Thera- 
vada  or  Pali  Buddhism  was  already  well  known  in  and 
around  that  country  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  of  the 
Christian  era.  Here  have  been  discovered  a   number  of 
epigraphs  relating  to  well-known  texts  from  canonical  Pali 
literature  inscribed  on  stone  and  gold  plates  in  what  is  very 
closely  allied  to  the  Kadamba  script,  paleographically 
belonging  to  the  5th  and  6th  centuries  A.D.  Two  of  these 
plates  begin  with  the  well-known  Buddhist  formula 
“   Ye  dhamma  hetuppabhava     etc.,  in  Pali,  and  refer 
respectively  to  the  19  categories  of  Buddhism,  and  the  equally 
well-known  praise  of  the  tri-ratna  as  contained  in  the 
Anguttara  Niktya™  Another  epigraph  contains  an  extract 
either  from  the  Dhammasatigani  or  Vibhanga  ;   while  a   third 
which  is  a   gold-leaf  manuscript  is  inscribed  with  an  extract 
giving  the  chain  of  causation  or  paticca-samuppada  and  other 
extracts  from  the  Sutta,  Vinaya,  and  Abhidhamma-Pitakas. 
All  these  texts  which  we  shall  refer  to  in  detail  in  the  next 
section  belong  decidedly  to  Pali  or  Thera vada  Buddhism, 
66  It  may  be  noted  here  that  Buddhaghosa  in  commenting  on  the  Anguttara 
Nikaya*  I.  14.  6,  describes  the  merchant  of  Ukkala  -'obviously  a   form  of  Utkala) 
as  having  been  inhabitants  of  Asitanjana  in  the  region  of  Hamsavatl  or  Pegu.  It 
shows  Buddhaghosa’s  acquaintance  with  the  region  of  deltaic  Burma.  Vide 
Forchammer,  Notes  on  the  Ancient  Geography  of  Burma,  The  n   Sbwedagon 
Pagoda,”  Rangoon,  1911,

--- PAGE 49 ---
30 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  the  epigraphs  prove  once  for  all  that  this  Buddhism  was 
known  and  practised  at  old  Prome  (Hmawza)  as  early  as 
when  those  epigraphs  were  inscribed,  i.e.,  in  the  5th  and  6th 
centuries  A.D.  Images  of  the  Buddha  in  traditional  poses  and 
attitudes  and  belonging  to  the  same  period  as  well  as 
stupas  and  other  monuments,  belonging  to  the  creed  of 
Theravada  Buddhism  by  reason  of  the  iconography  of  the 
sculptures  that  embellish  them  have  been  discovered 
in  considerable  numbers  at  the  same  locality.  To  all  these 
we  shall  turn  in  greater  detail  in  subsequent  sections.  These 
finds  known  to  scholars  for  several  years  are  important  by 
themselves,  but  when  we  consider  the  period  to  which 
they  belong  and  the  tradition  of  art  and  palaeography 
which  they  are  affiliated  to  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other 
the  period  when  Buddhaghosa  flourished  and  the  country  or 
countries  which  he  was  more  or  less  associated  with,  they 
become  at  once  invested  with  a   deeper  significance. 
According  to  Dhammakitti’s  account  in  the  Mahavamsa, 
Buddhaghosa  flourished  in  the  first  half  of  the  5th  century 
A.D.  This  account  is  supported  by  Burmese  tradition  and 
other  internal  evidences  from  the  works  of  Buddhaghosa 
himself/'7  Most  of  his  years  of  activity  he  lived,  it  is  true, 
in  Ceylon,  but  tradition  strongly  connects  him  with  South 
India  as  well,  more  definitely  with  Conjeeveram  or  ancient 
Kancipuram  which  the  great  Buddhist  scholar  and  preacher 
is  credited  with  having  developed  into  an  important  centre 
of  Theravada  Buddhism.  Tradition  and  history  also  associate 
him  intimately  with  the  Godavari  region  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  Kaverl  region  on  the  other.  In  fact,  if  tradition 
is  to  be  given  any  value,  it  is  to  the  credit  of  Buddhaghosa 
that  Theravada  Buddhism  had  a   new  lease  of  life  in  South 
India. 
We  shall  presently  see  in  the  sections  immediately  follow- 
ing, that  from  the  fifth  century  onwards  down  to  the  middle  of 
67  Law,  The  Life  and  Work  of  Buddhaghosa ,  pp.  9-11.

--- PAGE 50 ---
BUDDHAGHOSA  TRADITION 
31 
the  eleventh  there  is  a   continuous  record  of  a   very  flourish- 
ing state  of  Buddhism  in  and  around  the  kingdom  of 
old  Prome,  in  fact,  in  lower  Burma.  The  fifth  century 
indeed  seems  to  be  very  significant  from  what  we  shall 
presently  see  in  the  history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma.  This 
.  century  saw,  in  the  old  kingdom  of  Prome,  a   sudden 
awakening  of  Theravada  Buddhism,  a   new  start,  as  it  were, 
of  an  old  faith.  It  found  from  somewhere  a   strong  impetus, 
a   new  urge  of  life,  at  about  this  period,  and  this  new  urge 
expressed  itself  in  a   wide  outburst  of  activities  in  all  direc- 
tions chips  of  which  have  come  down  to  us  in  the  shape 
of  a   number  of  Pali  inscriptions,  a   large  number  of  Buddhist 
sculptures  and  Buddhist  monuments.  Is  it  or  is  it  not 
possible  to  connect  this  impetus,  this  outburst  of  Buddhist 
religious  activity,  suddenly  in  about  the  fifth  century,  with  the 
Buddhaghosa  legend  P  In  any  case  the  appearance  or  re- 
appearance of  Theravada  Buddhism  in  the  old  kingdom 
of  Prome  as  evidenced  by  her  old  epigraphs  and  sculp- 
tures and  monuments  thus  almost  coincides  not  only  with 
the  period  in  which  Buddhaghosa  flourished,  but  also  with 
the  establishment  and  development  of  great  centres  of 
Theravada  Buddhism  on  the  Krsna-Godavarl  and  Kaverl 
valleys,  in  places  like  Kanclpuram,  Kaverlpattanam  and 
Uragapuram,  all  intimately  associated  with  the  Buddhaghosa 
tradition.  The  coincidence  seems  rather  to  be  significant, 
and  when  we  examine  the  Burmese  tradition  from  this  point 
of  view  the  story  of  the  great  scholar’s  visit  may  not  seem 
to  be  altogether  without  a   foundation,  though  one  is  cons- 
cious that  such  an  argument  involves  a   certain  kind  of  logical 
fallacy.  Besides,  one  has  also  to  bear  in  mind  the  possibility 
of  earlier  prevalence  of  Buddhism  in  Burma  that  we  have 
indicated  in  the  previous  sections.  The  surgence  of  the 
religion  in  the  peninsula  from  about  the  5th  century  referred 
to  above  suggests  that  there  must  have  taken  place  some- 
where near  before  that  date  a   movement  that  spurred  into

--- PAGE 51 ---
52  '  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
activity  elements  that  had  already  been  in  existence  for  some 
time  past. 
Along  with  what  has  been  stated  above  in  this  section 
and  in  a   following  one  in  support  of  a   surgence  of  Theravada 
Buddhist  activities  in  lower  Burma  in  about  the  fifth  and 
and  sixth  centuries  may  also  be  considered  the  Mon  inscrip- 
tion found  at  Lobpuri  in  Siam  ascribed  to  about  the  same 
date;  references  to  Thaton,  the  capital  of  the  Ramannadesa  or 
Talaing  country,  in  several  passages  of  Buddhist  coramen- 
tarial  literature  which  in  their  Pali  recensions  are  dated  about 
the  5th  century  A.D. ;   and  references  to  Harnsavatl  or  Pegu 
in  the  Jataka  Nidana^atha  (VOL.  I,  p.  37)  as  “   Nagaram 
Padumottara-Buddhassa  ’  ’  in  several  places  in  the  Manoratha- 
puranl,  the  commentary  of  the  Anguttara  Ninety  a   (Sinhalese 
edn.,  1904)  and  other  places.  Both  Thaton  and  Pegu,  it 
may  be  remembered,  are  associated  with  the  Buddhaghosa 
tradition. 
In  respect  of  the  Buddhaghosa  tradition  it  may, 
therefore,  be  assumed  that  there  are  cogent  reasons  for 
doubting  it,  but  we  must  not  treat  the  problem  as  closed 
or  as  decided  once  for  all.  There  is,  indeed,  a   probability 
of  the  tradition  having  something  to  do  with  actual  facts, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  more  reasonable  to  keep  the  door  open 
for  more  light,  and  re-examine  the  legend  in  the  light  of 
evidences  that  are  daily  growing  in  volume  and  importance 
in  favour  of  an  early  introduction  of  Theravada  Buddhism 
in  Burma.  But,  Buddhaghosa  or  no  Buddhaghosa  in  Burma, 
it  is  immaterial  with  regard  to  our  study  of  the  history  of 
Buddhism  in  the  Peninsula.  If  the  tradition  be  given  any 
value,  the  great  Buddhist  scholar  must  then  have  made  his , 
influence  felt  in  Burma  some  time  in  the  first  half  of  the 
fifth  century  A.D.  .  If  it  be  dismissed,  it  would  matter  little, 
for  almost  immediately  after,  we  have  definite  epigraphic 
evidence  of  the  prevalence  of  Theravada  Buddhism,  the 
religion  of  the  Master,  in  its  pure  and  unsullied  form,  in

--- PAGE 52 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
33 
lower  Burma  where  Buddhaghosa  is  said  to  have  established 
one  of  his  centres  of  activity. 
VI 
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  :  C.  400-600  A.D. 
EVIDENCE  OF  PALI  INSCRIPTIONS 
As  early  as  1 897  there  were  discovered  at  Maunggan,  a 
small  village  close  to  the  ancient  ruins  of  Hmawza,  two  gold 
plates  bearing  writings  in  Pali  inscribed  in  characters  that 
have  long  been  recognised  as  having  a   very  close  affinity 
with  the  Kadamba  script  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  A.D. 
Each  of  the  two  plates  contains  three  lines  which  are  in 
perfect  state  of  preservation  and  the  letters  are  so  distinct 
as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  their  decipherment. 
They  begin  each  with  the  well-known  Buddhist  formula  : 
“Ye  dhamma  hetuppabhava  tesam  hetu   ”   but  differ 
in  the  text  of  the  extracts  that  follow/'8  This  will  be  evident 
from  what  follows  of  the  two  plates. 
First  Plate 
L.  1 
.  Ye  dhamma-hetuppabhava  tesam-hetum-Tatha- 
gato  aha 
tesan-cha-yo-nirodho  evamvadi-mahasamano-ti 
L.  2.  Catvaro-iddhipada  catvaro-samappadhana  catvaro- 
j, 
satipatthana  catvari-ariyasaccani  chatuvesarajjani 
panchindriyani  pancha-chakkhuni  chha 
L.  3.  Asaddharanani  satta-bhojjhanga  ariyo-atthangiko- 
maggo  nava-lokuttara  dhamma  dasa-balani  cuddasa 
Buddha-koni  attharasa-Buddhadhammani 
68  Ep .  Inch ,  V,  p.  101  ff.  For  a   more  correct  reading  and  interpretation'  see 
Finot,  "Un  nouveau  document  sur  le  buddisme  birman,”  JA.,  xx,  1912,  p.  121  ft.

--- PAGE 53 ---
34  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Second  Plate 
L.  1 .  Ye-dhamma-hetuppabhava  (te)sa(m)-hetu-Tathagato- 
aha  tesan-cha-yo-nirodho  evamvadi-mahasamano-ti 
iti-pi-so-bhagava  araham 
L.  2.  sammasambuddho  vijjacharanasampanno  sugato- 
lokavidu 
anuttaro-purisadhammasarathi  sattha-devamanus- 
sanam 
Buddho  bhagava-ti 
L.  3.  svakkhyato  bhagavata-dhammo  sanditthiko  akaliko 
ehipassiko  opanayiko  pachchattam-veditavvo  vinnuhl-ti. 
It  is  evident  that  in  the  first  plate  there  is,  besides  the 
well-known  formula,  an  enumeration  of  the  categories  of 
Saddhamma,  evidently  from  the  Abhidhamma,  in  a   pro- 
gressively numerical  order.  These  categories  are  separately 
alluded  to  or  discussed  in  more  or  less  detail,  in  most  of  the 
Abhidhamma  texts  ;   but  it  is  probably  in  the  Vibhanga, 
one  of  the  seven  books  of  the  Abhidhamma,  that  these 
categories,  some  of  them  at  least,  if  not  all,  are  often  alluded 
to  and  treated  in  detail.  At  least  in  one  place  the  Vibhanga 
enumerates  as  follows  some  of  the  categories  in  a 
progressively  numerical  order. 
Cattaro  satipatthana  cattaro  sammappadhana  cattaro 
iddhipada  pancindriyani  panca  balani  satta  bhojjhanga  ariyo 
atthangiko  maggo  ( Vibhanga ,  P.T.S.  edn.,  p.  372). 
This  plate  may,  therefore,  roughly  be  said  to  consist 
of  a   very  short  synopsis  of  some  of  the  contents  of  the 
Vibhanga,  a   sort  of  a   short  note  to  help  the  memory  or 
to  serve  as  a   guide  to  a   teacher  of  the  religion.  The 
enumeration  of  the  categories  in  arithmetical  progression 
can  also  be  found  in  the  Digha  Nifyaya  (p.T.S.  edn.,  Ill, 
p.  102),  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  (p.T.S.  edn.,  II,  p.  245), 
the  Anguttara  Nikaya  (P.T.S.  edn.,  IV,  pp.  125-26)  and 
the  Udana  (p.T.S.  edn.,  p.  56).

--- PAGE 54 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  ' 
35 
The  second  plate  begins  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
first ;   and  to  any  student  of  Pali  canonical  literature  it  will 
be  evident  that  the  first  line  is  followed  in  the  second  and  the 
third  by  the  well-known  praise  of  the  Buddha,  as  described  in 
the  Mahaparinibbana  Sutta  of  the  Digha  Ni\aya.  We  may 
find  it,  for  example,  in  the  Punnabhisandavagga  of  the 
Anguttara  Ni\aya,m  a   book  of  vhe  Sutta  Pita\a ,  where  the 
continuity  of  the  text,  as  in  our  plate,  is  broken  by  an 
introductory  and  a   concluding  sentence  in  each  case.  This 
will  be  clearly  evident  from  the  extract  reproduced  below 
from  the  Anguttara  : 
Idha  bhikkave  ariyasavako  Buddhe  aveccappasadena 
samannagato  hoti — iti  pi  so  bhagava  arahara  sammasam- 
buddho  vijjacaranasampanno  sugato  lokavidu  anuttaro  puri- 
sadammasarathi  sattha  devamanussanam  buddho  bhagava  ti. 
Ayam  bhikkhave  pathamo  punnabhisando  kusalabhisando — 
sukhaya  samvattati. 
Puna  ca  param  bhikkhave  ariyasavako  dhamme  aveccappa- 
sadena samannagato  hoti — svakkhato  bhagavata  dhammo 
sanditthiko  akaliko  ehipassiko  opanayiko  paccattam  veditabbo 
vinnuhiti.  Ayam  bhikkhave  dutiyo  punnabhisando  kusala- 
bhisando— sukhaya  samvattati. 
A   reference  to  the  praise  of  the  Buddha  may  be 
found  also  in  the  Samannaphala,  Ambattha,  Patika  and 
Sanglti  suttas  of  the  Digha  Ni\aya,  as  well  as  in  the  Paraji\a- 
hania,  Sutta  Vibhanga,  of  the  Vinaya  Pitaka. 
A   few  more  important  Pali  inscriptions  were  discovered  at 
Hmawza  not  earlier  than  twelve  years  later.  In  1910-11  while 
clearing  the  small  debris  round  the  base  of  the  Bawbawgyi 
Pagoda  were  unearthed  two  fragments  of  a   stone  inscription 
in  Pali ;   the  third  fragment  completing  the  inscription  was 
found  the  year  after  close  by  the  same  spot.  The  inscription 
*»  P.T.S.,  Edn.,  Vol.  II,  52,  p.  56.

--- PAGE 55 ---
36  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
was  edited  and  translated  for  the  first  time  by  Prof.  Finot 
in  his  very  interesting  article  already  referred  to.70  The  text 
runs  as  follows  : 
(1)  (Samphusa)na  samphus(i)tattam  vedanakkhandho 
sannakhandho  sankharakkhandho 
(2)  ...ditthivipphanditam  ditthiayam  vuccati  chalaya- 
tanapaccaya  phasso  tattha  katam  (a)  (pha)ssa  paccaya  vedana 
yam  ceta(s)i(kam). 
(3)  Sannojanam  ga(ho)  patilaho  patiggaho  abhiniveso 
paramaso  mummago   
Evidently  the  text  is  something  of  the  sort  of  a   discon- 
nected note  of  some  of  the  essentials  of  Buddhist  psychology. 
That  it  is  an  extract  from  a   canonical  text,  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  and  Prof.  Finot  suggested  71  that  it  might  probably 
be  an  extract,  not  necessarily  word  for  word,  from  the 
Dhammasafigani,  a   book  of  the  Abhidhpmma,  while 
M.  Duroiselle  pointed  it  out  72  to  be  an  extract  from 
the  Vibhanga,  another  book  of  the  same  Pitaka.  That  the 
subject  of  the  text  of  our  inscription  concerns  itself  directly 
with  those  portions  of  the  Dhammasafigani  which  deal  with 
the  questions  of  dhamma  kusala  and  dhamma  akusala 
must  needs  be  admitted,  but  nowhere  in  the  Dhamma- 
safigani the  subject  is  presented  in  the  way  we  have 
in  the  inscription.  Duroiselle’s  suggestion  seems  to  be 
rather  precise,  though  in  that  case  also  the  text  of 
the  inscription  does  not  follow  the  order  as  we  find  it  in 
the  Vibhanga.  It  is  evident  that  the  text  of  our  fragments  is 
nothing  but  a   cursory  and  indifferent  note,  loosely  arranged, 
of  an  important  article  of  the  Vibhanga.  iWhat  purpose  these 
or  such  notes  served  or  whom  these  were  intended  for  is 
somewhat  difficult  to  ascertain;  but,  as  I   have  already 
w   An.R.A.S.B.,  1924,  p,  22. 
71  Finot,  op.  cit. 
73  An  R.A.S.B.,  1924,  p.  22.

--- PAGE 56 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
37 
suggested,  it  is  likely  that  these  short  epigraphs,  by  way  of 
very  short  notes  on  essentials  of  the  religion,  served  the 
purpose  of  a   guide  book,  a   book  of  points  to  help  the 
memory,  for  those  preachers  of  the  faith  who  early  took 
upon  themselves  the  task  of  evangelising  the  land  of 
Suvannabhumi.  It  is  not  unlikely  on  the  other  hand  that 
following  the  well-known  Indian  Buddhist  custom,  these 
short  epigraphs  had  been  enshrined  as  sacred  objects  of  the 
religion  within  the  stupas  and  temples  from  the  ruins  of 
which  they  were  eventually  picked  up. 
But  the  most  important  record  hitherto  discovered  of  Pali 
Buddhism  in  lower  Burma,  again  from  the  ruins  of  old 
Hmawza,  is  a   book  of  twenty  leaves  of  gold,  exactly  of  the 
nature  of  old  palmdeaf  manuscripts  of  India,  each  inscribed 
on  one  side  only,  placed  within  two  covers  of  the 
same  metal.  This  unique  record  was  discovered  in 
1926  last,  and  has  recently  been  edited  and  published.78 
Each  of  the  first  eighteen  leaves  of  the  manuscript  contains, 
like  the  Maunggan  plates,  three  lines,  the  nineteenth  four 
lines,  and  the  twentieth  only  two.  Altogether  the  twenty 
leaves  contain  nine  extracts  from  the  different  texts  of  the 
Pali  Pitakas  :  this  will  be  evident  from  the  excerpts  quoted 
below  from  the  reading  of  Mr.  Lu  Pe  Win.78 
(Roman  numerals  within  brackets  indicate  the  text  number,  while  Arabic 
numerals  indicate  the  number  of  the  line  on  a   leaf  J 
Excerpt  No.  1 
. 
Siddham  Avijjapaccaya  sankhara  sankharapaccaya 
vinnana  (I- 1 )   vinnanapaccaya  namarupam  namarupapaccaya 
salayatanam  (1-2)  sajayatana  paccaya  phasso  phassapaccaya 
vedana  vedanapaccaya  (1-3)  tanha  tanhapaccaya  upadana 
upadanapaccaya  bhavo  bhava  paccaya  (II- 1)  jati  jatipaccaya 
»   An  R.A.S.  B„  1938-39,  pp.  12-22. 
M   An.R.A.S,  B.,  ibid.

--- PAGE 57 ---
38  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
jara  maranam  sokaparidevita-dumkhado  (II-2)  manussupayasa 
sambhavanti.  Evametassakevalassa  dukkhakhanaha  (II-3)  ssa 
samudayo  hot!  ti.  Avijjaya  tveva  asesaviraganirodha  (III- 1 ) 
sankharanirodho  sarikharanirodha  vinnananiiodho  vinnanani- 
rodha  (III-2)  namarupanirodho  namarupanirodha  sajayatanani- 
rodho  sajaya  (1II-3)  tananirodha  phassanirodha  phassanirodha 
vedananirodho  (IV- 1)  vedananirodha  tanhanirodho  tanhanira- 
dha  upadana  nirodho  (IV-2)  upadananirodha  bhavanirodho 
bKavanirodha  jatinirodho  (IV-3)  jatinirodha  jaramaranasoka- 
paridevitadumkhadomanassupaya  (V-l)  sa  nirujjhantlti.  Eva- 
metassakevalassa dumkhakhandhassa  nirodho  (V-2)  hot!  ti. 
Excerpt  No.  2. 
Udayavaya  bhaiigabhaya  adinnava  nibbida  mumjana 
upekkha  (V-3). 
Excerpt  No.  3. 
Siddha  cattaro  satipatthana  cattaro  samappadhana  cattaro 
iddhipada  (VI- 1)  pancindriyani  pancabalani  sattabojjhafigani 
ariyo  attha  (VI-2)  ngiko  maggo. 
Excerpt  No.  4. 
Cattarimani  bhikkhave  tathagatassa  vesarajjani  (VI-3) 
yehi  vesarajjehi  samannagato  tathagato  asabhanthanam  pati 
(VII- 1)  janati  parisasu  sihanadam  nadati  brahmacakkamvatteti 
(VII-2)  Katamani  cattari  sammasambuddhassa  te  patijanati 
ime  dhamma  (VII-3)  anabhisambuddha  ti  tattra  vata  mam 
samano  va  brahmano  va  devo  va  (VIII- 1)  maro  va  koci  va 
lokasmim  sahadhammena  paticodessanti  ti  (VIII-2)  nimitta- 
metarp  bhikkhave  na  samanupassami.  Etam  paham 
bhikkhave  nimitta  (VIII-3)  metam  asamanupassanto  khema- 
patto  abhayapatto  vesarajjapatto  (IX- 1)  viharami.  Khlnasa- 
vassa  te  patijananto  ime  asava  (IX-2)  aparikkhmati  tattra  vata

--- PAGE 58 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
3$ 
mam  samano  va  brahmano  va  devo  va  (IX-3)  maro  va  koci 
va  Iokasmim  sahadhammena  paticodessantlti  nimittame-(X-l) 
tam  bhikkhave  na  samanupassami.  Etam  paham  bhikkhave 
nimittam  asa-(X-2)  manupassanto  khemapatto  abhayapatto 
vesarajjapatto  viharami  (X-3).  Ye  kbo  pana  te  antarayika 
dhamma  vutta  te  patisevanto  nalam  antara-(XI-1 ) 
  yayati 
tattra  vata  mam  samano  va  brahmano  va  devo  va  maro  (Xl-2) 
va  koci  va  Iokasmim  sahadhammena  paticodessati  ti  nimitta- 
metam  (XI-3)  bhikkhave  na  samanupassami.  Etam  paham 
bhikkhave  nimittam  asamanu  (XU-1)  passanto  khemapatto  a- 
[b]  bhayapatto  vesarajjapatto  (XII-2)  viharami.  Yassa  kho 
pana  te  atthaya  dhammo  desito  so  [nini]  (X1I-3)  yati  takka- 
rassa  samma  dukkhakhayaya  [ti]  tattra  vata  mam  samano  va 
brahma  (XIII-T)  no  va  devo  va  maro  va  koci  va  Iokasmim 
sahadhammena  patico  (XIII-2)  dessantiti  nimittametam 
bhikkhave  na  samanupassami.  Etam  paham  bhikkha 
(XI1I-3)  ve  nimittam  asamanupassanto  khemapatto  abhaya- 
patto viha  (XIV- 1)  rami.  Imani  kho  bhikkhave  cattari 
tathagatassavesara  (XIV-2)  jjani  titi. 
Excerpt  No.  5. 
Katamehi  bhagava  cuddasehi  buddhanane  (XIV-3)  hi 
samannagato  Tathagato  ?  Dum[khe]  nanam  buddhananam. 
Dukkhasamudaye  (XV- 1)  nanam  buddhananam.  Dukkhani- 
rodhenanam  buddhananam.  Dukkhanirodha  (XV-2)  gamini- 
patipade  nanam  buddhanana.  Atthapatisambidhe  nanam 
(XV-3)  buddhananam.  Dhammapatisambidhenanam  buddha- 
nanam nirutti  (XVI-1)  pati  sambhidenanam  buddhananamr. 
Patibhanapatisabhi  (XVI-2)  de  nanam  buddhananam.  Yama- 
kapatiherananam  buddhananam  (XVI-3)  [ma]  hakarunasa- 
mapattiya  nanam  buddhananam.  Sabba  [nnu]  tananam 
buddha  (XVII-1)  nanam.  Anavaranananam  buddhanana. 
Imehi  bhagava  (XVII-2)  cuddasehi  buddhananehi  samanna- 
gato ti  ti.  (XVII-3).

--- PAGE 59 ---
46  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Excerpt  No.  6. 
Magganatthangiko  settho, 
saccanam  caturo  pada, 
virago  se  (XVIII- 1 ) 
  
ttho  dhammanam, 
dipadanam  ca  cakkhuma  ti. 
Excerpt  No.  7. 
Siddham  Danto  dantehi  (XVIII-2)  sahapuranajatilehi 
vippamuttehi  simginikasavanno  rajagaham  pavisi  bhagava 
(XVIII-3).  Mutto  muttehi  sahapuranajatilehi  siginikasavanno 
rajagaham  pavisi  bhagava  (XIX- 1).  Tinno  tinnehi  saha- 
puranajatilchi  vippamuttehi  siginikavanno  rajagaham  pa 
(XIX-2)  visi  bhagava.  Dasabale  dasav[a]so  dasadhamma- 
cupeto  so  dasasata[m]parivaro  rajagaham  pavisi  bha  (XIX-3)- 
gava. 
Excerpt  No.  8. 
Yo[v]  iro  sabbavidanto  • 
suddho  appatipuggalo 
araham  sugato  loke 
tassaham  paricarako  ti.  (XIX-4). 
Excerpt  No.  9. 
Iti  pi  so  bhagava  araham  sammasambuddho  vijjacarana 
sampanno  sugato  lokavidu  anuttaro  (XX- 1)  purisadammasa- 
rathi  sattha  devamanussana  buddho  bhagava  ti.  Abhibhavatu 
(XX-2). 
It  will  be  readily  seen  that  the  first  excerpt  relates  itself 
t|>  the  very  well-known  Paticcasamuppada  Sutta  or  the  Sutta 
of  the  twelve  nidanas  quoted  so  often  in  different  canonical 
texts.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  (P.T.S. 
edn.,  I,  pp.  261,  263-64,  III,  pp.  63-64),  the  Anguttara 
Nikaya  (p.T.S.  edn.,  V,  p.  184),  the  Samyutta  Nikaya 
P.T.S.  edn.,  II,  pp.  1-2,  III,  p.  135,  V,  p.  388),  the  Vinaya 
Pitakam  (Oldenberg’s  edn.,  I,  pp.  1-2),  the  Vibhanga  of  the

--- PAGE 60 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
.4! 
Abhidhamma  Pitaka  (Rhys  Davids’  edn.,  pp.  1 35*  138-39, 
165-68)  and  the  Dhammasangani  (P.T.S.  edn.,  p.  229); 
The  second  excerpt  enumerates  the  seven  kinds  ofVipassana- 
nana.  “   The  Visuddhimagga,  however,  on  page  639,  Volume 
II  of  the  P.T.S.  edn.,  gives  eight  kinds  and  the  Abhidham- 
mattha  Sangaha  enumerates  ten  kinds.  The  text  in  our  manus- 
cript has  omitted  one,  namely,  the  patisaiikhanupassanananaof 
the  Visuddhimagga  and  three,  namely,  the  sammasananana, 
patisankhanana  and  anulomanana  of  the  Abhidhammattha 
Sangaha."™  The  third  excerpt  is  an  enumeration  of  the 
37  categories  of  the  saddhamma  in  a   progressively  numerical 
order  which  can  be  traced  to  the  Digha  Nikaya  (P.T.S.  edn., 
Ill,  p.  102),  the  Anguttara  Nikaya  (P.T.S.  edn.,  IV,  pp.  .125- 
26),  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  (P.T.S.  edn.,  II,  p.  245)  and  the 
Udana  (P.T.S.  edn.,  p.  56).  The  fourth  excerpt  classifies 
the  four  perfections  of  the  Buddha  to  be  found  in  the  Maha- 
slhanada  Suttanta  of  the  Majjhima  Nikaya  (P.T.S.  edn.,  I, 
pp.  71-72)  as  well  as  in  the  Catukkanipata  of  the  Anguttara 
Nik&ya  (p.T.S.  edn.,  1,  pp.  8-9).  The  fifth  excerpt  is  also 
an  enumeration  of  the  fourteen  kinds  of  knowledge  of 
the  Buddha  which  can  be  traced  to  the  Patisambhidamagga 
of  the  Khuddaka  Nikaya  (p.T.S.  edn.,  I,  p.  133).  The 
sixth  can  be  traced  to  the  Dhammapada  (V.  203)  and  gives 
an  account  of  the  categories  of  things  that  are  best.  The 
seventh  describes  the  journey  of  the  Buddha  to  Rajagaha 
with  his  disciples,  the  three  Kassapa  brothers.  This  episode 
of  Buddha’s  life  can  be  traced  to  many  sources  but  particular 
reference  may  be  made  to  the  Vinaya  Pitaka  (P.T.S.  edn., 
Mahavagga,  p.  38)  and  to  the  J  
atakatthakatha  (Fausboll’s 
edn.,  I,  p.  84).  The  eighth  is  a   verse  and  can  be  traced  to 
the  Vinaya  Pitaka  (vOL.  I ;   p.  38,  P.T.S.  edn.).  The  last  and 
ninth  refer  to  the  well-known  praise  of  the  Buddha  as  des- 
cribed in  the  Mahaparinibbana  Sutta  of  the  Digha  Nikaya.™ 
75  An  R.A.S.B.,  op.  cit. 
76  por  these  identifications,  see  also  An.  R.A.S.B. ,  op .  cit. 
6 — 1445B

--- PAGE 61 ---
42 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
A   comparison  of  these  excerpts  as  well  as  those  of  the 
Maunggan  plates  and  Bawbawgyi  fragments  with  the  Pali 
canonical  texts  cited  above  would  show  that  most  of  the 
excerpts,  giving  due  allowance  to  the  scribes’  errors  and 
slips,  do  not  correspond  word  for  word  or  passage  for 
passage  with  those  to  which  references  have  already  been 
cited.  This  would  probably  warrant  an  assumption  that  the 
monks  in  Burma  had  before  them  texts  that  have  not 
come  down  to  us . 
The  citation  of  the  paticcasamuppada  sutta  in  the  first 
excerpt  is  interesting.  It  consists  of  the  sutta  itself  as  well  as 
its  nirodha,  but  no  vibhanga,  and  the  text  is  just  as  we  find 
it  in  the  Pali  canon.  But  what  is  more  interesting  is  that  it 
is  perhaps  one  of  the  earliest  epigraphic  record  of  the 
Paticcasamuppada  formula  in  Pali.77 
Another  gold-leaf,  inscribed  with  characters  exactly  similar 
to  the  one  just  considered  and  similarly  datable  in  the  fifth 
or  sixth  century  A.D.  was  recovered  in  1928-29  from  the 
Kyundawza  village  near  Hmawza.  The  plate,  broken  in  the 
process  of  cleaning  in  several  fragments,  bears  an  inscription 
in  two  lines.  It  is  in  Pali  and  contains  the  first  part  of 
the  well-known  Buddhist  formula  in  praise  of  the 
77  The  Pratttya  Samutpada  Sutra  in  its  Prakrit  and  Sanskrit  versions  is 
mentioned  in  very  ancient  texts.  The  earliest  in  Prakrit  can  be  found  in  the 
Kharosthl  inscription  on  a   Kurram  Casket  edited  by  Sten  Konow  (C.I.I  ,  Vol.  If, 
Pt.  i,  No.  LXXXj ;   and  the  latest  in  Sanskrit  can  be  found  in  a   Brahml  inscription 
on  two  Nalanda  bricks  edited  by  Dr.  N.  P.  Chakravarty,  Ep.  Ind.,  Vol.  23. 
For  a   very  valuable  and  interesting  note  on  the  Sutra,  see  Ep.  Ind.,  Vol.  23, 
*'  A   Note  on  the  Pratity  a   Samutpada  Sutra"  by  Dr  P.  C.  Bagchi.  The  result  of 
Dr.  Bagchi ’s  analysis  as  to  the  chronology  of  the  texts  as  quoted  in  inscriptions 
and  Chinese  texts  may  in  the  light  of  further  researches  ( 
J.R.A.S 
1938,  pp.  547-53) 
be  set  forth  as  follows  ;  Kurram  Insc.  text  (consisting  of  Pratttya  alone) — 
c.  100  A.D.;  Sutralamkara  text  (consisting  of  Pratttya  and  Nirodha) — c,  100  AD.; 
Kasia  Insc.  text  (consisting  of  Pratttya  and  Nirodha ) — c   450-75  A.D. ;   Chinese 
Sarnyuita  text  (consisting  of  Pratttya  and  Vibhanga— -414  A.D. ;   Gopalpur  bricks 
Insc,  text  (from  both  anuloma  and  pratlloma  aspects) —c.  500  A.D. ;   Nalanda  Insc. 
text  (consisting  of  Pratitya  and  Vibhanga)  —   c.  520  A.D.  and  now  this  Hmawza 
insc.  text  (consisting  of  the  Paiicca  and  the  Nirodha  in  Pali)  — c.  500  A.D.  ”

--- PAGE 62 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
43 
Buddha  discussed  above  in  connection  with  the  second 
Maunggan  'gold-plate  and  the  gold-leaf  Buddhist  note-book. 
Though  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  second  line  the  letters  are 
not  so  distinct,  the  inscription  which  runs  as  follows  can  be 
read  without  any  difficulty  : 
1   
st  line  :  Iti  pi  so  bhagava  araham  sammasambuddho 
vijjacaranasampanno  sugato  lokavidu  anuttaro 
purisa(dammasarathi  sattha) 
2nd  line  ;  devamanussanam  buddho  bhagava  ti.78 
Whatever  be  the  textual  consideration  of  these  and 
similar  other  epigraphs,  they  would  hardly  affect  the  general 
deductions  that  we  are  even  now  in  a   position  to  make  in 
respect  of  the  position  of  Theravada  Buddhism  in  old  Prome. 
These  records  were  inscribed  in  a   familiar  script,  long 
known  to  our  epigraphists  as  the  Kadamba  script,  of 
the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  This 
script  was  used  in  the  records  of  the  Kadambas  and  early 
Calukyas  and  was  prevalent  in  the  ancient  Kuntala 
78  "   The  formula  which  is  in  praise  of  the  Buddha,  is  a   stereotyped  one 
occurring  in  the  Vinaya  and  Svtta  Pifak^s.  The  Pyus  appear  to  have  had  a   pre- 
dilection for  copying  short  extracts  from  these  two  Pitakas  especially  from  the 
Abhidhamma,  on  gold  and  silver  plates,  which  were  enshrined  within  pagodas, 
as  well  as  on  terracotta  plaques  and  stones.” — Duroiselle,  An.  R.A.S.I.,  1928-29, 
pp.  108-09. 
In  the  same  Report  (p.  107),  Duroiselle  informs  us  of  the  discovery  of  some 
terracotta  tablets  from  a   mound  at  Pyogingyi-Kon  bearing  effigies  of  the 
Buddha  on  the  obverse.  The  reverse  of  some  of  these  contains  short  extracts 
from  the  Abhidhamma.  One  tablet,  of  which  only  the  lower  half  remains, 
contains  on  the  obverse  a   short  inscription.  All  these  epigraphs  are  in  the  same 
Kanada-Telugu  script  of  the  6th-7th  century  A.D.  The  short  inscription  just 
mentioned,  is  an  extract  from  the  Abhidhamma  and  is  quite  legible  : 
(adhi)  pafipaccaya  anantara  paccayo 
The  extract  is  probably  from  the  Paithdna  or  the  seventh  book  of  the  Abhidhamma. 
Another  tablet  contains  an  extract  which  appears  to  be  from  the  Dhammasahgani, 
the  first  book  of  the  Abhidhamma.  It  may  be  read  as  follows: — 
Kusala  (dhamma  aku) 
sala  dhamma  avyak  (ta) 
dhamma

--- PAGE 63 ---
44 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
(Kanarese  district)  and  Andhra  (comprising  the  valleys  of 
the  Krsna  and  the  Godavari)  regions.  The  affinity  of 
the  Hmawza  script  with  the  Kadamba  script  is  obvious, 
but  it  seems  there  is  also  an  evident  resemblance  with 
the  script  used  in  the  records  of  the  Iksvaku  kings  found 
at  Nagarjunikonda,71'  and  Jaggayyepeta/0  both  in  the  Krsna 
valley,  and  palaeographically  datable  in  the  third  century. 
This  seems  to  indicate  that  the  Hmawza  script  belongs  to 
the  Deccanese  variety  of  the  Brahmi  script  current  in  the 
Aridhra-Kuntala  region,  and  is  palaeographically  datable  in 
about  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 
The  language  of  the  above  records,  we  have  already 
seen,  is  Pali,  and  they  relate  themselves  to  the  doctrines  of 
Theravada  Buddhism.  We  can,  therefore,  safely  conclude 
in  the  light  of  what  we  have  discussed  above,  that 
(i)  Buddhism  of  the  Theravada  school  was  already  an  estab- 
lished religion,  at  least  as  early  as  the  fifth  century  A.D.  ; 
(ii)  Pali  as  the  language  of  Theravada  was  known  and  under- 
stood in  at  least  the  capital  city  by  a   certain  section  of  the 
people ;   
'  
(iii)  Pali  canonical  texts  were  known  and  studied 
in  their  doctrinal  and  most  abstruse  aspects ;   (iv)  and  finally, 
the  source  from  where  this  Buddhism  was  fed  and  nourished 
was  evidently  the  Andhra-Kuritala-Pallava  region  of  the 
Deccan  and  South  India,  from  such  centres  as  Amaravatl, 
Nagarjunikonda,  Kanclpuram,  Kaveripattanam  and  Uragapu- 
ram  where  Theravada  Buddhism  during  these  centuries  had 
established  famous  and  flourishing  strongholds.  All  these 
places  incidentally  were  intimately  connected  with  the 
Buddhaghosa  tradition.  It  is,  therefore,  reasonable  to  assume 
that  Theravada  Buddhism  which  in  Burma  to-day  is  of  the 
Sinhalese  form  was  originally  introduced  not  from  Ceylon 
but  from  the  Deccan  and  South  India,  where  in  the 
time  of  the  celebrated  Chinese  pilgrim  1-ching  (671-95) 
n   An.R.S.I.E.,  1916,  p.  92;  1927,  pp.  71-74. 
M   A.S.S.I.,!.,  pp.  110-111;  Plates  LXII  and  LXIII.

--- PAGE 64 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
45 
*  all  followed  the  Sthavira  nikaya  though  there  existed 
a   few  adherents  of  other  nikayas  also.’81  This  will  further 
be  evident  from  what  we  know  of  Asoka’s  missionary 
activities  in  the  Deccan  and  the  Far  South  as  well  as 
from  the  evidence  of  the  Nagarjunikonda  inscriptions  discuss- 
ed above,  Hsiian-chuang’s  itinerary  and  the  Buddhaghosa 
tradition.  All  available  sources  seem  to  suggest  that  eastern 
Deccan  and  the  Far  South  sheltered,  till  as  late  as  the  6th 
and  7th  centuries,  important  centres  of  Buddhist  activities. 
In  fact  it  seems  that  it  was  not  till  the  middle  of  the  twelfth 
century  that  Ceylon  came  to  play  any  important  role  in  the 
history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma.  It  was  in  1167  that 
Panthagu,  the  then  Primate  of  the  Burmese  kingdom,  chose 
Ceylon  as  his  refuge,  and  in  1180  Uttarajlva,  the  Primate 
who  had  succeeded  Panthagu,  returned  from  a   pilgrimage  to 
Ceylon  as  the  “   First  Pilgrim  of  Ceylon.  ’  In  1190  Capata, 
Uttarajiva’s  disciple,  earned  the  title  of  the  “   Second  Pilgrim 
of  Ceylon.”  and  on  his  return  tried  to  convert  the  whole 
realm  to  the  Sinhalese  form.  These  missions  coupled 
with  Capata  s  attempts  to  Sinhalese  Burmese  Buddhism 
led  to  the  gradual  predominance  of  Sinhalese  Buddhism 
in  Burma  and  the  wiping  out  of  even  the  memory  of  the 
original  source.  But  to  this  chapter  of  the  history  of  the 
religion  in  Burma  we  shall  have  occasion  to  turn  later  on. 
It  is  somewhat  curious  to  find  that  in  the  whole 
range  of  Pali  commentaries  and  chronicles  composed  in 
Ceylon  during  the  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  centuries,  there 
is  nowhere  any  mention  of  the  old  kingdom  or  capital  of  the 
Pyus  which,  as  testified  to  by  the  Pali  inscriptions  and 
Buddhist  sculptures  and  monuments  datable  from  about  the 
sixth  to  about  the  tenth  century,  was  an  important  centre 
where  Theravada  Buddhism  had  a   flourishing  existence. 
There  in  the  Sinhalese  chronicles  and  in  the  huge  mass  of 
81  Takakusu,  I-tstng's  Records  of  the  Buddhist  Religion,  pp.  xxiii-xxiv.

--- PAGE 65 ---
46 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
commentarial  literature  incidental  references  to  places,  made 
well-known  by  their  association  with  Buddhism,  are  but 
numerous ;   one  can,  therefore,  reasonably  expect  to  find  a 
reference  to  this  centre  of  Buddhism  in  Suvannabhumi  in  the 
Mahavamsa  or  at  least  in  the  CullaVamsa,  but  there  is  none. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  place  has  been  mentioned  in  some 
name  which  has  not  yet  been  identified ;   or,  as  the  Buddhism 
of  old  Prome  was  not  introduced  from  Ceylon  and  had 
consequently  nothing  to  do  with  their  country,  the  chroniclers 
and  commentators  did  not  feel  inclined  to  mention  it  in 
their  works.  It  may  also  be  accounted  for  by  the  secular 
hostility  during  all  these  centuries  between  the  natives  of 
Ceylon  and  the  Indians  of  the  south,  a   fact  that  naturally 
disposed  the  Sinhalese  authors  to  ignore  the  work  of  their 
enemies . 
Vll 
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  ( 
contd .) :   C.  675-700  A.D. 
The  deductions  from  epigraphic  evidence  are  strikingly  . 
corroborated  by  Chinese  literary  sources  of  a   period  closely 
following  the  date  of  the  inscriptions.  The  most  important 
evidence  in  this  respect  is  supplied  by  the  itinerary  of  the 
celebrated  Chinese  pilgrim  I-ching.  But  it  seems  most 
unfortunate  to  the  student  of  the  history  of  Buddhism  and 
the  different  Buddhist  schools  that  this  devoted  scholar  of  the 
religion  who  travelled  by  sea  from  China  to  India  Via  the 
ancient  kingdom  of  Jsrivijaya,  and  spent  about  twenty-five  years 
'(671-695)  abroad  interesting  himself  in  the  study  of  Buddhism 
could  find  no  opportunity  to  visit  any  of  the  regions  border- 
ing the  sea-coast  of  Burma  or  situated  at  some  distance  to 
the  interior.  But  if  he  could  not  actually  visit  any  country 
in  Burma,  as  he  could  not  do  most  of  the  islands  of  the 
Malay  archipelago  and  countries  of  Indo-China  of  which

--- PAGE 66 ---
47 
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
he  speaks  nevertheless,82  he  certainly  took  pains  to  acquaint 
himself  about  the  state  of  the  religion  in  all  these  countries 
lying  to  the  east  of  the  Bay.  That  he  succeeded  to  some 
extent  is  proved  by  a   note  in  his  Nan  hai  chi  \uei  nai  fa 
ch'nan  (ch.  I,  f.  3,  verso). 
**  At  the  (eastern)  extremity  (of  the  eastern  frontier  countries,  i.e. ,  East 
India),  there  is  the  so-called  ‘  Great  Black  *  mountain,  which  is,  I   think,  on  the 
southern  boundary  of  Tu-fan  (Tibet,  according  to  Takakusu).  This  mountain  is 
said  to  be  on  the  south-west  of  Shu*Chuan  (Ssu-Ch’uan)  from  which  one  can  reach 
this  mountain  after  a   journey  of  a   month  or  so.  Southward  from  this  and  close  to 
the  sea-coast  there  is  a   country  called  Srlksetra  (Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo)  ;   on  the  South- 
east of  this  is  Lankasu  (Lang-chia-shu)  ;   on  the  east  of  this  is  Dva  (ra)  pati  (She- 
ho-po-ti)  ;   at  the  extreme  east  Lin-i.  The  inhabitants  of  all  these  countries  greatly 
revere  the  three  Gems  (evidently  the  Buddha ,  Dharma  and  Samgha).  There 
are  many  who  hold  firmly  to  the  precepts  and  perform  the  begging  duhta  83  which 
constitutes  a   custom  in  these  couniries/’  84 
82  Takakusu,  Ltsing’s  Records  of  the  Buddhist  Religion,  pp.  8-11. 
83  The  begging  dhuta  is  one  of  the  thirteen  dhutaries  which  are  enumerated 
in  Pali  in  the  following  order : 
a.  Pamsukulikangam 
b.  Teclvarikangam 
c.  Pindapatikarigam 
d.  Sapadanacarikangam  (begging  from  door  to  door) 
e.  Ekasanikangam 
/.  Pattapindikangam  (begging  with  a   bowl) 
g.  Khalupacchabhattikangam 
h.  Arannakangam 
i.  Rukkhamuiikaiigam 
j.  Abbhokasikangam 
k Sosanikangam 
1.  Yathasanthatikangam 
m.  Nesajjikangam 
Of  these  Nos.  d   and  /  are  not  found  in  the  Sanskrit  list  of  Dhutangas  (for 
Chinese  counter-terms,  see  Takakusu,  Ibid.,  pp.  56-57;  Childers,  Dhutarigam), 
I-ching*s  reference  perhaps  includes  all  the  three  kinds  of  begging. 
84  Takakusu,  Ibid.,  pp.  9-10;  Pelliot,  BEFEO ,  1904,  pp.  405-06;  Chavannes, 
Religieux  Eminents,  p.  58  n. 
As  to  the  state  of  the  religion  in  Lin-i,  there  is  a   further  reference  in  I-ching’a 
Record  (Takakusu,  op.  cit.,  p.  12)  ;  “   Setting  out  from  Kwan-chou  (Huan-chou), 
a   district  in  Annam,  right  to  the  south  one  will  reach  Pi-king  after  a   
journey  of 
rather  more  than  half-a-month  on  foot,  or  after  only  five  or  six  tides  if  aboard  ship ; 
and  proceeding  till  southwards  one  arrives  at  Campa,  i.e.,  Lin-i.  In  this  country 
Buddhists  generally  belong  to  the  AryQsamTnitinikMyo ,  and  there  are  also  a   few 
followers  of  the  Sarvastivadanikjaya.''-

--- PAGE 67 ---
48 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Of  the  countries  alluded  to  in  the  above  passage,  Lin-i 
has  been  sought  to  be  identified  with  Campa,  She-ho-po-ti 
with  Dvaravati  (mod.  Ayuthia  in  Siam),  Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo 
with  Srlksetra  or  the  old  kingdom  of  Prome  (whose  capital 
is  represented  by  the  ruins  of  the  village  of  Hmawza,  6 
miles  to  the  south  of  the  present  town  of  Prome),  and 
Lang-chia-shu  with  the  kingdom  of  Chia-mo  lang-chia  or 
Kamalanka  of  Hsiian-chuang.8"  Of  these,  the  identifications 
of  Lin-i,  She-ho-po-ti  (also  mentioned  by  Hsiian-chuang  as 
To  lo-po-ti)  and  Shih-li-ch’a-to-lo  are  generally  accepted, 
the  latter  country  having  also  been  mentioned  by  Hsiian- 
chuang  as  situated  to  the  north-east  of  Samatata  by  the  side 
of  a   great  sea  in  a   valley  of  mountains.80 
But  it  is  difficult  to  be  equally  definite  with  regard  to 
Lang-chia-shu  or  Lankasu,  though  I   have  elsewhere  sought 
to  identify  the  place  with  the  entire  Tennasserim  division 
(Sanscrit  Buddhism  in  Burma,  pp.  24-29).  It  is  generally 
assumed  that  I-ching’s  Lang-chia-shu  or  Lankasu  is  the 
same  as  Hsiian-chuang’ s  Chia-mo-lang-chia  or  Kamalanka, 
the  reason  being  that  Lang-chia-shu  is  placed  by  I-ching 
exactly  in  the  same  relation  to  Srlksetra  and  Dvaravati 
(To-lo-po-ti)  as  Chia-mo-lang-chia  is  placed  by  Hsiian- 
chuang  in  relation  to  the  same  two  kingdoms  (z.e.,  Srlksetra 
and  Dvaravati).87 
85  For  these  identifications,  see  Takakusu,  op,  cit 
pp.  li-lii;  Phayre,  History  of 
Burma,  p.  32;  Beal,  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World ,  Vol.  II,  p.  200,  n.  34; 
Chavannes,  op.  cit. ;   and  above  all  Pelliot’s,**  Deux  liineraires  **  in  BEFEO 
1904. 
86  *f  Hsiian-chuang's  orientation  of  Sriksetra  is  evidently  wrong;  for  it  lies 
far  to  the  south-east,  not  to  the  north-east  of  Samatata.  The  only  solution  that 
occuis  to  me  is  that  Srtksetra  means  (as  is  not  improbable) ,  not  the  capital,  but 
the  kingdom  presumably  of  the  Pyu ;   that  at  the  time  of  Hstian-chuang  the  Pyu 
kingdom  extended,  not  as  Phayre  conjectured;  “   for  a   few  miles  north  and  south 
of  Prome,  but  as  in  806  A. D.,  over  upper  Burma ;   and  that  the  road  into  Burma 
from  Samatata  started  in  a   north-easterly  direction,  probably  leading  through 
Manipur  and  joining  the  Kamarupa  route  detailed  by  Chia  Tin  (785-805  A.D)  ” 
(JBRS.,  XIV,  II,  p.  161). 
87  li  Thence  north-east  (i.e.,  from  Samatata)  beside  the  great  sea  in  a   valley 
of  the  hills,  is  the  kingdom  of  Shi-li-ch’a-ta-lo ;   thence  to  the  south-east,  in  a

--- PAGE 68 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
49 
There  can  thus  be  no  objection  to  the  two  kingdoms 
being  the  same;  nor  can  there  be  any  valid  argument 
against  their  being  identified,  as  has  been  done,83  with 
Pegu  and  the  deltaic  region  of  the  Irrawady.  But  as 
Lang-chia-shu  has  been  identified  with  a   considerable 
number  of  similar  names  found  in  Chinese  and  other  sources, 
possibilities  of  identification  of  the  kingdom  with  other 
regions  in  Indo-China  have  very  naturally  suggested  them- 
selves, and  it  is  difficult  to  ignore  them.  It  is  pointed  out 
that  Lang-chia  or  Lang-chia-shu  is  mentioned  several  times 
by  1-ching  as  a   port  visited  by  the  pilgrims  whose  lives  he 
records,  on  their  way  to  India'  To  quote  one  such  passage  : 
“   Tao-lin,  a   Chineses  pilgrim,  was  tossed  on  shipboard  over  the  seas  of  the 
south.  He  passed  the  pillars  of  Copper  and  reached  the  kingdom  of  Lang-chia. 
He  crossed  the  kingdom  of  Ho-ling  (Java)  and  traversed  the  country  of  the  naked 
people  (Nicobar)    After  several  years  he  reached  Eastern  India,  in  the  kingdom 
of  Tan-mo-li-ti  (Tamralipti).”  89 
It  seems  clear  from  this  passage  that  I-ching’s  Lang- 
chia  (-shu)  ‘  ‘  was  on  the  west  coast  of  the  Peninsula,  on 
the  route  somewhere  between  Annam  and  Java;  and  if 
so,  how  can  it  be  both  south-east  of  Sriksetra  and  west  of 
Dvaravatl  which  is  placed  on  the  basin  of  the  Menam  ?  I- 
ching,  when  he  sent  his  Lives  of  the  Pilgrims  back  to  China, 
had  lived  about  eight  years  in  the  seas  of  the  south,  mostly 
at  Palembang.  Could  he  have  made  any  mistake  about 
the  position  of  Lang-chia-shu   ?  Or  did  he  know, 
without  troubling  to  distinguish  them,  two  kingdoms  of  the 
name  Lang-chia  (-shu),  the  one  somewhere  in  Tennasserim, 
the  other  on  the  east  side  of  the  Peninsula  south  of  the 
Isthmus  of  Kra  P  Or  is  I-ching  here  merely  echoing 
corner  of  the  great  sea  is  the  kingdom  of  Chia-mo-lang-chia ;   thence  in  the  east, 
is  the  kingdom  of  To-lo-po-ti."  This  is  from  Hsiian-chuang’s  Records ;   compare 
it  with  I-ching  quoted  above. 
88  Op.  cit, 
89  Chavannes,  Religieux  Eminents,  p.  100.

--- PAGE 69 ---
50  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Hsiian-chuang,  but  substituting  for  Kamalanka  (a  name 
unknown  to  him),  one  that  was  familiar,  Lang-chia-shu, 
without  much  regard  for  geographical  accuracy  ?  
’  ’  50  These 
are  some  of  the  very  pertinent  questions  that  have  been 
raised,  and  they  have  to  be  considered  very  carefully. 
Meanwhile,  Lang-chia-shu  has  been  taken  to  be  iden- 
tical with  the  kingdom  of  Lang-ya  or  Lang-ya-hsun  which 
is  referred  to  in  the  Liang  shu  (ch.  54,  f.  3  verso)  and  with 
that  of  Lang-ya-hsii  mentioned  in  connection  with  Ch’ang 
Chun’s  embassy  to  Ch’ih-t’u  kingdom  in  607-08  A.D.  ( 
Pei 
Shih,  ch.  f.  3  recto;  Sui  shu,  ch.  82.  f.  I.  verso). M 
Without  going  into  the  details  of  these  texts  which  have 
been  ably  weighed  and  considered  by  Chavannes,  Schlegel, 
Pelliot  and  Luce,®  it  may  be  said  that  the  position  of 
these  kingdoms  as  described  in  the  Chinese  texts  referred 
to,  seem  to  be  quite  in  accordance  with  that  of  I-ching’s 
Lang-chia-shu,  i.e.,  they  were  situated  somewhere  in  the 
east  coast  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  south  of  the  Isthmus 
of  Kra  in  the  southern  sea.  Furthermore,  Lang-chia-shu 
has  also  been  identified  with  Ling-yu-ssu-chia  mentioned 
by  Chau-ju-kua  (1225)  'IJ  as  one  of  the  fifteen  dependencies  of 
San-fo-ch’i  (Palembang  =   
Srivijaya  =   Sumatra),  which  again, 
£oedes  thinks,"1  is  the  same  as  (a)  Ilarigasogam  of  the  Tanjore 
Tamil  inscription  of  Rajendracola  (1012-1042),  and  ( b )   the 
Lenkasuka,  a   dependency  of  the  Majapahit,  mentioned  in 
the  old  Javanese  poem  Nagarakrtagama  (14th  century).  Prof. 
Pelliot  thinks  that  Lang-chia-su  ==  Lang -ya-hsiu  =   Lang-ya- 
hsii  =Ling-ya-ssu  (~chia)  =   Lenkasuka  were  one  and  the  same 
Luce,  JBP.S.,  op,  cit.t  pp,  162-63. 
11  Ibid.,  pp.  164-65. 
Pelliot,  op.  cit.,  BEFEO 
1903  and  1904 ;   Chavannes,  op.  cit  ;   Schlegel, 
Toting  Pao ,  
IX,  193;  Luce,  op.  cit. 
93  Chau-ju-kua,  Ed.  bj  Hirth  and  Rockhill.  This  kingdom  is  also  referred, 
to  as  Lmg-ya-ssO. 
M   BEFEO.,  1918,  No.  6.

--- PAGE 70 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
51 
kingdom  08  which  he  identifies  with  Tennasserim.  Ferrand 
agrees  with  him  but  further  identifies  it  with  Ilangasogam, 
Locac  of  Marco  Polo  *   (end  of  the  1 3th  century) ,  and 
finally  with  Lang-saka  of  an  Arabic  manuscript  of  the 
16th  century,  situated  on  the  east  coast  of  the  Malay 
Peninsula.117  He,  therefore,  fixes  the  position  of  the  kingdom 
on  the  Isthmus  of  Ligor.  But  Qoedes,  while  finding  in 
Lang-chia-shu  of  I-ching,  Lang-ya-hsiu  of  the  Liang  shu 
and  the  Lang-ya-hsii  of  the  Sui  shu  one  and  the  same  place, 
sees  in  the  Ilangasogam  of  Rajendracola’s  inscription,  the 
Ling-ya-ssy-chia  of  Chau-ju-kua  and  the  Lenkasuka  of  the 
Nagarakrtagama  quite  a   different  place."8  He  identifies 
the  former  with  Tennasserim  just  as  Prof.  Pelliot  does,  and 
the  latter  with  Gunong  Jerai  or  Kedah  Peak,  in  the  south  of 
the  Kedah  state. 
I   have  in  short  reproduced  above  the  various  identifica- 
tions of  l-ching’s  Lang-chia-shu  and  the  data  on  which 
they  are  based.  None  of  them  evidently  is  free  from 
objections.  Prof.  Pelliot  was  obviously  influenced  by  the  fact 
that  I-ching  located  the  kingdom  south-east  of  Sriksetra  and 
west  of  Dvaravati  which  one  cannot  certainly  ignore.  But 
I   do  not  understand  Ferrand’ s  arguments  for  placing  it  on 
the  Isthmus  of  Ligor ;   his  identification  does  neither  suit 
the  statement  that  it  was  situated  south-east  of  Srlksetra 
and  west  of  Dvaravati  nor  the  fact  which  I-ching  elsewhere 
seems  to  indicate,  according  to  some,  that  it  was  on  the 
opposite  coast  of  the  Peninsula  somewhere  on  the  route 
between  Annam  and  Java.  The  first  identification  of  £oedes 
is  understandable  but  the  distinction  he  makes  between  the 
two  sets  of  names  is  open  to  objections  which  have  been 
*   BEFEO.,  1904,  pp.  405-407.  n   O   K 
88  Yule  and  Cordier’s  edn.  Vol.  II,  p.  276.  *   ^   . 
JA.,  Juillet-Aoui,  1918,  pp.  '134-45,  153-54. 
38  A   translation  oi  the  Keddah  Annals,  J 
.  lnd.  Arch.,  Ill,  pp.  1 1-13.

--- PAGE 71 ---
52 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
ably  pointed  out  by  Prof.  Luce.50  For  the  present,  however, 
I   am  rather  disposed  to  agree,  though  it  is  not  conclusive, 
with  Prof.  Pelliot,  and  identify  1-ching’s  Lang-chia-shu  with 
at  least  that  portion  of  the  present  Tennasserim  division  which 
extends  from  Tavoy  to  Tennasserim,  i.e.,  the  region  watered 
by  the  Tennasserim  river  which  is  really  to  the  south-east 
of  Srlksetra  and  west  of  Dvaravati  (in  the  lower  valley  of 
the  Menam).100  As  for  other  references  by  I-ching  101  to 
Lang-chia-shu,  I   think  they  can  be  reconciled  in  the  follow- 
ing way  :   the  boats  that  carried  the  Chinese  Buddhist  pilgrims 
kept  generally  to  the  coast  line  till  they  passed  Fii-nan  (or 
Chen-la  as  it  was  then  called)  whence  they  did  no  longer 
follow  the  coast  line,  but  favoured  by  the  current  crossed 
the  gulf  of  Siam  almost  diagonally  till  they  came  to  anchor 
somewhere  at  the  head  of  the  gulf  on  the  east  coast  of  the 
peninsula,  whence  they  crossed  over  to  Ho-ling  or  Java, 
and  thence  via  Nicobar  to  Tamralipti.  For  the  rest,  we 
can  safely  assume  that  the  kingdom  of  Lang-chia-shu 
extended  from  coast  to  coast  of  the  peninsula. 
Accepting  this  identification  for  the  present,  we  ate  now 
in  a   position  to  use  more  or  less  definitely  I-ching’s  data 
as  to  the  state  of  Buddhism  in  the  countries  we  are  concerned 
with  in  our  present  subject  of  study.  Of  the  various 
countries  in  Indo-China  that  practised  Buddhism  in  his  time, 
M   JBRS 
XIV,  II,  pp.  168-69. 
100  Personally  I   would  like  to  assume  that  Lang-chia-shu  was  practically 
identical  with  the  entire  Tenasserim  Division  of  to-day  extending  from  Thaton  to 
Tenasserim.  The  position  then  of  the  various  kingdoms  (not  of  the  islands  but 
of  the  continent)  bordering  the  southern  seas  may  be  stated  briefly  as  follows  : 
First,  Shi-li-ch’a-ta-lo  or  Sriksetra,  i.e.,  the  old  kingdom  of  Prome  of  the  P’iao  or 
Pyu ;   second,  Lang-chia-shu  or  Chia-mo-lang-chia  (Kamalanka)  to  the  south-west 
of  Sriksetra  and  west  of  Dvaravati;  third  She-ho-po-ti  or  To-lo-po-ti  (Dvaravati)  on 
the  lower  valley  of  the  Menam  in  modern  Siam;  fourth,  P‘an-p’an  to  the  south  of 
Dvaravati  and  south-west  of  Lin-i  (Campa)  in  a   corner  of  the  sea ;   fifth,  Chen-la 
or  old  Fu-nan  (Cambodia)  to  the  east  and  south-east  of  P*an-p*an ;   and  lastly, 
Lin-i  to  the  extreme  east  extending  as  far  as  the  coast, 
305  See  Chavannes,  Religieux  EminenU,  pp,  57,  78,  100.

--- PAGE 72 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
53 
atji  pue.t  Euung  ui  pspnpui  ^pjragap  si  orias^iic;  ‘-s'l  ‘auo 
other  also  we  have,  for  the  present,  identified  with  a   region 
that  is  included  in  the  same  country.  According  to  1-ching, 
‘  the  inhabitants  of  both  these  countries  greatly  revere 
the  “Three  Gems”,  and  many  of  them  hold  firmly  to  the 
precepts  and  perform  the  begging  dhuta  which  constitutes 
a   custom  in  these  countries.’  That  in  one  of  the  two 
countries,  namely,  Lang-chia-shu,  Chinese  Buddhist  priests 
used  to  be  received  in  those  days  with  honour  and  treated 
with  a   great  deal  of  respect  will  be  evident  from  the  two 
following  passages  which  we  quote  on  the  authority  of 
Chavannes  : 
I-lang,  Cliih-ngan  and  I-hsiian,  three  Chinese  pilgrims,  having  reached  We- 
ld (a  small  sea-port  west  of  Pakhoi  in  Canton)  sailed  on  a   merchant  ship  .....  They 
passed  Fii-nan,  and  anchored  in  the  country  of  Lang-chia-shu;  and  were  treated  hy 
the  king  of  that  country  with  ceremony  that  is  usually  accorded  to  very  honoured  and 
distinguished  guests.102 
Further,  Tao-lin,  another  Chinese  pilgrim,  also  visited 
the  kingdom  of  Lang-chia ;   he  too  was  welcomed  by  the 
king  of  the  country  with  the  greatest  courtesy,  and  was 
treated  with  utmost  care  and  respect.103 
It  now  remains  to  be  considered  :  to  which  school  this 
Buddhism  of  Srlksetra  and  Lang-chia-shu  (in  the  7th  cen- 
tury) really  belonged  ?  On  this  point,  I-ching  himself,  I 
think,  gives  us  a   very  illuminating  and  a   most  definite  lead. 
He  speaks  of  the  four  nikayas  or  schools  of  Buddhism  in  his 
time :  the  Aryamahasanghifya  nil^aya,  the  AryasthaVira 
nikaya,  the  Aryamulasarvastivada  ni\aya,  and  the  Arya- 
sammiti  nif^aya,  though  “   which  of  the  four  schools  should 
be  grouped  with  the  Mahayana  or  with  the  Hinayana  is  not 
determined.”  In  South  India  generally  and  Ceylon 
exclusively  ‘all  follow  the  Sthavira  ni\aya,  ’  or  TheraVada, 
which  was  certainly  included  in  the  Hinayana.  Sammiti 
102  Chavannes,  Religieux  Eminertts,  p.  57  , 
103  ibid..p.m

--- PAGE 73 ---
54 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
nikaya  also  evidently  was  a   Hlnayanist  school.104  1-ching 
seems  also  to  include  the  Sarvastivada  nikaya  in  Hinayana. 
For,  when  he  speaks  of  the  “   Islands  of  the  Southern  Sea, 
consisting  of  more  than  ten  countries,  where  the  MulasarVas- 
tivada  nikaya  has  been  almost  universally  adopted,’  he 
states  rather  baldly  that  “Buddhism  is  embraced  in  all  these 
countries,  and  mostly  the  system  of  the  Hinayana  (Smaller 
Vehicle)  is  adopted  except  in  Malayu  (SrlBhoja  =   £n  Vi  jay  a   = 
Sumatra)  where  there  are  a   few  who  belong  to  the  Mahayana 
(Larger  Vehicle).’’  And  on  this  point  1-ching  certainly  could 
not  misstate  facts,  for  he  himself  subscribed  to  the 
school  of  the  Sarvastivadins.105  This  is  more  clear  in 
the  statement  he  elsewhere  makes :   “In  Northern  India 
(where  ‘all  belong  to  the  Sarvastivada  nikaya,  though 
we  sometimes  meet  the  followers  of  the  Mahasanghika 
nikaya')  and  in  the  islands  of  the  Southern  Seas  they 
generally  belong  to  the  Hinayana,  while  those  in  the 
Divine  Land  or  Red  Province  (meaning  in  both  cases 
China)  devote  themselves  to  the  Mahayana  ;   in  other  places 
(obviously  excluding  South  India  and  Ceylon  where  Sthavira 
nikaya  was  followed)  some  practise  in  accordance  with  one 
some  with  the  other.  ” 106  It,  therefore,  follows  that  I-ching 
104  Hsiian-chuang,  the  older  pilgrim,  definitely  labels  the  SammitTya  school 
as  Hlnayanist.  Watters,  Yuan  Chwang,  II,  pp.  178,  242,  246,  247,  249,  252,  256, 
258,  etc. 
J05  i(  Jn  I   ching's  time  the  Sarvastivada  school  flourished  most  in  North  India 
and  in  Magadha  in  Central  India  (Madhya-deSa) ,  and  had  also  some  followers  in 
East  and  West ;   but  was  entirely  absent  in  Ceylon  and  had  very  few  adherents  in 
South  India,  No  other  school,  so  far  as  we  can  ascertain,  ever  flourished  so  widely 
as  the  Sarvastivada,  either  before  or  after  the  seventh  century ;   though  its  adherents 
in  India  alone,  in  Hsiian-chuang’s  time  were  not  so  numerous  as  those  of  other 
schools”  JRA 5.,  1819,  p.  420;  Takakusu,  op,  cif.,  xxii. 
106  I-ching’s  line  of  distinction  between  the  two  Buddhist  systems,  HinaySna 
and  Mahayana,  is  likely  to  be  considered  liberal  from  the  orthodox  point  of  view. 
**  Those  who  worship  the  Bodhisattva  and  read  the  Mahayana  Sutras  are  called 
the  Mahayanists,  while  those  who  do  not  perform  these  are  called  the  Hinayanists. 
There  are  but  two  kinds  of  the  so-called  Mahayana :   the  Madhyamikas  (of  Nagarjuna) 
and  Yoga  (or  Yogacara  of  Asanga).”  Ibid.*  pp.  14-15,

--- PAGE 74 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  55 
considered,  and  rightly  so,  Sarvastivada  ni\aya  as  belonging 
to  the  Hlnayana,  though  he  does  not  expressly  say  so. 
From  I-Ching’s  clear  and  somewhat  detailed  account  of 
the  distribution  of  the  different  schools  of  Buddhism ,  we  are 
‘  thus,  1   think,  in  a   position  to  assume  that  the  two  countries 
of  Burma  (Srlksetra  and  Kamalanka  or  Lankasu),  where 
Buddhism  was  practised  in  his  time,  belonged  to  the  Hlna- 
yana which  included  not  only  the  Theravada,  or  Sthavira 
nikaya  as  I-ching  calls  it,  but  the  Sarvastivada  nifyaya  as 
well.  The  prevalence  of  the  latter  sect  may,  in  our 
present  state  of  knowledge,  seem  somewhat  startling,  but,  I 
think,  we  have  somewhat  independent  evidence  to 
prove  its  existence,  at  least  in  the  capital  of  the  old  Prome 
kingdom  in  about  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries,  and  at 
Pagan  in  the  subsequent  centuries,  till  the  twelfth  (see,  my 
Sanscrit  Buddhism  in  Burma,  1932).  As  to  the  prevalence 
of  the  Theravada,  the  Pali  inscriptions  found  at  Hmawza  and 
discussed  elsewhere  bear  ample  and  eloquent  testimony. 
VIII 
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  ( 
contd .) 
EVIDENCE  OF  T’ANG  CHRONICLES  :  C.  800  A.D. 
But  before  we  take  leave  of  the  information  afforded  by 
valuable  Chinese  sources  we  have  to  consider  one  or  two 
relevant  passages  relating  to  the  kingdom  of  P’iao  (Pyu),  in 
about  the  eighth  century,  from  the  chronicles  of  the  T’ang 
dynasty  of  China  (615-907  A.D.),107  so  far  as  they  relate  to  our 
Hsiian-chuang  also  very  loosely  distinguishes  between  the  two,  though  he  had 
great  personal  leanings  towards  Mahayana.  This  explains  why  he  sometimes 
describes  even  the  Sthavira  school  as  belonging  to  Mahayana.  See  Watters,  op,  cii., 
II,  PP.  136,  198,  234,  241. 
107  Chin-t' artg~shu  of  Li  Hsu,  etc.,  and  H$in-t'ang~shu  of  Oa  Yang  Hsin  and 
Sung  Ch’i,

--- PAGE 75 ---
56 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
present  subject  of  study.  The  Hsin-t’ ang-shu  (ch.  222  C, 
f.  2  verso)  mentions  eighteen  kingdoms  as  vassal  states  of 
P’iao  who  are  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  same  chronicle  as 
having  thirty-two  chief  settlements  that  were  presumably 
distributed  over  the  region  extending  from  at  least  the  mouths 
of  the  Salween  in  the  south  to  so  far  north  as  to  include  the 
whole  of  Upper  Burma.1"8  The  capital  of  the  P’iao  or  Pyus 
has  long  been  successfully  identified  with  Hsiian-Chuang  s 
Shi-li-cha-ta-lo  (Sriksetra)  or  Prome ;   the  evidence  therefore 
of  the  T’ang  chronicles  in  respect  of  the  religion  of  the 
country  is  certainly  of  interest  inasmuch  as  it  follows  close 
upon  that  of  I-ching. 
*'  When  the  P’iao  King  goes  out  in  his  palanquin,  he  lies  on  a   couch  of  golden 
cord.  "   For  long  distances  he  rides  an  elephant.  He  has  several  hundred  women  to 
wait  on  him.  The  wall  of  his  city  built  of  greenish  glazed  tiles,  is  160  Ii  round,  with 
twelve  gates  and  with  pagodas  at  each  of  the  four  corners.109  The  people  live 
inside... They  dislike  taking  life.  They  greet  each  other  by  elapsing  the  arm 
with  the  hand.  They  know  how  to  make  astronomical  calculations.110  They  arc 
Buddhists  and  have  a   hundred  monasteries,  with  bricks  of  glass  .  embellished 
with  gold  and  silver  vermilion,  gay  colours  and  red  kino.,.j4f  seven  years  of  age , 
the  people  cut  their  hair  and  enter  a   monastery  ;  if  at  the  age  of  twenty  they  have 
not  grasped  the  doctrine  they  return  to  lay  estate  .  For  cloths  they  use  skirls  made 
of  cotton,  for  they  hold  that  silk  should  not  be  worn  as  it  involves  the  taking  of 
.   life....”111 
The  annalist  continues,  * ‘There  is  a   huge  elephant  (or 
image)  a   hundred  feet  high ;   litigants  burn  incense  and  kneel 
See,  BEFEO.,  1904,  Pelliot’s  Deux  Itineraires,  p.  223 ;   also  Ferrand,  JA 
Marz-Avril ,  1919,  p.  251 ;   Luce,  JBRS.t  p.  161. 
309  The  remains  that  are  clearly  defined  of  this  extensive  wall  can  still  be 
seen  round  the  ruins  of  the  city  ;   and  three  of  the  four  pagodas  at  the  four  comers 
can  perhaps  be  traced  in  the  Bawbawgyi,  the  Payagyi  and  the  Pyama  stupas. 
110  This  probably  refers  to  the  Brahmana  court  astronomers  whose  influence 
in  the  Buddhist  courts  of  Indo-China  was  considerable.  They  are  again  and  again 
mentioned  in  M6n  Inscriptions  of.  the  1 1th- 13th  centuries.  It  is  not  improbable  that 
the  Buddhists  had  some  knowledge  of  astronomical  calculations  learnt  from  the 
Brahmana  priests  whose  existence  in  the  old  capital  of  Prome  during  these  centuries 
is  proved  by  the  discovery  of  Brahmanical  images  mainly  Visnuite.  Ray,  Brahma - 
nical  Gods  in  Burma ,  Calcutta,  1932. 
111  Parker,  Burma  with  special  reference  to  the  relations  with  China ,  1893, 
p.  12.

--- PAGE 76 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
57 
before  it,  reflecting  within  themselves  whether  they  be  right 
or  wrong,  and  then  they  retire.  When  there  is  any  disaster 
or  plague,  the  king  also  kneels  before  it  and  blames 
himself.” 
The  evident  conclusion  is  that  during  the  eighth  and 
ninth  centuries  Buddhism  in  the  capital  city  of  Prome  conti- 
nued as  strong  as  ever,  and  claimed — this  at  least  is 
the  impression  left  by  the  passage  quoted  above — the 
large  majority  of  the  population,  each  individual  member  of 
which  was  required  to  spend  some  specified  years  of  life  as  a 
monk,  a   custom  that  is  still  widely  prevalent  in  Burma. 
The  reference  to  a   hundred  monastic  establishments  need  not 
be  taken  literally,  but  it  certainly  indicates  a   flourishing  state 
of  the  religion  in  the  country  where  the  doctrine  of  *  non- 
killing ’   had  taken  so  deep  a   root  as  not  to  escape  the  notice 
of  even  foreign  sojourners. 
IX 
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME  ( 
contd .) 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCE  :  C.  50Q-950  A.D. 
What  is  indicated  by  epigraphic  and  literary  evidences 
discussed  in  the  preceding  sections  receives  direct  and 
definite  corroboration  from  what  is  revealed  by  archaeological 
finds  made  at  the  ruined  site  of  old  Prome.  These  finds' 
range  from  at  least  about  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  to 
about  the  end  of  the  tenth  century  A.D.,  and  consist  of  a 
number  of  ancient  monuments,  a   large  number  of  stone 
and  bronze  images,  terracotta  tablets  with  or  without 
inscriptions  and  reliquaries,  all  at  and  around  Hmawza, 
a   village  full  of  ruins,  five  miles  to  the  south  of  the 
modern  town  of  Prome,  and  belonging  definitely  to  the 
Buddhist  creed.  Out  of  this  huge  mass  of  evidence  that

--- PAGE 77 ---
58 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
has  been  collected  in  the  small  local  museum  and  in 
the  office  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  Burma  and  des- 
cribed in  the  Annual  Reports  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of 
Burma  and  India,  a   few  only  of  the  significant  ones  will  be 
discussed  here. 
A   consideration  of  the  sculptures  in  the  small  brick  monu- 
ments that  still  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  ruins  of  the  old 
city  and  of  the  relics  yielded  by  excavations  round  and  about 
their  bases,  notably  the  Bebe,  the  Lemeythna  and  the  Yahan- 
dagu,  enables  us  to  ascertain  that  these  monuments  were 
all  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  the  Buddha ;   and  judged 
from  their  sculptural  and  architectural  style  they  cannot 
be  assigned  to  a   date  later  than  the  seventh  or  eighth 
century  A.D.  It  is  possible  further  to  assume  tentatively 
from  a   consideration  of  the  art  and  iconography  of  the 
images  that  these  temples  were  in  the  main  patronised  by  the 
followers  of  the  Theravada  faith.  And,  if  the  Pali  stone 
inscription  fragments  found  from  the  debris  of  ruins  of  the 
railings  and  base  of  the  famous  Bawbawgyi  stupa  had 
originally  formed  part  of  the  monument  which,  it  seems,  they 
did,  then  we  can  assuredly  count  the  Bawbawgyi  also  as  one  of 
the  many  religious  inundations  cf  the  Theravadins  at  Hmawza. 
So  must  also  have  been  the  monuments  from  the  ruins 
of  which  the  longer  Pali  epigraphs  discussed  in  a   previous 
section  were  recovered,  since  such  records,  whether  on  terra- 
cotta tablets  or  gold  leaves,  were  presumably  deposited  inside 
the  shrines  as  sacred  relics.  Other  monuments  such  as  the 
East  Zegu,  the  Mahtaw  village  stupa,  the  Payagyi  and  the 
Payama  stupas  were  also  evidently  dedicated  to  the  worship 
of  the  Master  and  his  faith. 
The  stone  figure  sculptures  attached  to  some  of  these 
temples  and  terracotta  votive  tablets  recovered  from  their 
relic  chambers  or  from  their  debris  of  ruins  do  not  all  seem  to 
have  belonged  to  the  contemporary  tradition  of  art  of  the  regions 
whence  the  Pali  epigraphs  described  in  the  previous  section

--- PAGE 78 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
59 
or  below  in  this  section  seem  to  have  owed  their  inspiration, 
namely  the  Andhra-Pallava  zone  of  India.  A   considerable 
number  seems,  however,  to  affiliate  themselves  with  the 
north-east  Indian  tradition  of  the  later  Guptas,  and  not 
unoften  have  inscriptions  on  them  in  early  eastern  Nagari 
characters.  To  select  only  one  example  at  random,  the  main 
image  of  the  East  Zegu  temple  is  one  of  the  Buddha  himself 
flanked  by  what  appears  to  be  two  bejewelled  and  crowned  atten- 
dants. The  attitude  is  one  of  preaching  and  the  wheel  flanked 
by  two  gazelles  and  two  worshippers  in  the  attitude  of  adoration 
on  the  pedestal  seem  to  relate  the  incident  to  the  famous 
dharmacakrapravartana  at  the  Mrgadava  at  Sarnath.  This 
piece  of  sculpture  plainly  and  frankly  derives  its  style  and 
iconography  from  the  familiar  East  Indian  tradition.  “It 
can  hardly  be  assigned  to  a   later  date,”  says  Sir  John 
Marshall,  “   than  the  seventh  century  A.D.  and  may  be 
earlier.”  112  Such  scenes  from  the  Buddha’s  life  on  terracotta 
tablets  or  stone  reliefs  recovered  from  the  ruins  of  old  Prome 
are  by  no  means  rare  and  the  majority  of  them  belongs  to 
the  east  Indian  tradition  of  art  and  iconography,  and  may 
safely  be  ascribed  to  a   date  ranging  from  about  the  6th  to 
about  the  10th  century  A.D.  Apart  from  the  monuments 
referred  to  above,  every  year  the  excavator’s  spade  is  bring- 
ing to  light  the  ruins  of  large  and  small  brick  monuments 
that  appear  from  the  contents  of  sculptures,  terracotta  votive 
tablets  and  other  relics  recovered  from  their  ruins  to  have 
been  dedicated  to  the  faith  of  the  Buddha,  and  almost  all  of 
them  by  reason  of  the  style  of  the  sculptures  or  the  paleo- 
graphy of  the  epigraphs  on  the  votive  tablets  may  safely  be 
ascribed  to  a   date  between  the  6th  and  the  1 0th  century 
A.D. 
The  ruined  site  of  the  old  capital  of  the  Pyus  extending 
over  many  miles  have  so  far  yielded  to  the  excavator’s  spade 
An.R.A.S.B.,  1909-10,  Art.  33.

--- PAGE 79 ---
60 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
a   very  large  number  of  sculptures  in  stone  and.  bronze, 
terracotta  votive  tablets  and  other  objects  that  are  evidently 
affiliated  to  the  Buddhist  creed.  Not  unoften  the  sculptures, 
and  in  most  cases  the  votive  tablets  bear  short  epigraphs  on 
them  in  Pyu  or  Pali  or  Sanskrit  or  sometimes  in  Pyu  and  Pali 
or  Pyu  and  Sanskrit  written  in  either  the  Kadamba-Telegu 
script  of  the  Andhra-Pallava  region  or  in  later  Gupta-Brahml 
of  north-eastern  India.  It  is  not  necessary  here  to  refer  to 
each  one  of  such  finds  whose  number  is  legion  and  descrip- 
tions of  which  can  be  gathered  from  the  A   nnual  Reports 
of  the  Archaeological  Surveys  of  India  and  Burma ; 
for  our  purpose  it  would  be  enough  if  we  could  bring 
out  the  significance  of  some  typical  and  representative 
objects.  But  before  we  can  turn  to  a   consideration  of  these 
archaeological  documents  it  is  necessary  to  take  notice  of  the 
few  faint  lines  of  the  political  history  of  the  kingdom  of 
Prome  during  the  four  centuries,  from  about  the  seventh  to 
about  the  tenth,  of  the  Christian  era,  to  which  period  the 
monuments,  sculptures,  bronzes,  terracotta  tablets,  etc.,  may 
be  assigned,  stylistically  and  paleographically. 
Besides  casual  references  in  the  chronicles  of  the  T’ang 
dynasty  to  the  eighteen  vassal  states  of  P’iao  and  thirty-two 
different  settlements  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made 
in  a   previous  section,  there  has  been  found  from  the  ruins  of 
Hmawza  a   number  of  epigraphs  in  the  little  known  Pyu  langu- 
age referred  to  above.  They  are  embossed  or  inscribed  on 
earthenware  funerary  urns  or  on  stone,  and  record  the  names 
of  certain  kings  of  old  Prome  with  endings  in  ‘  varman  ’  and 
^vikrama.’  The  first  set  of  these  names  were  found  recorded 
in  a   number  of  inscriptions  on  several  funerary  urns  recovered 
in  191 1-13  from  an  ancient  vault  near  the  Payagi  pagoda; 
these  inscriptions  record  the  names  of  kings  Suriyavikrama, 
Harivikrama  and  Sihavikrama,  evidently  of  Hmawza,  who 
ruled  according  to  Dr.  Blagden,  the  learned  editor  of  these 
inscriptions,  presumably  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries

--- PAGE 80 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
61 
A.D.113  The  second  set  of  names  which,  by  the  way, 
happens  to  be  the  names  of  a   king  Sr!  Prabhuvarma  and  his 
queen  Sr!  Prabhudevi  were  found  recorded  in  another  one 
line  Pyu  epigraph  inscribed  around  the  lower  rim  of  a   votive 
stupa.  This  stupa,  it  should  be  mentioned,  has  another  line 
of  Pali  inscription  around  the  rim  of  the  top  of  the  cover, 
in  a   script  which  has  long  been  recognised  by  M.  Finot  for 
the  first  time,114  to  have  very  close  affinities  with  the  Kadamba 
script  (Kanada- Telegu,  according  to  Biihler)  of  South  India, 
of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  The 
significance  of  Pali  epigraphs  in  this  particular  script  will  be 
discussed  in  a   succeeding  section ;   for  the  present  we  shall 
confine  ourselves  to  the  importance  of  these  Pyu  epigraphs 
with  special  reference  to  their  bearing  on  the  subject  of  our 
study. 
The  name-ending  ‘  varman  ’  led  M.  Duroiselle  very 
naturally  to  surmise 1 15  that  the  ruling  dynasty  or  dynasties, 
apparently  of  Indian  blood,  had  their  original  home  some- 
where in  South' India,  evidently  in  the  Cola-Pallava  country 
where  royal  dynasties  with  name-endings  in  ‘  varman  ’  were 
rather  common  ;   in  fact,  the  kings  of  the  Pallava  dyanasty 
had  their  name-endings  in  ‘varman.’  There  are  also 
reasons  for  assuming  that  there  were  two  ruling  dynasties, 
a   ‘  varman  ’  (e.g.,  SrI-Prabhuvarman)  and  a   ‘  vikrama  ’ 
dynasty116  (e.g.,  Suriyavikrama,  Harivikrama,  etc.),  both 
having  their  original  home  in  South  India.  A   long  inscrip- 
tion, not  in  Pyu  or  Pali,  but  in  Sanskrit  and  interspersed  with 
113  Blagden,  Ep.  Ind .,  VII,  pp.  127-32.  Dr.  Blagden  told  me  in  1936  that 
he  was  no  longer  sure  about  these  dates, 
1:34  Finot,  “   Un  nouveau  document  sur  le  buddhisme  birman,”  ]A,t  XX, 
Juil-Aout ,  1912-27,  pp.  12!  if. 
An.R.A.S.L,  1926-27,  p.  172  and  plate  XXXV1I1,  e.  These  inscriptions 
have  not  yet  been  edited,  but  a   short  notice  appeared  in  above, 
U6  The  Icings  of  the  South  Indian  Kadamba  dynasty  had  their  name-endings 
in  “   vikrama.”  C/.  the  nigamana  of  the  Ahhidhammavatara  of  Buddhadatta  who 
was  a   native  of  Uragapura  (Uraiyur)  and  flourished  during  the  reign  of  king 
Acyutavikranta  or  Acyuta-vikrama.

--- PAGE 81 ---
62 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Pyu  words  and  phrases  which  are  nothing  but  translations  of 
the  Sanskrit  version,  in  clear  north-eastern  Gupta-Brahmi 
script  of  about  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries  was  very 
recently  recovered  from  the  ruins  of  the  old  city."7  This 
record  is  important  from  more  than  one  point  of  view.  It 
supplies  a   definite  starting-point  in  the  political  history  of  old 
.  Prome  and  throws  considerable  light  on  the  contemporary 
history  of  Bucjdhism  in  the  capital  city.  Moreover,  it  contri- 
butes substantially  to  the  elucidation  of  the  origin  of  the 
Pyu  script. 
It  may  now  definitely  be  stated  that  the  Pyu  script  is 
nothing  but  a   local  adaptation  of  the  Indian  Brahmi  script ; 
and  so  far  as  the  evidence  of  the  few  inscriptions  discovered 
up  to  date  may  help  us  to  ascertain,  it  seems  that  this 
adaptation  took  place  sometime  about  the  fifth  century  A.D.  ] 
for  Pyu  alphabets  and  numerals  show  a   very  close  resem- 
blance with  those  of  Brahmi  of  the  Gupta  period.  But  it  is 
not  yet  possible  definitely  to  ascertain  whether  it  was  the 
north-eastern  or  southern  Brahmi  that  served  as  the  source  for 
the  newly-evolved  script,  though  it  may  be  pointed  out  that 
the  elongated  character  of  the  alphabets  is  more  southern  than 
north-eastern. 
The  epigraph  alluded  to  above  is  inscribed  on  the  four 
sides  of  the  pedestal  of  a   torso  of  a   Buddha  image  seated 
in  dhyanamudra  and  Vajraparyafi\a  attitude.  Stylistically 
the  image  is  definitely  of  late  Gupta  tradition  and  may  safely 
be  ascribed  to  exactly  the  same  period  as  determined  by  the 
palaeography  of  the  inscription.  The  record  in  beautiful 
Sanskrit  verse  seems  to  have  been  set  up  by  king  Jayacandra- 
varman  at  the  instance  of  his  religious  teacher  (arya)  with 
117  This  important  record,  the  first  of  its  hind  in  Emma,  is  still  unpublished. 
But  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  K.  N.  Dikshit  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  has 
enabled  me  to  study  the  record,  a   summary  of  the  results  of  which  I   am  incorporat- 
ing here.  I   acknowledge  Mr.  Dikshit’s  kindness  and  courtesy  with  thanks.  A 
notice  of  the  inscription  appears,  however,  in  An.  R.A.S.I.,  1927-28,  pp.  128,  145.

--- PAGE 82 ---
Buddhism  in  old  prome 
63 
the  express  purpose  of  establishing  and  enhancing  peace, 
amity  and  good-will,  it  seems,  between  Jayacandravarman , 
the  king  and  his  younger  brother  (tasyanuja)  Harivikrama 
who  had  built  two  cities  ( 
puradvayam ),  evidently  side  by  side, 
and  one  for  each,  even  in  one  day .  
(ekail^adivase) .  The 
import  of  the  record  allows  us  to  arrive  at  some  tentative 
conclusions  :  first,  there  presumably  have  existed  some 
rivalry  between  the  two  brothers  Jayacandravarman  and 
Harivikrama,  and  the  rivalry  was  put  an  end  to  it  by 
providing  two  cities,  one  for  each,  from  where  they 
ruled,  probably  side  by  side  and  contemporaneously,  so 
that  there  could  be  no  loss  of  peace  and  good-will  between  the 
two  brothers.  Secondly,  Jayacandravarman  and  Hari- 
vikrama both  belonged  to  one  and  the  same  dynasty,  not  to 
two  different  dynasties  by  reason  of  their  having  had  different 
name-endings,  though  it  is  possible  that  they  had  branched 
off  in  two  different  lines  and  ruled  separately.  There  was 
thus  no  ‘  vikrama  ’  or  4  varman  ’  dynasty  in  Prome  as  hither- 
to assumed.  The  different  sets  of  names  so  far  known  of  this 
Indianised  dynasty  of  Prome  can  be  provisionally  arranged, 
in  the  light  of  the  above  assumption,  in  the  following 
way  :   — 
First  line  Second  line 
•  •  • 
 Suriyavikrama  (688  A.D.  ?) 
Jayacandravarman  tasyanuja  Harivikrama  (695  P) 
Sri  Prabhuvarma(n)  ...  Slhavikrama  (7 1 8  ?) 
Sri  Prabhudevi 
Thirdly,  the  dynasty  seems  to  have  become  Indianised  to 
the  extent  of  not  only  accepting  Buddhism  as  their  religion 
but  also  Indian  names,  a   practice  that  was  becoming  universal 
in  Indonesia  and  Insulindia.  They  had  also  adopted  an  Indian 
script  and  an  Indian  language,  in  the  present  instance  north- 
eastern Brahml  of  about  the  seventh  century  and  Sanskrit 
respectively.  It  should  be  mentioned  in  this  connection  that

--- PAGE 83 ---
64 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  image  round  whose  pedestal  the  epigraph  is  found 
inscribed  belongs  to  the  late  Gupta  tradition  of  art. 
Fourthly,  and  this  is  important  from  our  point  of  view, 
the  dynasty  to  which  these  ‘  varman  ’  and  ‘  vikrama  ’  kings 
belonged  was  evidently  a   Buddhist  dynasty.  This  is  proved 
firstly  by  the  Pyu  inscription  round  the  silver-guilt  reliquary 
stupa,  referred  to  above,  on  which  there  are  images  repousse 
in  high  relief  of  the  four  last  Buddhas,  with  their  names 
.  inscribed  in  Kadamba  script,  respectively  below  them.”8 
They  are  Konagamana,  Kakusandha,  Kassapa  and  Gotama 
with  their  attendants  Kasab  (Kassapa),  Maulana  (Moggallana), 
Sari  (Sariputta)  and  ...da  (Ananda),  the  four  disciples  of  the 
Buddha.  It  is  significant  that  the  names  are  given  in  their 
Pali  form,  and  that  these  names  are  followed  by  a   short  extract 
consisting  off  what  seems  to  be  words  and  phrases  taken  from 
Pali  scriptures.  The  characters  of  the  record  suggest  that 
the  source  of  inspiration  of  the  subject  of  the  record  was  the 
Pallava- Kadamba  region  of  South  India.  This  is  also 
strikingly  confirmed  by  a   stylistic  consideration  of  the  images 
moulded  in  high  relief  on  the  stupa  ;   they  belong  to  an  art 
tradition  having  remarkable  Pallava  affinities.  A   further  and 
more  definite  evidence  of  the  cult  professed  by  the  initiator 
of  these  images  and  the  epigraph  is  provided  by  the  Sanskrit 
inscription  round  the  pedestal  of  the  Buddha  image,  just 
referred  to  above.  'As  the  record  was  set  up  by  the  king 
himself  who  chose  the  pedestal  of  a   Buddha  image  for 
recording  an  important  episode  of  his  family,  it  may  safely 
be  assumed  that  Jayacandravarman  and  his  dynasty  profess- 
ed the  Buddhist  creed.  The  kingdom  of  Prome  was  thus 
ruled  over  during,  roughly  speaking,  the  seventh,  eighth  and 
ninth  centuries  by  an  Indianised  Buddhist  dynasty  of  kings ; 
and  it  was  presumably  under  the  aegis  of  this  dynasty  that 
118  It  is  unfortunate  that  these  inscriptions  have  not  yet  been  edited,  nor 
their  contents  made  known  in  any  detail.  For  short  notices,  however, 
An.R.A.S.l.,  1926-27,  pp.  -17273. 
see

--- PAGE 84 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
65 
.most  of  the  monuments  of  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  were 
probably  built,  epigraphs  inscribed,  sculptures  modelled, 
bronzes  cast,  and  terracotta  tablets  moulded. 
We  may  now  turn  to  the  sculptures  themselves.  Apart 
from  the  ones  already  referred  to  attention  may  be  drawn 
to  several  sculptures  and  their  fragments  depicting  scenes 
from  the  life  of  the  Buddha.  Such  sculptures  though 
not  so  numerous  as  from  Pagan  of  a   later  period  are  never- 
theless unearthed  from  time  to  time,  and  are  really  significant. 
One  such  is  a   scene  carved  on  a   piece  of  stone  representing 
the  well-known  story  of  the  Buddha  about  to  partake  of  the 
food  offered  to  him  by  the  two  merchants,  Trapusa 
and  Bhallika,  which  is  detailed  not  only  in  the  Jatakas 
but  in  the  Mahavastu  and  the  Lalitavistara  as  well. 
Following  this  story  and  connected  with  it  in  an  in- 
separable way  is  that  of  the  four  Lokapala  devas  who 
brought  four  stone  bowels  from  which  the  Master  was 
to  eat  the  food  offered  by  the  two  merchants.  This  story 
is  depicted  in  another  relief  in  which  the  Buddha  is  repre- 
sented as  seated  in  bhumisparsa  mudra  on  a   lotus  pedestal, 
and  on  his  left  is  placed  what  seems  to  be  an  alms  bowl. 
He  is  flanked  by  four  standing  personage^,  two  on  either 
side,  and  each  of  them  holding  a   bowl  in  both  hands. 
Presumably  they  are  the  four  Lokapala  devas  in  the  act  of 
offering  bowls  to  the  Buddha.11"  What  also  seems  to  be  a 
Jataka  story  is  represented  on  a   plaque  where  the  main 
figure  is  dressed  in  crowns  and  armlets  as  a   prince  and  is 
seated  cross-legged  on  a   lion-throne  with  his  hands  in 
dhyanamudra.  He  is  flanked  by  two  standing  figures 
turned  towards  him ;   that  on  the  proper  left  is,  as  if  it  were, 
in  the  act  of  striking  with  a   club  held  in  both  hands,  the 
other  on  the  right  seems  to  be  scratching  the  prince’s  arm. 
It  is  tempting  to  identify  the  scene  as  a   representation  of 
119  An.R.A.S.I,,  1927-28,  p.  129;  for  two  other  scenes  in  Buddha’s  career, 
Ihid.,  pp.  130,  131,  plate  LV,  figs.  4  and  10. 
9— 1445B

--- PAGE 85 ---
66  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  Mugapakk h*2  Jataka.m  On  another  terracotta  votive 
tablet  121  the  Buddha  is  flanked  by  two  figures  on  each  side, 
those  to  the  right  are  in  monkish  dress,  and  to  the  left  in 
secular  dress.  Below  them  are  represented  six  persons,  three 
on  each  side  of  what  seems  to  be  the  dharmacakra.  Lower 
below  are  two  gazelles  flanking  the  Wheel  of  Law  which 
helps  us  at  once  to  locate  the  scene  at  the  Deer  Park  or 
Mrgadava  of  Benares ;   and  if  the  five  figures  to  the  right 
are  all  monks,  the  scene  must  refer  itself  to  the  story  of 
the  first  five  converts  of  the  Master,  the  Pancavagglya 
bhikkhus.  There  are  also  other  fragments  of  stone  and 
terracotta  which  depict  the  main  scenes  in  the  life  of  the 
Master.  Such  examples  and  numerous  others  mostly  in 
stone  and  terracotta  which  represent  the  Buddha  in  one  or 
other  of  his  traditional  mudras  and  asanas  and  with  or 
without  his  disciples  and  attendants,  may  stylistically 
be  said  to  derive  their  inspiration  from  the  familiar  Gupta 
tradition  of  eastern  India,  and  ascribed  on  the  same  con- 
sideration to  a   period  ranging  from  the  sixth  to  about  the 
ninth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  They  are  indubitable 
proofs  of  the  existence  of  Buddhism  in  the  old  kingdom  of 
Prome  during  these  centuries. 
Some  of  the  Buddha  images  in  stone — and  there  is  a 
good  number  of  them,  fairly  large  in  size — are  frankly  works 
of  local  artists  and  craftsmen.  Such  examples  are  almost 
invariably  seated  in  paryafikasana  with  the  right  hand  in 
bhumisparsa  mudra  and  the  left  placed  on  the  lap  and 
holding  an  almsbowl.  This  limited  and  orthodox  mono- 
graphic type  may  perhaps  be  said  to  afford  some  argument 
for  these  images  to  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  orthodox 
or  Theravada  school,  an  assumption  which  is  supported 
not  only  by  their  facial  and  physiognomical  features,  dis- 
tinctly local  as  opposed  to  Indian,  but  also  by  the  stylised 
1S°  An.R.A.S.l.,  1926-27,  p.  171. 
Jn  Ibid.,  1909-10,  p.  123,  plate  XLIX,  fig.  8.

--- PAGE 86 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
67 
rendering  of  the  artistic  and  iconographic  type  traditionally 
inherited  from  the  Indian  masters.  One  such  image  can 
still  be  seen  carved  on  a   large  slab  of  stone  122  in  the  Bebe 
pagoda  which  is  a   small  square  building  surmounted  by  a 
pyramidal  roof  in  three  stages  superimposed  by  a   sikhara. 
The  Buddha  is  seated  in  paryan\asana  and  is  flanked  by 
two  figures  seated  cross-legged  with  aureole  round  their 
heads,  their  hands  raised  to  the  chest  and  clasped  in  adora- 
tion. They  are  evidently  disciples.  But  what  is  interesting 
in  this  piece  of  sculpture  is  to  see  the  Buddha’s  left  hand, 
not  the  right,  in  bh.umispa.rsa  mudra,  and  the  right  placed 
on  the  lap  and  holding  the  alms  bowl.  This  example 
is  one  good  evidence  to  show  how  the  local  craftsmen  while 
translating  on  stone  the  first  lessons  in  iconography  they 
received  from  their  Indian  teachers  made  mistakes  that 
obviously  the  local  converts  did  not  consider  grave.  Another 
example  of  similar  figures — the  iconography  is,  however, 
quite  correct  in  these  instances — may  be  seen  sculptured  in 
groups  on  a   large  rectangular  slab  of  stone  128  at  the 
Yahandagu  pagoda.  Eight  images  here  sit  cross-legged  in 
a   row,  all  with  their  right  hand  in  bhumisparsa  mudra  and 
the  left  placed  on  the  lap  and  holding  an  almsbowl.  The 
schematic  curls  of  the  hair  are  treated  in  mass ;   and  the 
sanghati  is  indicated  only  by  its  edges  as  also  by  the  fold 
treated  in  mass  that  hangs  from  the  left  shoulder.  Figures 
of  the  Buddha  of  similar  iconographic  type  but  belonging 
probably  to  a   different  artistic  tradition  may  be  seen  at  the 
Lemyethna  temple,  also  another  small  rectangular  structure 
whose  roof  is  supported  by  a   heavy  square  obelisk 
in  the  centre.  Facing  the  cardinal  points  there  appear 
originally  to  have  been  slabs  of  stone  with  figure  sculptures 
executed  on  them  in  bold  relief  embedded  in  the  square  pillar . 
Two  only  of  these  slabs,  those  on  the  south  and  west, 
™   Ibid..  1909-10,  p.  120,  fig.  3  on  p.  121. 
'«  Ibid,,  1909-10,  Plate  LI.

--- PAGE 87 ---
68 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
remain ;   that  on  the  south  bears  on  it  an  image  of  the  Buddha 
represented  as  seated  cross-legged  on  a   throne  with  what 
seems  to  be  three  flower  vases  in  front.121  The  sculpture  has 
suffered  so  badly  that  the  image  has  lost  its  head,  and  the 
two  accessory  figures  flanking  him,  portions  of  their  body 
as  well.  The  right  hand  of  the  principal  figure  is  placed 
on  the  right  knee  with  the  palm  down  and  the  fingers  raised 
upwards  which  probably  suggests  that  it  is  in  what  may  be 
called  the  varada  mudra.  The  standing  figure  on  the  right  is 
probably  that  of  a   male,  and  that  on  the  left  of  a   female, 
but  it  is  difficult  to  identify  them  owing  to  their  very  bad 
state  of  preservation.  On  the  stone  facing  west  the  Buddha 
is  flanked  not  by  two  human  figures  but  by  two  caityas,  and 
is  provided  with  an  aureole  round  the  head.  He  is,  more- 
over, seated  on  a   lotus  throne  “   with  the  feet,  not  the  legs, 
crossing  each  other,  thus  showing  the  sole  of  one  foot,  that 
is  the  right  foot  which  is  placed  just  above  the  other,  instead 
of  both  soles.  The  left  hand  is  placed  on  the  lap,  but  the 
right  hand  instead  of  being  placed  over  the  right  leg  with 
the  fingers  pointing  to  the  earth  and  the  palm  inward,  is 
stretched  out  and  placed  over  the  right  knee.”  125  Duroiselle 
has  rightly  suggested  an  iconographical  affinity  of  this  type 
with  the  Buddha  images  of  Amaravatt  in  South  India ;   
126 
and,  I   think,  that  his  assumption  is  supported  by  artistic 
considerations  as  well. 
Recent  explorations  at  Hmawza  have  brought  to  light 
a   few  more  stone  sculptures  that  are  significant  from  our 
point  of  view.  One  slab  depicts  the  famous  story  of  the 
taming  of  the  infuriated  elephant  Nalagiri  at  Rajagaha, 
while  three  others  represent  respectively  the  birth  of  the 
Bodhisattva  Gautama,  the  scene  of  the  conquest  of  Mara 
Ibid.,  p.  120,  pi.  XLVII,  fig.  6. 
An.R.A.S.l.,  1924-25,  p.  26,  Plate  III,  fig.  2. 
m   Ibid.,  p.  27.

--- PAGE 88 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  OLD  PROME 
69 
and  the  twin  miracle  at  Savatthi.127  Stylistically  they  can 
be  assigned  to  about  the  7th  or  8th  century  A.D.  and  seem 
to  affiliate  themselves  to  the  contemporary  east  Indian 
tradition  though  the  impress  of  local  craftsmanship  is  but 
too  apparent  on  them.  A   comparison  of  similar  scenes  as 
depicted  in  the  later  reliefs  from  Pagan  would  show  that  the 
Hmawza  ones  must  have  been  the  prototypes  of  those  from 
Pagan. 
Another  stone  slab  recovered  from  one  of  the  three  stOpas 
south  of  the  Bawbawgyi  shows  an  arched  niche  containing 
the  image  of  the  Buddha  seated  in  dhyana  mudra  and  flanked 
by  two  worshippers.  The  slab  is  inscribed,  partly  in  Pyu 
and  partly  in  Sanskrit,  both  in  the  well-known  Andhra- 
Kadamba  script  of  about  the  sixth  century.128  A   Buddha  in 
bronze  seated  in  bhumisparsa  mudra  contains  the  first  five 
letters  of  the  Buddhist  formula  ye  dhamma  incised  in  east 
Indian  Gupta-BrahmI.129  Another  stone  Buddha  image  has 
the  central  portion  of  its  throne  inscribed  similarly  with  the 
first  few  letters  of  the  Buddhist  formula.130 
Amongst  other  sculptures  from  Hmawza  may  be  men- 
tioned a   good  number  of  stone  reliefs  representing  the 
Buddha  seated  or  standing  and  flanked  by  two  Bodhisattvas, 
Avalokitesvara  and  Maitreya.  It  is  now  well-known  that 
these  two  Bodhisattvas  were  recognised  as  members  of  the 
Hlnayana  pantheon  in  Burma.  The  iconographic  representa- 
tion of  such  reliefs  from  Burma  has  an  exact  parallel  in 
contemporary  sculptures  of  eastern  India. 
Besides  stone  sculptures,181  almost  a   deluge  of  small 
terracotta  votive  tablets  has  been  unearthed  from  the  ruins  of 
the  old  capital,  and  every  year  the  spade  brings  fresh  hordes 
w   Ibid.,  1938-39,  pp.  7-9,  Plate  III,  figs,  b  and  c. 
AR./t.S./.,  1934-35,  p.  45. 
129  Ibid.,  p.  47,  pi.  XXII,  i. 
130  Ihid.,  p.  71. 
131  See  also,  in  this  connection,  Ray,  Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma,  Chap, 
HI,  pp.  40*49,  Chap.  VI,  pp.  88-9I.

--- PAGE 89 ---
70  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
on  the  surface.  These  tablets  easily  fall  into  several  well- 
defined  types.  A   good  number  of  them  are  embossed  with 
short  epigraphs  recording  the  well-known  Buddhist  formula 
of  the  extolment  of  the  qualities  of  the  Buddha  beginning 
with  “   iti  pi  so  bhagava  araham...'"  14‘  already  known 
to  us  from  the  longer  Pali  epigraphs,  discussed  in  a   preceding 
section.  There  is  besides  a   small  number  of  such  tablets 
that  bear  on  them  short  legends  in  Pyu.  But  the  script  in 
both  these  types  is  the  well-known  east  Indian  script  of  the 
8th- 1 0th  centuries.  Still  a   smaller  number,  with  or  without 
any  epigraph,  represent  gods  and  goddesses  of  the  Sanskrit 
Buddhist  pantheon.  The  large  majority  of  the  tablets,  how- 
ever, bear  on  them  the  popular  Buddhist  formula  ye 
dhamma..., etc.,  in  Pali  embossed  invariably  in  east  Indian 
characters  of  the  8th- 10th  centuries.  Such  tablets  with  the 
formula  in  Pali  but  paleographically  somewhat  later  in  date 
(11th- 12th)  have  also  been  picked  up  from  the  ruins  of 
old  Prome  and  Pagan.  But  they  all  seem  to  have  been 
locally  copied  to  order  from  Sanskrit  originals.  Of  such 
Sanskrit  epigraphs  recording  the  Buddhist  formula  in  Nagari 
script  we  have  literally  a   deluge  both  from  old  Prome  and 
Pagan  as  well  as  from  other  sites,  for  example,  from 
Sameikshe  near  Thazi.  These  tablets  were  generally  depo- 
sited, probably  as  relics  inside  the  relic  chamber  housed 
within  the  shrines  and  was  also  sometimes  used  by  wander- 
ing devotees  as  moving  shrines,  a   practice  still  not  unknown 
among  wandering  preachers.  Exactly  similar  tablets  with  the 
Buddhist  formula  inscribed  in  Sanskrit  have  been  found  in  large 
numbers  in  Eastern  India,  at  Sarnath,  Bodhgaya,  Nalanda  and 
other  places ;   and  not  in  a   few  instances  the  tablets  found  in 
Burma  were  presumably  bodily  carried  over  by  Indian 
emigrants  to  Burma  and  by  Burmese  pilgrims  who  came  to 
pay  homage  at  the  sacred  sites  sanctified  by  association  with 
the  Master. 
For  a   short  notice  of  these  records,  see  An.R.A.S.l ,,  1927-28,  p.  145.

--- PAGE 90 ---
Buddhism  in  oLd  prome 
7i 
It  is  evident  from  a   stylistic  examination  of  the  sculptures 
and  the  terracotta  tablets  that  they  are  affiliated  to  two 
different  -traditions.  A   small  number  of  stone  sculptures 
frankly  owe  their  artistic  inspiration  to  the  Andhra-Pallava 
zone  whence  came  also  the  impress  of  the  Kadamba-Telegu 
script  of  those  records  that  are  written  in  Pali.  These 
undoubtedly  belong  to  the  Theravada.  But  the  large 
majority  of  stone  sculptures  and  terracotta  tablets  seem 
to  have  derived  their  inspiration  from  the  contemporary 
art  tradition  of  eastern  India.  This  is  corroborated  by 
the  use  of  contemporary  east  Indian  Nagari  script  in  a 
large  nunber  of  epigraphs  inscribed  or  embossed  on 
them.  Those  sculptures  and  tablets  using  Sanskrit  or  re- 
presenting Bodhisattvas  and  their  Saktis,  must  be  held 
to  belong  to  one  or  other  of  the  various  schools  and 
sects  of  Sanskrit  Buddhism.  Those  that  use  Pali,  in  what- 
ever script  can  safely  be  said  to  have  belonged  to  the 
Theravada. 
It  is  strange  that  from  what  have  up-to-date  been  re- 
covered by  research  and  exploration  in  the  shape  of  inscrip- 
tions, sculptures  and  terracotta  tablets  from  the  ruins  of 
the  old  capital,  it  becomes  apparent  that  during  the  fifth, 
sixth  and  seventh  centuries  the  Pyu  kingdom  was  in  intimate 
relation  more  with  the  Andhra-Pallava-Kadamba  zone 
than  with  any  other  part  of  India.  But  from  about  the 
seventh,  eastern  India  seems  to  have  come  into  more 
direct  relation  with  realm  of  the  Pyus  and  Talaings. 
In  fact,  east  Indian  influences  on  the  art  and  iconography  of 
the  sculptures,  terracotta  tablets .  and  Sanskrit  epigraphs  of 
Hmawza  are  only  much  too  evident.  This  is  a   fact  that  has 
hardly  yet  been  fully  recognised.  It  is  not  the  place  here  to 
go  into  a   detailed  discussion  of  the  problem,  but  the  fact 
remains  that  besides  the  Pali  epigraphs  discussed  in  a 
preceding  section,  a   few  terracotta  tablets  bearing  Pali 
writings,  and  a   small  number  of  sculptures,  there  has  been

--- PAGE 91 ---
*12  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
recovered  from  Hmawza  hardly  any  object  that  can  definitely 
be  said  to  betray  south  Indian  influences,  whereas  there 
has  been  picked  up  from  the  huge  mass  of  ruins  a   countless 
number  of  sculptures  and  terracotta  tablets  that  frankly 
derive  their  style  from  the  familiar  Post-Gupta  and  Pala 
sculptures  of  Eastern  India.  In  inscriptions  as  well,  without 
in  any  way  under-estimating  the  value  in  this  respect  of  the 
Pali  records  in  South-lndian  script,  one  can  point  out  that 
the  importance  of  the  long  Sanskrit  inscription  recovered 
from  Kan-wet-khaung-kon  and  the  numberless  votive 
tablets  with  Sanskrit  epigraphs,  all  in  north-east-Indian  script, 
is  not  much  the  less.  A   systematic  study  of  the  monuments 
of  Prome  is  yet  to  be  made,  but  here  also  as  elsewhere,  one 
may  point  out  that  not  only  the  stupas  like  the  Bawbawgyi 
but  also  the  rectangular  edifices  like  the  Bebe  betray  north- 
east-Indian  traits  as  revealed  respectively  in  the  contemporary 
Dhamek  stupa  of  Sarnath  and  replicas  of  rectangular  temples 
with  sifyharas  sculptured  on  some  of  the  reliefs  of  Bihar  and 
Bengal,  no  doubt  of  a   later  date. 
The  sculptures  and  monuments  referred  to  above  by  no 
means  exhaust  even  a   small  fraction  of  what  the  old  site  of 
the  ruined  capital  has  yielded  to  archaeological  research  and 
exploration.  It  has  been  possible  for  us  to  make  notice  of 
only  a   few,  just  to  show  that  with  very  few  epigraphic  records 
and  reliable  chronicles  at  our  disposal,  these  sculptures, 
bronzes,  terracotta  tablets  and  monuments  constitute  in  fact 
the  main,  if  not  the  only  data  for  re-writing  the  very  little 
known  account  of  the  early  history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma. 
The  main  conclusion  as  revealed  by  a   study  of  these  docu- 
ments is  now  well  determined,  and  it  may  be  stated  that 
Buddhism  during  the  centuries  from  the  sixth  to  at  least 
the  tenth  was  a   popular  and  flourishing  religion  in  the  capital 
city  of  the  old  kingdom  of  Prome,  and  presumably  at  other 
centres  of  the  kingdom  as  well,  expressing  itself  in  numerous 
monuments,  votive  tablets  and  images  in  stone  and  bronze,

--- PAGE 92 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  PEGU 
73 
and  deriving  its  inspiration  not  only  from  south  India  but 
from  eastern  India  as  well. 
X 
BUDDHISM  IN  PEGU.  C.  1000-1050  A.D. 
We  have  so  long  confined  our  narrative  mainly  to  the 
capital  city  of  the  Pyus  whence  hail  almost  all  archaeological 
sources  of  our  information.  But  this  does  not  necessarily 
mean  that  the  neighbouring  realms  of  Pegu  and  Thaton, 
both  included  in  the  ancient  Suvannabhumi,  were  left  un- 
touched by  the  waves  of  the  great  faith.  Pegu  or  Hamsavati 
was  well-known  to  the  early  Buddhist  tradition,  at  least 
amongst  those  who  followed  the  Lower  Vehicle  or  the 
Hinayana.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the 
place  is  referred  to  in  the  Durenidana  section  of  the  JataJ^as, 
and  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Manorathapurant,  the 
commentary  of  the  Afiguttara  Nikaya.  Sujata,  the  first 
lay  woman  convert  was,  it  is  said,  born  at  Hamsavati  in  a 
previous  existence.  Citta,  the  Upasika  and  a   number  of 
other  important  personages  of  the  Buddhist  Order  are  said 
to  have  been  born  there.  This  intimate  association  of 
Hamsavati  or  Pegu  with  early  Buddhist  tradition  probably 
points  to  the  fact  that  the  realm  had  already  come  to  achieve 
some  sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  the  Buddhists  by  about  the  5th 
and  6th  centuries  of  the  Christian  era  when  the  large  mass 
of  Buddhist  commentarial  literature  in  its  Pali  recension  came 
probably  to  be  recorded  down. 
But  Buddhism  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  only 
religion  in  the  realm  of  Pegu  as  it  was  neither  in  the 
capital  city  of  the  Pyus  nor  in  Thaton  or  Suddhamma- 
vati.  In  Sriksetra,  the  capital  of  the  Pyus,  Brahmanical 
Hinduism  was  a   strong  rival,133  and  the  same  condition 
133  See,  Ray,  Brahmanical  Gods  in  Burma,  Cal,  Univ.,  1932,

--- PAGE 93 ---
74 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
seems  to  have  prevailed  in  Pegu  and  Thaton  as  well. 
In  Pegu,  moreover,  it  seems  to  have  sometimes  claimed 
homage  and  patronage  from  the  reigning  kings ;   and  the 
two  religions  at  times  even  came  into  conflict  with  each 
other .  The  tradition  of  such  a   conflict  is  preserved  in  the 
Slapat  Rajawan ,  a   local  Burmese  chronicle.  There  is  much 
of  legendary  element  in  the  story  which  is  reproduced  at 
some  length  below,  but  to  any  careful  reader  its  historical 
value  is  obvious.  The  following  story  which  relates  itself  to 
king  Tissa  of  Pegu,  assigned  according  to  local  or  Burmese 
reckoning  to  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century'  (1043-57), 
affords  a   key  to  the  position  of  Buddhism  in  Pegu  during  his 
reign,  and  shows  how  it  was  sometimes  persecuted ;   but  that 
seems  to  be  an  attempt  of  the  chroniclers  who  were  all 
Buddhists  of  a   much  later  date  at  proving  the  superiority  of 
the  religion  they  themselves  professed. 
“   Tissa  was  a   heretic  king  of  Pegu.  He... made  no  obeisance  to  the  Buddha,  to 
the  Law  he  hearkened  not,  he  honoured  the  Brahmanas.  He  threw  down  the 
images  of  the  Buddha  and  cast  them  away  into  ditcher,  and  marshes. 
“   Now  there  was  a   certain  merchant’s  daughter  who  clung  to  true  religion, 
BhadradevI  was  this  maiden  s   name.  From  her  tenth  year  she  went  out  to  listen  with 
her  parents  and  hearkened  continually  to  the  Law.  She  had  exceeding  great  joy  in 
the  Three  Gems  (Triratna)  Daily  she  said  the  Three  Names  of  Refuge  { Buddha , 
Dhamma ,  Saipgha )   with  care.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  time  when  she  was  in 
her  first  youth  was  the  time  when  the  king  cast  down  th  e   images  of  the  Buddha. 
At  that  time  the  maiden  went  down  to  bathe,  and  by  chance  she  thrust  her  hand 
against  an  image  of  Buddha.  And  she  drew  it  up  and  it  glistened  with  gold.  She 
asked,  f  who  has  caused  this  image  to  be  cast  away?’  And  the  old  slave-woman 
made  answer,  r  Lady,  this  king  follows  the  word  of  false-teachers.  Verily  it  is 
the  king  who  has  caused  this  image  of  Buddha  to  be  cast  away  ?  Whoever  greets, 
honours  or  bows  before  Buddha  at  the  pagodas,  him  the  king  causes  to  be  slaL  and 
to  be  brought  to  naught,  thus  said  the  slave-woman.’  When  the  maiden  had 
heard  these  words,  she  spake  on  thLwise,  '  I   obey  the  Three  Gems.  I   can  endure 
death.  First  wash  the  image  clean,  then  set  it  up  at  a   pagoda/  She  herself  and 
tKe  slave-woman  washed  it  and  set  it  up  at  a   pagoda. 
"   Now  as  she  was  setting  up  the  image,  these  things  were  told  to  the  king.  And 
he  sent  runners  to  call  her.  The  maiden,  that  ring  adorned  with  gems  beyond 
price,  spoke  to  the  king’s  runners  saying,  'Let  me  abide  here  before  the  image.’ 
And  she  made  haste  to  wash  every  image  of  Buddha  as  many  as  were  there,  and  to 
set  them  up  every  one.  Ahd,  after  a   time  he  sent  more  runners.  When  the  maiden 
cape  before  him,  she  spake  unto  him.  But  he  listened  with  anger  and  spake  in

--- PAGE 94 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  PEGU 
75 
thiswise,  ‘Take  her  to  the  elephants  that  they  may  trample  her  to  death.’  Then 
the  maiden  caused  gentleness  to  soften  the  king  and  the  elephants  and  the  elephant- 
men,  and  continually  she  said,  ‘  I   take  refuge  in  the  Lord  ’  and  she  called  on  the 
Three  Names  of  Refuge.  And  the  elephant  dared  not  tread  on  her,  hut  he  roared 
with  his  voice,  neither  could  the  elephant-men  make  him  run  at  her..  So  men 
told  the  king  in  fear.  When  the  king  heard  these  things,  he  spake  in  thiswise, 
1  Cover  her  with  straw  for  the  funeral  pyre.  But  the  maiden  caused  gentleness  to 
work  again,  and  she  called  on  the  Three  Names  of  Refuge,  Men  stirred  themselves 
to  bum  her,  yet  she  burned  not.  So  they  told  the  king  in  fear.  Thus  spake  the 
king,  and  he  said,  ‘O  maiden,  when  I   see  the  image  of  Buddha,  thy  teacher  fly  up 
into  heaven,  then  mayest  thou  live.  But  if  fiom  the  image  of  thy  teacher  there  fly 
not  up  seven  images,  eight  images,  1   will  have  thee  cut  into  seven  pieces.’  And  he 
had  her  led  to  the  foot  of  the  ditch    and  she  prayed  on  miswise,  '  O   image  of 
the  Lord  of  Bliss!  I,  thy  hand-maiden,  set  up  thy  images.  Buddha  is  lord 
everywhere,  his  Law  is  lord  everywhere,  his  Samgha  is  lord  everywhere.  As 
Buddha,  his  Law,  his  Church  are  everywhere  lord,  so  may  eight  images  of  Buddha 
fly  up  into  heaven  at  the  king’s  hall.’  And  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  there  flew 
eight  images  up  into  heaven  .  towards  the  king’s  hall.  And  the  maiden  returned 
and  pointed  it  out  to  the  king  ..Then  said  the  maiden,  f  0   earthly  king,  Buddha,  my 
teacher,  is  gone  to  Nirvana.  Thou  hast  been  able  to  see  only  his  images  fly  up  into 
heaven  in  his  stead.  Thou  hast  followed  false  teachers  and  called  them  better. 
Let  thy  hand-maiden  see  them  fly  up.’  Then  the  king  commanded  them  to  fly. 
But  the  false  teachers  could  not  fly.  And  the  king  drove  them  away... and  he  caused 
the  maiden  to  bathe,  and  he  raised  her  to  be  his  chief  queen   and  he  returned 
thanks  and  followed  true  religion  ever  after.”  134 
Thenceforth  Tissa  became  a   faithful  follower  of  Buddhism 
and  proved  himself  to  be  a   patron  of  the  Faith.  Here  is 
another  passage,  from  another  chronicle  : 
“   In  Benares  land  there  was  an  ancient  pagoda  on  the  top  of  the  river  Ganges* 
bank.  When  the  bank  was  washed  away  men  picked  up  the  relics  and  holy  images 
that  had  been  enshrined  there,  and  gave  them  to  their  children  to  play,  for  ' there 
was  no  longer  anyone  to  worship  them.  Now  Nga  Dula,  a   ship  s  captain,  saw  this, 
and  he  thought,  *  The  folk  of  the  east  country  deem  these  images  divine  and 
worship  them.  1   shall  get  gain  if  I   sell  them  to  the  folk  of  east  country.  So  he 
bought  them  for  a   fitting  price  and  came  with  them  to  the  landing  stage  at 
Pegu   Men  told-king  Tissa...and  he  rewarded  Nga  Dula  richly  and  ennobled 
him.”  135 
Incidentally  it  gives  an  idea  of  the  attitude  of  the  Peguan 
people  towards  Buddhist  images;  they  considered  these 
images  divine,  and  worshipped  them. 
1U  Schmidt,  Slapat  Ragawan  datow  smin  ron .  Buch  des  Ragawan,,  des 
Konigsgeschichte ,  Vienna,  1906, 
135  ShwemadatQ  Thamaing . 
 ,  .

--- PAGE 95 ---
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
% 
XI 
BUDDHISM  IN  THATON  :  C.  1050-57  A.D. 
Like  Pegu  or  Hamsavat!,  Thaton  or  Sudhammavatl,  the 
capital  of  Ramannadesa  or  the  Talaing  country,  seems  to 
have  been  well-known  to  the  Buddhist  tradition  of  about  the 
5th  and  6th  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  The  city  is 
referred  to  in  several  passages  in  the  commentaries  which  in 
their  Pali  recension  are  generally  dated  about  that  time.  But 
in  the  absence  of  any  archaeological  finds  of  such  an  early 
date  or  of  other  evidences  to  which  a   more  or  less  early  and 
definite  date  can  be  assigned,  it  is  difficult  to  further  press 
the  assumption.  Indeed,  not  before  the  middle  of  the 
eleventh  century,  1057  to  be  more  exact,  do  we  have  any 
idea  of  the  state  of  the  religion  in  this  part  of  peninsular 
Burma.  But  when  in  1 057  the  curtain  is  lifted  before  us  we 
achieve  a   clear  view  not  of  faint  traces  but  of  a   vast  pano- 
rama in  which  life  as  in  Buddhism  is  in  full  play.  This 
view  is  provided  by  the  story  of  the  introduction  of  Thera- 
vada  Buddhism  in  Pagan  in  Upper  Burma  following  the 
conquest  of  Thaton  by  King  Anawrahta  in  1057. 
Anawrahta’s  conquest  of  Thaton  is  described  in  detail  in 
all  the  standard  Burmese  chronicles  as  well  as  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa,  and  is  rightly  given  the  importance  it  deserves.  The 
long  KalyanI  inscriptions,  however,  make  a   short  reference ; 
the  reason  is  obvious,  for  king  Dhammaceti’s  primary  object 
was  to  record  the  history  of  the  reformation  of  the  Order  by 
himself,  and  everything  else  was  only  of  secondary  impor- 
tance, coming  in  only  as  an  introduction  to  his  own  great 
work.  The  successful  march  on  Thaton  is  viewed  with 
importance  by  all  later  chroniclers,  not  so  much  for  the 
actual  conquest  of  the  Talaing  country  and  assertion  of 
Burmese  supremacy,  as  for  the  introduction  of  Buddhism 
in  its  purest  form  into  Upper  Burma  and  the  consequent 
beginning  of  actual  intercourse  of  the  Marammadesa  with

--- PAGE 96 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  THATON 
77 
the  outside  world.  The  introduction  of  the  new  religion 
produced  a   general  outburst  of  faith,  and  kings  and  minis- 
ters, rich  and  poor,  queens  and  maids,  nobles  and  commons 
vied  with  one  another  in  devoting  themselves  to  works  of 
merit,  and  to  the  erection  of  sacred  edifices  of  diverse 
plans  and  styles  which  stand  to  this  day,  in  various  stages 
of  decay,  as  silent  witnesses  to  the  religious  zeal  that 
pervaded  the  whole' country  for  nearly  three  centuries.  It  is 
therefore  very  interesting  to  read  in  the  chronicles  the  rapid 
and  dramatic  march  of  events  which  led  to  this  great  awaken- 
ing of  faith  and  enthusiasm. 
Shin  Arahan  was  a   young  Talaing  monk  of  Thaton 
well-versed  in  the  sacred  books  of  Theravada  Buddhism. 
Burning  with  the  zeal  of  a   fervent  proselyte  and  with  the 
intent  of  preaching  the  Law  to  the  people  of  *  Tampadlpa  ’  130 
he  came1to  Pagan,  and  dwelt  in  a   forest  *  not  near,  not  far  1 
from  the  capital.  One  day  he  was  brought  to  the  capital  before 
Anawrahta,  the  then  reigning  monarch  of  the  realm  of  Pagan. 
“   And  Anawratha  said,  ‘Master,  of  what  race  art 
thouP  Whence  comest  thou?  Whose  doctrines  dost  thou 
follow  ?  
’  And  Shin  Arahan  made  answer  ‘  My  race  is  that 
of  the  Lord  Buddha,  possessor  of  the  nine  qualities  beginning 
with  sanctity,  the  six  glories  beginning  with  lordship,  and 
the  four  incomprehensible  beginning  with  intuition.  Thou 
sayest,  whose  doctrine  do  I   follow?  I   follow  the  doctrine  of 
the  sermon  of  authority,  most  fine,  subtle,  difficult  and 
profound,  preached  by  the  Lord — the  Lord  Buddha.’  And 
the  king  was  full  of  joy  and  rapture,  and  spake  again, 
entreating  him,  ‘  My  Lord,  preach  me  somewhat — yea,  but  a 
little — of  the  Law  preached  by  the  Lord,  the  Master.’  And 
336  According  to  a   seventeenth  century  inscription,  quoted  by  Burmese  diplo- 
mats in  negotiation  with  the  British  Government  and  translated  for  his  Government 
by  Colonel  Burney,  at  that  time  Resident  at  Ava,  Tampadlpa  included  the  districts 
of  Pagan,  Ava,  Pinya  and  Myingyan.  Yule,  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava.  The 
British  Burma  Gazetteer ,  however,  equals  Tampadlpa  with  the  upper  portion  of 
the  Theyet  district,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Irrawady,  (VoL  ii,  p.  746.)

--- PAGE 97 ---
78  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Shin  Arahan  preached  the  Law... When  he  had  made  an 
end  of  preaching  the  king  spake  again  :   '  Where  is  my 
Master,  the  Lord — the  Lord  Buddha  ?  How  much  is  the 
sum  of  the  Law  preached  by  the  Lord  ?  Liveth  there  any 
disciple  and  son  of  the  Lord  save  thee,  my  Master?’  ” 
To  all  these  Shin  Arahan  made  adequate  and  satisfactory 
replies. 
“   And  when  Anawrahtaminsaw  heard  the  words  of 
Ashin  Arahan,  he  was  seized  with  an  ecstasy  of  faith 
unbounded,  and  he  said,  f  Master,  we  have  no  other  refuge 
than  thee  !   From  this  day  forth,  my  Master,  we  dedicate 
our  body  and  our  life  to  thee  !   And  Master,  from  thee  I 
take  my  doctrine  !’  And  he  built  and  offered  him  a   monas- 
tery in  the  forest   When  the  king  and  all  the  people 
forsook  their  own  opinions  and  were  established  in  the 
good  Law,  the  Ari  lords  lost  their  gain  and  honour  and  bore 
great  hatred  against  Shin  Arahan.  And  the  king  fearing 
that  the  Ari  would  practise  ill  against  him,  took  good  heed 
and  appointed  guards  enough  to  defeat  the  thirty  Ari  lords 
and  their  sixty  thousand  disciples.  At  that  time  there 
came  many  saints  and  novices  from  Thaton,  and  made 
saints  and  ghostly  counsellors  of  those  who  were  faithful  in 
the  religion...”  137 
But  the  religion  that  Shin  Arahan  had  introduced  could 
not  thrive,  there  being  no  sacred  text  in  Pagan,  for,  *  without 
the  scriptures  there  can  be  no  study,  without  study  there 
can  be  no  intuition.’  But  where  were  the  scriptures  to 
come  from?  And  Shin  Arahan  said,  ‘  In  the  country  of 
Thaton  are  thirty  sets,  the  three  Pitakas  in  each  set.  There 
are  also  many  sacred  relics  !   
’  So  Anawrahta  sent  a   wise 
minister  with  a   store  of  gifts  and  presents  to  Manuha,  the 
king  of  Thaton,  to  beg  of  him  certain  sacred  texts  and  relics. 
But  Manuha  grew  jealous,  and  ‘  answered  ill  ’  :   ‘‘It  is  not 
seemly  to  send  the  three  Pitakas  and  the  relics  to  such  as 
137  Glass  Palace  Chronicle,  pp,  73-75.

--- PAGE 98 ---
BUDDHISM  IN  THATON 
79 
you,  who  hold  false  doctrines — even  as  the  fact  of  the  maned 
lion  can  be  kept  in  a   bowl  of  gold  and  not  in  a   vessel  of 
clay.”188  It  was  a   direct  hint  at  Anawrahta’s  former 
patronage  of  the  Samanakuttaka  heresy,  and  an  insulting 
refusal.  Anawrahta  grew  furious  and  marched  on  Thaton 
with  a   huge  force,  by  land  and  sea,  and  laid  seize  to  the  city. 
The  rest  of  the  story  is  briefly  told.  Anawrahta’s  men 
captured  Manuha  with  his  family  and  ministers  who  were  all 
taken  captive  to  Pagan.  But  An'awrahta’s  objective  was  still 
something  more  than  Manuha  himself  or  his  kingdom ;   he 
wanted  scriptures,  and  learned  teachers  to  explain  and  preach 
all  that  was  contained  in  them.  He  therefore  “   brought 
away  the  sacred  relics  which  were  kept  in  a   jewelled  casket 
and  worshipped  by  a   line  of  kings  in  Thaton ;   and  he  placed 
the  thirty  sets  of  Pitakas  on  the  king’s  thirty-two  white 
elephants  and  brought  them  away...  Moreover,  to  the  Noble 
Order  acquainted  with  the  books  of  the  Pitakas  he  made  fair 
appeal  and  brought  them  away.”  138  Manuha  was  perhaps 
at  first  treated  with  consideration  and  allowed  to  pass  the  rest 
of  his  days  at  Myinkaba,  in  the  outskirts  of  the  royal  capital, 
where  he  built  two  edifices,  the  Nanpaya  which  contains  his 
throne  room,  and  the  other  named  and  still  known  after  him 
and  where  there  is  a   colossal  figure  of  the  Buddha  entering  the 
parinirvana.  Later  on,  Anawrahta  seems  to  have  dedicated 
him  and  his  family  as  slaves  to  the  Shwezigon  pagoda,  thus 
rendering  them  outcasts  for  ever.140 
138  Sasanavamsa,  p.  62.  Sadhammapurindo  Manohari  nama  raja  pi  macchera- 
citto  hutva  tumhadkanam  micchaditthinam  thane  pitakattayam  sariradhatu  ca  pahini- 
tum  na  yutla  tilokaggassa  hi  sammasambuddhassa  sasanam  sammaditthlnam  thane 
yeva  patitthassati  yatha  nama  kesaraslharajassa  vasa  suvannapatiyam  yeva  na  rnatti- 
kabhajane  ti, 
L19  Glass  Palace  Chronicle ,  pp.  78-79. 
HO  The  New  Chronicle,  however,  denies  this,  and  adduces  an  interesting 
reason:  “Various  chronicles  say  that  Anawrahta  dedicated  Manuha,  king  of 
Thaton,  to  the  Shwezigon      If  Manuha  was  so  dedicated  his  grandson  would 
riot  have  been  married  to  king  Narapati’s  daughter.”  The  Sasanavamsa  too  seems 
to  suggest  that  Manuha  (or  Manohari)  was  not  ungenerously  treated  by  Anawrahta. 
^pp,  63-64),  See  also  Forchammer’s  Report ,  
Jan.,  1891,  pp.  7-8.

--- PAGE 99 ---
80 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Shin  Arahan  had  now  got  all  that  he  wanted  to  have, 
and  his  mission  received,  as  a   result,  a   wonderful  fillip.  He 
had  now  at  his  service  a   large  band  of  monks  devoted  to 
his  cause,  and  a   library  of  sacred  texts 141  at  his  disposal. 
The  abominable  Aris — the  heretic  Samanakuttakas,  as  the 
SasanaVamsa  would  call  them — were  already  at  bay ;   the 
king  with  his  counsellors  and  ministers  had  already  been 
won  over;  and  the  field  was  ready  for  the  Arhanta  to  sow 
his  seeds.  And  he  lost  no  time.  With  the  king  and  the 
court  behind  him  and  all  the  resources  they  could  com- 
mand, with  the  services  of  a   devoted  band,  but  above 
everything,  with  the  zeal  and  fervour  of  a   preacher  and 
reformer  and  the  will  to  win,  his  work  of  propagation  of 
the  sacred  religion  of  the  Sakyamuni  went  apace  till  within 
a   very  short  time  he  had  won  thousands  of  converts  to  his 
side.  Hundreds  came  forward  to  receive  ordination,  and 
entered  the  sacred  Order,  burning  with  the  zeal  and 
enthusiasm  of  new  converts.  At  the  head  of  them  all,  to 
guide  them  all  was  Shin  Arahan,  the  primate  of  a   kingdom 
daily  growing  and  expanding. 
This,  in  short,  is  the  account  of  the  introduction  of 
Theravada  Buddhism  in  Pagan  in  Upper  Burma.  From  this 
account  it  is  evident  that  in  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury Theravada  Buddhism  had  a   very  flourishing  existence  in 
the  Ramannadesa,  the  land  par  excellence  of  the  Talaings ; 
and  its  capital  Thaton  142  in  the  land  of  Thudammawadi 
( 
=   Sudhammavatl) 143  swarmed  with  hundreds  of  monks  who 
lived  in  monasteries  that  must  have  housed  libraries 
Hi  The  scriptures  that  were  brought  from  Thaton  were  all  housed  by 
Anawratha  in  a   library-hall  specially  built  for  the  puipose.  This  building  known 
as  the  Bidagataik  (=Tripitaka  *taik  or  Tripitaka  library),  an  edifice  of  wooden 
origins,  stands  to  this  day  in  the  midst  of  the  jungle  of  ruins  of  Pagan. 
I*2  Thaton  was  anciently  known  as  Sudhammapura  or  Sudhammanagara  (Taw 
Sein  Ko,  “Preliminary  Study  of  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions,”  Ind ,  ^4nf.  Vol.  xxii, 
p.  17). 
I*3  Paklat  T aiding  ChtQnicle.

--- PAGE 100 ---
BUDDHISM.  IN  THATON 
81 
containing  not  only  the  books  of  “   the  Three  Pi  takas  but 
also  the  Four  Books  of  Divination  ”   1,14 
...And  the  king  of  Arimaddanapura,  having  possession  of  king  Manuka, 
took  away  the  saintly  monks,  who  were  full  ol  learning  and  piety ;   he  took  away  the 
monks  who  knew  the  Three  Scriptures  and  the  Four  Books  of  Divination... 
he  took  them  all  to  the  land  of  Arimaddana  (Pagan).”  145 
Moreover,  the  kings  of  Thaton  were 
“   famous  and  mighty  kings  who  upheld  the  religion  of  the  Lord;  all  the 
people  followed  the  command  of  almsgiving  and  all  other  commands  of 
righteousness,’’ 146 
There  were  in  Thaton  also  different  orders  of  monks 
besides  the  one  to  which  Shin  Arahan  himself  belonged. 
“   And  thou  hast  asked — is  there  any  monk  of  the  Order,  save  myself,  a   disciple  of 
the  Lord?  Yea,  verily;  besides  myself  there  are  the  Paramattha  Order  and  Samuti 
Order.”  347 
Pali  as  the  language  of  the  religious  texts  must  have 
been  known  there  and  understood  by  the  entire  body  of 
monks  and  at  least  by  a   section  of  the  lay  people  ;   Pali 
literature,  mainly  canonical  and  commentarial,  was  also 
presumably  more  or  less  widely  read.  It  is  evident  that  this 
reputation  of  Thaton  as  centre  of  the  religion  of  the 
Buddha  was  not  built  in  a   day ;   it  must  have  taken  some  y 
time  to  enable  Thaton  to  attain  the  glory  she  came  to  share 
with  Kancipuram  and  Kaveripattanam  in  South  India  on  the 
one  hand  and  Ceylon  on  the  other  which  incidentally,  were 
the  three  other  contemporary  centres  of  Theravada  Buddhism, 
We  may,  therefore,  start  with  the  assumption  that  Theravada 
Buddhism  was  introduced  into  Suvannabhumi,  the  land  of 
the  M6ns  or  Talaings,  at  least  several  centuries  earlier,  and 
gradually  established  itself  not  only  at  Thaton,  but  also 
at  other  places  in  lower  Burma. 
m   Ibid.  .  • 
Ibid. 
I4®  Hmannartf  I,  252, 
^   M7  The  Glass  Palace  Chronicle  (Hmannan)»  P*  74^  ,   ■ 
11 — 1445B

--- PAGE 101 ---
82 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
But  at  the  same  time  it  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that 
all  our  sources  of  information  regarding  Anawrahta’s  sack 
of  Thaton  and  consequent  introduction  of  Theravada 
Buddhism  in  Upper  Burma — the  Kalyani  inscriptions,  the 
Hmannan  and  other  Burmese  chronicles — belong  to  a   much 
later  date.  In  fact  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  are  the  earliest 
datable  record  alluding  to  this  important  historical  event, 
and  they  cannot  be  dated  earlier  than  the  15th  century. 
In  recent  years  quite  a   large  number  of  inscriptions 
from  Pagan  in  Mon,  Pyu  and  Burmese  and  datable 
from  the  11th  to  the  1 4th  century,  have  been  discovered 
and  deciphered,  and  it  is  strange  that  not  even  one  of  them 
contains  any  reference  to  this  important  and  glorious  histori- 
cal event,  glorious  of  course  from  the  Fagan  point  of  view. 
It  is  difficult  to  explain  the  silence  of  contemporary  and 
almost  contemporary  records  of  the  Pagan  kings  and  the 
nobility  to  whose  credit  must  have  been  due  the  vigorous 
religious  and  cultural  drive  that  we  witness  in  Pagan  during 
the  reign  of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty.  Indeed  the  omission  is 
so  significant  as  to  lead  one  to  doubt  the  authenticity  of  the 
whole  story  as  contained  in  later  inscriptions  and  chronicles. 
Yet  one  must  reasonably  account  for  the  deluge  of  epigraphic 
records  pervaded  by  the  unmistakable  spirit  of  Buddhism,  the 
countless  number  of  temples,  stupas,  monasteries,  all  dedicat- 
ed to  that  noble  faith  and  containing  images  of  gods  and 
goddesses  belonging  to  the  Buddhist  pantheon,  and  stone 
reliefs  and  terracotta  tablets  bearing  stories  and  legends  of  the 
Buddhist  faith  that  suddenly  begin  to  crop  up  at  Pagan 
onwards  from  about  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century. 
One  cannot  help  feeling  that  this  sudden  outburst  must 
have  been  due  to  some  outside  contact,  some  event  or 
achievement  that  brought  Pagan  in  touch  with  the  march  of 
a   civilised  and  cultured  life  unknown  to  these  northern 
barbarians  who  had  swooped  from  their  hilly  retreats  on  to 
the  torrid  plains  of  the  Upper  Irrawady.  And  strangest  of

--- PAGE 102 ---
A   RESUME 
83 
all  strange  things,-  the  Pagan  records  do  not  make  any 
mention  of  any  such  contact,  any  such  historic  upheaval. 
It  is  indeed  a   pity  that  one  has  to  fall  back  upon  an  explana- 
tion contained  in  records  that  are  at  least  four  centuries  later 
than  actual  events.  But  it  is  almost  impossible  not  to 
admit  that  these  records,  though  late,  offer  on  the  whole  a 
trustworthy  and  perhaps  convincing  explanation . 
XII 
A   RESUME 
In  the  foregoing  pages  has  been  traversed  a   wide 
expanse  of  time  covering  a   period  over  twelve  hundred  years 
in  an  attempt  to  find  out  traces  of  Buddhism,  mainly  of 
the  Theravada  denomination,  in  Burma  up  to  Anawrahta’s 
conquest  of  Thaton  and  consequent  introduction  of 
Theravada  Buddhism  in  Pagan  in  about  the  middle  of  the 
eleventh  century  of  the  Christian  era.  Not  all  the  traces  of 
footprints  of  the  march  of  the  religion  through  all  these 
centuries  are,  it  is  true,  equally  distinct  and  pronounced ; 
some  of  them  are  beyond  reasonable  doubt  and  may  be 
treated  as  authentic,  some  are  less  certain  since  they  rest  on 
certain  assumptions  not  yet  definitely  proved,  but  accepted 
none  the  less  as  working  hypotheses ;   some  even  are  based 
merely  on  traditions  which  fall  far  short  of  history,  but 
critically  considered  they  have  strong  claims  to  be  recognised 
as  containing  germs  of  sober  and  authentic  history  that  lie 
enmeshed  in  the  thick  web  of  mythical  and  legendry  details. 
On  the  whole,  we  are  thus  able  to  present  at  least  some 
unconnected  facts  in  the  early  history  of  the  most  important 
school  of  Buddhism  in  Burma.  These  facts  may  be 
summarised  as  follows  : — * 
(a)  Asoka  sends  an  ecclesiastical  mission  headed  by 
Sona  and  Uttara  to  evangelise  the  land  of  Suvannabhumi

--- PAGE 103 ---
84 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
(c.  250  B.C.).  This  is  based  on  a   tradition  recorded  five 
hundred  years  later.  Circumstantial  evidence  lends  no  doubt 
a   colour-  of  probability  to  the  tradition,  but  it  cannot  as  yet 
be  accepted  as  a   fact  of  history.  It  cannot  be  dismissed 
outright  either.  The  correct  historical  attitude  would 
be  to  keep  the  door  open  for  further  research  and  investiga- 
tion. 
( b )   Along  with  China,  a   part  of  Burma,  known  to  Indian 
tradition  as  the  land  of  the  Kiratas  or  Cilatas,  seems 
to  have  been  converted  to  Buddhism  by  a   fraternity  of 
monks  from  Tambapamna  (before  C.  250  A.D.).  This 
fact  rests  on  the  proposed  identification  of  the  Cilata 
or  Kirata  .country  with  a   part  of  Burma,  an  identifica- 
tion that  appears  to  be  upheld  by  all  available  sources  of 
information. 
(c)  Chinese  travellers  see  Buddhism  a   flourishing  religion 
at  Lin-Yang,  identical  with  either  Prome  or  some  region  in 
central  Burma  (c.  250  A. D.).  This  point  rests  on  the  identi- 
fication of  Chin-Lin  with  Chin-ch’en  which  has  so  far  been 
generally  accepted. 
( 
d )   Buddhaghosa  or  one  of  his  celebrated  contemporaries 
infuses  new  life  into  the  religion  in  Lower  Burma  (c.  400- 
450  A.D.).  The  character  of  the  tradition  is  suspicious, 
but  circumstantial  evidence  leads  a   colour  of  probability  to 
it.  At  least  there  is  nothing  antecedently  improbable  in  the 
Buddhaghosa  tradition. 
(e)  Pali  as  the  language  of  Theravada  Buddhism  is 
known  and  understood,  and  Pali  canonical  texts,  at  least  the 
more  important  of  them,  are  studied  in  fheir  doctrinal  and 
metaphysical  and  most  abstruse  aspects  (c.  450-500  A.D.). 
Early  Buddhalogy  also  seems  to  have  been  more  or  less  a 
familiar  subject,  at  least  in  the  old  Pyu  capital,  i.e.,  old 
Prome.  This  point  is  beyond  doubt. 
(/)  I-ching  testifies  to  the  prevalence  of  Buddhism  in 
Sriksetra  (old  Prome)  and  Lang-chia-shu  or  Lankasu

--- PAGE 104 ---
A   RESUME 
85 
( 
  
=   Tennasserim)  (c.  675-700  A.D.).  This  point  is  absolute- 
ly certain;  the  identification  of  Lankasu  with  Tennasserim  is, 
however,  tentative. 
( g ) 
  T’ang  chronicles  refer  to  Buddhism  as  the  religion 
of  the  people  in  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  P’iao  ( 
=   Pyu), 
identical  with  old  Prome  (c.  750-850  A.D.).  This  is  as 
good  as  sober  history. 
(h)  Sculptures,  bronzes,  terracotta  votive  tablets,  epigra- 
phic  documents  and  monuments  of  the  ruined  capital  of  old 
Prome  point  to  a   very  flourishing  condition  of  the  religion 
(c.  550-1000  A.D.).  This  is  definite. 
(i)  Burmese  chronicles  refer  to  the  prevalence  of 
Buddhism  in  Pegu  where  it  sometimes  came  into  conflict 
with  Brahmanical  Hinduism  (c.  1000-1050  A   D.).  This  tradi- 
tion seems  to  contain  germs  of  sober  and  authentic  history. 
(j)  And  lastly,  the  story  of  Anawrahta's  conquest  of 
Thaton  points  to  a   very  flourishing  state  of  the  religion  in  the 
Talaing  kingdom  towards  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century 
(C.  1057  A.D.). 
It  is  readily  seen  that  from  about  the  fifth  century 
onwards  we  are  on  more  definite  grounds.  Epigraphic 
documents  prove  beyond  doubt  the  prevalence  of  the  ortho- 
dox school  of  Buddhism,  and  the  texts  they  quote  reveal  that 
the  religion  stressed  the  doctrinal  and  metaphysical  aspects 
more  than  anything  else.  All  the  quotations  are  significant 
and  refer  to  the  fundamental  creeds  and  tenets  of  the  reli- 
gion. Onwards  from  that  date  the  continuity  of  archaeo- 
logical evidence  is  maintained  throughout,  but  they  no  longer 
yield  materials  that  throw  light  on  the  character  of  the 
religion,  nor  can  one  say  with  any  amount  of  certainty  that 
the  wealth  of  archaeological  materials  in  the  form  of  sculp- 
tures, bronzes,  terracotta  tablets  and  epigraphs  all  belong 
to  the  Theravada  denomination.  In  fact,  it  is  now  evident 
that  by  about  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries,  Mulasarvasti- 
vada  was  one  of  the  niJiayas  in  practice  in  the  capital  city

--- PAGE 105 ---
86 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
of  the  Pyus.  This  is  testified  to  not  only  by  I-ching  but  also 
by  a   number  of  archaeological  objects  recovered  from  the 
ruins  of  the  city.  And,  if  the  style  and  iconography  of  the 
gods  and  goddesses  represented  in  sculptures  and  bronzes 
and  on  terracotta  tablets  and  the  paleography  of  the  embossed 
epigraphs  are  any  indication,  then  it  must  be  recognised  that 
Mahayanism  of  the  east-Indian  affiliation  was  also  well- 
known  in  old  Prome  by  at  least  about  the  ninth  and  tenth 
centuries  of  the  Christian  era.3'18  It  is,  however,  difficult 
to  say  in  what  relations  Theravada  stood  in  the  realm  of  the 
Pyus  in  respect  of  the  other  nikfyas  of  Buddhism. 
If  the  identification  of  Cilata  or  Kirata  country  with  a 
part  of  Burma  stand  to  reason,  and  if  we  lay  aside  the 
claim  of  the  Asoka-mission,  we  have  then  to  admit  that 
Burma  received  the  message  of  the  Buddha  for  the  first  time 
from  the  hands  of  a   Buddhist  fraternity  of  southern  India. 
The  Pali  epigraphs  in  the  Andhra-Kadamba  script  also  point 
unmistakably  to  the  fact  that  contemporary  Theravada 
Buddhism  of  the  Pyu  capital  was  directly  affiliated  to  such 
centres  of  Buddhism  in  South  India  as  Amaravatl,  Nagarjuni- 
konda,  Uragapura,  Kancipura,  etc.  Other  nikayas  of 
Buddhism  which  we  have  evidence  of  at  the  Pyu  capital,  e.g., 
Sarvastivada  and  Mahayana,  seem  to  have  been  affiliated 
to  the  respective  east-Indian  religious  traditions.  This  is 
determined  by  the  style  of  art  of  the  sculptures  and  terracotta 
tablets  as  well  as  by  the  paleography  of  the  writings  on 
most  of  them.349 
But  Sarvastivada  and  Mahayana  were  not  the  only 
religions  Theravada  Buddhism  had  to  measure  steps  with. 
Brahmanical  Hinduism  was  also  another  Indian  religion  that 
had  to  be  taken  into  account  from  at  least  about  the  sixth  or 
seventh  century  A.D.  Archaeological  explorations  have 
348  por  hoth  SarvatTivgda  and  Mahayana  in  old  Prome  *ee  my  Sanskrit 
Buddhism  in  Burma }  
Cal.  Univ.,  1936. 
M   Ibid.

--- PAGE 106 ---
A   RESUME 
87 
up  to  now  brought  to  light  several  Brahmanical  sculptures 
from  old  Prome  and  Thaton  that  can  be  dated  on  stylistic 
grounds  from  about  the  sixth  or  seventh  to  about  the  tenth  or 
eleventh  century  A.D.  Burmese  tradition  in  respect  of  Pegu 
referred  to  in  a   preceding  section,  and  Chinese  tradition  as 
recorded  by  Prof.  Pelliot  in  respect  of  Tun-hsiin  or  Tennasserim 
seem  to  point  to  the  same  conclusion.360  Existence  of 
Brahmanas  and  prevalence  of  Brahmanism  in  the  realm  of 
the  Pyus  and  Talaings  from  very  early  times  seem  now 
to  be  beyond  doubt,361  but  at  no  period  of  Burmese  history 
does  it  appear  to  have  achieved  any  considerable  importance, 
and  the  account  of  the  sack  of  Thaton  by  Anawrahta  as 
preserved  in  the  Burmese  chronicles  seem  to  reveal  that 
Theravada  Buddhism  which  used  to  receive  patronage  of  the 
Talaing  royalty  was  the  most  dominant  faith  in  the  realm  at 
that  time. 
no  Pdliot,  BEFEO.j  1903,  P.  279. 
See  my  Brahmanical  Cod$  in  Burma,  Cal.  Univ.,  1932,  and  An.  R.  A.  S   I., 
1930-1937-

--- PAGE 107 ---
CHAPTER  TWO 
EFFLORESCENCE 
FROM  THE  INTRODUCTION  OF  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN 
PAGAN  IN  1   057  TO  THE  FALL  OF  THE  PAGAN 
DYNASTY  :   C.  1287  A. D. 
Whoever  has  cared  to  study  the  local  chronicles  of  Burma 
must  have  taken  notice  of  one  characteristic  feature  common 
to  almost  all  of  them.  He  must  have  seen  that  with  the 
occupation  of  the  Pagan  throne  by  Anawrahta  the  chronicler 
becomes  infused  as  it  were  with  new  life ;   his  account 
becomes  fuller  with  details,  events  begin  to  move  with  force 
and  vigour,  the  narrative  becomes  more  vivid,  lively  and 
continuous,  information  more  definite,  and  the  chronicle 
comes  to  stand  against  a   more  or  less  secure  chronological 
background.  It  is  from  this  time  that  the  chronicler  seems  to 
give  us  a   more  or  less  exact  history  of  the  peninsula.  In 
fact,  there  is  in  these  chronicles  and  thamaings  (prose  his- 
tories of  pagodas,  monasteries  and  towns)  and  in  the  historical 
ballads  a   continuous  history  of  Burma,  full  of  details,  not 
unoften  with  interpretations  thereof,  from  the  conquest  of 
Thaton  down  to  the  British  conquest  of  Burma ;   and  on  the 
whole  the  information  and  the  interpretation  furnished  by 
them  are  reliable.  This  has  been  amply  demonstrated  by 
the  chronicles  and  thamaings  themselves  agreeing  with  one 
another  on  all  essential  points  as  well  as  with  independent 
archaeological  and  monumental  sources  of  information.  A 
good  deal  of  caution  is  indeed  necessary  in  dealing  with 
evidences  from  such  sources,  but  that  is  more  or  less  true  of 
all  literary  and  semi-historical  materials;  even  then  such

--- PAGE 108 ---
EFFLORESCENCE 
89 
sources  can  be  turned  to  the  best  advantage  if  the  husk 
can  be  carefully  separated  from  the  grain. 
A   modern  historian  attempting  to  write  a   history  of 
Burma  from  1057  onwards  has  therefore  reasons  to  be  more 
happy  about  his  materials  which  are  far  from  scanty  and  are 
generally  of  reliable  authenticity.  It  is  thus  possible  for  him 
to  present  his  readers  with  a   detailed,  complete  and  continu- 
ous readable  account  whether  of  political  or  religious  history 
without  burdening  it  with  discussions  of  details  and  examina- 
tions of  materials  that  are  otherwise  necessary.  The  story  of 
the  religion  from  the  memorable  event  of  the  sack  of  Thaton 
and  eventual  introduction  of  Theravada  Buddhism  into 
Pagan  onwards  is,  therefore,  told  with  less  difficulty. 
I 
SOURCES  AND  SOURCE-MATERIALS 
A   series  of  inscriptions  originally  engraved  on  ten 
upright  stones  at  the  Kalyanlsima,  Pegu,  for  example,  consti- 
tute a   most  important  evidence,  and  may  be  considered  to  be 
a   dependable  foundation  on  which  a   structure  of  the  events  of 
Buddhism  during  the  four  centuries  and  a   half  from  C.  1057 
to  C.  1 500  A.D.  can  be  built.1  They  are,  moreover,  our 
earliest  sources,  and  since  they  devote  themselves  entirely 
and  exclusively  to  recording  the  events  and  vicissitudes 
of  the  religion  irrespective  of  any  political  or  military  acti- 
vities of  contemporary  kings  and  dynasties  they  go 
to  furnish  us  with  an  exhaustive  and  a   most  dependable 
account,  simply  and  faithfully  told.  These  inscriptions,  it  is 
well-known,  were  set  up  at  the  instance  of  king  Dhammaceti 
of  Pegu  (1472-92)  to  record  the  re-introduction  by  the  king, 
referred  to  in  the  inscriptions  as  Ramannadhipati,  of  a 
canonically  valid  monastic  succession  from  Ceylon  where, 
according  to  him,  such  a   succession  had  been  preserved, 
1  See  Appendix  to  this  chapter. 
12— 1445B

--- PAGE 109 ---
90 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
while  in  his  own  realm  it  had  long  been  split  up  into 
schismatical  sects.  The  validity  of  such  succession  depends 
on  the  ordination,  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the 
Vinaya,  being  handed  down  by  successive  ordinations  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  the  previous  and  proper  consecration  of 
the  places  where  such  ordinations  are  carried  out.  Dhamma- 
ceti  had  sent  a   mission  of  twenty  monks  to  Ceylon  to  receive 
their  re-ordination  at  the  hands  of  the  great  theras  of  the 
Mahavihara.  When  they  came  back  and  when  an  adequate 
number  of  validly  ordained  monks  had  become  available,  king 
Dhammaceti  caused  them  to  consecrate  in  due  form  a   sitna  or 
ordination  site  at  Pegu.  To  this  he  gave  the  name  of 
Kalyamslma  to  commemorate  the  fact  that  the  monks  who 
had  been  sent  to  Ceylon  had  received  their  upasampada 
ordination  in  a   stma  on  the  Kalyani  river.  When  the  king 
had  thus  succeeded  in  creating  a   good  deal  of  interest  in  the 
great  work  he  had  performed,  large  numbers  of  monks  of 
his  realm  came  flocking  together  to  receive  re-ordination  at 
the  hands  of  the  monks  already  re-ordained  in  Ceylon. 
Dhammaceti  was  thus  able  to  bring  about  a   closing  down  of 
all  schisms  and  effect  an  unity  in  the  Buddhist  Order  of 
Burma  on  the  basis  of  a   canonically  valid  succession.  In 
recording  an  account  of  this  good  and  great  achievement,  the 
inscriptions  begin  no  doubt  with  a   full  reference  to  king 
Asoka’s  reformation  of  the  Buddhist  Order  and  the  mission 
of  Sona  and  Uttara  to  Suvannabhumi,  but  then  take  a   long 
jump  over  more  than  1 200  years  and  at  once  refer  themselves 
to  the  reign  of  king  Manohari  or  Manohar  (Manuha)  of 
Sudhuim  (Thaton)  and  the  eventual  conquest  of  Sudhuim  and 
introduction  of  the  religion  into  Arimaddanapura  by  king 
Anuruddha  (Anawrahta).  It  is,  in  fact,  from  the  account  of 
the  origin  and  consequences  of  the  schismatical  divisions  of 
the  Order  in  Burma,  in  Burma  proper,  i.e.,  in  the  realm  of 
Pagan,  but  with  special  reference  to  the  Mon  country,  that 
the  narrative  becomes  full  of  minute  and  exhaustive  details

--- PAGE 110 ---
EFFLORESCENCE 
91 
furnishing  a   complete  record  of  the  great  work  king 
Dhammaceti  had  so  successfully  performed.1" 
Of  other  standard  sources  for  a   religious  history  of  the 
period  mention  must  be  made  of  the  MahaVamsa,  the 
CullaVamsa,  the  Gandhavamsa"  and  the  Sasanavamsa, 3  
the  last 
a   Pali  work  written  in  Burma  by  a   Burmese  scholar,  and  the 
Pita\attha-main /  
a   twentieth  century  work.  All  these  books 
have  been  utilised  by  Dr.  Mabel  Bode  as  furnishing  elabor- 
ate bibliographies  of  Pali  literature  of  Burma  and  Ceylon ; 
they  are  indeed  the  indigenous  accounts  of  the  Pali  literature 
of  Burma  furnishing  us  with  an  almost  complete  record  of 
more  or  less  well-known  authors  and  their  works.  But  at 
the  same  time  they  also  throw  much  welcome  light  on  the 
history  and  vicissitudes  of  the  religion,  and  have  a   more  or 
less  complete  record  of  the  religious  activities  that  were  res- 
ponsible for  bringing  into  existence  such  a   store  of  Pali 
literature  in  Burma.  The  Gandhavamsa  which  is  the  earlier 
chronicle  belonging  to  about  the  seventeenth  century  is  not 
so  full  of  details  as  the  later  Sasanavamsa ;   it  is  in  fact 
very  sparing  of  information  with  regard  to  the  period  and 
chronology  of  the  works  it  enumerates.  The  Gandhavamsa 
thus  suffers  from  a   serious  drawback  which  is  further 
The  Pali  text  of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  with  a   translation  and  somenotes  as 
well  as  an  introduction  was  first  edited  and  published  in  1893  by  Mr.  Taw  Sein 
Ko  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  Vol.  xxii ;   some  additional  notes  were  appended  in 
the  two  years  following  under  the  title — “   Some  remarks  on  the  Kalyam  Inscrip- 
tions ”  (Vols.  xxiii,  xxiv).  These  publications  were  issued  in  separate  form,  which, 
however,  was  further  supplemented  by  a   transcript  in  the  Burmese  character  of  the 
actual  Pali  text,  as  it  survives  in  a   fragmentary  state  on  the  stones. 
The  Mon  text  of  the  inscriptions  was  edited  in  a   most  admirable  manner  by 
Dr,  C.  O.  Blagden  {Ep.  Birmanica ,  Vol.  Ill,  part  II,  1928,  Rangoon).  He  gives 
a   full  reading  of  the  Mon  text,  tested  and  verified  by  the.  Pali  text,  and  portions 
of  it  by  two  copies  of  a   palm-leaf  manuscript  in  the  possession  of  the  KahnyaW 
monastery,  Bilugyun,  and  the  Bernard  Free  Library.  This  is  prefaced  by  a   very 
good  descriptive  account  and  followed  by  an  able  translation  based  upon  the 
Mon  text  and  its  Pali  counterpart, 
2  Gandhavamsa,  Ed.  by  Minayeff,  JPTS 
1886,  Index,  1896, 
3  SasanaVarpsa,  Ed.  by  Dr,  Mabel  Bode,  JPTS,,  1897. 
4  Piiakkatthamain  (in  Burmese),  Rangoon,  1906.  ^

--- PAGE 111 ---
92  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
complicated  by  the  very  meagre  information  it  gives  of 
the  events  and  vicissitudes  of  the  faith  in  Burma.  But 
much  more  useful  from  our  point  of  view  is  the  Sasana - 
Vamsa  which  fully  utilises  the  older  Burmese  chronicles, 
for  example,  the  Rajavamsa,  which  is  most  often  referred 
to,  the  Maharajavamsa  or  the  national  chronicle,  the  Atiha - 
katha  and  even  the  inscriptions  of  the  Kalyanlsima. 
It  has,  moreover,  a   reliable  chronological  sequence  and  even 
assigns  dates  to  events,  authors  and  their  works  which  are 
verifiable  with  reference  to  other  independent  sources.  Its 
value  lies  in  that  it  enables  us  to  present  a   brief  but  connect- 
ed account  of  the  religion.  But  the  Sasanavamsa.  has  its 
limitations  :   “   
It  is  confused,  rambling  and  prejudiced.  The 
author  (Pannasaml)  who  dates  his  book  1223  B.E.=  1861  A.D., 
was  the  tutor  of  King  Mindon-min  and  himself  a   pupil  of 
the  Samgharaja,  or  Head  of  the  Order  at  Mandalay,  a   high 
ecclesiastic  of  Mindon-min's  reign,  belonged  by  all  his 
convictions  and  traditions  to  the  Slhala  Samgha  (as  distinct 
from  and  opposed  to  the  Maramma  Samgha  or  Burmese 
School)  an  important  school  or  sect,  having,  as  the  name 
shows,  a   close  connection  with  the  Buddhist  fraternity  of 
Ceylon.  As  for  the  other  communities  whose  spiritual  fore- 
fathers refused  to  look  on  the  Mahavihara  (of  Ceylon)... 
as  the  very  centre  and  hearth  of  orthodoxy,  they  interest 
him  only  moderately. .  .Therefore,  we  must  beware  of 
considering  the  Sasanavamsa  a   complete  record  of  monastic 
work.  Nevertheless,  the  author’s  own  point  of  view  is 
instructive,  and  we  have  no  right  to  say  that  he  does  not  try 
to  be  impartial.” 5 
The  Sasanavamsa  professes  to  be  a   general  history  of 
Buddhism  and  begins,  therefore,  with  the  birth  of  the 
Buddha  and  gives  a   short  and  running  summary  of  events 
in  the  light  of  the  Sinhalese  tradition  up  to  the  sending 
5  Bode,  Pali  Literature  of  Burma,  Introduction,  pp,  xi-xii.

--- PAGE 112 ---
EFFLORESCENCE 
93 
forth  of  missionaries  by  Asoka,  more  definitely  by 
Moggaliputta  Tissa  Mahathera,  to  nine  different  countries. 
The  later  history  of  the  religion  is  then  followed  in  these 
nine  countries,  a   separate  chapter  being  given  to  each ; 
but  it  is  with  only  two  of  these  nine  that  we  are  concerned, 
Viz.,  Chapter  111  dealing  with  Suvannabhumi  (i.e. ,  lower 
Burma  for  all  practical  purposes)  and  Chapter  VI  dealing 
with  Marammamandala  (i.e.,  Burma  proper)  in  Aparanta- 
rattha  (i.e..  Upper  Burma  with  its  centre  at  Pagan  or 
Arimaddanapura).  The  account  of  Suvannabhumi-  together 
with  that  of  Slhala  (Ceylon)  is  far  more  complete  and  shows 
more  knowledge  of  the  subject  than  those  of  Yonakarattha, 
Vanavasa,  Kasmlra,  Gandhara,  Mahimsakamandala,  Ctnarattha 
and  Maharattha.  But  even  the  account  of  the  religion  in 
Suvannabhumi  is  meagre  compared  to  that  of  Maramma- 
mandala (Chap.  VI)  which  practically  occupies  three-fifths  of 
the  entire  Sasanavamsa,  and  which  is  by  far  the  longest  and 
most  important  chapter.6  But  what  is  'interesting  is  that 
neither  of  the  accounts  of  the  two  realms  gives  us  any  exact 
detail  (besides  referring  to  the  Asoka  mission  in  Suvanna- 
bhumi  and  vaguely  speaking  of  the  Samanakuttaka  heresy 
at  Arimaddana)  of  the  vicissitudes  of  the  religion  before 
the  occupation  of  the  Pagan  throne  by  Anawrahta  and  the 
subsequent  conquest  of  Thaton.  It  is  only  with  the  histori- 
cal event  that  the  Sasanavamsa  begins  to  be  interesting 
and  convincing.  From  this  point  it  promises  a   fuller  and 
detailed  narrative,  not  only  with  regard  to  Marammamandala 
alone,  but  with  regard  to  Suvannabhumi  as  well  which,  by 
the  way,  included,  according  to  the  Sasanavamsa,  the 
Ramanna  country  (Thaton),  Hamsavat!  (Pegu)  and  Muttima 
.(Martaban).7 
6  For  an  account  of  the  arrangement  and  contents  of  the  SasanaVamsat 
see  PTS  edn,,  Introduction,  pp.  1*10, 
7  Sasanavamsa t  p.  35.

--- PAGE 113 ---
94 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
The  Pitakkatthamain  is  a   twentieth  century  (1906) 
Burmese  bibliography  of  Buddhist  works  written  in 
Rangoon,  and  is  dependable  as  a   book  of  reference.  It  is 
of  little  importance  as  a   chronicle  of  the  events  of  the 
religion  and  as  such  is  not  indispensable,  but  it  is  useful 
with  regard  to  dates  and  authors  of  Buddhist  works,  and 
as  it  records  the  tradition  of  older  chronicles  it  has  its  im- 
portance in  the  history  of  Pali  literature  of  Burma. 
Apart  from  purely  ecclesiastical  works  we  have  at  our 
*  disposal  a   number  of  standard  chronicles,8  one  of  which,  the 
Yazawingyaw,  a   work  of  Shin  Thilawantha,  goes  as  far  back 
as  the  fifteenth  century.  Its  historical  value  is  almost  nothing, 
as  it  speaks  more  of  the  history  of  Buddhism  in  India  and 
Ceylon  than  in  Burma .  Other  chronicles  are  the  sixteenth 
century  Razadarit  Ayedawpon  by  Binnya  Dala,  and  the 
Pawtugi  Yazawin.  The  most  important  chronicles  belong, 
however,  to  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries ;   such 
are  the  Great  Chronicle  by  Maung  Kala,  the  New  Pagan 
Chronicle  written  in  1785,  the  New  Chronicle  written  towards 
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  by  Twinthin  Mahasithu 
and  lastly  the  Hmannan  Yazawin  compiled  by  a   royal 
commission  in  1829.  Besides  these,  there  is  a   number 
of  other  chronicles  of  lesser  importance  such  as  the  Tagaung 
Chronicle,  the  Ra\haing  Chronicle,  the  Tharehkittara 
Chronicle,  the  Hngeppyittaung  Chronicle,  the  Pagan 
Chronicle,  the  Vamsadipani  and  perhaps  yet  others  which 
may  be  included  in  this  list.  There  are  still  others  which 
deal  with  particular  periods  or  aspects  of  history ;   such,  for 
example,  are  the  Talaing  Chronicles,  Pegu  Chronicles,  Tavoy 
Chronicle,  Cetivakatha,  Cetivamsa,  and  so  forth.  But  since 
I   have  not  been  able  to  examine  for  purpose  of  my  study 
chronicles  other  than  the  standard  ones,  it  is  hardly  of  any 
8  For  an  account  of  these  chronicles  and  their  value  see  Harvey,  History  of 
Burma,  pp.  xvi-xix;  Maung  Tin  and  Luce,  The  Glass  Palace  Chronicle , 
pp,  xiii  xxii.

--- PAGE 114 ---
EFFLORESCENCE 
95 
use  giving  a   long  list.  But  this  is  just  to  impress  on  the 
reader  that  there  is  indeed  no  reason  to  complain  about  the 
dearth  of  historical  materials  in  Burma,  though  one  may, 
however,  doubt  their  quality  or  standard.9 
Of  the  standard  chronicles  enumerated  above  and  which 
I   have  been  able  to  consult,  the  Hmannan  Yazatoin  is  by 
far  the  most  complete  and  authoritative.  The  first  two 
chapters  of  this  chronicle  are  devoted  to  a   mere  repetition 
of  the  story  of  Buddhism  and  of  the  Buddhist  kings  of  India, 
but  with  the  third  chapter,  the  story  moves  to  Burma  where  it 
opens  with  the  history  of  the  three  kingdoms  of  Tagaung, 
Tharekittara  and  Pagan,  and  in  a   string  of  several  chapters 
it  brings  the  history  of  Burma  with  the  main  outlines  of  her 
political  and  religious  vicissitudes  down  to  1752.  It  was 
compiled  by  a   committee  of  scholars  consisting  of  learned 
monks,  learned  Brahmanas  and  learned  ministers  appointed 
under  the  orders  of  king  Bagyidaw  in  1829.  “   The  king  of 
the  Law  seeing  many  discrepancies  and  repetitions  in  the 
former  chronicles  gave  thought  to  the  matter.  Being  con- 
vinced that  a   chronicle  of  kings  should  be  the  standard,  a 
balance,  so  to  speak,  for  all  duties  of  the  king,  for  all  affairs 
9  Mr.  Harvey  in  evaluating  the  quality  and  standard  of  the  Burmese  chronicles 
in  the  introduction  of  his  admirable  work,  History  of  Burma ,  writes,  “   Our  main 
authority  is  the  standard  Burmese  chronicles.  It  is  impossible  to  study  these 
especially  in  conjunction  with  the  other  native  records  without  acquiring  consider- 
able respect  for  them.  No  other  country  on  the  main  land  of  Indo-China  can  show 
so  impressive  continuity.  The  great  record  of  substantially  accurate  dates  goes 
back  for  no  less  than  nine  centuries,  and  even  the  earlier  legends  have  a   substratum 
of  truth.  But  that  which  gives  continuity  also  gives  false  perspective ;   the  record 
is  that  of  the  Burmese,  the  energetic  and  the  dominant  minority  who  possessed 
an  abiding  place  and  a   continuous  tradition.  Written  in  the  shadow  of  the 
throne,  the  chronicles  tell  little  of  general  conditions  and  their  story  is  not  that  of 
the  peoples  of  Burma,  or  even  of  the  Burmese  people,  but  simply  that  of  the 
dynasties  of  Upper  Burma.  In  a   land  of  centrifugal  tendencies,  facts  are  distorted 
to  fit  into  a   centripetal  scheme,  and  the  Burmese  capital  is  made  to  occupy  klhe 
whole  of  the  canvas,  while  races  such  as  the  Shans  who  for  centuries  were  of  at 
least  equal  importance,  and  the  Talaings,  who  were  probably  the  leaders  of 
civilization  to  the  very, end,  are  scarcely  mentioned  save  as  a   foil.”  (lbid.f  p,  xix.)

--- PAGE 115 ---
96 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
of  state,  for  all  matters  of  religion,  and  not  a   thing  full  of 
conflicting  and  false  statement,  he  assembled  his  ministeis 
and  ecclesiastical  teachers ...  and  caused  the  chronicle  to 
be  purified  by  comparing  it  with  other  chronicles  and  a 
number  of  inscriptions  each  with  the  other,  and  adopting 
the  truth  in  the  light  of  reason  and  traditional  boohs.”  The 
Hmannan  is  indeed  based  largely  on  earlier  sources,  e.g.,  a 
large  number  of  inscriptions,  almost  all  the  standard  chro- 
nicles and  those  of  lesser  and  local  importance  and  a 
large  number  of  thamaings,  besides  Pali  chronicles  and 
Burmese  poetical  literature.  Discrepancies  among  the 
chronicles  there  are,  but  they  are  never  vital  and  do  hardly 
affect  the  fundamental  facts  or  factors  of  history  except  in  one 
or  two  minor  details,  and  those  even  only  with  regard  to 
very  early  times.  From  our  point  of  view  and  with  regard 
to  the  period  under  survey  agreement  rather  than  difference 
among  the  different  standard  chronicles  is  the  general  rule ; 
events  of  the  religion  in  the  one  is  practically  repeated 
in  the  other  with  very  few  minor  discrepancies.  I   have, 
therefore,  thought  it  convenient  to  draw  largely  upon 
one  chronicle,  the  Hmannan,  which  practically  contains  all 
that  is  given  in  the  earlier  chronicles,  especially  with  regard 
to  all  matters  concerning  the  vicissitudes  of  the  religion. 
Like  all  other  sources,  the  Hmannan,  too,  is  very  sparing  of 
details  so  far  as  it  relates  itself  to  happenings  before  the  days 
of  king  Anawrahta,  but  with  him  the  account  of  the  Hmannan 
becomes  more  lively  and  interesting  and  more  full  of  details, 
connected  and  complete. 
There  is  another  class  of  Burmese  historical  literature 
called  the  Thamaings,  important  from  both  political  and 
religious  points  of  view.  They  are  frequently  very  late, 
but  as  they  profess  to  be  based  on  older  materials  it  is  not 
unoften  that  they  contain  valuable  tradition.  Their  con- 
tents are  mainly  of  a   religious  nature,  and  they  are  generally 
associated  with  the  foundation  and  history,  usually  of  a

--- PAGE 116 ---
EARLY  PHASE 
97 
pagoda  or  monastery  and  sometimes  even  of  a   town.  The 
account  in  most  of  the  thamaings  is  a   queer  admixture  of 
legends  and  facts,  but  incidentally  it  sometimes  throws  wel- 
come light  on  some  political  or  religious  event  or  events. 
The  Shwemadaw  Thamaing  is  perhaps  one  of  the  earliest, 
and  the  Shwesandaw  Thamaing  probably  follows  close. 
Among  other  thamaings  may  be  mentioned  the  Thaton 
Shwezayan  Hpayazyi  Thamaing,  the  Shwenattaung  Tha- 
maing, the  Hop-u-Thamaing  and  the  Zat-ngaya  Thamaing 
which  are  all  based  on  the  older  Shwesandaw  Thamaing, 
and  the  Ke-Hkayaina  Thamaing,  which  was  written  only 
about  two  decades  ago.  The  majority  of  the  thamaings  are 
written  in  prose,  but  some,  for  example,  the  Shwezigon 
Thamaing  Lin\a,  are  also  written  in  verse.  But  I   have  not 
been  able  to  find  the  thamaings  to  be  of  much  use  for 
purposes  of  my  present  study ;   in  fact  I   have  not  found  it 
possible  to  use  any  of  them  to  any  very  good  advantage. 
They  do  not  seem  to  contribute  much  towards  the  history  of 
Buddhism  of  the  period  under  review. 
4 
II 
THE  EARLY  PHASE 
The  story  of  the  introduction  of  Theravada  Buddhism  in 
Pagan  in  Upper  Burma  as  a   sequel  to  the  conquest  of  Thaton 
in  1057  by  Anawrahta  has  already  been  detailed  in  the 
preceding  chapter.  That  memorable  sack  of  Thaton,  if  we 
are  to  believe  our  available  sources,  is  indeed  a   significant 
event  in  the  history  of  Burma  :  it  marks  the  starting  point  of 
authentic  Burmese  history.  Before  1057  there  is  hardly  any 
exact  history  of  the  peninsula ;   available  records  speak  but 
very  little  of  the  activities  of  its  people  prior  to  this  date, 
and  even  the  scanty  information  that  can  be  gleaned  with 
difficulty  are  so  wrapped  in  mist  and  woven  with  myths  that 
a   reconstruction  of  the  history  of  that  period  mean?  but  a 
15—1445©

--- PAGE 117 ---
98 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
careful  knitting  together  of  some  hypothetical  guesses  con- 
firmed in  a   very  few  instances  by  literary  or  archaeological 
evidences.  From  the  Burmese  point  of  view  there  is  in  fact 
little  importance  attributed  to  the  period  prior  to  Anawrahta  s 
conquest  of  Thaton ;   local  chronicles  of  which  we  have  a 
very  good  number  from  about  the  fifteenth  century  onwards 
dismiss  the  pre-Pagan  period  of  their  accounts  in  one  or  two 
chapters  which  are  but  composed  of  hazy  and  indefinite 
half -historical,  half-legendary  tales  thinly  interspersed  with 
stray  notices  of  happenings  unconnected  with  one  another. 
The  information  supplied  is  meagre,  and  the  sources  for  the 
chroniclers  who  sat  down  at  a   much  later  period  to  record 
them  down  must  have  been  still  more  so.  Events  of  great 
importance  must  have  taken  place,  and  the  course  of  history 
must  have  been  as  vigorous  and  as  full  of  life  as  it  was  after- 
wards, but  our  sources  have  hardly  any  record  of  them 
except  in  stray  and  meagre,  often  unintelligible,  references. 
But  it  is  as  if  by  a   magic  touch  that  the  situation  changes  with 
that  memorable  year  of  1057.  With  the  occupation  of  the 
Pagan  throne  by  Anawrahta  the  chronicler  becomes  infused 
as  it  were  with  new  life,  his  account  becomes  fuller  with 
details,  events  begin  to  move  with  force  and  vigour,  the 
narrative  becomes  more  vivid,  lively  and  continuous,  in- 
formation more  definite,  and  his  chronicle  comes  to  stand 
against  a   more  or  less  reliable  background.  It  is  from  this 
date  that  the  chronicles  seSn  to  give  us  a   more  or  less  exact 
history  of  the  peninsula  in  matters  political,  religious  and 
cultural. 
We  have  already  seen  that  the  most  important  trophy  of 
the  conquest  of  Thaton  was  Shin  Arahan  himself  at  the  head 
of  a   large  fraternity  of  Talaing  monks  brought  over  to  Pagan 
and  the  great  faith  of  their  Master  recorded  in  the  Tripitaka, 
the  repository  of  Buddhist  wisdom.  As  a   result  of  the  zeal, 
enthusiasm,  energy  and  sincerity  with  which  Shin  Arahan, 
with  Anawrahta  always  ready  by  his  side  to  add  strength  to

--- PAGE 118 ---
EARLY  PHASE 
99 
his  elbows,  had  devoted  himself  to  his  noble  mission 
of  evangelising  the  land  of  Pagan,  the  work  of  propagation 
of  the  pure  and  simple  religion  of  Sakyamuni  went  apace 
till  within  a   very  short  time  he  had  won  thousands  of  con- 
verts to  his  side.  Hundreds  from  all  parts  of  the  country 
came  to  receive  ordination  and  entered  the  sacred  Order, 
burning  with  the  zeal  and  enthusiasm  of  new  converts. 
The  fame  of  Pagan  as  a   centre  of  Theravada  faith  was  thus 
firmly  established.  It  spread  even  outside  and  crossing 
the  sea  reached  Ceylon  where  the  religion  had  suffered 
from  Brahmanical  persecution  of  the  Damilas  (Tamils)  of 
South  India.  The  Damilas  were  none  but  the  Colas. who 
were  at  the  zenith  of  their  power  at  this  time  and  they 
were  making  themselves  felt  in  Ceylon.  The  Sinhalese 
king  Vijayabahu  (1065-1120)  sought  Anawrahta’s  aid 
against  the  Colas,  but  before  any  help  was  available 
he  was  himself  able  to  inflict  a   defeat  on  the  Colas. 
But  the  ravages  on  the  religion  the  Cojas  had  done 
needed  repair.  Scriptures  had  become  so  rare  and  monks 
so  few  that  it  was  difficult  to  convene  a   chapter  and 
make  valid  ordinations  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya. 
Vijayabahu,  therefore,  sent  ships  to  request  Anawrahta  for 
scriptures  and  monks 10  and  the  Pagan  king  gladly  complied 
with.  He  not  only  sent  the  monks  and  scriptures  asked 
for,  but  added  a   white  elephant  as  a   present  for  the  king  of 
Ceylon,  asking  in  return  the  tooth-relic  of  the  Buddha  which 
was  the  property  of  the  Sinhalese  king.  Vijayabahu  was 
10  The  story  is  referred  to  in  the  Kalyajn  inscriptions,  and  elaborated  in  the 
Hmannan  (1.264)  and  the  Mahavamsa,  LV.  4andLVIII  8.  Muller,  in  his  ^4ncrent 
Inscriptions  in  Ceylon  (1883)  fixes  the  date  of  Vijayabahu’s  request  for  monks  and 
scriptures  at  1071  A.D.  or  just  after.  According  to  the  Hmannan ,  the  name  of  the 
Sinhalese  king  was  Dhatusena  ;   while  according  to  the  Great  Chronicle  the  Ceylon 
king  was  Sirisamghabodhi,  which  however,  is  argued  against  by  the  Hmannan. 
The '  Cullavamsa  states  that  Vijayavahu  wrote  with  his  own  hand  in  Pali  a   letter  of 
great  merit  to  the  king  of  Arimaddana,  that  he  made  great  friendship  with  the  latter, 
and  that  he  gave  great  delight  to  the  monks  that  dwelt  in  Lanka  and  Arimaddana,

--- PAGE 119 ---
1 00  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
not  slow  to  return  the  courtesy ;   he  parted  with  the  sacred 
relic  and  made  a   present  of  it  to  Anawrahta. 
But  this  was  not  the  only  sacred  relic  that  Anawrahta 
claims  to  have  come  in  possession  of.  Earlier  he  is  said 
to  have  secured  some  relics  from  Tharehittara.  These 
relics  he  enshrined  in  the  great  Shwezigon  stupa  which  he 
had  begun  to  build  at  the  advice  of  Shin  Arahan.  When 
he  had  finished  the  three  terraces,  there  arrived  from  Ceylon 
the  tooth-relic  which  also  was  enshrined  in  the  great  stupa.11 
But  the  monarch  did  not  live  to  see  the  completion  of 
this  great  undertaking.12  The  great  stupa  was  completed 
by  his  worthy  son  Kyanzittha.  Anawrahta  built  quite  a 
good  number  of  other  shrines,  all  dedicated  to  the  religion 
to  which  he  became  devotedly  attached.  All  these  are  said 
to  contain  the  sacred  tooth-relic  of  the  Buddha  which  in 
reponse  to  Anawrahta’s  prayer  were  miraculously  repro- 
duced from  the  tooth-relic  of  Ceylon  ! 
Anawrahta’s  contribution  to  the  new  faith  was  yet 
something  more  than  building  of  these  shrines  and  these  mad 
campaigns  and  prayers  for  sacred  relics.  He  sent  four 
ministers  of  the  religion  to  bring  copies  of  the  Three  Pitakas 
from  Ceylon,  and  having  brought  them,  he  had  them 
compared  by  Shin  Arahan  with  the  copies  of  the  Pitakas 
brought  by  the  latter  from  Sudhammanagara  or  Thaton. 
Shin  Arahan  also  edited  and  corrected  them  in  the  light 
Hmannan,  pp.  88-89. 
12  The  ShwezigSn  <r  is  a   solid  Pagoda  of  the  kind  so  common  all  over  Burma; 
yet  it  attracts  worshippers  daily,  while  the  finer  temples  built  by  his  successors  are 
deserted  Its  popularity  is  due  to  the  exceptional  sanctity  of  the  relics,  and  to 
the  shrines  of  the  entire  pantheon  of  the  thirty-seven  Nat  spirits  who,  as  if  were, 
have  come  circling  round  in  homage  to  these  relics.  If  any  one  doubts  the  debt 
Burma  owes  to  Buddhism,  or  wishes  to  see  what  she  would  have  been  without  it, 
let  him  wander  here  and  contemplate  these  barbarous  images  of  the  heathen  god, 
Asked  why  he  allowed  them,  Anawrahta  said,  *  Men  will  not  come  for  the  sake  of 
the  true  faith.  Let  them  come  for  their  old  gods>  and  gradually  they  will  be  won 
overY*  Harvey,  History  of  Burma,  p.  33.

--- PAGE 120 ---
EARLY  phase 
101 
of  the  copies  brought  from  Ceylon  which  admittedly  were 
more  reliable.13 
Anawrahta’s  is  a   heroic  and  remarkable  personality  in 
the  history  of  Burma.  In  a   single  lifetime  he  had  estab- 
lished and  spread  a   true  religion  throughout  a   large  portion 
of  his  dominions,  and  suppressed  all  heretical  sects  and 
beliefs ;   from  a   chieftainship  he  raised  his  principality 
to  the  position  of  the  most  powerful  political  authority  in 
Burma,  and  by  introducing  the  Talaing  culture  of  lower 
Burma  to  civilise  the  north,  he  set  the  people  of  Maramma- 
desa  (as  distinct  from  Ramannadesa)  on  the  road  to  culture 
and  civilisation  that  made  the  annals  of  the  Pagan  dynasty  a 
most  glorious  record  in  the  history  of  mankind. 
Anawrahta  was  unfortunate  in  his  successor,  Sawlu; 
for  according  to  the  Hmannan,  he  “   lived  only  in  the 
enjoyment  of  worldly  pleasures.  He  preferred  not  his 
father’s  work  of  merit.”  But  in  Kyanzittha  Buddhism  found 
a   loyal  and  devoted  servant. 
He  completed  the  building  of  the  Shwezigon,  but  his 
chief  work  of  merit  was  the  building  of  the  Ananda  Temple, 
the  one  monument  which  has  spread  the  name  of  Pagan 
beyond  the  boundaries  of  Burma,  and  which,  with  its 
white  garb  bathed  in  the  tropical  sun,  shines  as  the  crown- 
jewel  on  the  head  of  Eastern  architecture.  There  at 
the  end  of  the  western  aisle  in  the  darkness  of  the  lofty 
but  narrow  vaults  stands  a   colossal  statue  of  the  Buddha 
flanked  by  two  kneeling  figures  with  hands  clasped  in 
adoration.  One  is  a   crowned  head,  that  of  the  devout 
founder-king  Kyanzittha ;   the  other  a   shaven  head,  that 
of  the  royal  primate,  Shin  Arahan,  the  teacher  of  Kyanzittha 
and  the  man  who  led  him  to  the  throne  by  the  hand  at 
13  Anuruddharaja  yeva  cattaro  mahayodhe  Slhaladlpain  pesetva  tato  pitakatta* 
yam  anesi,  Sihaladjpato  aniapitakatlayena  Sudhammapurato  aiiitapitakattayam 
afinam&finaip  yojetva  saipsandetva  Arhaht&thero  Vimamsesi,  Sa$hnavamsdt  p.  64.

--- PAGE 121 ---
102  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  time  of  his  coronation .  Inside  the  first  corridor  formed 
by  the  outer  and  inner  walls  of  the  temple  there  are  eighty 
niches  containing  sculptures  representing  the  incidents  of 
Buddha’s  own  life  until  the  attainment  of  the  bodhi.  The 
series  begins  with  the  request  of  the  gods  in  the  Tusita 
heaven  asking  the  Boddhisattva  to  be  reborn  in  his  very 
last  existence  and  to  become  the  Buddha,  and  the  succession 
of  scenes  follows  the  pradaksina.  Besides  these,  there  are 
in  each  of  the  four  porticoes  sixteen  sculptures,  mostly 
repeating  themselves,  but  representing  like  those  of  the 
corridors,  scenes  from  the  last  existence  of  the  Master. 
They  include  scenes  like  the  Parileyya  incident,  the  descent 
from  the  Trayastrimsa  heaven,  the  subjection  of  the  Nalagiri 
elephant,  etc.  In  the  small  vaulted  passages  intersecting 
the  corridors  more  stone  sculptures  are  found  represent- 
ing scenes  mostly  belonging  to  the  durenidana  cycle  and 
illustrating  the  anterior  lives  of  the  Buddha,  i.e.,  the  Jatal^as. 
The  eighty  scenes  in  the  outer  corridor  of  the  Ananda 
Temple  are  devoted  to  represent  the  principal  events  of 
the  Bodhisattva’s  last  existence,  from  the  time  of  his  birth 
to  that  of  his  attainment  of  the  bodhi.  A   few  of  the  events  of 
this  subsequent  career  up  to  the  Parinibbana  are  also 
represented,  but  they  are  all  on  the  walls  of  the  four 
porticoes.  It  has  been  very  ably  argued  by  M.  Duroiselle 
that  the  present  arrangement  and  distribution  of  the  scenes 
on  the  sculptures  of  the  porticoes  were  not  the  original  one, 
and  he  has  been  able  to  show  that  all  the  events  subsequent 
to  the  attainment  of  Buddhahood  must  certainly  have  been 
represented  in  the  sixty-four  scenes  of  the  porticoes.  What- 
ever that  may  have  been,  the  arrangement  of  the  scenes 
on  the  walls  of  the  corridor  as  well  as  those  few  of  the 
porticoes  follows  a   very  well-known  order,  that  of  the 
Nidana\atha.  It  proves,  therefore,  that  in  addition  to 
every  important  event  in  the  life  of  the  Master  which  had 
by  this  time  become  well-known  in  Upper  Burma,  the  Nidcina -

--- PAGE 122 ---
EARLY  PHASE  1 
  
03 
kdtha  was  also  known  and  studied  at  least  by  those  who 
ministered  to  the  religious  needs  of  the  people. 
But  it  was  not  the  incidents  of  the  last  existence  alone 
of  the  Master  that  were  known  to  the  new  converts  of 
the  faith ;   the  Jata\a  stories  also  were  equally  well-known 
by  this  time  and  the  Ananda  bears  eloquent  testimony 
to  it.  The  basement  and  the  walls  and  the  terraces  of  the 
temple  are  ornamented  with  a   huge  wealth  of  glazed 
terracotta  plaques.  The  plaques  on  the  basement  walls 
relate  themselves  to  two  important  phases  of  the  Buddha’s 
attainment  of  the  bodhi,  namely,  the  attack  of  Mara  and 
his  retinue  on  the  Buddha,  and  the  eventual  jubilation 
among  the  gods  who  came  to  glorify  him.  Each  plaque 
is  inscribed  at  the  bottom  with  a   short  legend  in  Taking. 
The  second  story  is  also  similarly  embellished ;   here  also 
there  is  a   wealth  of  glazed  tiles  illustrating  five  hundred 
and  forty-seven  fatal^as,  the  entire  series  of  }atak_a  stories. 
But  the  most  interesting  thing  in  the  Ananda  is  that  on 
the  walls  of  the  upper  terraces  there  are  nearly  four  hundred 
bas-reliefs  which  illustrate  the  last  ten  great  Jatakas,  so 
that  each  Jatal^a  story  occupies,  on  average,  about  forty 
bas-reliefs  for  itself,  each  relief  being  explained  by  a 
legend  in  Talaing  inscribed  at  the  bottom.  M.  Duroi- 
selle  finds  this  series  to  be  a   most  interesting  and  unique 
feature  which  is  found  only  at  the  Ananda.  According  to 
his  counting,  the  number  of  these  reliefs  from  the  basement 
to  the  uppermost  terrace  is  one  thousand  four  hundred  and 
seventy-two.14 
My  purpose  in  giving  an  account  of  the  stone-sculptures 
and  terracotta  plaques  of  the  Ananda  is  to  show  the  extent 
to  which  Theravada  Buddhism  with  its  myths  and  legends 
14  Duroiselle,  The  Stone  Sculptures  in  the  Ananda  Temple ,  ARASL, 
1913-14,  where  he  gives  a   long  and  full  description  of  the  temple  and  the  stone 
sculptures  inside  it.  An  elaborate  account  of  the  bas-reliefs  and  the  explanatory 
epigraphs  is,  however,  contained  in  Ep.Birminica,  II,  i   and

--- PAGE 123 ---
104 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
had  already  taken  root  in  Pagan  in  less  than  two  scores  of 
years  since  it  had  been  introduced  for  the  first  time  in  the 
royal  capital.  These  sculptures  and  terracotta  plaques  served 
as  illustrative  texts  to  hundreds  of  those  who  daily  flocked 
to  worship  at  the  temple.  In  employing  them  as  such, 
Kyanzittha  and  Shin  Arahan  only  adopted  an  usual  and 
well-known  method  of  popularising  the  religion  among  the 
ordinary  people  and  it  was  perhaps  one  of  their  methods  for 
the  propagation  of  the  faith.  The  same  method  was  also 
employed  in  later  temples  and  stupas,  obviously  with  the 
same  object  in  view,  for  example,  in  the  Petleik  temples,  in 
the  Shwezigon,  in  the  Mingalazedi,  in  the  Nagayon  and 
others.  These  sculptures  and  the  terracotta  plaques  are  of 
special  historical  importance  inasmuch  as  they  afford  us 
indubitable  proof  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Jatakas  and  the 
Nidanakatha  in  Upper  Burma  in  the  last  quarter  of  the 
eleventh  century. 
It  was  in  the  seclusion  of  the  Ananda  Temple  that 
Acariya  Dhammasenapati,  according  to  the  Gandhavamsa 
(pp.  63,  73),  wrote  his  Karima,  a   grammatical  work  in  Pali. 
He  is  also  said  to  have  composed  two  other  works,  the  Eti- 
mSsamidiparii  and  the  Manohara.  The  same  source  tells 
us  that  Dhammasenapati  wrote  his  Karima  at  the  instance  of 
the  monk  ftanagambhlra  who  was  a   resident  of  Pagan.15 
What  a   softening  influence  Buddhism  wielded  on  the  lives 
of  these  sturdy  and  swarthy  tyrants  will  be  evident  from  an 
extract  from  one  of  the  inscriptions  set  up  by  Kyanzittha. 
“   With  loving  kindness     shall  king  Kyanzittha  wipe  away  the  tears  of  those 
who  are  parted  from  their  trusted  friends   his  people  shall  be  unto  him  as  a 
child  to  its  mother’s  bosom   he  shall  soften  the  hearts  of  those  who  intend  evil. 
With  wisdom,  which  is  even  as  a   hand,  shall  king  Kyanzittha  draw  open  the  bar 
of  the  Gate  of  Heaven,  which  is  made  of  gold  and  wrought  with  gems.”  16 
15  Bode,  Pali  Literature  of  Burma,  p.  16  and  fn.  !. 
1S  The  Great  Talaing  Inscription  of  the  ShwezigSn  Pagoda,  Ep.  Birminica,  I,  ii,

--- PAGE 124 ---
EARLY  PHASE 
105 
It  ranks  almost  as  literature,  and  the  typically  Buddhist 
sentiment  in  it  is  unmistakable.  It  is  a   pity  that  neither  the 
local  qhronicles  nor  the  Sasanavamsa  dwells  at  any  length  on 
the  service  Kyanzittha  rendered  to  the  cause  of  the  religion. 
The  Sasanavamsa  has  not  even  a   passing  reference  to  the 
great  personality  or  to  his  work.  Yet,  besides  being  person- 
ally deeply  influenced  by  the  new  religion  and  performing 
various  works  of  merit,  it  was  he  who  was  the  first  Burmese 
king  to  restore  the  holy  shrine  at  Bodh-Gaya,  and  who  in  his 
zeal  and  enthusiasm  for  the  new  faith  exhorted  a   Cola  king 
to  accept  Buddhism.  His  exhortations  were  successful. 
14  King  Kyanzittha  gathered  together  gems  of  diverse  kinds  and  sent  them  in  a 
ship  to  build  up  the  holy  temple  at  Bodh-Gaya,  and  to  offer  lights  which  should 
burn  for  ever  there.  Thereafter,  king  Kyanzittha  builded  anew,  making  them  finer 
than  before,  the  great  buildings  of  king  Asoka  for  they  were  old  and  in  ruins.  In 
this  respect  no  other  king  is  like  king  Kyanzittha.  Thereafter,  he  presented  all  the 
lords  of  the  Samgha  who  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Arimaddanapura  with  four 
necessaries  on  every  occasion.  In  that  respect,  too,  no  other  king  is  like  him...17 
“   At  the  same  time  king  Kyanzittha  heard  that  a   Cola  lord  had  arrived,  and  he 
bethought  him  that  apart  from  the  Three  Jewels  there  is  no  other  single  thing  that 
can  give  great  happiness  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come,  or  confer  Nirvana 
upon  all  beings;  the  Three  Jewels  alone  can  give  it.  Therefore,  he  wrote  concern- 
ing the  grace  of  the  Jewel  of  the  Lord  (Buddha),  the  Jewel  of  his  Law  (Dhamma) 
and  the  Jewel  of  his  Clergy  1   
Samgha),  with  vermilion  ink  upon  leaf  of  gold  and 
sent  it  unto  the  Cola  Lord.  Thus  hearing  the  grace  of  the  Buddha,  the  Law  and 
the  Clergy  by  reason  of  king  Kyanzittha's  sending  word  unto  him,  the  Cola  Lord 
with  all  his  retinue  cast  off  his  adhesion  to  false  doctrine ;  he  saw,  he  was  pleased, 
he  was  happy...’ * 18 
Kyanzittha  was  fortunate  in  his  love-child  born  of 
Thambula  in  exile.  For  when  having  reigned  for  28  years 
he  fell  sick  unto  death,  this  son,  Yazakumara,  made  solemn 
offerings  and  set  up  a   stone-post  which  is  still  in  its  place,  at 
the  Myazedi  pagoda,  south  of  Pagan. 
The  post  is  inscribed  on  its  four  faces  with  the  same 
matter  in  four  different  languages — Pali,  Talaing,  Pyu  and 
17  The  Third  Talaing  Inscription  of  the  Shwesandaw  Pagoda,  Prome,  Ep- 
Birminica ,  I,  ii,  153. 
IS  Ibid, 
H-I445B

--- PAGE 125 ---
106 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Burmese.  Extracts  from  it  are  worth  quoting  for  the  senti- 
ments expressed,  as  well  as  for  incidental  references  to  a 
number  of  venerable  theras  of  the  time,  and  to  the  practice 
of  dedication  of  slaves  to  the  shrines. 
M   Glory  and  honour  be  to  Buddha !   In  the  one  thousand  six  hundred  and 
twenty-eighth  year  of  religion  (1084  A,  D.)  Kyanzittha  became  king  in  this  city  of 
Arimaddanapura   Now  the  king  having  reigned  twenty-eight  years  fell  sick  unto 
death.  Then  YazakumSra...  .remembering  the  benefits  wherewith  the  king  had 
nourished  him,  made  a   golden  Buddha  and  went  into  the  presence  and  showed 
it  to  the  king  saying,  *  This  Golden  Buddha  have  I,  thy  slave,  made  to  assist  my 
lord.  The  three  villages  of  slaves  which  my  lord  gave  unto  me,  I   now  dedicate 
unto  this  Buddha.  May  my  lord  approve!’  Then  was  the  king  well  pleased  and 
said,  ‘  Well  done !   Well  done!’  And  in  the  presence  of  the  image,  of  the 
primate,  of  the  venerable  lords  Moggaliputta  Tissa,  Sumedha,  Brahmapala,  Brahma- 
diw,  Sana,  and  very  learned  Samghasena,  in  the  presence  of  all  these  venerable 
lords  the  king  made  offering  of  poured  water.  When  it  was  done,  the  son  of  the 
beloved  queen  made  this  cave-temple  with  a   golden  spire  and  enshrined  therein 
the  golden  Buddha.  And  in  dedicating  this  shrine  and  Buddha,  the  queen’s  son, 
brought  up  the  men  of  Sakmunalon,  one  village,  Rapay,  one  village,  Henhuiy,  one 
village,  all  those  three  slave  villages,  and  made  offering  of  poured  water  for  the 
golden  Buddha  and  the  shrine  wherein  he  had  enshrined  it ;   and  thus  he  prayed, 
'  May  this  act  of  mine  be  unto  me  for  the  attainment  of  divine  wisdom  !   If  any 
hereinafter,  be  it  my  son,  grandson,  kinsman,  or  any  other,  oppress  the  slaves 
whom  I   have  dedicated  unto  this  Buddha  may  he  never  behold  the  most  high 
Buddha  Arimittiya  (Maitreya),”19 
Shin  Araban,  the  Primate,  had  grown  old,  and  his  days 
were  gradually  drawing  to  a   close.  Early  in  Alaun- 
gsithu’s  reign  (1112-67)  he  breathed  his  last,  about  the 
year  1 1 1 5  A. D., 20  full  of  years — he  was  about  ■  80 — and  full 
of  glory.  Few  are  destined  to  witness  so  successful 
an  achievement  of  the  ideals  and  missions  of  their  lives. 
Shin  Arahan  perhaps  achieved  more  than  he  had  dreamt ; 
his  was  a   record  of  unbroken  chain  of  success.  It  was  a 
mere  chance  that  brought  him  before  the  king,  and  once  the 
king  was  won  over,  the  rest  followed  almost  as  a   matter  of 
course  till  finally  he  saw  himself  as  the  Primate  of  the 
kingdom  and  the  acknowledged  head  of  a   church  organi- 
19  Myazedi  Inscription,  Ep,  Birminica,  I,  i, 
20  4n,  Rep,  A.S.B.,  1915,  p.  23,

--- PAGE 126 ---
EARLY  PHASE 
107 
sation  that  embraced  within  its  fold  hundreds  of  monas- 
teries and  thousands  of  monks  ready  to  carry  the  message 
of  the  religion  into  the  remotest  parts  of  the  far-flung 
kingdom.  He  performed  almost  a   miracle;  in  almost  a 
lifetime  he  with  the  help  of  his  patrons  was  successful  in 
keeping  the  degenerate  Aris  at  bay  and  putting  a   definite 
check  to  their  vile  and  abominable  practices,  and  in  esta- 
blishing in  the  place  of  crude  and  primitive  beliefs  in  heathen 
‘  Nats,’  one  of  the  purest  faiths  mankind  has  ever  known. 
l£  
is  due  to  him  than  to  anybody  else  that  Burma  owes 
to-day  her  allegiance  to  Theravada  Buddhism  and  the 
Burmese  people  their  admission  into  the  world  of  culture 
and  civilization. 
Shin  Arahan  was  succeeded  by  Panthagu,  son  of  Seinny- 
ekmin,  as  Primate.  His  royal  disciple,  Alaungsithu,  was 
a   devout  and  faithful  follower  of  the  religion.  Along  with 
the  elevation  of  Panthagu  to  the  position  of  Archbishop  *  the 
king  presented  the  elder  Ananda  and  the  elder  Bodhi,  both 
men  fulfilled  with  all  virtuous  qualities,  with  golden  litters 
of  state  and  pole  and  awning.’  He  also  exhorted 
Letyaminnan,  the  prince  of  Arakan,  who  was  restored  by 
the  Pagan  king  to  the  throne  of  his  fathers,  to  repair 
the  shrine  at  Bodh-gaya  which  had  fallen  to  decay. 
Letyaminnan,  therefore,  under  the  guidance  of  Panthagu, 
the  Primate,  sent  an  envoy  with  men  and  money  to  Bodh- 
gaya  to  do  all  that  was  necessary  to  repair  the  sacred  shrine 
at  Vajrasana.  The  work  was  executed  with  care  and  the 
fact  is  recorded  on  stone  at  the  spot.21  He  built  the  great 
Thatpyinnu  (Sabbanna — All-knowing  or  Omniscient, 
i.e.,  the  Buddha)  temple  in  1144,  and  the  Shwegu 
which  stands  close  by.  In  this  small  but.  beautiful 
temple  he  was  destined  to  die,  and  on  its  walls  can  still  be 
read  the  long  inscription  recording  in  Pali  verse  the  beauti- 
21  Rajendralal  Mitra,  Buddhagaya ;  Furgusson,  History  of  Indian  and  Eastern 
Architecture,  I,  p.  78 ;   An  Rep.  A>S  B.t  1911,  p,  181.

--- PAGE 127 ---
1 08  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
ful  and  typically  Buddhist  ideas  and  sentiments  of  the 
king : 
“   By  this  my  gift,  whatever  boon  I   seek, 
It  is  the  best  of  boons,  to  profit  all ; 
 ® 
By  this  abundant  merit  I   desire 
Here  nor  hereafter  no  angelic  pomp 
Of  Brahmas,  Suras,  MSras ;   nor  the  stale 
And  splendours  of  a   monarch ;   nay,  not  even 
To  be  the  pupil  of  the  conqueror. 
But  1   would  build  a   causeway  sheer  athwart 
The  river  of  Samsara,  and  all  folk 
Would  speed  across  thereby  until  they  reach 
The  Blessed  city.  I   myself  would  cross 
And  drag  the  drowning  over.  Aye,  myself 
Tamed,  I   would  tame  the  wilful ;   comforted, 
Comfort  the  timid ;   wakened,  wake  the  asleep ; 
Cool,  cool  the  burning;  freed,  set  free  the  bound. 
Tranquil  and  led  by  the  good  doctrines  I 
Would  hatred  calm,  The  three  immortal  states, 
Greed,  hate,  delusion,  rooted  all  in  self, 
0   may  they  die,  wherever  born  in  me  I 
# 
 # 
 # 
 # 
“   As  the  best  of  men 
Forsaking  worldly  wealth  and  worthless  fame 
Fled,  for  he  saw  their  meaning... so  would 
All  worldly  wealth  forsaking  draw  me  near 
Religion  and  the  threefold  course  ensue. 
1   would  fulfil  hereafter  great  and  small, 
Those  rules  the  Teacher  gave  for  our  behoof. 
Borne  through  the  elements  the  spotless  moon 
Outdazzles  all  the  constellated  stars ; 
So  I   delighting  in  the  Master’s  Lore, 
The  SainFs  Religion,  virtuously  yoked. 
Would  shine  among  disciples,  f   would  know 
Sutta ,  and  Abhidhamma,  Vinatja 
The  Master’s  mind,  his  ninefold  Doctrines  fraught 
With  words  and  meaning.  By  the  Conqueror’s  Law 
I   would  do  good  to  others  and  myself. 
What  the  great  Sage  forbids  I   would  not  do. 
*  *  *  * 
'*  By  merits  of  this  act  1   would  behold 
Mettaya,  captain  of  the  world,  endowed 
With  two  and  thirty  emblems,  where  he  walks 
Enhaloed  on  a   rainbow  pathway  fair.

--- PAGE 128 ---
EARLY  phase 
i09 
**  There  might  I   hear  good  Law,  and  bending  low 
Offer  the  four  things  needful  to  the  Lord 
And  all  his  monks,  till  clad  in  virtues  eight, 
Informed  by  such  a   Teacher,  I   become 
Buddha  in  the  eyes  of  spirits  and  men/’22 
Alaungsithu’s  death  was  followed  by  a   fratricidal  struggle 
between  the  two  brothers,  Narathu  and  Minshinsaw.  At  the 
request  of  Narathu,  Panthagu,  the  Primate,  had  to  intervene, 
but  the  intervention  led  to  unfortunate  results  and  Panthagu 
in  scorn  and  disgust  left  the  shores  of  Burma  and  went  to 
Ceylon,  refusing  to  live  in  a   kingdom  ruled  over  by  so  vile  a 
king  as  Narathu.  The  incidents  leading  to  this  unhappy 
sequel  is  briefly  but  vividly  related  in  the  Hmannan,  and  it 
is  difficult  for  a   modern  historian  to  improve  upon  the 
narrative.  When  Minshinsaw  heard  that  his  royal  father, 
Alaungsithu,  was  no  more,  he  began  marching  with  his  army 
towards  Pagan  to  occupy  the  throne.  Narathu  scented 
danger,  and  designed  a   secret  plot  by  which  he  was  to  secure 
the  throne  without  shedding  a   drop  of  blood.  So  he  went  to 
Panthagu  who  “   was  worshipped  like  the  Lord  by  the  whole 
country  of  Pagan,”  and  said  : 
44  4  It  will  take  long  if  thus  he  (Minshinsaw)  marcheth  with  his  army,  and  the 
home  affairs  of  the  kingdom  will  suffer.  Lo  !   1,  thy  servant,  am  here  already. 
Call  my  brother,  and  let  him  come  speedily  with  a   sword  and  a   horse  only  and 
ascend  the  throne  I   
*  But  Panthagu,  the  elder  replied  :  *  If  I   call  him  and  he  come, 
and  thou  abide  without  raising  him  to  be  king,  I   have  sinned  against  the  saintly 
law/  So  Narathu  swore  a   mighty  oath  that  he  would  shoulder  his  brother’s  sword 
and  set  him  on  the  throne,  And  Panthagu  the  elder  believed  the  oath  sworn  by 
Kalagya  and  went  to  the  place  of  Minshinsaw  and  told  him  all.  And  Minshinsaw, 
hearing  the  words  of  the  elder,  trusted  them,  and  he  set  him  on  a   single  barge  of 
gold  and  came  downstream.  When  he  reached  Lappan  port,  Narathu,  according 
to  the  oath  he  had  sworn,  went  down  to  the  boat  and  shouldering  his  brother’s 
sword,  he  raised  and  set  him  on  the  throne.  After  his  anointing,  his  food  was 
poisoned  and  that  night  he  died.” 
Next  day  Narathu  was  crowned  king  and  the  whole 
people  came  to  offer  allegiance  to  him.  But  Panthagu, 
22  }  
B.R.S.,  1920,  English  rendering,  in  verse  by  Maung  Tin  and  Luce, 
Shwegugyi  Pagoda  Inscription.

--- PAGE 129 ---
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
HO 
though  old,  would  not  do  so.  When  he  heard  that 
Minshinsaw  was  poisoned  and  dead,  he  burnt  with  fury  and 
anger,  and  going  to  the  palace  cried  : 
“   ‘  Thou  vile  king  !   Thou  foul  king  !   Thou  fearest  not  the  woe  thou  shalt 
suffer  in  Samsara.  Though  now  thou  reignest,  thinkest  that  thy  body  shalt  not  grow 
old,  not  die?  A   king  more  damned  than  thou  there  is  not  in  all  the  world  !   Nay 
Master,*  said  Narathu,  *  I   shouldered  my  brother’s  sword  and  set  him  on  the 
throne.  ’  But  the  noble  master  made  reply  :  *  A   man  more  vile  and  foul  than  thou 
there  is  not  in  the  world  of  men  I   And  he  departed  and  went  to  the  island  of 
Ceylon  \  ”   (1167) 
And  he  did  not  come  back  so  long  as  Narathu  was  in  the 
land  of  the  living. 
Ill 
MARAMMA  SAMGHA  AND  SlHALA  SAMGHA 
Narathu  was  succeeded  by  Naratheinka  (1171-73).  He 
had,  it  seems,  neither  the  mind  nor  the  opportunity  to  do 
anything  for  the  religion  which  his  fathers  served  and  patro- 
nised with  such  great  care  and  devotion.  But  his  successor 
Narapatisilhu’s  reign  (1 173-1220)  22“  is  important  for  more 
than  one  reason.  He  will  be  remembered  for  his  noble 
patronage  of  the  religion,  and  more  for  the  fact  that  his 
reign  saw  the  first  formation  of  the  Slhala  Samgha  or 
Sinhal  Order  in  Burma  and  the  beginning  of  the  long  and  bitter 
rivalry  between  the  Slhala  Samgha  and  the  Maramma  Samgha 
or  Burmese  Order  that  continued  to  disturb  the  Buddhist 
clergy  of  Burma  till  it  ended  three  hundred  years  later  in  the 
final  triumph  of  the  Slhala  Samgha. 
22  a   An  inscription  from  Saggaing  in  the  Saggaing  district  refers  to  the  gift 
of  a   plot  of  land  by  Zeyathura  Mingyi  in  533  Sakkarac  which  is  equivalent  to 
1171  A.D.  Zeyathura  Mingyi  is  king  Narapatisithu.  This  inscription  therefore 
seems  ttTprove  that  Narapatisithu  was  already  on  the  throne  in  1 171.  An.  R.A.S.I. , 
1936-37,  P.  115.

--- PAGE 130 ---
MARAMMA  SAMGHA  AND  SIHALA  SAMGHA  111 
Narapatisithu  himself  was  a   king  of  advanced  views, 
and  devoted  to  the  new  religion ;   ‘  in  order  that  men 
might  follow  the  Path  and  reach  fruition  in  Nirvana  ’  he 
built  a   number  of  ‘  works  of  merit/  setting  up  colossal  images 
of  Buddha  in  all  of  them.  Among  the  bigger  temples  he 
built  for  the  furtherance  of  the  religion  were  the  majestic 
Gawdawpalin,  the  Sulamani  gnd  the  Dammayazaka  ;   of 
smaller  but  nevertheless  beautiful  works  were  the  Mimalung- 
kyaung  and  the  Chaukpala.  “He  succoured  with  the  things 
needful  scholars  of  the  noble  Order  learned  in  Pali,  in  the 
commentaries  and  sub-commentaries,  who  practised  piety 
throughout  all  the  homeland,  and  they  gave  instruction  in 
the  books.”28  Narapati’s  reign  was  peaceful  and  prosperous, 
and  was  one  of  the  brightest  epochs  of  monastic  scholarship 
in  Burma. 
Panthagu,  the  Primate,  lived  in  self-banishment  for  only  a 
few  couples  of  years.  From  his  refuge  in  Ceylon  he  heard 
of  the  devoted  patronage  of  the  newly-crowned  king,  Nara- 
patisithu, and  soon  after  the  accession  of  this  monarch  he 
returned  home  (1173)  hoping  to  spend  the  rest  of  his  days 
in  peace  amidst  the  purer  atmosphere  of  a   more  prosperous 
and  benevolent  rule.  He  was  warmly  received  and  was 
again  treated  as  Primate ;   but  he  was  already  old — about 
ninety — and  did  not  live  long  to  enjoy  the  king’s  patron- 
23a 
Panthagu  was  succeeded  in  the  Primateship  by  a   Talaing 
monk,  Uttarajlva  by  name,  a   pupil  of  Shin  Ariyavamsa,  the 
23  Glass  Palace  Chroniclet  p.  142. 
23 “  An  inscription  in  Burmese  recovered  from*  the  ruins  near  Kotheinnayon 
at  Pagan  and  recording  the  dedication  of  slaves  to  a   monastery  before  several  monks 
mentions  the  name  of  one  Panthagugyi  as  one  of  the  monk  witnesses.  This  took 
place  in  1247  A.D.  It  has  been  suggested  that  Panthagugyi  is  the  celebrated  Primate 
Panthagu.  But  Panthagu  in  about  1 175  was  already  ninety  and  if  he  really  continued 
to  be  alive  in  1247  it  would  mean  he  was  then  about  162  years  of  age — obviously 
very  difficult  to  believe.  Panthagugyi  of  this  insc.  may  have  been  some  other  indivi- 
dual. An.  R.A. 5./.,  1936-37,  P.  1|4.

--- PAGE 131 ---
112 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
elder  of  Thaton.  Uttarajfva,  like  Shin  Arahan,  claimed 
to  belong  to  the  direct  line  (acariyaparampara)  of  Sona 
and  Uttar  a.  The  religion  in  Ceylon  had  for  some  time  been 
in  disrepute,  and  had  “   fallen  into  soilure  and  decay,”  as 
the  Hmannan  puts  it,  perhaps  again  owing  to  Brahmanical 
persecution  by  the  Tamils  (Dramilas).  But  Parakkamabahu 
proved  himself  to  be  a   strong  and  resolute  king ;   he  saved 
the  religion  from  Tamil  persecution,  and  initiated  a   re- 
formation of  the  church  organisation.  This  led  to  a   re- 
awakening of  religious  activities  in  the  island .  The  fervour 
rose  to  such  a   height  that  the  fame  of  the  church  reached 
the  Burmese  capital,24  where  it  roused  the  eagerness  and 
enthusiasm  of  Uttarajfva  for  pilgrimage  to  the  island.  He 
took  with  him 
“many  disciples  of  the  Order  and  went  to  worship  the  MahSzedi  pagoda  in 
the  island  of  Ceylon.  Among  these  disciples  was  a   novice  of  about  twenty  years 
of  age  from  the  village  Capata,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  Bassein  town.25... When 
Uttarajiva  the  elder,  Capata  the  novice  (so  named  from  his  native  village',  and  the 
many  disciples  of  the  Order  reached  the  island  of  Ceylon,  they  had  conversed  with 
the  elders  of  Ceylon  concerning  the  religion,  and,  inquiring  of  each  other’s  lineage, 
they  found  that  the  elders  in  Ceylon  island  were  heirs  of  Shin  Mahinda,  the  noble 
saint,  and  Uttarajiva  the  elder  was  of  the  lineage  of  Shin  Sona*  the  elder  and  Uttara 
the  elder.  Then  they  ordained  Capata  the  novice,  saying,  *  let  us  perform  a   priestly 
act  of  pure  validity.”  26 
Capata  was  thus  received  into  the  Sinhalese  religious 
brotherhood. 
The  ordination  of  Capata  was  to  have  far-reaching  results  ; 
in  fact,  it  was  the  first  frank  admission  of  the  superiority 
of  the  Sinhalese  over  the  Burmese  Order.  Evidently  the 
elders  of  Ceylon  did  not  consider  the  ordination  ceremony 
by  the  Burmese  brotherhood  as  a   priestly  act  of  pure  validity 
24  Evidence  of  a   very  active  maritime  intercourse  between  Ceylon  and  Burma 
during  this  time  is  afforded  by  Sinhalese  Chronicles  as  well  as  by  Burmese  inscrip- 
tions of  the  period.  See,  also  MahaVam$af  Ixxvi,  10-75,  for  a   quarrel  between 
Ceylon  and  Burma  in  about  1180  A.D.  when  the  Sinhalese  king  despatched  an 
expedition  against  Burma. 
25  Glass  Palace  Chronicle,  pp.  142-43, 
**  7fei<h,  p.  143,

--- PAGE 132 ---
MARAMMA  SAMGHA  AND  SlHALA  SAMGHA 
113 
and  the  Burmese  monks  were  not,  therefore,  considered 
to  have  been  validly  ordained,  since,  according  to  the 
Kalyanl  inscriptions,  the  SasanaVarnsa,  the  Hmannati  and 
other  chronicles,  they  belonged  to  an  acariyaparampara  of 
lesser  aristocracy.  However,  a   section  of  Burmese  monks 
must  have  had  a   very  great  respect  for  the  Sinhalese 
brotherhood  and  their  monastic  conduct  and  learning, 
for,  when  Uttarajiva,  after  the  ordination  of  Capata,  came 
with  his  disciples  back  to  Burma,  he  was  hailed  as  the  “   First 
Pilgrim  of  Ceylon.”  Already  Shin  Arahan  had  admitted 
the  comparatively  better  reliability  of  the  Sinhalese  Pitakas 
than  those  he  had  brought  from  Thaton;  and  now  was 
admitted  the  superiority  of  the  Sinhalese  Order  itself. 
Capata  did  mot  return  home  with  his  teacher  Uttarajiva ; 
the  latter  stayed  behind  in  Ceylon  and  for  full  ten  rainy  seasons 
he  studied  and  acquired  a   full  knowledge  of  the  Three  Pitakas 
and  their  commentaries.  He  thus  earned  the  designation  of 
a   mahathera. 
“   Being  now  desirous  of  returning  to  PugamS  he  reflected  thus  :  ‘  If  I   were  to 
return  home  alone,  and  if,  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  Uttarajiva  mahsthera,  I   did 
not  wish  to  associate  with  the  monks  of  Pugama  in  the  performance  of  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies,  how  could  I,  in  the  absence  of  paiica-oaggagana,  perform  such  function 
separately  ?  It  is  perhaps  proper,  therefore,  that, I   should  return  home  in  thes 
company  of  four  other  monks,  who  are  well  versed  in  the  Tipitaka.  After 
reflecting  thus,  hh  appointed  Mahathera  Sivili,  a   native  of  Tamalitthi  (Tamra  ipti  in 
Bengal),  the  Mahathera  Tamalinda  the  son  of  the  Raja  of  Kamboj,  the  Mahathera 
Ananda,  a   native  of  KancTpura,  and  the  Mahathera  Rshula,  a   native  of  Cey  on, 
accompany  him.”  28 
Capata  with  his  four  colleagues  returned  to  Pagan 
(1181-82)  after  having  observed  the  vassa  in  a   monastery  at 
Bassein.  These  five  monks  of  the  Order  were  called  the 
“   Second  Pilgrims  of  Ceylon. 
27  The  Pali  text  of  the  Kalyanl  inscriptions,  Ep.  Birm.,  Ill,  ii,  P.  190,  footnote  6. 
The  passage  in  the  Hmannan  (p.  143)  is  similar  m   purport. 
28 
(sage  in  tne  nmannuu.  —     . 
 r   D,  TTT  .. 
The  MSn  and  Pali  text  of  the  Kalyanl  inscriptions,  Ep.  Birm.,  Ill,  n, 
pp.  190-91. 
29  Glass  Palace  Chronicle,  p.  144. 
15-T445B  ,  .

--- PAGE 133 ---
114 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Now,  Uttarajiva  had  died  in  the  meanwhile  and  was 
buried  a   few  days  before  Capata  and  his  company  could 
reach  Pagan.  So,  when  they  arrived  they  went  to  the 
chaplain’s  grave  and  worshipped  there.  The  demise  of 
Uttarajiva  gave  rise  to  a   very  curious  situation  in  the  Burmese 
church  organisation,  due  no  doubt  to  the  high-brow  and 
supercilious  attitude  of  Capata.  But  it  is  best  told  in  the 
KalyanI  inscriptions  which  is  quoted  almost  verbatim  in  the 
Glass  Palace  Chronicle ■  Capata  is  said  to  have  addressed 
his  companions  thus  : 
“   ‘As  the  Mahatheras  of  Ceylon  associated  with  our  teacher  the  venerable 
Uttarajlvamahathera  (at  the  time  of  his  visit  to  Ceylon),  in  the  performance  of 
ecclesiastical  ceremonies,  it  is  proper  that  we  should  now  perform  such  functions 
after  associating  ourselves  with  the  monks  of  Pugama,  who  are  the  spiritual  successors 
of  Sonathera  and  Uttarathera,  However,  our  teacher,  the  Mahathera  Uttarajiva, 
who  was  a   native  of  the  Mon  country,  was  formerly  the  sole  head  of  the  Church, 
but  now  that  the  Burmese  monks  have  become  supreme,  we  do  not  wish  to 
associate  with  them  in  the  performance  of  ecclesiastical  ceremonies.’  Thus, 
through  pride,  the  Mahsthera  Capata  declined  to  associate  with  the  monks  of 
Pukham  in  the  performance  of  ecclesiastical  ceremonies  and  he  performed  such 
functions  separately.”  30 
It  was  thus  that  the  Sinhalese  Church  or  the  Slhala 
Samgha,  as  it  has  been  called  in  the  SasanaVarnsa,  came  to 
be  established  in  Pagan.  According  to  the  Mon  text  of  the 
KalyanI  inscriptions,  this  event  took  place  “   in  the  124th  year 
that  had  elapsed  since  the  introduction  of  the  religion  into 
Pukam  (Pagan),  the  Burmese  country,  from  Sudhuim 
(Thaton)  in  the  Mon  country,”  31  i.e.,  in  1 181-82  A.D. 
When  Capata  had  come  back  to  his  own  country,  he 
evidently  returned  with  a   strong  faith  in  Sinhalese  orthodoxy. 
He  also  believed  that  it  was  the  Mahavihara  alone  of  Ceylon 
that  could  claim  to  have  kept  the  acariyaparampara  direct 
from  the  thera  Mahinda,  and  that  the  Sinhalese  Order 
30  Ep.  Birtn 
II.  ii,  pp.  191  -92 ;   i bid.,  footnote  7  of  p.  191 ,  Glass  Palace 
Chronicle ,  p.  144. 
31  Ep.  Birm.,  Ill,  ii,  p.  192,

--- PAGE 134 ---
MARAMMA  SAMGHA  AND  SIHALA  SAMGHA  115' 
could  alone  confer  the  valid  upasampada  ordination. 
Naturally  enough,  he  was  eager  to  establish  the  Sinhalese 
Order  in  Burma,  evidently  to  bring  the  Burmese  Order  in 
the  direct  ‘  line  of  descent.’  But  it  was  equally  natural  that 
the  older  Burmese  school  would  resent  and  resist  this  claim 
of  the  Sinhalese  church.  They  could  argue,  and  perhaps 
they  did,  with  equal  force  and  logic  that  since  they  belonged 
to  the  direct  line  of  descent  from  Sonathera  and  Uttara- 
thera,  they  had  as  good  an  authority  to  perform  a   valid 
ordination  as  the  Sinhalese  school  itself.  But  their  argument 
seems  to  have  carried  little  weight,  and  their  influence  was 
gradually  on  the  wane. 
From  the  very  outset  the  Sinhalese  church  was  fortunate 
in  receiving  the  warm  patronage  of  the  king .  The  reigning 
king  Narapatisithu  *  conceived  a   feeling  of  great  esteem  and 
reverence  for  the  five  Mahatheras,’  he  ‘caressed  and  regarded 
them  beyond  measure,’  and  he  gave  all  the  patronage  he 
could  to  this  newly- founded  church.  He  caused  a   raft  of 
boats  to  be  put  together  on  the  river  Irrawady  and  requested 
the  five  Mahatheras  to  confer  upasampada  ordination  on  the 
many  monks  who  desired  to  receive  it. 
Many  novices  were  ordained  as  monks.  Thus  they 
multiplied  in  the  course  of  time  till  their  influence  and  their 
following  grew  in  numbers.  The  school  thus  founded  by 
Capata  and  his  colleagues  came  to  be  known  as  paccagana 
or  the  later  school  while  the  Burmese  school  was  known  as 
purimagana  or  the  earlier  school.82 
But  dissensions  were  soon  in  sight  among  these  five 
Mahatheras  which  resulted  in  the  splitting  up  of  the  Slhala 
Samgha  into  four  factions.  The  stories  of  these  dissensions, 
not  without  their  human  interest,  are  elaborately  told  in  the 
local  chronicles,  for  example,  in  the  Hmannan,  and  in  the 
KalyanI  inscriptions,  and  are  briefly  summarised  in  the 
32  Sasanavamsa,  p,  67.

--- PAGE 135 ---
116 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Sasanavamsa.  Of  the  four  Mahatheras  that  accompanied 
Capata  to  Pagan,  Rahula  was  the  most  erudite,  but  his  learn- 
ing was  of  little  avail ;   for,  in  a   great  almsgiving  ceremony 
held  by  Narapatisithu  in  their  honour,  Rahula  fell  desperately 
in  love  and  lost  .his  heart  to  a   beautiful  girl.  “   He  lusted 
after  her  and  delighted  no  more  in  the  law  of  the  clergy 
but  strove  to  quit  the  Order  ”   He  longed  to  be  a  layman 
and  made  preparations  to  carry  out  his  object.  The  Maha- 
thera  Capata  and  three  other  Mahatheras  “   repeatedly  ex- 
pounded religious  discourses  to  him,  in  a   body  entreated  him 
to  turn  away  from  the  course  he  had  resolved  to  take.”  But 
nothing  could  prevent  Rahula  from  taking  his  course ;   he 
became  a   layman  and  went  to  Malayadipa  ( Malay  peninsula) . 
There  the  king  of  Malaya  received  from  him  instructions  “   in 
the  meaning  of  the  text  of  the  whole  Vinaya  ”   and  studied 
the  Khuddakasityiha,  a   compendium  of  the  Vinaya  written 
in  Ceylon,  with  its  commentary.  Pleased  with  Rahula, 
he  made  valuable  presents  to  him  which  the  thera  accepted, 
and  as  a   consequence  quitted  the  Order,  became  a   layman, 
married,  finally  settled  down  in  the  country,  and  was  no 
more  heard  of.  Rahula’s  deflection  was  certainly  a   severe 
blow  to  the  monastic  discipline  of  the  newly-established 
Sihala  Samgha. 
Soon  after  this  Capata  died,  and  Sivali  (or  Sivili),  Ananda 
and  Tamalinda  (or  Tamulinda)  remained  to  continue  “   to 
maintain  the  religion  in  splendour  at  Pukham.”  But 
differences  of  opinion  on  questions  of  monastic  discipline 
arose  among  them,  and  readily  they  fell  out  and  each 
founded  a   new  school  for  himself. 
On  a   certain  occasion  king  Narapatisithu  presented 
the  three  Mahatheras  each  with  one  elephant.  In  pursuance 
of  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya,  Sivali  and  Tamalinda  liberated 
their  elephants  in  a   forest  but  Ananda  shipped  it  off  and 
made  a   present  of  it  to  his  relatives  in  Kailcipuram,  an 
action  which  Sivali  and  Tamalinda  considered  to  be  against

--- PAGE 136 ---
MARAMMA  SAMGHA  AND  SlHALA  SAMGHA 
117 
the  rules  of  monastic  discipline.  This  led  to  the  secession  of 
Ananda  who  thenceforward  performed  his  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies  separately  from  Sivali  and  Tamalinda. 
A   long  while  thereafter  Sivali  and  Tamalinda  disagreed 
on  a   more  important  question  of  discipline.  The  latter 
“   sought  to  advance  the  welfare  of  his  pupils  who  excelled 
in  wisdom,  strength  and  courage,  and  by  word-suggestion 
obtained  for  them  ’’  from  the  pious  laity  the  four  things 
needful.  Sivali  took  strong  exceptions  to  this  indirect 
process  of  receiving  gifts,  referred  to  by  a   technical  name 
vacivinnatti  in  the  Sasanavamsa  and  the  Kalyani  inscriptions, 
saying  that  the  Buddha  had  disapproved  of  such  gifts.33  After 
some  argumentation  which  proved  useless,  Sivali  refused 
to  have  any  relation  with  Tamalinda,  and  both  of  them 
founded  separate  schools. 
“   From  that  day  forth  four  several  sects  of  the  Order  were  known  in  the 
kingdom  of  Pe^gan.  One  sect  of  the  Order  was  of  the  race  or  Shin  Arahan  .  ; 
one  sect  of  the  Order  was  of  the  race  of  Sivali  the  elder ;   one  sect  of  the  race  of 
Tamalinda ;   one  of  the  race  of  Ananda.  Of  these  four  sects  that  of  the  race  of 
Shin  Arahan  who  first  came  from  Sudhamma  city  was  called  the  Former  Order. 
Of  the  three  elders  who  came  from  the  island  of  Ceylon  were  called  the  Latter 
Order,’*3** 
The  Former  Order  or  the  monks  who  were  of  the 
religious  succession  of  those  that  came  from  Thaton  has 
been  referred  to  in  the  Sasanavamsa  as  the  Maramma 
Samgha  or  Burmese  Order  as  distinguished  from  the 
Latter  Order  referred  to  as  Slhala  Samgha  in  the 
Sasanavamsa  and  the  Kalyani  inscriptions,  for  the  monks 
of  that  Order  belonged  to  either  cf  the  three  sects 
of  the  religious  successions  of  those  who  had  returned  from 
Ceylon. 
33  For  the  opinion  of  the  Vinaya  on  this  point,  see  Vinaya  Pila\a  (Oldenberg’s 
Edn.),  Ill,  pp.  227,  256,  V,  p.  125. 
34  Glass  Palace  Chronicle,  pp.  1 46-47 ;   see  also  Kalyani  inscriptions,  Ep.  Birm,, 
III,  a,  p.  195.

--- PAGE 137 ---
1 18 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Sivali  and  Tamalinda  had  already  attained  Nirvana  when 
Ananda  died  in  1245-46  (the  year  607  of  the  Common  Era)."'1 
But  their  deaths  did  not  mean  the  cessation  of  the  work, 
namely  the  spread  of  the  influence  of  the  Sinhalese  frater- 
nity, they  had  begun  in  so  right  earnest.  Among  their 
disciples  and  followers,  especially  of  Sivali  and  Ananda, 
there  were  at  least  one  or  two  who  grew  to  be  as  wise  as  their 
gurus  and  who  were  ready  to  carry  the  message  of  the 
religion  outside  the  Marammamandala  or  upper  Burma. 
Indeed,  even  during  their  lifetime  Ananda  and  Sivali  had 
the  satisfaction  of  witnessing  the  prestige  and  influence  of 
the  Slhala  Samgha  spreading  in  the  Mon  or  Talaing  country 
and  the  Martaban  (Pali :  Muttima ;   Mon :  Matlama)  region 
under  the  willing  patronage  of  king  Narapatisithu. 
IV 
THE  RELIGION  IN  THE  TALAING  COUNTRY 
One  might  assume  that  the  carrying  away  by  Anawrahta 
of  all  sacred  texts  and  almost  the  entire  clergy  of  Thaton 
had  practically  strangled  Buddhism  in  the  Talaing  count!  y, 
and  the  realm  had  reverted  to  its  primitive  faith  or  faiths. 
Anawrahta’s  sack  of  Thaton  was  no  doubt  a   severe  blow 
to  the  religion  in  the  Talaing  country,  but  there  is  hardly 
any  reason  to  think  that  the  light  that  once  burnt  bright  was 
altogether  extinguished.  Indeed,  there  must  have  been 
centres  of  the  religion  and  monastic  scholarship  in  the  interior 
regions  of  the  realm  where  Anawrahla’s  fury  hardly  pene- 
trated. Conquering  raids  in  ancient  days  were  often  confined 
36  Ep ,  Birm.,  IIJ,  ii,  p.  195,

--- PAGE 138 ---
RELIGION  IN  THE  TALAING  COUNTRY  ,119 
to  the  area  where  it  actually  took  place ;   the  rest  of  the 
country  was  also  affected,  of  course,  but  private  life,  espe- 
cially monastic  life  in  its  seclusion  and  solitude,  went  on 
in  much  the  usual  way,  and  in  those  days  of  difficult 
communication  it  was  not  sometimes  affected  at  all. 
Moreover,  it  is  possible  that  the  Talaing  country, 
so  intimately  in  touch  with  Ceylon,  Further  India 
and  the  Indian  mainland  through  maritime  intercourse, 
received  from  time  to  time  monks  and  religious  texts  that 
infused  new  vitality  in  the  old  organisation  which  had 
been  robbed  of  its  glory  through  Anawrahta  s   exhibition 
of  power.  And  then,  the  Burmese  who  had  now  come 
in  possession  of  the  realm  of  the  Talaings  could  have 
no  possible  objection  in  the  continuance  of  the 
religion  they  themselves  had  adopted.  It  was  rather 
likely  that  they  would  encourage  further  propagation 
of  the  faith  under  the  aegis  of  their  rule.  In  fact,  the 
Kalyani  inscriptions  seem  to  indicate  that  a   fraternity  of 
monks,  ecclesiastical  successors  of  Sonamahathera  and 
Uttaramahathera,  had  been  flourishing  at  Dala  and  Martaban 
regions  when  during  the  reign  of  Narapatisithu  the 
Sinhalese  fraternity  came  to  be  established  there. 
Sariputta,  a   native  of  Padippajeyya  village  (near  Ran- 
goon) in  the  province  of  Dala,  was  a   saman&rct  of  the  frater- 
nity of  monks  who  belonged  to  the  line  of  descent  from  Sona 
and  Uttara.  But  going  to  Pagan,  he  received  the  upasam- 
pada  ordination  at  the  hands  of  Anandamahathera,  and 
came  thus  to  belong  to  the  Mahavihara  tradition  of  Ceylon. 
His  deep  knowledge  of  the  Dhamma  and  Vinaya  attracted 
the  notice  of  the  reigning  king  Narapati  who  wanted  to  make 
him  his  preceptor.  But  as  Sariputta  suffered  from  a 
physical  deformity  (one  of  the  big  toes  of  the  monk  was 
too  short),  the  king  could  not  offer  him  the  appointment. 
But  he  “presented  him  with  a   great  many  offerings,  conferred 
on  him  the  title  of  Dhajnmavilasathera  and  dismissed  him

--- PAGE 139 ---
120 
0 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
with  the  injunction  :   *  Do  you  maintain  the  religion  in 
splendour  in  the  Mon  country’.”30 
u   Dhammavilasa  proceeded  to  the  Mon  country,  and  taught  the  Dhamma  and 
the  Vinaya  to  a   great  many  monks  in  Dala.  The  people  of  the  Mon  country 
called  the  fraternity  of  these  monks  at  Dala  the  “   Slhalapakkhabhikkhusamgha,” 
and  designated  as  the  **  Ariyarahantapakkhabhikkhusamgha,”  the  fraternity  of 
monks  who  ware  already  in  the  country  and  were  of  ecclesiastical  successors  of 
Sonamahathera  and  Uttaramahathera/’^ 
It  is  permissible,  I   think,  to  identify  this  Dhammavilasa- 
thera  with  one  Dhammavilasa  mahathera  who  is  mentioned 
as  the  donor  of  a   number  of  stone  images  of  the  Buddha 
seated  in  bhumisparsa  mudra  recovered  from  the  ruins  of 
a   stupa  at  Thiyipyitsaya,  five  miles  from  Pagan.  The  name 
of  Dhammavilasa'  mahathera  is  inscribed  on  the  pedestal 
of  these  images  and  paleographically  considered  the  images 
may  be  said  to  belong  to  about  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth 
century  A.D.  If  this  identification  be  correct,  then  here 
is  another  confirmation  of  the  tradition  recorded  in  the 
KalyanI  inscriptions  and  in  the  SasanaVamsa. 
The  “   Ariyarahantapakkhabhikkhusamgha  ”   came  later 
on  to  be  known  as  the  ‘  ‘  fraternity  of  the  Mahathera  of  the 
Krom  (Kamboja)  Market,”  and  still  afterwards  as  the 
“fraternity  of  the  Krom  Market,”  and  finally  simple  as 
the  “Krom  fraternity.”88  However,  at  that  time  in  the  city 
of  Dala,  there  were  two  fraternities,  the  Ariyarahanta 
fraternity  and  the  Ceylon  fraternity . 
36  Ep.  Birm.,  III.  ii,  p.  196;  SasanaVamsa,  p.  41.  The  SasanaVamsa  account 
is  a   bit  different,  but  seem  to  be  more  plausible.  Sariputta  at  that  time  had  grown 
extremely  old  and  feeble.  The  king,  out  of  consideration  for  him,  did  not  like 
to  burden  him  at  that  age  with  the  heavy  and  responsible  work  of  the  royal  acariya. 
He,  however,  presented  him  with  offerings  and  conferred  the  title  of  Dhamma-  , 
 v 
vilasa  on  him.  The  king  also  charged  him  with  the  work  of  purifying  the  religion 
in  the  Mon  country  which  meant  that  he  was  to  represent  the  Ceylonese  Church 
there. 
37  Ep.  Birm.,  Ill,  ii,  p.  196.  ^ 
 ;
38  Ep.  Birm.,  Ill,  ii;  pp.  196-97,  where  an  explanation  is  given  why  the 
fraternity  was  so  named.  , 
 , 
 1 
*

--- PAGE 140 ---
RELIGION  IN  THE  TALA1NG  COUNTRY  121' 
The  Sinhalese  fraternity  established  itself  also  in  the 
Martaban  region  where  the  Krom  or  Kamboja,  i.e.,  the  Ari- 
yarahanta  fraternity  had  already  been  in  existence.  But 
very  6oon  the  Sinhalese  fraternity  in  Martaban  came 
to  be  split  up  into  five  different  sects.  It  may  be  observed 
that  the  local,  i.e.,  Maramma  Samgha  or  Arahanta  Samgha, 
whatever  we  may  like  to  call  it,  so  long  as  its  power  and 
influence  counted  in  the  religious  life  of  the  country,  was 
one  undivided  Order  and  was  never  split  up  into  sects, 
while  the  Slhala  Samgha  from  the  very  beginning  though 
believing  in  the  common  Mahavihara  orthodoxy  and 
firmly  holding  to  the  Sinhalese  tradition,  showed  signs 
of  dissensions  within  itself  that  led  to  the  splitting  up 
of  the  Order  into  different  sects.  It  was  so  in  Pagan,  it 
was  the  same  story  in  Martaban.  It  is  no  doubt  very 
difficult  to  find  out  what  was  there  in  the  tradition  of  the 
Sinhalese  fraternity  that  led  to  such  dissensions  ;   but 
it  may  be  argued, — and  this  is  indicated  by  the  Kalyani 
inscriptions — 89  that  the  Slhala  Samgha  was  more  concerned 
with  the  Vinaya,  i.e.,  with  the  rules  of  conduct  of  monastic 
life;  and  any  infringement  of  the  rules,  or  any  new  inter- 
pretation of  the  rules  other  than  the  traditional  and  generally 
accepted  ones  by  any  leading  member  of  the  fraternity, 
led  to  dissensions,  and  eventually  to  the  founding  of  new 
sects,  of  course  within  the  Order. 
In  Martaban  the  successors  of  Sivali  (or  Sivili),  Ananda 
and  Tamalinda,  all  of  the  Sinhalese  fraternity,  established 
three  different  sects.  Besides  these,  there  were  two  other 
sects  founded  respectively  by  Buddhavamsamahathera  and 
Mahasamimahathera  otherwise  known  as  Mahanaga.  Both 
of  them  were  preceptors  of  the  chief  queen  or  aggamahesi 
of  Muttima,  and  both  had  received  their  training  in 
Ceylon."  They  thus  came  to  belong  to  the  Mahavihara 
«   Ibid.,  pp.  198-99. 
SasanaVamta,  p.  42;  Ep.  Birm.,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  198-99,  in.  5,  p,  198; 
1 6— .1445IJ

--- PAGE 141 ---
122 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
acariya-parampara ;   but  when  they  came  back  to  their 
native  country,  they  began  to  perform  their  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies  separately,  and  thus  gave  rise  to  two  more  sects. 
No  reason  of  their  separation  is  given,  but  presumably  it 
was  on  certain  rules  of  monastic  conduct.  This  will  be 
evident  from  the  fact,  noted  in  the  KalyanI  inscriptions, 
that  “the  Ceylon  clergy  who  were  of  the  fraternity  of 
Ananda41  screened  (themselves  with  a)  cloth  to  eat  (their) 
rice.  When  people  invited  (them  to  a)  stead,  they  were  not 
able  to  eat  in  the  house,  (but)  returned  to  eat  (in  the) 
monastery.”  And  “the  Ceylon  fraternity  who  were  successors 
of  the  pupils  of  Mahathera  Tamalinda  were  styled  teachers 
of  the  minister  of  the  silk-cloth  screen”,42  which  suggests 
that  they  used  the  silk-cloth  as  a   screen.  Strangely  enough,  it 
was  on  such  flimsy  and  trivial  monastic  rules  that  dissensions 
took  place  and  eventually  gave  rise  to  contending  sects. 
Naturally,  therefore,  these  sectarian  differences  on  petty  ques- 
tions of  procedure  and  discipline  led  to  the  degeneration  of  the 
Order.  Such  an  unfortunate  state  of  the  religion  is  reflected 
in  the  KalyanI  inscriptions  which  relate  rather  candidly  : 
“   In  all  these  sects  of  clergy   there  were  none  who  were  well-versed  in 
Tipijaka,  that  were  wise  (and)  qualified  to  come  (and)  investigate  (and)  ascertain 
matters  concerning  ecclesiastical  ceremonies.  The  clergy  of  these  various 
fraternities   would  say,  f  We,  indeed,  are  the  wise  and  qualified 
Each  of  these  sects  would  perform  their  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies  according  to  their  own  light,  each  fraternity  went 
its  own  way  and  performed  the  ceremonies  separately.48 
V   
' 
THE  DIMMING  OF  THE  RELIGION 
Narapatisithu  died  in  1210,  and  was  succeeded  by  Htilo- 
minle  (1210-34),  one  of  the  five  sons  whom  the  dying  king 
41  Ep.  Birm.,  op,  cit,  p.  198,  fn.  7. 
4*  Ibid.,  p.  199,  fn.  2. 
43  7feid.,p,  199,  fn,  5  and  9,

--- PAGE 142 ---
Dimming  of  the  religion 
123 
had  enjoined  to  rule  with  mercy  and  justice  and  together  in 
perfect  amity  and  good-will.  Htilominle  was  a   devout 
Buddhist  and  the  religion  flourished  in  his  reign,  though 
not  with  equal  brilliance  as  in  that  of  his  father.  He  was 
the  builder  of  the  Sittana  pagoda  and  of  the  Mahabodhi,  an 
unsuccessful  imitation  of  the  temple  at  Bodh-Gaya,  and  the 
Htilominle  temples,  all  in  Pagan.  He  also  completed  the 
unfinished  temple  of  his  father,  the  Gawdawpalin. 
No  wonder  he  was  hailed  as  a   good  patron  of  the  religion. 
But  his  son,  Kyaswa  (1234-50)  was  even  more  devout 
than  his  father.  It  was  perhaps  the  Pagan  Samgha  that  gave 
him  the  significant  title  of  Dhammaraja/’ 
M   He  had  compassion  on  all  the  people,  both  layman  and  monks,  as  though 
they  were  children  of  his  house.  He  read  the  Three  Pitakas  nine  times  over, 
diverse  interpretations  of  the  Pali  commentaries  and  sub-commentaries,  he  pondered 
on  them,  in  the  meeting  of  questions  there  was  none  to  equal  him.  Seven  times  a 
day  he  studied  with  the  noble  Order.  For  the  sake  of  the  palace  ladies  he  composed 
the  Paramatthavindu,  that  they  might  know  of  mind  and  the  qualities  of  mind, 
matter,  nirvana,  forms  of  being  and  personality.  He  would  not  even  lend  an  ear 
to  affairs  of  the  villages  or  kingdom.  Whenever  there  was  any  enquiry  to  be 
made,  power  exercised,  he  caused  his  son  Uzana,  the  heir-apparent,  to  dispose 
thereof.”  44 
According  to  the  Pitakaithamain,  the  GandhaVamsa 
and  the  SasanaVamsa  Kyaswa  was  the  author  of  another 
book,  SaddaVindu ,45  a   treatise  on  grammar.  Kyaswa’s 
daughter  seems  to  have  been  very  much  interested  in  Bud- 
dhist  learning ;   to  her  is  ascribed  the  authorship  of  a   book, 
Vibhattyattha,  a   little  work  on  Pali  Vibhaktis  or  case-end- 
ings.40 
Kyaswa  was  indeed  the  last  great  patron  and  protector 
of  the  religion  and  religious  scholarship  in  the  long  line  of 
kings  of  Pagan.  He  was  unfortunate  in  his  successors  :  his 
44  Glass  Palace  Chronicle,  p.  185. 
45  Pi^akat t hamain,  pp.  45,  70;  Gandha 
pp.  64,  73;  Sasana 
p.  76.  See  also 
Dr.  Bode,  p.  25. 
46  Sasana 
p.  77,  Bode,  p.  25.

--- PAGE 143 ---
124 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
son  Uzana  (1250-54)  was  a   pleasure-seeker  while  the  grand- 
son Narathihapate  (1254-87),  the  last  king  of  the  dynasty,  a 
swarthy  tyrant.  He  built  the  Mingalazedi  pagoda  in  Pagan, 
and  set  up  an  inscription  which,  though  written  in  self-glori- 
fication, is  unwittingly  of  course,  a   sarcastic  commentary 
written  by  himself  on  his  life.  What  more  could  one  expect 
from  a   pompous  glutton  who  speaks  of  himself  in  the 
following  way  : 
“King  Narathihapate  styled  Siritribhuvanatitya-paramadhammaraja,  the 
supreme  commander  of  a   vast  army  of  thirty-six  million  soldiers,  the  swallower  of 
three  hundred  dishes  of  curry  daily,  being  desirous  of  attaining  the  bliss  of 
Nirvana,  erected  a   pagoda.  In  it  he  enshrined  fifty-one  gold  and  silver  statuettes 
of  kings  and  queens,  lords  and  ladies,  and  over  those  he  set  up  an  image  of 
Gautama  Buddha  in  solid  silver  one  cubit  high,  on  the  full  moon  of  Kahson  636 
(1274  A.D.).  A   covered  way  was  made  from  the  palace  to  the  pagoda,  with 
bamboo  matting,  whereon  were  laid  rush  mats,  and  on  these  again  were  spread 
pieces  of  cloth  each  twenty  cubits  in  length,  and  at  each  cubit’s  distance  on  the 
way  there  was  a   banner.  During  the  ceremony  the  princes,  princesses  and  lords 
cast  pearls  among  the  statues.”47 
How  far  removed  in  attitude  and  sentiment  is  th  is  from 
the  Great  Talaing  Inscription  of  the  Shwezigon  Pagoda  of 
king  Kyanzittha,  or  the  Myazedi  inscription  of  Thambula,  or 
the  Shwegugyi  inscription  of  Alaungsithu  ! 
With  Kyaswa’s  death,  therefore,  the  light  that  shone 
in  splendour  in  Pagan  for  more  than  two  centuries  began  to 
grow  dim ;   and  though  life  in  the  monasteries  no  doubt 
went  on  undisturbed,  monastic  scholarship  which  depend- 
ed mainly,  if  not  solely,  on  royal  bounties  and  patronage, 
suffered  a   great  deal,  while  the  activities  of  the  Samgha,  now 
without  the  favour  and  protection  of  the  king,  were  perforce 
limited  and  curtailed.  Thus,  weak  and  emaciated,  the 
W   Mingalazedi  Pagoda  Inscription,  Pagan,  of  the  year  1274,  Inscriptions  d/ 
Pagan,  Piny  a   and  Ava ,  1892,  p,  199. 
"   The  Mingalazedi  is  a   large  stupa  so  common  all  over  Burma.  Its  coarse 
execution  seems  to  symbolise  the  exhaustion  of  a   realm ;   it  was  built  in  blood  and 
Sweat.  For  two  centuries  Pagan  had  witnessed  the  spectacle  of  a   whole  population 
filled  with  a   passion  for  covering  the  earth’s  surface  with  pagodas  and  now  she 
was  perishing  to  the  drone  of  prayer.”  Harvey,  History  of  Burma}  p.  63.

--- PAGE 144 ---
Monastic  Scholarship*.  125 
Samgha  faced  a   new  danger 
the  country  began  to  show 
signs  of  political  unrest  which  meant  unsettled  condition  of 
life,  at  least  in  the  royal  capital.  These  political  disturbances 
reacted  unfavourably  on  the  religious  life  of  the  country  and 
contributed  their  share,  a   large  share  indeed,  to  the  ‘dimming 
of  the  religion,  ’  as  the  chronicles  put  it,  at  this  time.  But 
before  we  proceed  to  deal  with  that  phase  of  the  religion  we 
must  turn  back  to  have  an  idea  of  the  monastic  life  and 
scholarship  during  this  brilliant  period  of  active  patronage  of 
the  religion  by  the  kings  of  the  Pagan  dynasty. 
VI 
MONASTIC  SCHOLARSHIP 
Dr.  Mabel  Bode  in  her  excellent  work,  The  Pali  Litera- 
ture of  Burma,  gives  a   very  good  and  complete  account  of 
monastic  scholarship  in  Burma  from  the  reign  of  Anawrahta 
down  to  the  reign  of  Min-don-min.  But  no  account,  it 
seems,  can  give  us  a   vivid  picture  of  the  literature  and 
scholastic  activities  of  the  Kynazittha  Onhmin  or  the 
Kyaukku  Onhmin  or  numerous  other  monasteries  of  Pagan 
and  the  interior  regions  where  away  from  the  din  and  bustle 
of  ordinary  life,  the  bhikkhu  conforming  strictly  to  all  the 
duties  of  the  monastic  Order,  strove  hard  to  master  the 
sacred  texts  of  the  religion.  There  in  the  darkness  and 
solitude  of  the  library  hall  of  the  monastery  he  devoted 
whatever  time  he  could,  day  in  and  day  out,  in  reading  the 
works  most  suited  to  his  line  of  study,  and  writing 
down  on  palm  leaves  the  thoughts  and  comments  of 
his  own,  not  for  any  earthly  fame  or  gain,  but  as 
a   work  of  merit.  The  Gandhavamsa,  the  Sasanavamsa  and 
other  chronicles  give  a   long  list  of  such  monk-scholars  and 
philosophers,  and  a   longer  list  of  their  works,  but  even  these 
lists  must  represent  only  a   fraction  of  the  good  and  continu- 
ous work  that  was  carried  on  in  the  network  of  monasteries

--- PAGE 145 ---
126 
THEiRAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
spread  all  over  the  country.  No  subject  was  too  unworthy 
for  their  study ;   and  though  naturally  Buddhism  in  all  its 
various  aspects  and  branches  demanded  the  most  serious  and 
careful  attention,  subjects  like  grammar,  logic,  medicine, 
astrology,  astronomy,  polity,  law,  prosody,  metres,  and  even 
war,  etc.,  claimed  their  time  and  labour,  grammar  being  one 
of  the  most  important.18  This  may  help  to  give  us  a   rough 
idea  of  the  busy  but  silent  scholastic  life  in  the  monasteries 
that  continued  through  generations  of  thera-parampara. 
1   have  already  referred  to  Dhammasenapati,  the  author  of 
the  Karika  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of  Kyanzittha  and 
worked  in  the  monastery  attached  to  the  Ananda  temple. 
But  the  golden  period  of  monastic  scholarship  in  Pagan 
began  with  the  reign  of  fCyanzittha’s  successors,  in  fact, 
from  the  reign  of  Narapatisithu.'10  Narapati’s  tutor,  Agga- 
vamsa,  was  a   learned  thera,  one  of  the  most  noted  who  dwelt 
in  the  monastery  on  the  plateau  to  the  north  above  Pagan. 
Aggavamsa  wrote  a   grammar  of  the  Tipitaka  called  Saddariiti 
(1 1   54)  which  is  still  regarded  as  classic  in  Burma.  Uttarajlva, 
when  he  crossed  over  to  Ceylon  on  a   visit  to  the  Mahavihara, 
took  with  him  a   copy  of  this  work  which  was  ‘  received  with 
enthusiastic  admiration,  and  declared  superior  to  any  work  of 
the  kind  written  by  Sinhalese  scholars.’50  Capata,  otherwise 
known  as  Saddhammajotipala,  the  disciple  of  Uttarajlva,  was 
also  interested  in  grammar,  besides  the  Vinaya  and  the 
Abhidhamma.  He  is  credited  by  the  Gandhavamsa,  the 
Sasanavamsa  and  the  SasanaVamsadipa  to  have  been  the 
48  C/.  the  list  of  texts  in  the  inscription  of  the  Common  Era  804  (1442  A.D.). 
See  also  texts  mentioned  in  other  records  in  Inscription  of  Pagan ,  Piny  a   and  Ava, 
Ed.  by  Taw  Sein  Ko  and  translated  by  Tun  Nyein,  Rangoon,  1899. 
49  A   full  list  of  authors  and  their  works  is  given  in  Pali  Literature  of  Burma} 
by  Dr.  Bode.  What  I   am  attempting  here  is  only  a   bare  catalogue  with  a   view  to 
giving  an  idea  of  the  scholarly  activities  of  the  monks  just  to  give  a   complete 
account  of  the  religion  during  the  period.  This  catalogue  is  gleaned  mainly  from 
the  Sasanavamsa ,  the  Gandhavamsa  and  the  Pitapat thamaxn,  My  indebtedness  to 
Dr.  Bode  in  this  connection  is  obvious. 
50  Dr.  Bode,  p.  17;  Gandha ,,  pp.  67,  72;  Fausboll,  Cat,  Ind ,  Mss,,  p,  49.

--- PAGE 146 ---
MONASTIC  SCHOLARSHIP 
127 
author  of  the  Suttaniddesa  (or  Kaccayanasuttaniddesa ) 
  which 
was  composed  at  Arimaddana  (Pagan)  at  the  request  of  his 
pupil  Dhammacari.51  He  was  also  the  author  of  Samkhepa- 
vannana,r’“  a   commentary  on  the  Abhvdhammattha-samgha 
of  Anuruddha,  the  Simalan\ara  or  Simalanharatika,™  a 
commentary  on  a   Ceylonese  work  on  boundaries  and  sites 
for  religious  ceremonies,  the  Vinayasamutthanadipani ,54  a 
work  on  monastic  discipline  written  at  the  request  of  his 
preceptor,  the  VinayagulatthadipaniJ"’  an  exposition  of  the 
abstruse  passages  of  the  Vinayapitaka,  the  Namacaradiparii,^ 
the  Matikatthadipanl,  the  Patthanagananaya/'7  all  dealing 
with  Abhidhamma  subjects,  and  the  Gandhisara 68  or 
Ganthisara,  a   condensed  collection  of  important  texts. 
Forchammer  thinks,  however,  that  the  Suttaniddesa,  the 
Samikhepavannana  and  the  Namacaradiparii  were  not  the 
works  of  Capata,  but  were  introduced  by  him  from  Ceylon.60 
Of  these,  the  Namacaradiparii,  according  to  him,  was  a   book 
on  ethics,  and  not  on  Abhidhamma.00  According  to  the 
Pita\atthamain,  Capata  was  the  author  of  another  work,  the 
Visuddhimaggaganthi ,nl  a   commentary  on  the  difficult 
passages  of  Buddhaghosa’s  great  encyclopaedia.02 
51  Gandha.,  pp.  64,  74;  Sasana.,  p.  74;  Sasanadip 
verses  1274-8;  Pifakattha- 
main ,  p.  66. 
52  According  to  the  Gandha 
this  work  was  the  only  one  written  in  Ceylon. 
The  Pitakatih amain  classes  this  work  under  Abhidhamma  works,  p.  50.  See 
Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office,  JPTS.,  1882,  p.  85;  Fausboll,  Cat. 
Mand.  MSS.,  JPTS.,  1896,  p.  39. 
55  Gandha.,  p.  62;  Sasanadip.,  vv,  12-13;  Pitakatthamin ,  pp.  43,  49. 
54  Gandha.,  pp.  64,  74. 
55  Pifakatthamain,  p.  44. 
56  Gandha.,  p.  74. 
57  Ibid. 
55  Gandha 
p.  74. 
59  Forchammer,  Jardine  Prize  Essay ,  pp.  34,  35. 
60  Ibid . 
61  Pifakatthamain,  p.  37. 
por  Capata’s  Works  see  Dr.  Bode,  op.  cit,  pp.  17-19.

--- PAGE 147 ---
128 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  N   BURMA 
The  introduction  of  the  Slhala  Samgha  by  Capata  inten- 
sified the  enthusiasm  among  monks  for  scholastic  work, 
and  we  find  monk-scholars  busying  themselves  in  writing 
treatises  mostly  on  grammar.  Saddhammasiri,  a   monk  of 
Pagan,  wrote  a   grammatical  treatise  called  Saddatthabheda- 
cinta ,68  a   book  based  on  the  Pali  aphorisms  of  Kaccayana, 
and  perhaps  also  on  Sanskrit  texts  on  grammar.  According 
to  the  Sasanavamsa,  he  was  the  translator  of  the  Brhaja, 
which  evidently  is  the  Brhajjataka  of  Varahamihira,  into 
Burmese,  probably  one  of  the  first  works  in  the  vernacular.64 
Vimalabuddhi  (also  called  Maha-Vimalabuddhi),  another 
thera  of  Pagan,  was  the  author  of  another  important  gramma- 
tical work  known  as  Nyasa  or  Mufyhamattadipanl ,  a   commen- 
tary on  the  Kaccayanayoga.  He  also  wrote  a   fiJija  on  the 
Nyasa,®  and  to  him  is  also  ascribed  the  Abhidhammattha- 
sangahatlka .60 
Aggapandita,  a   native  of  Burma  and  resident  of  Pagan, 
wrote  a   treatise  named  Lokuppatti ,07  an  important  book 
which  is  not  on  grammar.  But  treatises  on  grammar  closely 
followed  one  upon  another.  Subhuticandana,  Nanasagara 
and  Uttama,  all  of  Pagan,  were  the  authors  of  Lingattha- 
vivarana,  Lingatthavivaranappakasaka  and  Lingatthavivarana- 
trk.a.®  Uttar  a   also  wrote  a   ti\a  on  BalaVatara,  the  grammar 
of  Vacissara  of  Ceylon,  while  the  authorship  of  Lingattha- 
vivaranavinicchaya,  another  work  on  grammar,  is  unknown.69 
Earlier,  a   scholium  on  Nyasa  entitled  Nyasappadipatika 
was  composed  by  a   noble  man  whose  name  is  not  given, 
but  who  was  a   grammarian  of  repute.70  A   very  interesting 
®3  Gandha 
pp.  62,  72 ;   Forchommer,  List,  p.  xix. 
64  Sasana.,  p,  75;  Pitakatthamain,  p.  68. 
Gandha 
pp.  63,  73. 
66  Sasanadip.t  v.  1223. 
Gandha 
pp.  64,  67 ;   Sasana.,  p.  74;  Pifakatthamain,  p.  60, 
««  Gan dha,,  pp.  63,67,  72,  73. 
Ibid.,  pp.  65-75. 
?6  §asanadip .,  v.  1240,

--- PAGE 148 ---
MONASTIC  SCHOLARSHIP5 
129 
but  intensely  human  story  is  told  about  this  author  in  the 
Sasanavamsa ,71  which  seems  to  indicate  that  he  had  been  a 
noble  man  of  rank  when  he  fell  violently  in  love  with  one 
of  the  princesses  royal.  Narapatisithu,  the  reigning  king, 
agreed  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  noble  man  if 
he  could  produce  a   scholarly  work.  The  noble  man  then 
presumably  entered  the  Order  and  took  upon  himself  the 
responsible  task  of  writing  the  work  referred  to  above.  On 
the  completion  of  the  work  the  king  evidently  gave  him  the 
hand  of  his  daughter,  and  he  returned  to  the  layman’s  life 
and  was  conferred  the  title  of  Rajjuggahamacca. 
Dhammadassi  was  another  important  grammarian  of 
Pagan.  He  was  a   samanera  when  he  wrote  his  work  on 
V accavacaka  or  V acavacaka,  2  on  which  Saddhammanandi 
wrote  a   jfifca.78  Thera  Abhaya,  also  of  Pagan,  wrote  his 
Mahatika ,74  a   commentary  on  the  Saddatthabhedacinta  of 
Saddhammasiri,  and  the  Sambandhacintatika ,7B  a   commentary 
on  the  Sambandhacinta  of  Samgharakkhita ,  a   scholar  of  Ceylon. 
Scholastic  activities  in  the  monasteries  of  Pagan  continued 
unabated  even  after  Narapatisithu ’s  reign.  We  have  seen 
that  Kyaswa  himself  was  an  author  of  repute,  while  his 
daughter  was  also  the  authoress  of  a   little  work  in  Pali 
cases  called  Vibhattyattha.™  It  is '  no  wonder,  therefore, 
that  important  treatises  continued  to  be  written.  Sagara, 
or  Gunasagara  as  he  is  called  in  the  GandhaVamsa,  wrote 
the  Mukhamattasara  77  as  well  as  a   tika  on  his  work,  at.  the 
71  Sasana ,  p.  75  ;   Forchammer,  List,  p,  xxiii. 
72  Sasana >  p.  75.  According  to  the  Pifakatthamain ,  the  VaccaQacakfl  was 
written  by  an  author  whose  name  is  unknown. 
73  Cat  Mand.  Mss.  mention  three  fikas  on  the  VaccaVacaka,  but  Saddham- 
manandi is  the  only  author  mentioned,  p.  50. 
74  Gandha,  pp.  63,  73;  Forchammer,  List,  p.  xxi ;   Report,  p.  2. 
75  Cat.  Mand.  Mss.  p.  50;  Pifakaiihamain,  pp.  69,  71;  Forchammer,  List , 
p.  xxi. 7®  Sasana,  p.  77. 
77  Sasana,  p.  76;  Gandha,  pp,  63,  73.  Forchammer  in  his  List  gives  tha 
name  as  Gunasara,  p.  xxiii. 
17— 1445B

--- PAGE 149 ---
130 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
request  of  the  Samgharaja  who  was  also  the  preceptor  of  the 
king.  Besides  grammar,  Abhidhamma  was  also  an  important 
subject  of  study.  The  Sasanaoamsa  gives  us  a   short  story 
of  the  old  monk  Disapamokkha  who  took  so  seriously  to  the 
study  of  this  subject  that  he  mastered  it  thoroughly  within 
a   very  short  time.  The  other  theras  were  astonished  at  this, 
and  the  earnestness  of  the  old  man  was  rewarded  by  the 
king  who  appointed  him  as  his  acariya. 
It  is  strange  that  we  have  practically  no  information  of 
the  state  of  monastic  learning  and  scholarship  in  the  Talaing 
country  during  all  this  time.  I   have  already  argued  that 
there  is  no  ground  for  assuming  that  with  the  taking  away 
of  sacred  texts  and  many  learned  monks  from  Thaton  by 
Anawrahta,  Buddhism  and  Buddhist  learning  had  become  a 
thing  of  the  past  in  the  Talaing  country.  The  reason  of  our 
having  no  information  about  the  state  of  the  religion  or 
religious  scholarship  in  that  country  after  the  memorable 
Sack  of  Thaton  for  well-nigh  one  century  and  a   half  must 
b,e  sought  for  elsewhere.  All  our  sources  of  information 
hails,  from  the  Sinhalese  school  or  from  some  other  quarter 
having  a   great  leaning  towards  that  school,  the  KalyanI 
inscriptions  being  no  exception.  The  Sasanavamsa,  the 
most  important  source  in  this  respect,  is  frankly  of  Sinhalese 
affiliation,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  does  not  take  any  notice 
q!  any  scholar  or  scholarly  work,  except  in  a   few  instances, 
that  does  not  belong  to  that  school.  The  Talaing  country, 
on  the  other  hand,  owed  allegiance  all  this  time  to  the  older 
school  to  which  belonged  Shin  Arahan  himself.  It  is 
easy  to  imagine  that  this  Samgha  which  was  known  as  Ari- 
yarahanta  Samgha  had  a   history  of  its  own  even  after  Anaw- 
rahta had  robbed  the  Talaing  capital  of  much  of  its  political 
and  religious  glory.  It  may  also  be  imagined  that  during 
all  this  time  the  Talaing  country  had  not  been  without  its 
history  of  monastic  learning  and  scholarship.  But  all  our

--- PAGE 150 ---
MONASTIC  SCHOLARSHIP 
131 
sources  ignore  this  history  altogether.  When  therefore, 
the  veil  is  lifted  once  more  and  we  get  a   glimpse  of  the 
Talaing  country  after  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  years, 
we  find  the  Sinhalese  school  already  firmly  established 
there.  Naturally,  therefore,  the  first  Buddhist  scholar  whom 
we  meet  with  as  devoting  himself  in  furthering  the  cause  of 
the  religion  in  the  Talaing  country  is  Sariputta  Dhammavilasa, 
a   resident  of  Ramannadesa,  but  ordained  in  the  Sihala  Samgha 
by  thera  Ananda.  The  one-sidedness  of  all  our  main 
sources  of  information  is  nowhere  so  clearly  brought  to 
prominence  than  in  this  instance.  The  SasanaVamsa  and  the 
Kalyani  inscriptions  so  relate  the  story  as  to  suggest  that 
Dhammavilasa  was  the  first  scholar  and  divine  of  the  Talaing 
country  after  Shin  Arahan,  a   fact  palpably  absurd  in  a   country 
where  Buddhism  had  been  a   living  religion  for  centuries 
and  where  a   flourishing  Samgha  was  all  the  time  in  existence'. 
We  must  therefore  lament  that  no  scholar  or  chronicle 
belonging  to  the  Talaing  school  or  having  at  least  sympathies 
with  that  school  left  for  us  any  account  of  the  religion 
to  enable  us  to  give  a   more  complete  history  of  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  religion  in  Burma  through  the  centuries. 
Sariputta  Dhammavilasa  is  not  known  to  have  written 
any  work  on  Vinaya  or  Abhidhamma  or  even  on  grammar. 
His  most  interesting  and  important  work  was  on  law  ; 
in  fact,  his  Dhammathat  or  Law  Code  was  one  of  the  earliest 
in  Burma,  and  was  the  source  and  model  of  practically 
all  later  Pali  and  Burmese  law  texts  written  in  Burma.78 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  monkish  scholars  devoted 
themselves  so  rigorously  to  the  study  of  grammar.  Readers 
may  have  noticed  that  a   considerable  number  of  works  of  this 
78  Forchammer,  Jardine  Prize  Essay ;   also  his  Notes  on  Buddhist  Law, 
Dhammavilasa’ s  Dhammathat  can  no  longer  be  traced ;  the  book  exists  only  in 
quotations  of  extracts  in  a   commentary  written  in  1856,  and  in  a   Burmese  translation 
of  1768.  Essay,  p.  29.  Also,  Furnivall,  "Manu  in  Burma:  some  Burmese  Dhamma- 
thats  ”   in  JBRS .  1940,  pp.  351-70.

--- PAGE 151 ---
132 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
period,  and  also  of  later  periods,  are  on  grammar,  apparently 
an  uncreative  subject  of  study  for  monks  who  are  expected 
to  be  more  concerned  with  deeper  aspects  and  problems  of  life, 
and  as  such,  with  psychology,  ethics  and  metaphysics.  It  is 
strange  that  so  late  a   scholar,  holding  so  important  a   position 
as  that  of  the  Samgharaja,  Pannasami,  the  author  of  the 
Sasanavamsa,  interests  himself'  in  grammar  almost  out  of 
all  proportion.  He  cannot  conceal  his  predilection  towards 
the  subject  in  preference  to  others  ;   indeed,  he  delights 
in  relating  the  accounts  of  those  scholars  who  are  interested 
like  himself  in  the  subject.  In  one  place  he  is  almost 
enthusiastic  in  recording  how  popular  was  the  study  of 
grammar  even  among  women  of  all  ages,  and  how  even 
busy  mothers  of  families  of  Pagan  could  find  time  to  study 
grammar  ;   70  in  another  place  he  relates  with  pleasure 
how  witty  women  disputed  with  monks  on  Pali  accidence. 
This  extraordinary  interest  in  grammar  may  have  been  due 
to  the  fact  that  for  all  who  were  interested  in  the  religion — 
and  a   very  considerable  section  of  the  community  un- 
doubtedly was — a   knowledge  of  the  sacred  texts  was  almost 
the  first  requisite,  and  knowledge  of  the  texts  presupposed 
a   good  knowledge  of  Pali  grammar.  But  perhaps  more  than 
this,  it  was  due  to  the  peculiar  orthodox  attitude  of  the 
<ac t*  on  aTHHnril**  tArT-nr*!^  a lco  pynlflrno  trp»r\;

--- PAGE 152 ---
DURENlDANA  AND  AVIDURENIDANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA  1 33 
VII 
THE  DURENlDANA  AND  AVIDURENIDANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA 
In  a   preceding  section  we  have  incidentally  referred  to 
the  representation  of  the  entire  repository  of  Jataka  stories 
numbering  547,  on  the  glazed  plaques  adorning  the  walls  of 
the  Ananda  temple.  ‘‘The  jataka  stories  embodying,  as 
they  do,  their  moral  and  ethical  teachings  in  the  form  of 
charming  tales  and  fables,”  says  M.  Duroiselle,  “   were  one 
of  the  most  potent  means  for  pressing  the  claims  of  Buddhism 
among  the  peoples  of  Indo-China ;   they  have  left  a   deep 
impression  wherever  the  religion  has  become  established. 
This  is  true  of  all  the  Jatakas,  but  especially  of  the  last  ten 
long  ones  ;   and  the  most  prized  and  read  among  these  ten 
are :  Sama,  Mahajanaka,  Mahosadha  (Maha-ummagga)  and 
Vessantara  ;   they  have  been  translated  in  prose  and  verse, 
and  turned  into  theatrical  plays  in  the  case  of  Vessantara. 
This  predilection  explains  the  great  prominence  given  to 
these  ten  stories  in  the  plaques  of  the  Ananda,  for,  while 
the  lesser  Jatakas  have  only  one  plaque  to  each,  these  ten 
are  illustrated  by  389.  In  Burma,  they  form  the  subject  of 
a   voluminous  literature,  both  in  Talaing  and  in  Burmese.”81 
Out  of  the  total  number  of  547  Jatakas  537  plaques  contain 
537  shorter  Jataka  stories  and  the  number  and  the  order  of  the 
stories  are  the  same  as  we  find  them  in  the  Pali  recension 
preserved  in  Ceylon  and  other  countries  professing  Pali 
Buddhism.  The  last  ten,  i.e.,  the  Mahanipata  stories 
as  we  find  them  on  the  Ananda  do  not  follow  the  traditional 
order.  The  reason  is  difficult  to  guess.82  Nevertheless,  it  is 
evident  that  already  by  about  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century 
the  entire  corpus  of  Jataka  literature  was  made  familiar  to  the 
Buddhist  fraternity  of  Upper  Burma,  and  it  is  natural  to 
81  Ep.  Birm,  I,  part  One>  PP*  v-vi. 
82  Ibid ,  pp.  iv-v.

--- PAGE 153 ---
134 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
imagine  that  through  these  stories  Buddhism  made  its  appeal 
to  the  rude  common  people  of  the  north  and  rapidly  won 
their  heart. 
But  it  is  not  the  Ananda  alone  in  Pagan  that  was  embel- 
lished by  pictorial  representations  of  Jatakas.  The  temples 
that  according  to  tradition  and  epigraphic  evidence 68  seem 
to  be  earlier  than  even  the  Ananda,  namely  the  two  Petleik 
pagodas,  were  also  similarly  decorated  with  the  complete 
series  of  representations  of  Jataka  stories.  In  all  editions  of 
Jataka  stories,  the  number  is  547,  and  in  all  other  Pagan 
temples  that  had  their  walls  similarly  decorated,  e.g.,  the 
Shwesandaw  built  by  Anawrahta,  the  Shwezigon  finished 
by  Kyanzittha,  the  Dhammarajika  built  by  Narapatisithu, 
the  Mingalazedi  built  by  Tarukpyemin,  etc.,  the  number  is 
the  same.  The  traditional  number  in  Burma  is  however  550, 
and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  Western  Petleik  numbers 
its  plaques  up  to  550  which  agrees  exactly  with  the  tradition. 
The  three  additional  Jatakas  are  :   497  Velama-Jat  (Jataka) , 
498  Mahagovinda  Jat,  and  499  Sumedhapadita  Jat.  The 
legends  on  the  plaques  on  the  two  Petleik  pagodas,  the 
Ananda  and  the  Shwezigon  are  all  written  in  Pali  giving  the 
name  of  the  Jataka  followed  by  its  number,  while  those 
on  the  plaques  of  the  Dhammarajika,  the  Mingalazedi, 
the  Nandawyeat  Myanzaine  near  Kyaukse  (c.  1300)  and  the 
Shwezigon  between  Mandalay  and  Kyaukse  (c.  1300), 
the  legends  are  both  in  Pali  and  Burmese,  Pali  giving 
the  name  of  the  Jataka  and  the  Burmese  the  state  of 
existence  in  which  the  Bodhisattva  had  been  born  in  that 
particular  story.84  A   few  titles  differ  slightly  as  to  spelling, 
while  certain  other  Jatakas  have  been  given  a   name  altogether 
different  from  what  we  find  in  Faiisboll’s  edition.  For 
“ Dlghitikosala  Jataka,”  for  example,  we  have  “   Kosalaraja 
63  An.R.A.S.l.,  1912-13,  p.  89. 
Ibid.,  p.  91,

--- PAGE 154 ---
DURENIDANA  AND  AVlDURENIDANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA  135 
Jataka,”  for  “Aggika  Jataka”  we  have  “   Aggikabharadvaja 
Jataka,”  for  “   Radha  Jataka  ”   we  have  Potthapada  Jataka, 
Potthapada  being  the  name  of  the  younger  parrot  and  Radha 
that  of  the  elder  in  the  story. 8S 
The  complete  series  of  547  Jataka  stories  is  also  found 
painted  on  the  interior  walls  of  the  Kubyaukkyi  temple  at 
Wetkyi-in,  between  Nyang-U  and  Pagan,  belonging  to  about 
the  twelfth  century  A. D.,  as  well  as  on  those  of  another  temple 
at  Nyang-U,  also  belonging  to  the  same  date.  In  the  former, 
out  of  the  entire  series  2 1 0  only  remain .  The  legends  are 
in  Pali  and  Burmese  which  latter  is  followed  by  the  serial 
number  of  the  Jatakas  in  each  nipata,  the  whole  collection 
being  divided  into  22  nipatas.88 
We  have  seen  above  that  the  number  and  order  of  the 
Jatakas  follow  rigorously  the  Pali  version  of  Southern 
Buddhism  which  had  been  known  to  the  Talaings  of  Lower 
Burma  already  for  several  centuries.  From  this  it  is  per- 
missible to  assume  that  Pagan  was  admitted  into  this  wonder- 
ful realm  of  edifying  tales  of  Buddhism,  as  in  those  of  so 
many  other  elements  of  culture  and  civilisation,  through  the 
Talaings,  a   very  large  number  of  whose  monks,  artist9, 
craftsmen,  sculptors  and  architects  were  brought  over  to 
Pagan  as  captives  by  Anawrahta. 
“   Eventful  is  that,  "   says  M.  Duroiselle,  u   the  Burmese,  victorious  in  the  field, 
were  intellectually  the  conquered ;  for  it  is  from  that  period  that  the  wonderful 
architectural  and  literary  activity,  which  made  Pagan,  for  a   lime  the  Buddhist  metro- 
polis of  China,  is  to  be  dated.  Nearly  three  centuries  of  Northern  and  North- 
Eastern  Indian  active  influences  had  slowly  prepared  the  Burmese  thoroughly  to 
assimilate  the  Talaing  civilisation  introduced  by  King  Anawrahta’s  conquest; 
from  that  time  writing  was  adopted  to  common  use  by  the  adoption  of  a   foreign 
alphabet  to  represent  Burmese  sounds,  and  inscription  on  stone  or  brick,  in  Talaing 
and  Burmese  appeared  at  Pagan ;   the  Tipitakas  are  transliterated  into  the  newly 
adop  ed  alphabet.  Sanskrit  is  definitely  abandoned  as  a   vehicle  of  religious  teach- 
ing and,  with  it,  the  form  of  MahaySnism  then  extant  at  the  Burmese  capital,  and 
superseded  by  Pali ;   the  court  and  the  people  receive  the  teaching  of  Hlnayanism 
86  Ibid,  p.  91. 
86  Ibid ,  p.  93.

--- PAGE 155 ---
136 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
at  the  feet  of  Talaing  monks,  and  under  Indian  and  Talaing  supervision  the  moat 
magnificent  temples  are  built  in  rapid  succession,87 
The  earlier  inscriptions  belonging  to  the  eleventh  and 
greater  part  of  the  twelfth  centuries  are  almost  all  in  Talaing, 
not  in  Burmese;  and  a   closer  examination  of  a   very  large 
number  of  Burmese  words  of  the  labels  of  Jataka  legends 
would  show  that  their  spelling  had  not  yet  then  become 
standardised  and  the  form  of  writing  was  just  at  its  beginnings. 
It  was  not  very  easy  to  represent  adequately  the  phonetics 
of  Burmese  speech  through  the  characters  of  Talaing. 
That  the  Talaings  themselves  helped  the  Burmese 
to  a   very  great  extent  in  achieving  this  would  be  evident  from 
a   very  large  number  of  early  Burmese  words  and  sounds  that 
are  nothing  but  phonetic  transcriptions  of  original  Talaing. 
Besides  those  already  referred  to  there  are  also  other 
temples  in  Pagan  that  contain  pictorial  representations  of 
Jatakas.  Mention  may  be  made  for  instance  of  the  wall- 
paintings  of  the  Abeyadana  and  Kubyaukkyi  temples  of  Pagan 
proper.  Both  temples  seem  to  belong  to  about  the  third 
quarter  of  the  eleventh  century.  The  large  majority  of  the 
paintings  inside  the  Abeyadana  represent  gods  and  goddesses 
of  the  Brahmanical,  Mahayana  and  Vajrayana  pantheons, 
the  solitary  exception  being  that  of  a   
Jataka  story — the  Maha- 
ummagga  Jataka.  Panels  in  the  porch  outside  however 
seem  all  to  belong  to  the  Hinayana.  All  the  scenes,  where  - 
ever  the  paintings  are  still  traceable,  bear  each  a   legend  in 
both  Pali  and  Talaing.  A   number  is  also  attached  to  each 
with  the  numbers  of  the  nipata  given  after  each  series. 
The  number  and  arrangement  of  the  Jatakas  follow  very 
closely  those  given  by  Fausboll  and  noticeable  in  so  many 
other  temples  in  Pagan.  The  Kubyaukkyi  temple  also,  like 
the  Abeyadana,  is  a   repository,  so  far  as  the  wall  paintings 
are  concerned,  of  Brahmanical,  Mahayana,  Vajrayana, 
■«  Ibid,  p.  91.

--- PAGE 156 ---
DORENIDANA  AND  AVIDURENIDANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA  1 
  
37 
Tantrayana  and  Hinayana  divinities  and  fully  and  adequately 
illustrate  the  eclectic  religious  life  of  the  Burmese  metro- 
* 
 polis  which  was  not  very  much  unlike  what  one  finds  in 
Bihar  and  Bengal  from  about  the  seventh  to  about  the  tenth 
; 
 century  A.D.  Here  also  we  find  on  the  walls  paintings 
depicting  scenes  from  the  Jatakas  and  stories  from  the  life 
j   of  the  Buddha  as  known  to  Pali  literature. 
Like  the  Durenidana  or  Jataka  stories,  the  Avidurenidana 
or  the  life-stories  of  the  Buddha  also  became  very  popular  in 
Burma  during  this  period  and  continued  to  be  so  ever  since. 
Already  we  have  seen  the  ruins  of  Old  Prome  yielding  relief 
|   sculptures  narrating  important  episodes  from  the  life  of 
; 
 the  Master.  We  have  also  seen  that  the  complete  cycle  was 
elaborately  represented  on  the  walls  of  the  terraces  and 
corridors  of  the  Ananda.  Archaeological  exploration  and 
|   research  in  Pagan  during  the  last  forty  years  have  yielded 
i 
 a   large  number  of  sculptures,  terracotta  tablets  and 
j   painted  panels  representing  important  episodes  of  Buddha’s 
.{  life  beginning  from  that  of  the  request  of  the  gods 
|   in  the  Tusita  heaven,  but  more  often  from  that  of  the 
dream  interpretation,  to  the  story  of  the  Mahaparinibbana. 
\   Such  sculptures  and  painted  panels  are  but  too  numerous 
to  enable  us  to  take  individual  notice  of  them.88  One  or 
two  representative  examples  brought  to  light  by  recent 
; 
 explorations  may  just  be  referred  to  ;   but  the  most  important 
repository  of  Avidurenidana  stories  in  Burma  is  of  course 
\   the  Ananda  where  one  finds  the  richest  store  of  sculptures 
!   and  glazed  terracotta  tablets  representing  the  entire  series  of 
events  and  episodes  of  the  Master’s  life  beginning  with  the 
request  of  the  gods  in  the  Tusita  heaven  and  ending  with  the 
Parinibbana,  including  the  various  miracles  he  performed  in 
his  last  existence  and  also  other  incidents  connected 
with  his  life  and  activities.  Nowhere  else  in  Burma  except 
88  An.R.A.S.I.t  191 3-14,  Duroiselle,  The  stone  sculptures  in  the  Ananda 
Temple  at  Pagan,  pp.  63  ff. 
18— 1445B

--- PAGE 157 ---
138  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  the  Ananda  is  the  Avidflrenidana  cycle  so  elaborately  re- 
presented, though  from  a   number  of  temples  hail  reliefs  that 
stylistically  and  iconographically  may  be  considered  more  or 
less  as  replicas  of  those  of  the  Ananda. 
But  Pagan  has  also  yielded  stone  slabs  and  terracotta 
reliefs  in  which  several  scenes  are  clustered  together  round 
a   principal  central  scene,  all  co-ordinated  into  one  relief- 
composition.  Reliefs  representing  such  scenes  belong  almost 
invariably  to  the  East  Indian  tradition  of  India  and  the 
iconographic  presentation  is  in  most  cases  a   veritable  copy 
of  similar  presentations  from  Sarnath  and  other  centres  in 
Bihar  and  Bengal.  Take,  for  example,  two  stone  reliefs 
unearthed  from  the  ruins  of  a   temple  at  Thyipyitsaya, 
five  miles  from  Pagan  illustrating  several  scenes  from  the 
Buddha’s  life.  The  central  figure  is  of  the  Buddha  seated 
in  bhumisparsamudra  in  vajrasana  which  represents  the  story 
of  Illumination  at  Bodh-gaya  where  he  called  the  earth 
to  witness  a   most  important  event  of  his  life.  From  his  right 
are  arranged  the  following  episodes  in  order  of  sequence 
from  the  bottom  :   (2)  nativity  or  the  birth  of  the  Bodhisattva, 
(3)  the  First  Sermon,  (4)  taming  the  Nalagiri  elephant, 
(5)  descent  from  the  Trayatrimsa  heaven,  (6)  the  Savatthl 
miracle,  (7)  the  presentation  of  honey  by  the  monkey,  and 
last  of  all  (8)  the  Parinibbana  which  is  placed  on  the  top  of 
the  slab.  Going  round  in  the  same  order  the  first  panel 
in  the  inner  row  represents  :  (9)  feeding  the  Buddha,  (10) 
the  Buddha  in  dhyanamudra,  (11)  the  Buddha  with  both  his 
hands  in  abhayamudra,  (12)  Buddha  standing,  (13)  repetition 
of  No.  10,  and  (1^)  the  Mucalinda  incident.80  In  a   good 
number  of  such  slabs,  the  first  eight  principal  scenes  are 
represented  in  almost  the  same  order.  For  instance,  a 
small  stone  slab  recovered  from  a   field  close  to  the  Shwezigon 
pagoda,  Pagan,  represents  in  the  centre  the  principal  figure 
An.R.A.S.B.  1928-29,  pp.  30-31,  plate  III,  fig.  1,

--- PAGE 158 ---
DURENIDANA  AND  AVIDUREN1DANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA  139 
of  Bodhisattva  Gotama  seated  in  bhumisparasamudra  under 
the  Bodhi  tree  at  Bodh-gaya  and  flanked  by  the  two  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  Maitreya  and  Avalokitesvara,  a   common  feature  in 
Burma.  Just  above  the  head  of  Maitreya  and  Avalokita,  in 
a   vertical  row  will  be  seen  Mara’s  retinue  which  suggests 
that  the  Bodhisattva  is  just  on  the  threshold  of  attaining  the 
Buddhahood.  It  will  be  noticed  in  all  such  reliefs  from 
Burma  that  the  Bodhisattva  is  represented  in  princely  attire 
which  is  explained  in  Burmese  and  Siamese  tradition  by  the 
introduction  of  a   story  that  is  unknown  to  Indian  Buddhalogy. 
The  story  represents  Buddha  Gotama  as  Jambupati  or  a 
RajachakkavattI  whose  dress  he  assumed  when  he  appeared 
before  a   certain,  king  who  was  very  proud  of  his  wealth  and 
power,  and  it  was  to  curb  his  pride  that  the  Buddha  appeared 
in  a   princely  resplendent  attire."0  Round  the  principal  figure 
beginning  from  the  bottom  left  are  represented  the 
following  stories :  (2)  Nativity  scene,  (3)  the  First 
Sermon,  (4)  taming  of  the  wild  elephant  Nalagiri,  (5)  descent 
from  the  Tusita  heaven,  (6)  Miracle  at  Savatthi,  and  (7)  above 
the  principal  figure,  the  Mahaparinibbana,  01  An  exactly 
similar  slab  was  unearthed  from  the  debris  of  a   ruined 
pagoda  at  Myinpagan.  Here  also  the  principal  figure 
is  that  of  the  Bodhisattva  Gotama  seated  under  the 
Bodhi  tree  in  bhumisparsamudra  and  flanked  by  Avalokita 
and  Maitreya  as  well  as  by  the  army  of  Mara,  and  the 
seven  other  principal  scenes  are  arranged  in  exactly  the  same 
sequence.  But  in  this  instance  around  the  central  figure 
there  is  a   vertical  row  in  between  the  principal  figure  and 
the  outer  row  of  seven  scenes.  This  vertical  row  represents 
six  other  scenes  which  are  exactly  similar  to  those  of  the 
stone  slab  from  Thyipyitsaya  described  above.  Here  too 
the  Mucalinda  incident  is  clearly  indicated  by  a   seated 
figure  with  cobra  hoods  above  its  head  immediately  on  the 
*#  Ibid,  pp.  30-31,  .... 
si  Ibid,

--- PAGE 159 ---
140 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
left  of  the  standing  figure  of  the  Bodhisattva  on  the  left  side 
of  the  central  figure.  82 
It  would  be  evident  from  the  reliefs  described  above  that 
the  eight  principal  scenes  as  we  find  them  on  these  and 
similar  other  reliefs  were  very  popular  in  Burma.  Of 
the  reliefs  representing  individual  scenes,  finds  from 
Pagan  indicate  that  the  most  popular  incidents  of  the 
Master’s  life  were  those  of  his  birth,  the  Bodhi,  the  First 
Sermon,  the.  taming  of  the  elephant,  and  the  stories  relating 
to  the  Parileyyaka  forest,  Mucalinda,  and  the  ogre  Alavaka. 
The  birth  story  was  so  very  popular  that  in  some  cases  the 
different  stages  of  the  story  have  also  been  represented.  For 
example,  on  a   stone  relief  in  one  of  the  corridors  of  the 
Kubyaukgale  temple  at  Myinpagan  is  represented  the  birth  of 
the  Bodhisattva  and  the  incidents  that  immediately  followed, 
viz.,  (l)four  chief  Brahmanas  receiving  the  new-born  infant 
on  a   golden  net-work,  (2)  four  Lokapalas  receiving  him  on  a 
black  antelope’s  skin  from  the  hands  of  the  chief  Brahmanas, 
(3)  four  men  receiving  him  on  a   piece  of  cloth  from  the 
hands  of  the  Lokapalas,  and  (4)  the  new-born  infant  making 
the  first  seven  strides,  flanked  on  his  left  by  Brahma  holding 
the  white  umbrella  over  his  head  arid  on  his  right  by  two 
devas.  Such  representations  can  also  be  seen  with  but 
slight  variations  at  the  Ananda  as  well  as  in  the  wall- 
paintings  and  stone-slabs  in  other  temples  in  Pagan.  An 
interesting  feature  of  the  Kubyaukgale  relief  is  that  on  the 
top  of  the  head  of  MayadevI  is  a   small  figure  seated 
cross-legged  with  the  right  hand  placed  on  the  right  knee, 
palm  downwards,  and  the  left  hand  on  the  lap,  palm 
upwards.  This  must  represent  the  Bodhisattva,  and  the 
representation  of  the  incidents  are  in  accordance  with  Burmese 
Buddhalogy.88 
M   An.R.A.S.1.,  1930-34,  p.  180. 
m   An.R.A.S.1.,  1935-36,  P.  73-75.

--- PAGE 160 ---
DURENIDANA  AND  AViDURENIDANA  STORIES  IN  BURMA  141 
Not  only  on  stone  reliefs  and  terracotta  votive  tablets 
but  in  wall-paintings  as  well  we  have  a   large  number  of 
representations  of  stories  from  Buddha’s  life.  The  walls  of 
a   large  number  of  temples  of  Pagan  were  originally  decorated 
with  paintings  ;   but  ravages  of  men,  time  and  nature  have 
been  successful  in  obliterating  them  in  most  cases.  Few 
that  remain  show  that  the  people  of  Pagan  had  a 
very  intimate  knowledge  of  the  entire  cycle  of  stories 
pertaining  to  Buddha’s  life.  Such  representations  are 
often  found  along  with  those  of  Brahmanical,  Mahayana, 
Vajrayana  and  Tantrayana  gods  and  goddesses.  Examples 
may  be  cited  from  two  temples,  one  from  among  the  earliest 
monuments,  namely,  the  Patothamya,  and  another  from 
among  the  latest  of  the  Pagan  period,  namely,  the 
Payathonzu.  The  Patothamya  paintings  illustrating  stories 
from  the  Buddha’s  life  are  provided  with  legends  in  Mon  in 
characters  of  about  the  eleventh  century.  These  legends 
help  us  to  identify  the  stories,  one  of  which  represents  the 
prediction  by  the  sage  Kala-devala,  while  another  shows  the 
Buddha  in  the  midst  of  his  Sakya  kinsmen  exhibiting  the 
Yamaka-pratiharya.  u   Among  the  Payathonzu  temple  draw- 
ings the  following  scenes  may  easily  be  identified  :   (1)  descent 
from  the  Trayatrimsa  heaven,  (2)  birth  of  the  Bodhisattva, 
(3)  the  seven  strides,  (4)  adoration  of  the  relics,  (5)  walk- 
ing near  Gandhakuti  in  Jetavana,  (6)  Buddha  in  the 
Parileyyaka  forest,  (7)  Bodhisattva  proceeding  to  the  Bodhi 
tree,  and  (8)  Buddha  seated  on  the  Vajrasana  at  Bodh-Gaya.05 
In  one  of  the  paintings  on  the  walls  of  the  Sayambu 
temple  one  notices  a   representation  of  the  story  of  the  ogre 
Ajavaka'oe 
w   An.R.A.S.I.,  1935-36,  p.  139. 
os  An.R.A.S.I.,  2935-36,  p.  80-81. 
96  Ibid,  p.  81.

--- PAGE 161 ---
142 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
VIII 
FURTHER  CORROBORATIVE  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCE 
The  story  of  Theravada  Buddhism  as  related  in  the 
previous  sections  finds  confirmation  in  the  history  and  art 
of  the  hundred  and  one  monuments  that  came  to  cover 
every  available  inch  of  ground  of  the  torrid  plains  of  Pagan. 
One  should  bear  in  mind  all  these  large  and  small  edifices 
dedicated  to  the  glorification  of  the  Master  and  his  faith  were 
reared  up  in  course  of  about  250  years,  from  about  the 
middle  of  the  eleventh  to  about  the  closing  of  the  thirteenth 
century  A.D.  These  monuments  that  pierce  the  Pagan  sky 
furnish  an  undying  testimony  to  the  efflorescence  of 
Buddhism  during  those  eventful  two  centuries  and  a   half 
when  the  kings  of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty  sat  on  the  throne. 
Remains  of  dozens  of  monasteries  strewn  all  over  the  metro- 
polis and  its  suburbs  suggest  that  there  were  thousands  of 
monks  who  went  about  with  their  begging  bowl  from  door 
to  door,  brought  relief  and  succour  to  those  physically  and 
mentally  afflicted,  taught  the  message  of  the  Master  to  those 
who  had  been  given  up  to  heathen  gods  and  spirits,  and 
retired  to  their  regulated  and  disciplined  duties  of  daily  life  in 
the  seclusion  of  their  cells  inside  the  monasteries.  Inscriptions 
only  in  dozens  testify  to  the  donations  of  villages,  lands,  books, 
slaves,  cattle  and  other  necessities  of  monastic  life  towards 
the  regular  upkeep  and  maintenance  of  temples  and  other 
monastic  establishments,  and  such  donations  were  made  not 
by  the  kings  and  members  of  the  royal  and  noble  families 
but  by  well-to-do  members  of  the  lay  public  as  well.  Two 
inscriptions  in  Burmese,  for  example,  recovered  from  the 
ruins  of  a   temple  south-east  of  the  Nagayon,  Myinpagan, 
record  the  dedication  of  lands,  slave  and  cattle  to  some  stupas 
and  temples  by  an  ordinary  citizen.  One  of  these  inscrip- 
tions is  dated  in  the  Burmese  Common  Era  equivalent  to

--- PAGE 162 ---
CORROBORATIVE  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCE  143 
1081  A.D.97  Another  old  Burmese  inscription  recovered  from 
the  ruins  near  the  Sinbaung  Temple,  Thyipyitsaya,  Pagan, 
records  the  dedication  by  a   revenue' officer  and  his  wife,  of 
lands  and  slaves  to  a   pagoda  and  a   monastery  and  of  certain 
objects  for  the  use  of  monks  of  that  monastery.  It  is  dated 
595  S.E.  =   1233-34  A.D.  The  interesting  point  in  the 
inscription  is  that  the  dedication  was  made  in  the  presence  of 
8  monks  headed  by  “   Sklin  Singhuim,”  a   description  that  pre- 
sumably stands  for  a   Sinhalese  monk.08  These  are  but 
specimens  of  many  such  inscriptions  brought  to  light  by 
archaeological  research  and  exploration  at  Pagan  and  other 
important  centres  in  Upper  Burma.  If  further  corroborative 
evidence  is  needed,  it  is  furnished  by  the  numberless  stone 
and  stucco  images  of  the  Buddha  in  different  attitudes 
that  adorn  the  niches  and  sanctums  of  hundreds  of 
stupas  and  temples  as  well  as  by  the  deluge  of  terracotta 
votive  tablets  bearing  effigies  of  the  Buddha  and  Buddhist 
epigraphs.  Such  epigraphs  on  tablets  belong  to  different 
categories.  One  category  whose  number  is  by  far  the  largest 
bears  the  name  of  King  Anawrahta,  the  man  responsible  for 
the  introduction  of  Theravada  Buddhism  in  Upper  Burma. 
The  epigraph  is  either  as  follows  : 
Ye  dhamma  hetuprabhava  hetum  tesam  Tathagatohavadat 
tesam  ca  yo  nirodha  evamvadl  Sri  Aniruddhadeva 
in  Sanskrit  or  Pali  or  in  mixed  Sanskrit  and  Pali,  but  in- 
variably in  East-Indian  characters  of  the  eleventh  and 
twelfth  centuries.  This  is  the  well-known  Buddhist  formula 
snatched  from  the  lips  of  the  Mahasamana  and  put  into 
those  of  Aniruddhadeva  (King  Anawrahta).  Or,  in  other 
instances,  it  runs  as  follows  : 
Om  deyadharmo’ym?1  saccadanapati 
Maharaja  Sri  Aniruddhadevasya 
w   An.R.A.S.I.,  1930-34,  p.  190. 
88  Ibid,  1934-35,  pp.  71-72.

--- PAGE 163 ---
1 44 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  the  same  East-Indian  characters  of  the  same  date. 
Whether  they  are  in  Sanskrit  or  Pali  or  in  mixed  Pali-Sanskrit, 
doubtless  they  were  all-  locally  moulded  to  order.  In 
the  second  category  fall  those  that  bear  on  them  the  Buddhist 
formula  as  such  without  the  name  of  any  body,  either  in 
Pali  or  Sanskrit  but  always  in  East-Indian  characters  of 
the  eleventh,  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries.  Those  in 
Sanskrit  may  have  been  carried  over  to  the  metropolis 
from  such  centres  as  Sarnath,  Bodhgaya,  Nalanda  and 
other  places  in  Eastern  India,  but  those  in  Pali  were 
probably  locally  moulded  to  order.  The  third  category 
includes  those  tablets  that  begin  with  Ye  dhamma  hetu- 
ppabhava  and  ends  with  ‘  ‘  danapati  Sri  Mah(i)syadev!  ’  ’  or  with 
the  name  of  some  other  individual.  There  is  a   fourth 
category  which  does  not  quote  the  Buddhist  formula  but 
record  only  the  name  of  the  donor  of  the  particular  tablet 
and  the  fact  and  aim  of  the  donation.  Such  legends  are  in 
Mon  or  Pali  or  in  mixed  Mon  and  Pali,  in  East-Indian 
characters  of  the  eleventh,  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries. 
The  legends  are  of  various  kinds.  For  example,  one  says 
that  the  image  of  the  Jina,  the  Buddha,  was  made  by  an 
acariya  or  monk ;   another  contains  a   prayer  expressing  a 
hope  that  his  work  of  merit  (i.e.,  having  the  tablet  moulded) 
might  be  a   help  to  obtain  omniscience.  A   third  of  which 
the  first  half  is  in  Mon  means  that  a   particular  tablet  was 
made  by  Yasa,  while  the  other  half  which  is  in  Pali  means 
“   with  his  own  hands.”  Still  a   fourth  would  have  another 
legend  in  Mon  which  means  ‘  ‘  made  by  Samben  (or  Minister)” , 
and  a   fifth  which  reads  in  Pali :  “   eso  bhagava  Triloka- 
vatamsaka  Mahadeviya  kata  vimuttattham  sahatthen’evati ’’ 
which  translated  would  be  “This  tablet  was  made  '  by 
Trilokavatamsaka,  the  chief  queen,  with  her  own  hands, 
with  a   view  to  attain  salvation.”  The  last  is  indeed  a   pattern 
often  found  employed  in  votive  tablets  by  Anawrahta  and 
others,  the  only  variation  being  in  the  names  of  donors ;   for

--- PAGE 164 ---
CORROBORATIVE  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCE 
145 
example, one  tablet  depicting  the  Buddha  in  bhumisparsamudra 
has  the  following  inscription :  “   eso  bhagava  Samben 
Jesalyena  kata  vimuttatham  sahatthen’evati.”  99 
In  respect  of  Theravada  Buddhism  in  Pagan  and  other 
important  centres  in  Upper  Burma  during  the  suzerainty 
of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty  evidence  has  indeed  been 
overwhelming,  and  the  account  narrated  from  traditions  and 
chronicles  stands  fully  corroborated  by  epigraphic  documents, 
sculptures,  paintings,  terracotta  votive  tablets  and  not  the 
least  by  the  most  splendid  array  of  monuments  that  are  a 
real  glory  to  the  culture  and  civilisation  of  Burma.  But 
the  growth  of  Pagan  as  the  most  important  centre  of  religion 
in  Burma  and  carrying  over  to  Pagan  of  monks,  artists, 
artisans,  and  sacred  texts  and  relics  of  the  religion  from 
Thaton,  did  not  and  could  not  possibly  extinguish  the  light 
that  had  been  burning  in  the  Talaing  realm  for  centuries  past. 
I   have  already  drawn  pointed  attention  to  the  fact  that 
nothing  could  be  further  from  truth,  and  have  also  tried  to 
give  in  a   preceding  section  an  account  of  the  religion  in  the 
Talaing  country  after  the  cruel  fate  that  attended  her  in 
1057.  It  is  true,  the  religion  suffered  a   great  set  back; 
robbed  of  royal  patronage  and  heavily  affected  by  transfer- 
ence of  political  authority,  the  religious  fraternity  must  have 
found  itself  in  deep  sea.  Fortunately  it  turned  out  to  be  but 
a   temporary  eclipse,  and  soon  we  find  the  monks  and 
monastic  establishments  of  the  country  showing  renewed 
signs  of  life  and  movement.  This  finds  striking  confirmation 
from  archaeological  finds  made  at  Thaton  and  Rangoon 
and  dateable  from  about  the  eleventh  to  about  the 
thirteenth  century  A.D.  In  recent  years  attention  has  been 
drawn  to  seven  stone  slabs,  all  bearing  inscriptions  and 
belonging  at  the  Shwezayan  pagoda,  Thaton.  The 
Shwezayan  in  its  present  form  is  a   monument  not  older 
99  For  references,  see  An.  R.A.S.  /.,  1930-34,  pp.  178-178,  188-89, 
19— I445B

--- PAGE 165 ---
146 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
than  about  the  fifteenth  or  sixteenth  century,  but  the  inscrip- 
tions, in  Pali  and  Mon,  seem  to  be  older  than  the  monument 
itself.  They  were  not  all  inscribed  at  one  and  the  same 
period,  for,  while,  paleographically  speaking,  the  earliest  of 
them  can  be  dated  in  about  the  eleventh  century,  the  latest 
probably  belong  to  about  the  fifteenth.  They  have  not  yet 
been  deciphered  and  edited,  but  even  a   cursory  glance  at  them 
would  prove  that  their  subject-matter  is  Buddhistic.  But  more 
important  is  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  terracotta  plaques 
of  the  Thagyapaya  stupa  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Thaton 
town.  Originally  there  seem  to  have  been  a   total  of 
61  plaques,  but  now  only  a   few  remain.  In  my  Brahmanical 
Gods  in  Burma  (1932)  I   had  suggested  that  these  probably 
represented  stories  from  the  Ramayana  or  the  Puranas.  I   am 
now  convinced  that  they  represent  Jataka  stories,  and  among 
the  very  few  reliefs  that  are  still  extant,  the  following  stories 
have  already  been  traced  :   the  Vessantara  Jataka,  the  Vidhura 
Jataka  (2  plaques),  the  Mahaummagga  Jataka  (2  plaques), 
the  Bhuridatta  Jataka  (2  plaques)  and  the  Temiya  Jataka.100 
Stylistically  these  terracotta  reliefs  can  be  assigned  to  a 
period,  not  later  than  the  12th  century  A.D.  Further, 
round  the  Kalyanlslma,  Thaton,  there  stands  a   row  of 
sandstone  pillars  depicting  stories  from  the  Jatakas  carved 
in  relief.  The  Mahajanaka,  the  Sama  and  the  Nemi 
Jatakas  can  at  once  be  recognised;  the  Vidhurapandita 
Jataka  is  illustrated  on  two  pillars,  while  another  pillar  found 
broken  in  two  parts  seem  to  represent  scenes  from  the 
Vessantara  Jataka,  so  very  popular  in  Burma.  These 
reliefs  can  stylistically  be  dated  between  the  12th  and 
13th  centuries.101  In  Rangoon  also  where  excavation  was 
undertaken  for  the  first  time  in  1 938-39  last,  important  finds 
have  been  made  that  go  to  prove  the  prevalence  of  Buddhism 
in  that  part  of  the  Taking  country  from  about  the  eighth  or 
100  An.R.A.S.I.,  1930-34,  pp.  196-203, 
101  Ibid ,  pp.  203-4,

--- PAGE 166 ---
CORROBORATIVE  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  EVIDENCE  147 
ninth  to  about  the  thirteenth  century  A.D.  The  most 
important  of  these  finds  is  a   terracotta  votive  tablet,  not 
unlike  those  from  Pagan,  bearing  on  the  obverse  a   represent- 
ation of  the  Buddha  seated  in  vajrasana  inside  a   temple  and 
on  the  reverse  a   five-line  Pali  inscription,  deciphered  and 
translated  as  follows  : 
1      (buddha)  rupa  s     
  
    n  
(i)  naga  (1)  e  ne  ... 
  
        (Sa)  nsaramuccanattlia 
4.        na  karitan-ti 
5 
   ther  bilah... 
“   This  image  of  the  Buddha   in  the  Naga  cave   
has  been  caused  to  be  made  by   for  the  sake  of 
deliverance  from  Samsara  (i.e.  round  of  rebirths) — (Signed) 
The  Thera  Vilasa.”  m   The  inscription  is  in  Burmese  and 
may  paleographically  be  assigned  to  about  the  twelfth 
century  A.D.  The  remains  of  a   stupa  and  a   very  large 
number  of  terracotta  votive  tablets  unearthed  from  the  site 
which  is  not  very  far  from  the  Tadagale  railway  station, 
may  also  be  safely  assigned  to  the  same  date.  On  a   large 
number  of  these  tablets  can  be  seen  effigies  of  the  Buddha 
in  several  rows ;   on  others  a   single  Buddha  seated  in 
vajrasana  within  a   small  temple  surrounded  by  stupas. 
Another  variety  represents  the  Buddha  seated  in  bhumisparsa- 
mudra,  while  a   fourth  depicts  the  twin  miracle  of  Savatthi 
or  the  Yamaka-pratiharya.103  A   bronze  statue  of  Dlpankara 
Buddha  in  a   scanding  position,  stylistically  dateable  in  about 
the  eighth  century,  is  also  another  interesting  and  perhaps 
the  earliest  find  from  the  same  site.. 
IX 
RELIGIOUS  ECCLECTICISM  OF  PAGAN 
Thera vada  Buddhism,  the  religion  of  the  state  and  a 
large  majority  of  the  people  though  it  was  during  the  two 
M®  i4n.R.j4.5.B.,  1938-39,  p.  5. 
im  Ibid,  p.  6.

--- PAGE 167 ---
148  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
hundred  and  fifty  years  the  Anawrahta  dynasty  wielded 
power  in  the  land,  was  not  the  only  religion  in  the  metropolis 
of  Pagan.  All  the  kings  of  the  dynasty  were  zealous 
Buddhists,  faithful  and  sincerely  devoted  unto  the  cause  they 
had  made  their  own,  and  the  people  also  seem  to  have 
responded  fully  and  well  to  the  lead  given  by  the  royal 
family,  the  court  and  the  nobility.  But  it  was  difficult  for 
the  different  classes  of  people  to  bid  good-bye  all  at  once  to 
the  old  faiths  they  had  dearly  held  and  practised  for  centuries, 
namely,  their  age-old  faith  in  the  primitive  Nat-spirits,  or  in 
Brahmanism,  Mahayanism,  and  Vajrayana  and  Tantrayana 
Buddhism  brought  in  by  Indian  traders,  adventurers, 
scholars,  monks  and  all  other  kinds  of  people  who  resorted 
to  the  place  on  their  respective  missions  and  vocations. 
Anawrahta  introduced  Theravada  Buddhism  into  Pagan; 
he  as  well  as  Sawlu  and  Anawrahta  were  sincere 
Theravadins — there  cannot  be  any  doubt  about  it — and  so 
were  their  descendants,  but  elsewhere  I   have  shown104  that 
the  court-rituals  were  all  deeply  tinged  with  Brahmanical 
religious  practices  in  which  Narayana  had  a   place  of  honour 
and  gods  like  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Ganesa  actually  found 
place,  admittedly  as  minor  deities  in  the  orthodox  Buddhist 
pantheon  of  Burma.  In  fact,  the  temple  built  at  Myinpagan 
for  Manuha,  the  Talaing  king,  seem  to  have  been  one  in 
which  Brahma  figured  very  prominently.  Also,  not  only 
there  was  the  Nat-hlaung-Kyaung,  a   Visnu-Dasavatara 
Temple100  in  the  very  heart  of  the  city,  but  there  has  also 
been  unearthed  or  picked  up  a   considerable  number  of 
images  that  tend  to  show  that  Brahmanism  was  a   considerable 
factor  in  the  religious  life  of  Pagan  and  claimed  at  least  a 
certain  section  of  the  people.  This  is  further  corroborated  by 
the  fact  that  besides  Brahmanical  images  in  stone  and  bronze 
104  Ray,  Brahmanical  Gods  in  Burma. 
105  Ibid;  also  see  An.R.A.S.L,  1930-34,  pp.  191-92.

--- PAGE 168 ---
RELIGIOUS  ECCLECTICISM  OF  PAGAN 
149 
picked  up  from  the  ruins  of  Pagan  and  now  housed  in  the 
Pagan  Museum  or  found  installed  in  the  niches  or  at  the 
corners  or  other  places  of  some  of  the  frankly  Buddhist 
stupas  and  temples  we  have  in  the  wall-paintings  of  temples 
like  the  Abeyadana  and  the  Kubyaukkyi  representations  of 
Brahmanical  divinities  like  Brahma,  Siva,  Visnu,  Ganesa, 
Yamuna  and  others,  300  and  nobody  can  say  that  these  two 
temples  are  not  frankly  Buddhist  ones.  Indeed,  if  tradition 
is  to  be  believed  they  were  both  built  either  by  Anawrahta  or 
by  Kyanzittha.  In  any  case  they  were  built  between  1050 
and  1 100  A.D.  when  Theravada  Buddhism  was  just  making 
its  appearance  in  Pagan.  Of  such  Brahmanical  divinities, 
Brahma,  Visnu  or  Narayana,  Siva  and  Ganesa  seem  to  have 
enjoyed  special  favour,  most  of  all  Ganesa.107 
But  if  Brahmanical  Hinduism  claimed  a   certain  section  of 
the  people  besides  the  Hindu  colonists  themselves,  the  different 
schools  of  Sanskrit  Buddhism,  namely  Mahayana  proper  and 
its  offshoots,  Vajrayana  and  Buddhist  Tantrayana  along  with 
Mantrayana  and  Kalacakrayana  did  even  more.  I   have 
elsewhere  gone  into  details  to  find  out  the  extent  achieved 
by  these  cults  in  Pagan108 ;   here  it  would  suffice  to  mention 
that  Mahayanism  and  its  allied  cults  had  been  well-known  in 
Pagan  and  claimed  a   considerable  section  of  the  population 
from  at  least  one  or  two  centuries  before  Theravada  came  to 
make  its  influence  felt  there.  And  even  after  the  introduction 
of  Theravada,  Mahay anistic  Tantrik  influences  continued  to 
flow  in  from  Bihar,  Bengal,  Tibet  and  Nepal  yet  for  some 
time  more.  The  followers  of  frankly  Tantrik-Buddhist  rituals 
and  practices  came  to  be  known  to  Burmese  tradition  as 
Aris  or  Samanakuttakas  whom  successive  Burmese  kings 
sought  to  suppress.  Not  only  has  there  been  picked  up  from 
the  ruins  of  Pagan  a   considerable  number  of  images  in  stone 
106  An.R.A.S.I.  1930-34,  p.  184. 
107  Ibid;  also  see  An.R.A.S.I,  1935-37,  pp.  165-66. 
108  Ray t  Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma,  1936,

--- PAGE 169 ---
150  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  bronze  of  frankly  Mahay  ana  and  Vajrayana  affiliation  and 
dateable  from  about  the  tenth  to  about  the  twelfth  centuries, 
but  wall-paintings  of  such  temples  as  the  Patothamya, 
Abeyadana  and  Kubyaukkyi,  represent  gods  and  goddesses 
like  Avalokitesvara,  ManjusrI,  Tara,  Maitreya,  Hayagrlva, 
Lokanatha,  etc.,  and  Bodhisattvas  with  their  Saktis  in 
sensuous  and  sometimes  frankly  erotic  postures  and  positions. 
More  sensuous  and  erotic  are  the  representations  on  the 
walls  of  the  Payathonzu  and  the  Nandamanna  temples  that 
are  admittedly  of  Tantrik  origins.  Considered  from  the 
point  of  view  of  nature  and  style  of  the  sculptures  and 
paintings  as  well  as  of  the  monuments  containing  such 
representations,  it  appears  that  Mahay anism  and  its  allied 
cults  coninued  to  flourish  in  Pagan  at  least  till  the  end  of 
the  thirteenth  century  A.D. 
It  is  thus  evident  that  when  Theravada  was  introduced 
into  Pagan  it  found  itself  pressed  by  ancestral  Nat  worship 
and  Brahmnical  Hinduism  on  one  side  and  Mahayana 
and  allied  cults  on  the  other.  But  Theravada  from  the 
very  beginning  was  fortunate  in  having  the  devoted  patro- 
nage of  the  court  backed  by  the  resources  of  a   kingdom, 
and  we  have  already  seen  with  what  rapid  strides  it  spread 
itself  far  and  wide  and  won  the  heart  of  the  larger  section 
of  the  entire  populace.  But  in  doing  so  it  could  not  ignore 
all  the  elements  of  the  contending  cults  that  had  already 
been  in  existence  in  the  metropolis.  The  ancestral  Nats 
whom  one  can  see  still  guarding  the  entrances  and  points 
at  the  Shwezigon  came  to  claim  their  share;  some  of 
the  Brahmanical  divinities  also  came  to  be  incorporated 
into  the  orthodox  Theravada  pahtheon,  and  court  rituals  and 
ceremonies  also  came  to  be  deeply  tinged  with  Brahmanical 
practices.100  With  regard  to  Mahayana  and  its  allied  cults 
109  Op.  tit*  Brahmanical  Gods  in  Burma,  Chap.  L

--- PAGE 170 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN:  A   POSTSCRIPT 
151 
the  attitude  of  Theravada  was  a   bit  otherwise.  This  I   have 
elsewhere  summarised  as  follows  : 
M   Mahayana  Buddhism  and  its  allied  cults  in  Pagan,  when  we  see  them  in 
existence,  were  after  all  practised  by  only  a   section  of  the  people  who,  we  may 
infer,  had  a   full-fledged  organisation  of  their  own,  but  the  Theravada  being  the 
much  more  popular  and  powerful  religion  could  well  afford  to  look  at  its 
vanquished  rival  with  a   confident  smile.  The  two  faiths  seemed  to  have  lived 
side  by  side  till  at  last  the  Theravada,  always  with  the  support  of  the  throne, 
was  able  to  emerge  completely  triumphant  and  wipe  out  even  the  memory  of  its 
rival.  But  in  course  of  centuries  of  close  neighbourhood,  the  Theravada  of 
Burma  came  to  absorb  some  of  the  elements  of  its  sister  faith,  and  some  of 
the  gods  of  the  Mahayana  pantheon,  e.g.,  AvaiokiteSvara  and  Maitreya,  were 
even  adopted  by  the  Theravadins.  This  is  perhaps  why  Taranatha  says  that  in 
the  Koki  countries  the  “   Mahayana  and  the  Hlnayana  were  not  always  distinguish- 
able/’ 111 
X 
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN:  A   POSTSCRIPT 
By  far  the  most  reliable  and  important  documents  that 
furnish  a   detailed  and  authentic  picture  of  the  state  of 
religion  in  Upper  Burma,  especially  in  Pagan,  is  the  long 
series  of  Pali,  Mon  and  Burmese  inscriptions  of  the  kings 
of  the  Pagan  dynasty  and  the  countless  monuments 
reared  up  by  them  or  during  their  suzerainty,  with  their 
wealth  of  Buddhist  images,  narrative  reliefs,  and  terracotta 
plaques  all  representing  Buddhist  subjects.  The  long  and 
unique  series  of  epigraphic  records  reveal  unmistakably  the 
extent  to  which  the  members  of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty  were 
touched  and  inspired  by  the  faith  they  had  lately  adopted, 
their  attitude  towards  the  religion  and  the  motive  that  brought 
into  being  the  glorious  monuments  of  the  royal  citadel  and 
the  surrounding  country.  They  also  furnish  a   vivid  picture 
of  the  social  and  economic  life  against  the  background  of 
which  the  religion  shone  and  sought  to  mould  the  new 
fabric  of  life  of  a   rude  and  semi-barbaric  people.  Here 
110  Op.  cit.  Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma ,  p.  93.

--- PAGE 171 ---
152 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  these  records  we  read  of  Buddhist  rites  and  rituals  heavily 
tinged  with  those  that  were  essentially  Brahmanical  and 
perhaps  also  with  those  of  primitive  Nat  and  Naga  worship, 
of  Brahmanical  priests  and  astrologers  taking  part  in  the 
religious  observances  of  kings  who  were  frankly  Buddhists, 
and  of  Brahmanas  who  carried  purificatory  water  for  the 
recitation  of  the  paritta,  a   typically  Buddhist  ritualistic 
formula  invoking  protection.  “   At  sunset,  godhuli  being  the 
lagna,  the  Sankran  (samkranti?)  Brahmanas  who  carried 
litters’, ’  so  runs  a   passage  in  the  Tharaba  gate  inscription,111 
“   beat  the  foremost  drum.  The  Brahmana  astrologers  went 
(and)  drew  water  for  the  reciting  of  the  paritta .”  In  one 
and  the ‘same  ceremony  offerings  were  made  to  the  statues 
of  the  Buddha  along  with  those  of  Nagas,  Indra,  Narayana 
and  other  gods  of  the  Brahmanical  pantheon.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  some  at  any  rate  of  the  Brahmanas  referred 
to  came  from  the  Mon  country,  just  as  some  of  the  Buddhist 
monks  also  evidently  did.  Here  in  these  records  we  not  only 
find  reference  to  the  Three  Pitakas  and  the  Abhidhamma,112 
but  at  least  in  one  early  Mon  record  from  the  Shwesandaw 
pagoda,  Prome,118  we  read  that ,  Kyanzittha  effected  a 
revision  of  the  Buddhist  canon,  “   the  three  holy  Pitakas 
which  had  become  obscured.”  The  same  inscription  also 
refers  to  a 
'‘mission  to  India  with  funds  for  the  restoration  and  endowment  of  the 
temple  at  Bodhgaya,  liberality  to  the  monks,  relation  with  other  princes  and  in 
particular  with  a   certain  ‘Coli*  prince  whom  the  king  claims  to  have  converted  to 
Buddhism... This  episode  is  followed  in  the  record  by  details  of  the  offerings  made 
by  the  people  of  Pagan  and  its  neighbourhood  on  festive  occasions  of  a   religious 
character,  and  stress  is  laid  here  {as  in  some  of  the  other  inscriptions)  on  the  fact 
that  the  king  himself  delivered  didactic  addresses  to  his  subjects  who  appreciated 
them  highly... There  is  an  interesting  passage  illustrating,  as  ,it  would  appear,  the 
Buddhist  doctrine  of  kindness  to  animals.  It  seems  that  certain  birds  were  the 
111  Ep .  Birm,  III,  part  One,  p.  Iff. 
112  Por  example,  in  the’  Great  Shwezigon  inscription  and  the  Tharaba  gate 
inscription*  Ep.  Birm.  I,  part  Two  and  III,  part  One, 
113  Ep.  Birm.  I,  part  Two,  p.  158  ff.

--- PAGE 172 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :   A   POSTSCRIPT 
153 
objects  of  the  king’s  special  favour  and  enjoyed  his  protection,  while  (from  another 
passage)  it  may  be  inferred  that  animals  in  general  were  secured  generous  treat- 
ment and  some  provision  of  food ;   a   strong  tinge  of  ethical  and  religious  sentiment 
pervades  the  inscription. 
A   very  strong  religious  and  ecclesiastical  flavour  also 
pervades  the  great  and  well-known  Shwezigon  inscription  m 
which  begins  with  a   Pali  exordium  followed  by  a   nissaya ; 
this  is  equally  true  of  a   good  number  of  other  Mon,  Pali  and 
Burmese  records  of  Pagan.  Indeed,  the  Pagan  kings, 
vainglorious  tyrants  as  they  were,  were  sincere  and  ardent 
Buddhists  as  well ;   and  it  is  evident  from  the  inscriptions 
that  they  strove  hard  not  only  to  make  Buddhism  a   living 
faith  with  themselves  and  their  people  over  whom  they  were 
destined  to  rule,  but  a   really  potent  social  force  as  well  in 
the  country.  To  what  extent  they  succeeded  in  their  efforts 
would  be  evident  from  the  fact  recorded  in  numerous 
inscriptions  that  sometimes  even  a   whole  family  participated  * 
in  the  foundation  of  a   Buddhist  establishment,  one  vying 
with  the  other ;   sometimes  they  dedicated  themselves  or  were 
done  so  by  their  masters  as  slaves  to  one  or  other  of  their 
religious  foundations,  and  often  made  gifts  to  them  of  lands, 
books,  clothes  and  all  other  requirements  of  a   modest 
monastic  life.  Of  many  such  examples,  not  unoften  full  of 
Buddhist  sentiments  and  essentially  Buddhist  phraseology, 
here  is  one  from  an  inscription  found  at  Kyaukse  and 
belonging  to  about  the  twelfth  century.  The  inscription 
records  the  foundation  of  a   baddhastma  at  Kyaukse  (Klok  sa) 
that  was  set  up  by  the  chief  monk  of  the  locality  with  the 
assistance  of  certain  other  persons  whom  he  apparently 
dedicated  to  that  service.  A   grant  of  land  made  by  some 
local  official  or  officials  to  the  founder  was  also  transferred 
to  his  foundation. 
20-1445B 
Ep.  Eirtn .  I,  part  Two,  p.  80  ff.

--- PAGE 173 ---
154 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
© 
“I,  the  Chief  Monk  .  .  Lon,  when  I   came  to  dwell  at  Klok  sa,  I   informed  the 
Chief  Monk  of  Pagan,  I   informed  the  king  there,  that  I   was  building  a   baddhasima. 
These  fare  the  persons)  who  together  with  her  with  myself  worked  (for  this 
temple?) :  the  junior  monk  Mahadew,  his  father,  his  mother,  his  (grand  father?) ; 
(...?)  the  mother  of  Na  Lwoy,  Ya  Wan,  son  of  Na  Mrik,  Na  Gan  Da  :  these  I   dedi- 
cate to  the  temple,  who  worked  together  with  myself.  The  great  (donation?)  of 
(7  measures  of)  arable,  land,  which  the  Kon  Samben  dalen  gave  Lo  me,  I   also  give  to 
the  temple  (May  ?)  the,  accumulation  of  merit  (offering  and  worshipping)  ..  (con- 
duct ?)  for  (all  beings).”11*5 
But,  it  is  curious  that  nowhere  in  the  contemporary 
inscriptions  is  there  any  evidence  that  may  be  reasonably 
interpreted  to  explain  how  the  new  faith  was  introduced 
into  Pagan,  and  was  accepted  by  the  ruling  dynasty,  or  how 
it  fared  and  thrived  during  the  two  centuries  and  a   half  the 
Pagan  dynasty  had  its  overlordship  recognised  throughout 
Burma.  They  seem  to  know  nothing  of  the  very  dramatic  and 
eventful  story  of  the  introduction  of  Theravada  Buddhism  as 
related  in  the  fifteenth  century  Kalyani  inscriptions  and  follow- 
ing them,  in  the  later  Burmese  chronicles.  There  is,  for 
example,  no  mention  in  these  records,  frankly  Buddhist  in 
affiliation  and  sentiment,  of  Shin  Arahan,  the  central  figure  in 
that  eventful  drama,  nor  of  any  other  name  or  names  of  monks, 
or  of  events  and  episodes  mentioned  or  narrated  in  the  Kalyani 
inscriptions.  Two  monks,  Tamalin  and  Dhammavilasa,  find 
mention  in  the  Pagan  inscriptions  as  well,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
say  if  the  two  pairs  of  names  were  identical.  There  is  no 
warrant  in  the  Pagan  inscriptions  for  the  story  that  Tamalin 
was  the  son  of  a   ruler  of  Kamboja  or  had  ever  been  to  Ceylon, 
as  Tamalinda  is  alleged  by  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  to  have 
been.  As  regards  Dhammavilasa  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  if  he 
was  the  same  as  the  Dhammavilasa  of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions. 
There  is  a   Capata  pagoda,  a   stupa  of  Sinhalese  type,  at 
Nyangu  in  Pagan,  but  since  the  date  of  its  foundation  is 
uncertain,  it  cannot  with  absolute  certainty  be  associated 
with  the  monk  Capata  of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  or  of 
115  Ep.  Birm ,  III,  part  One,  p.  70  if  .

--- PAGE 174 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :  A   POSTSCRIPT  1 55 
the  Sasanavamsa.  The  KalyanI  inscriptions  refer  in  some 
detail  to  a   mission  sent  by  Anawrahta  to  Ceylon;  one 
would  imagine,  it  may  be  argued,  that  the  Cullavamsa 
which  purports  to  be  a   history  of  the  island  would  dilate 
on  this  mission,  but  this  history  merely  states  that 
Vijayabahu  wrote  with  his  own  hand  a   letter  of  great 
merit  to  the  king  of  Arimaddana  with  whom  he  made 
a   great  friendship.  He  is  further  credited  with  having  given 
great  delight  to  the  monks  that  dwelt  in  Lanka  and 
Arimaddana.  From  all  these  one  may  be  disposed  to  hold 
that  the  account  of  the  introduction  of  Theravada  Euddhism 
to  Pagan  including  the  story  of  Shin  Arahan  and  the 
subsequent  history  of  the  Buddhist  church  in  Burma  as 
narrated  in  the  KalyanI  inscriptions  are  but  pious  fictions 
concocted  not  earler  than  the  fifteenth  century  by  the  zealous 
Buddhist  king  Dhammaceti. 
But  such  an  assumption  would  indeed  be  the  height  of 
scholarly  scepticism .  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  Dhammaceti 
created  a   fiction  out  of  nothing,  and  that  the  story  of  the 
introduction  of  the  faith  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the 
Samgha  with  its  different  monkish  orders  were  just  figments 
of  his  imagination.  Burmese  tradition  ascribes  the  story  of 
Shin  Arahan  and  the  sack  of  Thaton  to  1057-58  A.D., 
and  it  is  not  a   little  curious  that  not  even  one  of  the  long 
series  of  Pagan  inscriptions  can  be  dated  earlier  than  the 
third  quarter  of  the  eleventh  century  from  which  time, 
roughly  speaking,  the  art  and  momumental  activity  centring 
round  Buddhism  also  seems  to  have  taken  its  start.  Indeed 
Burmese  culture  as  distinguished  from  Pyu  and  Talaing  cul- 
tures dates  from  this  period  and  it  is  significant  that  its  earliest 
centre  was  Pagan.  There  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that 
this  simultaneous  bursting  forth  of  vigorous  Buddhist  religious 
and  all  round  cultural  activity  in  the  Pagan  kingdom  from 
about  the  third  quarter  of  the  eleventh  century  was  due  to 
Pagan’s  coming  into  contact  with  the  Pyu  and  Talaing  cul-

--- PAGE 175 ---
156 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
ture  and  civilisation  of  Central  Burma  and  Suvannabhumi. 
Or,  otherwise  the  great  historical  upheaval  remains  entirely 
unexplained,  at  least  so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  goes. 
Racially,  the  Talaings  were  different  from  the  Burmese ; 
the  rude  Burmese  barbarians  who  considered  the  Talaings 
as  their  sworn  and  eternal  enemies  through  centuries  had 
wrested  political  power  from  the  latter,  and  yet  whatever  culture 
and  civilisation  they  came  to  acquire  including  Buddhism 
itself,  were  the  gifts  directly  of  the  Talaings  themselves. 
As  not  unoften  happens  in  history,  the  Burmese  have  always 
been  very  careful  not  to  admit  the  debt  they  owed  to  their 
enemies ;   indeed,  even  the  nineteenth  century  chronicler 
PannasamI  was  not  free  from  anti-Talaing  feelings.  There 
is  more  than  one  evidence  in  the  history  of  Buddhism  in 
Burma  of  wilful  suppression  of  facts  in  respect  of  religious 
activities  amongst  the  Talaings  and  of  Talaing  contribution 
to  the  history  of  the  religion  in  the  peninsula.  It  is, 
therefore,  not  at  all  unlikely  that  the  Burmese  and  their  early 
champions,  the  Pagan  kings,  deliberately  ignored  or 
suppressed  whatever  the  Talaings  had  contributed  towards 
the  introduction  and  propagation  of  the  faith  in  Pagan  and 
upper  Burma,  including  the  activities  of  Shin  Arahan;  the 
Talaing  monk  who  happened  to  be  the  harbinger  of  a   new 
way  and  ideal  of  life  and  cuture  to  the  uncultured  Butmans 
of  the  north.116  Dhammaceti,  a   Mon  sovereign  himself,  had 
.  116  It  cannot  be  said  with  absolute  certainty  that  Shin  Arahan  is  not  at  all 
mentioned  in  the  Pagan  inscriptions.  Mon  Inscription  No.  IX  (Ep.  Birm.  Ill,  Part  I) 
mentions  one  Mahathera  Arahan  on  several  occasions  along  with  one  hundred  and 
eight  ‘lords  of  the  Church’  in  connection  with  the  ceremonial  for  the  consecration 
of  the  royal  palace  of  Kyanzittha.  It  is  most  likely  that  this  Mahathera  Arahan  is 
no  other  than  Shin  Arahan,  If  non-mention  in  the  inscriptions  of  Pagan  can  be 
pressed  forward  as  a   valid  argument,  then  it  would  stand  to  reason  to  argue  chat 
the  Ananda  was  not  built  under  the  patronage  of  king  Kyanzittha  since  the  fact  is 
not  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions  of  Pagan,  nor  can  it  be  said  that  the  two  kneeling 
figures  before  the  standing  Buddha  in  the  main  sanctum  of  the  Inanda  represent 
the  crowned  king  Kyanzittha  and  the  shaven-headed  Buddhist  monk  Shin 
Arahan.  Yet  both  tradition  and  all  available  evidence  of  a   later  date  would  have 
us  believe  otherwise.

--- PAGE 176 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN:  A   POSTSCRIPT 
157 
the  centre  of  his  kingdom  in  the  heart  of  the  Talaing  country 
amongst  the  Talaings  themselves,  and  it  was  natural  for 
him  that  in  an  account  of  the  history  of  the  religion  in  the 
peninsula  he  would  refer,  however  briefly,  to  the  great  work 
of  Shin  Arahan  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  faith  not 
only  in  the  Marammamandala  but  also  in  Suvannabhumi, 
i.e.,  the  Talaing  country. 
Moreover,  not  one  of  the  inscriptions  of  Pagan  is  directly 
concerned  with  giving  us  any  account  of  how  Buddhism 
came  to  Pagan  or  how  it  fared  and  flourished  during  the 
two  centuries  and  a   half  of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty’s  rule. 
The  large  majority  of  the  inscriptions  concerns  themselves 
with  recording  of  religious  benefactions  and  foundations 
and  other  activities  of  the  proud  and  conscious  royalty  and 
the  nobility.  Personal  names  of  monks  or  references  to 
monkish  orders  are  rare  in  them,  indeed  there  was  not  much 
scope  for  such  mention.  If,  therefore,  there  is  hardly  any 
reference  in  the  inscriptions  of  Pagan  to  the  names  of  monks 
known  from  the  Kalyani  inscriptions,  there  does  not  certainly 
lie  in  a   negative  evidence  like  this  an  argument  for  dismissal 
of  the  Kalyani  tradition  as  mere  fiction.  As  regards 
Tamalin,  it  may  be  argued  that  the  context  in  which  he  has 
been  mentioned  in  one  of  the  Pagan  inscriptions  hardly 
calls  for  a   reference  to  his  parentage  or  to  his  having  once 
visited  Ceylon.  If  there  is  no  warrant  for  his  identification 
with  Tamalinda  of  the  Kalyani  inrcriptions,  there  is  also 
nothing  to  suggest  that  the  two  were  not  identical.  The 
same  argument  holds  good  in  respect  of  Dhammavilasa. 
Moreover,  I   have  tried  to  point  out  that  Dhammavilasa  thera 
of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions  may  be  the  same  as  the  Dhamma- 
vilasa mahathera  who  is  mentioned  as  the  donor  of  a   number 
of  stone  images  of  the  Buddha  recovered  from  the  ruins  of 
a   stupa  at  Thiyipyitsaya,  five  miles  from  Pagan.  It  is  true, 
nothing  definite  is  known  about  the  foundation  of  the_Capata 
pagoda,  but  the  fact  that  the  name  of  this  monk,  described

--- PAGE 177 ---
158 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  the  Kalyanl  inscriptions  as  one  of  the  “   Second 
Pilgrims  of  Ceylon,”  came  to  be  associated  with  a   stupa  of 
the  typical  Sinhalese  form,  is  significant  and  points  probably 
to  the  fact  that  the  Kalyanl  epigraphs  correctly  recorded 
down  the  tradition  current  in  Pagan  in  the  fifteenth 
century.  As  regards  Anawrahta’s  mission  to  Ceylon  it 
cannot  be  argued  absolutely  that  the  Cullavamsa  should  have 
dealt  with  it  in  some  detail.  From  the  author’s  point  of 
view  and  for  his  purpose  it  was  enough  to  say  that  Vijaya- 
vahu  was  in  most  friendly  terms  with  the  king  of 
Arimaddana,  that  he  wrote  a   letter  with  his  own  hands  to 
the  latter  and  that  he  was  a   great  friend  of  the  Buddhist 
monks  of  Ceylon  and  Pagan.  After  all,  the  story  of 
Anawrahta’s  mission  to  Ceylon  was  not  much  of  an  achieve- 
ment from  his  side  and  one  may  not  expect  that  the  author 
would  dilate  on  the  event. 
All  that  is  sought  to  be  argued  is  that  the  Kalyanl  inscrip- 
tions furnish  for  the  first  time  a   rational  and  convincing 
explanation  of  the  introduction  of  the  faith  into  Pagan  and 
its  subsequent  history ;   incidentally  they  also  seem  to  offer 
a   convincing  explanation  of  the  great  religious  and  cultural 
upheaval  Pagan  witnessed  from  about  the  third  quarter  of 
the  eleventh  to  about  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century. 
The  absence  of  any  such  explanation  in  the  contemporary 
inscriptions  of  Pagan  may  have  been  due  to  the  bitter  racial 
and  political  hatred  of  the  Burmese  towards  the  Talaings. 
All  later  Burmese  records,  chiefly  the  chronicles,  followed 
the  Kalyanl  tradition  and  on  certain  points  of  detail  even 
extended  and  amplified  it,  on  what  authority  it  is  difficult 
to  say.  In  the  foregoing  pages  the  tradition  has  been  related 
as  a   whole,  not  because  every  detail  of  it  is  accepted  as 
historical  but  because  it  reflects  the  attitude  with  which  the 
Burmans  themselves  viewed  the  great  religious  upheaval 
that  brought  culture  and  civilisation  to  their  doors.

--- PAGE 178 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :   A   POSTSCRIPT  1   59 
Few  records  in  the  ancient  East  offer  such  valuable,  and 
complete  picture  of  any  religion  as  do  the  long  series  of 
Pagan  inscriptions  in  respect  of  Buddhism.  I   have  already 
referred  to  the  eclectism  of  the  religious  life  of  not  only 
Prome,  the  centre  of  Pyu  culture  and  civilisation  and  other 
centres  of  Lower  Burma,  but  of  the  capital  city  of  the 
Anawrahta  dynasty  as  well.  Besides  tribal  and  primitive 
faiths  and  practices  under  disguise  reference  is  made  in  these 
records  to  the  notorious  Ari  monks  and  the  “jungle  monas- 
teries” which  they  seem  to  have  inhabited.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  whether  the  Buddhist  sxma  built  on  Mt.  Turaii,  eight 
miles  east  of  Pagan,  by  Caw  Rahan,  the  only  king  before 
Anawrahta  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions,  refers  to  a   found- 
ation belonging  to  the  religion  presumably  of  the  Ari  monks  or 
to  Mahayanist  Tantrik  Buddhism  that  must  have  penetrated 
Pagan  and  its  adjoining  regions  by  about  the  ninth, 
tenth  and  eleventh  centuries.  There  is  no  doubt  that  inspite 
of  repeated  mention  of  Brahmanas  mainly  of  Visnuite  persua- 
sion and  of  Brahmana  astrologers,  of  lands  and  mahadan 
fields  being  offered  to  them  as  gifts,  of  their  great  influence 
at  the  court,  of  even  a   Brahmana  village  and  of  presumably 
a   Brahmana  chief  minister  (minister  of  war  ?)  named' 
Caturangavijay  “well-versed  in  the  Three  Pitakas  and. 
in  Sanskrit,  Vyakarana  and  Astrology,”  the  number  of 
Brahmanas  was  not  considerable  and  Brahmanism  as  such 
must  have  been  confined  to  only  the  Indian  section  of 
the  population. 
The  Pagan  inscriptions  are  mostly  dedicatory  records. 
All  kinds  of  dedications  to  pious  foundations  and  religious 
establishments  were  made  with  various  objects  and  motives  ; 
but  all  bears  the  stamp  of  a   deep  religious  fervour  and  enthu- 1 
siasm  that  is  unmistakably  Buddhist.  The  spirit  and  language 
of  the  inscriptions  are  surprisingly  simple,  direct,  grace- 
ful and  dignified.  In  most  cases  the  dedications  were  made 
by  those  who  were  “of  boundless  faith,  desirous  of  escaping

--- PAGE 179 ---
160  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  misery  of  the  round  of  rebirths  and  of  attaining  nirvana” ; 
in  certain  cases  such  dedications  were  just  made  as  thank-  , 
offerings  or  out  of  gratitude ;   still  in  certain  other  cases  in 
commemoration  of  a   beloved  or  of  a   happy  and  memorable 
event.  Dedicated  objects  included  lands  and  houses,  gardens, 
wells,  tanks,  cattle  like  goats,  buffaloes,  horses,  and  elephants, 
rice  and  paddy,  boats,  gold,  silver,  ruby,  iron,  lead, 
copper,  robes,  cloth  and  garment,  libraries  with  manus- 
cripts, fans  and  umbrellas,  betel  and  betel-nuts,  betel-boxes, 
oil  lights,  flowers,  pots  and  utensils  including  bowls,  spitoons, 
bells,  trays,  basins,  lamp-stands,  chains,  etc.,  and  the  most 
important  of  all,  slaves.  All  the  pious  foundations,  remains 
of  which  we  see  even  to  this  day  in  Pagan  and  hundreds  of 
which  were  brought  to  being  by  anybody  who  could  afford 
to  do  so,  had  to  be  maintained  by  thousands  of  slaves 
that  were  dedicated  along  with  lands,  fields  and  other 
necessities  of  an  active  monastic  life.  Literally,  hundreds 
of  names  of  these  slaves — quite  as  many  women  as  men 
amongst  them — are  mentioned  in  the  inscriptions.  Prof. 
Pe  Maung  Tin  has  attempted  an  admirable  picture  of  the 
donor  and  the  slave  from  this  long  series  of  inscriptions  : 
“It  is  true  that  the  picture  of  the  donor  may  be  one-sided, 
since  we  catch  him  in  a   religious  mood.  But  since  the 
religious  mood  is  so  pervading,  we  catch  him  in  other 
moods  also,  as  when  he  appears  in  a   law  suit  over  the  owner- 
ship of  some  dedicated  slaves.  The  picture  we  get  of  the 
slave,  though  faint,  is  fairly  representative,  since  we  read  of 
dedicated  slaves,  jvho  are  painters,  wood-carvers,  turners, 
black-smiths,  gold-  and  silver-smiths,  masons,  washermen, 
gardeners,  cow-herds,  elephant-herds,  dancers,  singers,  musi- 
cians, scribes,  weavers,  cooks,  etc.  And  we  shall  see  that 
women  played  a   most  important  part  in  the  life  of  the  people, 
both  of  donors  and  of  slaves  alike.”  117  Not  infrequently,  a 
117  ]BRS.}  1935,  149  ff.  Pe  Maung  Tin,  “   Women  in  the  Inscriptions  of  Pagan/*

--- PAGE 180 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN:  A   POSTSCRIPT 
161 
whole  family  including  babes  was  offered  as  slaves ;   a   few 
slaves  were  even  literates.  Just  as  lands  were  dedicated  ear- 
marked for  the  Three  Pitakas,  the  Three  Gems,  or  one  Gem 
in  particular,  so  the  same  was  done  for  slaves  as 
well.  Their  usual  work  consisted  in  sweeping  and  cleaning 
the  shrine-yard  and  the  temple  and  monastery,  lighting 
lamps,  preparing  food  for,  and  doing  other  services  of,  the 
monks.  At  least  one  inscription  mentions  women  slaves  as 
dealers  in  rice,  curries,-  meat,  betel-nut  and  statues.  In 
another  there  is  specific  mention  of  the  duties  of  the  dedicated 
slaves  :  “all  these  slaves  are  offered  in  order  that  they  may 
wash  the  feet  and  hands  of  the  ariya  monks  and  draw 
water  for  them  to  bathe  and  drink,  that  they  may  cook  the 
rice  alms,  sweep  the  area  and  remove  the  rubbish.”  Some- 
times donors  offer  themselves  with  their  wives  and  children 
also  as  slaves.  There  is  at  least  one  instance  of  a   woman 
figuring  as  a   nun,  religious  teacher,  reciting  the  paritta  prayer 
along  with  others  in  religious  ceremonies ;   some  of  the 
women  figuring  in  the  inscriptions  were  women  of  letters 
holding  responsible  positions  in  society.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  women  played  a   very  important  part  in  the  reli- 
gious life  of  Pagan  ;   indeed  their  prayers  recorded  in  the 
inscriptions  of  Pagan  have  a   flavour  of  their  own, 
charmingly  simple  and  humane  and  revealing  the  extent  to 
which  they  were  touched  and  inspired  by  the  teachings  of 
their  Lord  the  Buddha.118 
A   few  extracts  taken  at  random  from  the  inscriptions 
would  reveal  much  more  of  how  Buddhist  sentiment  and 
ideology  pervaded  the  contemporary  life  of  Pagan  than  it 
would  be  possible  to  convey  through  a   modern  historian’s 
118  iror  a   detailed  treatment  of  the  subject,  see  Pe  Maung  Tin  in  JBRS.,  1939, 
PP.  149-159,  and  JBRS.,  1936,  pp.  52-70;  Luce,  JBRS.,  1936,  PP.  131-138.  The 
translations  of  Burmese  extracts  that  follow  are  all  from  either  Pe  Maung  Tin 
or  Luce. 
21-1445B

--- PAGE 181 ---
162 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
commentary  on  them.  In  one  of  the  inscriptions110  a   queen 
says  : 
“I  wish  to  abandon  a   body  oppressed  by  countless  miseries, — the  misery  of 
birth,  the  misery  of  old  age,  the  misery  of  death,  the  misery  of  living  with  those 
we  do  not  love,  the  misery  of  separation  from  those  ,we  love,  the  misery  of  not 
getting  what  we  want.  So  f   have  resigned  my  dear  and  precious  gold,  silver  and 
other  treasures,  and  built  a   monastery.  And  I   have  offered  all  my  fields,  gardens 
and  slaves,  excepting  none,  for  the  happiness  of  monks,  pupils  of  the  Lords  who 
dwell  therein,  pure  in  piety,  and  “ever  seeking  the  three  graces  of  peace,  holiness, 
and  wisdom.  May  the  merit  of  our  deed  go  first  to  the  king,  ruler  of  us  all  and 
lord  of  land  and  water.  By  virtue  of  this  act  may  he  live  long  seeking  the  increase 
and  happiness  of  all  who  live  in  the  realm  and  upholding  this  foundation.  May 
the  queens  also,  and  all  the  ladies-in-waiting  share  it.  May  they  look  at  one 
another  with  eyes  of  love,  without  one  speck  of  anger  or  doing.  May  those  who^ 
desire  worldly  prosperity  get  it.  May  those  who  prefer  to  do  good  deeds,  do  them. 
For  myself  I   
pray  that  I   may  never  be  covetous,  insatiate,  wrathful,  bullying, 
ignorant,  dull,  disagreeable,  mean,  unfaithful,  frivolous  nor  ungrateful.  But  1 
would  cross  samsara  full  of  these  good  graces  -   modest  in  my  wants,  easily  satisfied, 
mild  of  temper,  pitiful,  wise,  conscious  of  causes,  generous,  large-hearted,  faithful, 
earnest,  unforgetful  and  considerate,  and  may  1   win  deliverance  in  the  very 
presence  of  Lord  Mittarya  (Maitreya) 
In  another,120  ‘The  tragic  mother  of  RacasO,  powerful 
Lady  Acaw  laments  : 
“   My  mother  and  father,  my  grandparents  and  great  grandparents  have  all 
gone,  abandoning  their  inherited  property.  And  now  my  beloved  son,  my  lovely  one 
too  has  gone  abandoning  his  inherited  property  and  even  his  own  mother.  Now  I 
too  know  that  1   likewise  cannot  take  away  with  me  this  inherited  property  which 
they  have  left  because  they  could  not  take  it.  And  J   will  even  dedicate  it  so  that 
it  may  Kelp  my  mother  and  my  father  and  my  son  and  all  my  relatives  to  attain 
NirvSna.  The  merit  of  this  my  dedication,  may  my  grandfather  king  KlacwS,  my 
grandmother,  my  lord  the  king  my  husband,  His  Majesty  my  lord  the  .king  my  son, 
my  royal  mother,  my  father,  my  two  beloved  sons  by  the  king,  my  uncle,  my  aunt, 
my  elder  sister,  my  three  brothers,  my  two  younger  sisters,  all  my  slaves  and 
servants,  all  the  Ministers  in  the  royal  presence,  and  all  the  concubines  and  maids  of 
honour  get  it.  As  far  as  heaven  above,  as  far  as  hell  below,  may  all  the  endless 
universes  in  all  the  four  directions  get  it.  1   too,  for  as  much  as  I   have  done  this  work 
of  merit,  and  now  my  mother,  father  and  all  my  family  are  dead,  and  I   alone  am 
left,  I   
pray  that  it  may  last  throughout  5000  years  of  Religion— when  1   die  and  pass 
from  hence,  may  I   become  a   heavenly  spirit  worshipping  night  and  day  insepa- 
rately  the  Lord's  Tooth  Relic.  Meantime,  before  I   reach  the  boon  I   long  for,  I   would 
fulfil  the  Ten  Perfections  which  all  the  Bodhisattvas  must  fulfil.” 
119  A.  S.  Burma,.  List  of  Inscriptions  found  in  Burma,  No.  311. 
120  Ibid.,  no.  384,

--- PAGE 182 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :  A   POSTSCRIPT 
i 
  
63 
In  another1"1  a   married  but  childless  lady  says  :   ‘I  have 
no  son,  and  there  is  none  fit  to  inherit  my  property.  There- 
fore let  the  Exalted  Buddha  look  after  it  in  my  stead.’  Still 
in  another1"3  the  foster  mother  of  king  Klacwa  in  dedicating 
her  own  house  for  the  purpose  of  a   monastery  says  : 
'I  knew  not  my  mother.  My  step-mother  nourished  me  so  that  1   grew  up. 
My  step-mother  is  my  mother,..’  so  saying  the  King  built  me  a   house  and  also  gave 
me  a   family  of  slaves  and  fields.  I   lived  in  the  house.  I   employed  the  slaves. 
I   ate  the  fields.  It  would  be  belter  if  the  pious  and  learned  monks 
were  to  dwell  in  the  house  than  I.  Thus  I   chanced  to  think  and  I   made  a   cave. 
When  it  was  finished,  I   informed  the  Future  Lord  saying  ;  ‘My  noble  Lord  I   Very 
pleasant  was  the  house  that  was  built  for  tby  servant.  Better  that  the  clergy  should 
dwell  in  it  than  thy  servant.  So  I   have  made  a   cave.  The  house  is  now  a   monas- 
tery. And  thy  servant  has  dedicated  the  family  of  slaves  and  fields  which  Your 
Majesty  gave  me.’  When  I   said  thus,  the  King  said,  ‘Let  my  step-mother  instal 
such  of  the  clergy  as  she  thinks  fit. 
Punishments  for  offences  of  various  nature  in  the  royal 
courts  of  Pagan  were,  not  unoften  as  everywhere  in  the 
middle  ages,  very  cruel  and  inhuman;  the  kings  set  up  codes 
of  punishments  that  must  be  considered  contrary  and 
repugnant  to  the  very  spirit  of  Buddhism.  It  is  not,  therefore, 
striking  that  there  should  be  at  least  one  or  two  good*  Buddhist 
kings  who  would  try  to  mitigate,  to  an  extent,  the  treatment 
meted  out  to  offenders.  In  a   royal  edict  king  Kyawsa  is 
seen  complaining  that  the  kings  of  old  put  thieves  to  death 
‘by  impaling  them  and  in  various  ways’.  It  seems  that  he 
aimed  at  the  abolition  of  capital  punishment.  His  remarks 
in  this  connection  are  worth  quoting  : 
“   People  in  this  world  should  respect  these  words  of  mine,  believe  them  and 
obey  -   them  strictly,  inasmuch  as  these  words  of  mine  are  not  invented  with 
ingenuity,  but  are  uttered  in  reliance  on  the  omniscient  word  of  the  Exalted  Buddha, 
Kings  of  old  put  thieves  to  death  by  impaling  them  and  in  various  ways.  Not 
desiring  the  destruction  of  such  creatures  but  thinking  of  all  creatures  as  myself,  1 
have  spoken  these  words  of  mercy.  Therefore  they  should  be  respected  and 
obeyed.,..” 
131  Ibid,}  no.  191.  t 
13*  Ibid 
no.  289,

--- PAGE 183 ---
164 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Works  of  merit  were  brought  into  existence  from  various 
motives,  and  if  generally  the  patrons  were  all  humility 
and  devotedness  in  their  attitude  there  are  instances  of 
those  who  were  vain  and  much  too  self-conscious  and  were 
actuated  by  motives  other  than  of  love  and  devotion.  Here 
is  one  such  example  : 
“On  Thursday,  moon-death,  the  14th  waning  of  Nadaw  604  Sakkrac,  my  lord 
and  husband  Gangasu  passed  away,  I,  lord  Gangasu’ s  wife,  am  a   lady  of  high 
lineage,  beyond  reproach  for  seven  generations,  both  on  my  mother’s  and  my 
father’s  side.  I   am  the  daughter  of  lord  ftonramkri.  When  lord  Gangasu  died, 
my  beloved  husband,  my  very  life,  the  apple  of  mine  eye,  I   suddenly  felt  the  law 
of  impermanence,  and  1   was  frightened,  and  built  sites  for  the  Three  Gems,  on 
Sunday,  the  third  waxing  of  Pyatho.*'  123 
Sometimes  the  dedications  conclude  with  curses  to  those 
who  dare  violate  them,  and  not  infrequently  the  Avici  and 
other  seven  major  hells  and  the  traditional  six  heavens  as 
in  Buddhism  are  enumerated.  Here  are  a   few  more  extracts 
from  dedications ;   they  will  incidentally  give  some  idea  of  the 
character  of  the  religion  and  of  the  transformation  Buddhism 
brought  about  in  centemporary  Burmese  way  and  ideal  of 
life  and  society : 
“   I,  Natonmya  the  king,  have  built  a   splendid  temple,  a   library  and  a   monastery, 
and  offered  a   troupe  of  dancers,  gold  and  silver  popcorn,  oil-lamps  and  rice-alms, 
in  order  to  cause  my  lords  the  monks  to  apply  their  minds  to  amity  and  goodwill 
(mittabhavana)/’ 124 
Another  dedication,  after  the  enumeration  of  the  various 
offerings  made  to  a   cave,  proceeds  to  explain  to  the  dedicated 
slaves  the  wherefor  of  their  dedication  : 
“   It  is  not  because  I   do  not  want  to  employ  you  and  your  families  that  I   cut 
you  off.  It  is  because  I   wish  the  pagoda  to  be  attended  tothat  I   
give  you  and  your 
families.... It  is  because  I   wish  to  provide  for  the  support  of  the  Buddha  and  the 
Law  that  I   hand  over  you  all.”  125 
123  /hid.,  no.  259. 
IN  Ibid.,  no.  273. 
1*5  Ibid.,  no.  184.

--- PAGE 184 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :   A   POSTSCRIPT 
165 
f<  I,  Gloria,  have  built  a   monastery,  and  on  the  full  moon  of  Tabaung  560 
Sakkarac.,  I   dedicated  3  monasteries,  3  tanks  altogether,  monastic  robes,  6 
calabastes,  1   lump  of  lime,  a   wishing  tree,  a   cow.  Wheresoever  j 
  
1   wonder  in 
Samsara ,  I   want  misery,  I   don’t  want  hell.  I   want  the  grace  of  perfection.  And  at 
the  end  of  Samsara ,  1   want  to  reach  Nirvana.  May  all  the  coolies  share  my  merit. 
I   have  given  oil-lamps,  and  1   have  given  \athina  robes;  40  sets  of  ^athma 
requisites,  20  kettles  of  food,  4  cups,  5  almsbowls,  1   bell,  etc.  1   do  not  want  to 
know  the  slightest  little  bit  !   ”   *26 
"...  Ere  1   reach  Buddhahood  I   want  the  happiness  excited  by  drum  and 
trumpet,  and  the  live  instruments  of  music*  Therefore  I   dedicate  the  following 
players  on  big  drums  and  small. ...Whensoever  I   am  born,  I   do  not  want  the  misery 
of  hunger  and  thirst.  Therefore  I   offer  to  Lord  Buddha  and  the  monks  living 
in  this  monastery  the  following  paddy-fields... I   want  to  rebel  against  the  world  of 
slavery  to  appetite.  Therefore  I   offer  also  a   hundred  slaves  to  serve  the  needs  of 
the  Lord  Buddha  and  the  monks.’’  127 
But  frivolous  and  vainglorious  Queen  Caw’s  dedication 
breathes  a   different  spirit  altogether  : — 
“   Meantime,  before  I   reach  Nirvana  by  virtue  of  this  great  work  of  merit  1   have 
done,  may  I   prosper  as  a   man,  and  be  more  royally  happy  than  all  other  men. 
Or  as  a   spirit,  may  I   be  full  of  colour,  dazzling  brightness  and  victorious  beauty, 
more  than  any  other  spirit.  More  especially  I   would  have  a   long  life,  freedom 
from  disease,  a   lovely  complexion,  a   pleasant  voice,  and  a   beautiful  figure.  I 
would  be  the  loved  and  honoured  darling  of  every  man  and  spirit.  Gold,  silver, 
rubies,  corals,  pearls  and  other  lifeless  treasure,  elephants,  horses  and  other 
living  treasure— may  I   have  lots  of  them.  By  virtue  of  my  power  and  glory  1 
would  be  triumphant  with  pomp  and  retinue,  with  fame  and  splendour.  Wherever 
1   am  horn,  may  I   be  fulfilled  with  noble  graces,  charity,  faith,  piety,  wisdom,  etc,, 
and  not  know  one  speck  of  misery;  and  after  I   have  tasted  and  enjoyed  the 
happiness  of  men  and  the  happiness  of  spirits,  when  the  noble  law  of  deliverance 
called  the  fruit  of  Sanctity  blossoms,  may  I   at  last  attain  the  peaceful  bliss  of 
Nirvana.*’ 128 
Temples,  shrines  and  monasteries  were  evidently  built 
on  large  scale  and  at  heavy  costs,  and  their  dedication 
and  consecretion  were  usually  an  elaborate  affair.  An  idea 
of  the  cost  involved,  the  complexity  of'  the  whole  affair 
including  planning  and  construction  of  the  shrine  and 
the  monasteries  and  the  accessories  of  worship  may  be 
gathered  from  a   number  of  inscriptions,  notably  from  nos. 
126  Ye-ngwe  Insc.  Mahlaing,  JBRS 
1936,  p.  135, 
12*  A.  S.  Burma,  List  of  Insc.  no.  123. 
W8  Ibid.,  iro.  334.

--- PAGE 185 ---
1 66 
TMERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
105,  190,  235,  242  and  276  of  the  List  of  Inscriptions  found 
in  Burma  (A.  S.  of  Burma).  Incidentally,  Inscription  no. 
242  refers  to  the  representation  of  the  550  Jatakas  in  a 
certain  temple  built  in  598  Sakkarac,  and  several  inscriptions 
refer  to  the  foundation  of  libraries  with  sets  of  the  Three 
Pitakas.  The  full  anthropomorphic  worship  of  the  Buddha 
image  is  elaborated  in  several  inscriptions,  notably  in  no.  254. 
The  offerings  to  monks  and  religious  foundations  of 
various  material  objects  including  lands  and  fields  and 
slaves  recorded  in  the  inscriptions  show  clearly  that  the 
members  of  the  Samgha  were  well-cared  for  and  were  kept 
elaborately  supplied  with  all  their  material  needs  and  require- 
ments. Undisturbed  they  were  left  to  their  own  religious 
and  scholarly  pursuits.  Not  only  they  studied  the  sacred 
texts  of  Buddhism  in  the  libraries  provided  for  them  and 
scrupulously  performed  their  religious  observances,  but  there 
are  inscriptions  that  reveal  their  intimate  knowledge  of 
the  ethical  and  metaphysical  concepts  of  the  religion. 
Mention  is  made  in  the  records  of  the  Paticcasamuppada 
(no.  105),  the  Patisambhida  (no.  90),  the  three  existences  of 
\ama,  rupa  and  arupa,  the  threefold  division  of  a   Buddha- 
khetta,  namely  jati  J^hetta,  visaya  k_hetta  and  ana  ghetto 
(no.  105),  and  the  five  qualities  of  Saccam,  dhammo,  dhiti , 
cago  and  bodhicittam  (no.  191),  etc.  The  Jatakas  collective- 
ly and,  several  important  and  popular  Jatakas,  separately 
are  frequently  ^mentioned,  but  most  frequent  is  the  mention 
of  the  Three  Pitakas  which  were  housed  in  libraries  built 
for  the  purpose. 
Some  rough  idea  of  the  monkish  organisation  of  contem- 
porary Pagan  can  also  be  gleaned  from  the  inscriptions.  The 
clergy  as  a   whole  was  known  as  the  Samgha,  ariyasamgha 
or  rahansamgha ;   and  the  monks  were  individually  referred 
to  as  skhiti  ariya  or  simply  ariya.  The  chief  monk  of  a 
monastery  was  called  thera  or  mahadhi  in  Burmese,  and 
special  offerings  in  certain  cases  were  made  for  him.  Pe

--- PAGE 186 ---
INSCRIPTIONS  OF  PAGAN  :   A   POSTSCRIPT  1 67 
Maung  Tin  has  shown  that  the  Burmese  word  Sankri  was 
often  used  to  designate  the  elder  thera  of  a   company  of 
monks  or  lay  men  or  lay  women.  The  king  had  his  own 
acariya  who  was  known  as  Mahadhi  Rajaguru  or  simply 
Rajagu.ru,  or  Mahadhi  Dhammarajaguru  who  presumably 
used  to  be  the  Primate  or  the  Samgharaja  of  the  realm. 
The  title  of  Rajaguru  was  not  however  always  confined  to 
one  monk  at  a   time.12’  Lands  and  fields  once  made 
over  as  gifts  by  or  on  behalf  of  kings  to  monks  and  monas- 
teries were  held  to  be  inalienable  and  nobody,  not  even 
the  descendants  of  the  chief  monk,  had  any  right  to  sell  or 
dispose  of  it  in  any  other  way.1”0  Even  a   king  had  no  right 
to  seize  lands  once  dedicated  to  monks  and  religious  founda- 
tions by  his  forefathers.1”1  Once  a   certain  individual  named 
Zeyyaput  offered  in  dedication  to  a   forest  monastery,  in  the 
name  of  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  the  Samgha,  750  fields 
that  he  h'ad  once  received  as  mahadan  from  the  king.  When 
the  king’s  son  prince  Klacwa  ascended  the  throne  in  597 
Sakkarac  he  seized  all  the  mahadan  fields  in  the  upper 
country  and  the  lower  country,  and  those  750  fields  were 
amongst  them.  The  head  of  the  clergy  concerned  with  the 
gift  represented  the  case  personally  to  the  king  who  forthwith 
caused  an  enquiry  to  be  made  by  a   committee.  The  enquiry 
revealed  that  the  king’s  father  had  indeed  given  these  fields 
to  Zeyyaput  and  that  the  latter  had  also  offered  it  to  the 
pagoda.  The  king  had  therefore  to  admit  the  claim  of  the 
clergy  and  the  fields  were  restored  to  the  forest  monastery.183 
Of  venerable  Buddhist  monks  participating  in  grave 
matters  of  contemporary  political  life,  the  case  of  Panthagu 
the  Primate  has  already  been  cited.  In  recent  years  Pe 
Maung  Tin  has  drawn  our  attention  to ,  another  example, 
JBRS.,  1936,  pp.  59-62. 
13G  A.  S.  Burma,  List  of  Insc.  no,  287. 
131  Ihid.,  no.  230. 
132  JBRS.,  1936,  p.  63,

--- PAGE 187 ---
168  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
a   more  detailed  and  certainly  a   more  interesting  one, 
presented  in  a   brilliant  and  colourful  narrative,  in  one  of 
the  Burmese  inscriptions  of  Pagan.183  It  appears  that  at 
the  approach  of  the  Taruks,  i.e.,  the  Mongol  invaders, 
Tarukpyemin  destined  to  be  the  last  king  of  Pagan,  took 
to  flight  to  a   place  near  Prome  whence  he  was  trying  to 
find  out  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  His  generals  dared 
not  contact  them ;   in  the  midst  of  the  prevailing  panic 
and  confusion  there  was  at  least  a   Buddhist  elder,  thera 
Disapramuk13'1  who  was  not  only  unnerved  but  had  the  courage 
and  self-confidence  to  take  upon  himself,  on  request  from 
the  king,  the  task  of  contacting  the  enemy  and  negotiating 
terms  with  them.  This  he  did  at  considerable  risk  to 
himself  and  with  great  tact  and  intelligence.  The  story 
related  by  Disapramuk  himself  is  characteristic,  '  and  is 
remarkable  for  its  simplicity  and  directness  as  well  as  for 
its  local  colour  and  atmosphere. 
A.  S  Burma,  List  of  Insc.  No,  376;  JBRS.,  1936,  pp.  63-64, 
134  Disapramuk  is  presumably  Disapamokkha  of  the  Sasanavamsa ,  and  if  this 
be  so,  then'  here  is  one  more  instance  of  the  general  authenticity  of  Pannasaml’s 
narrative.  For  Disapamokkha,  see  p.  130  of  this  book,

--- PAGE 188 ---
CHAPTER  THREE 
THE  GREAT  REFORMATION  AND  ITS  PREAMBLE 
Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  Centuries 
I 
the  fourteenth  century 
Narathihapate  had  reigned  for  about  a   quarter  of  a   century 
when  the  Pagan  throne  came  to  be  threatened  by  the  Mongol 
marauders  of  the  north.  Ten  years  later,  in  1287,  the  city  of 
Pagan  actually  fell  at  the  blow  of  the  army  of  Kublai  Khan. 
Almost  at  the  same  time  the  Talaing  provinces  revolted 
under  the  leadership  of  Tarabya,  the  Governor  at  Pegu,  and 
overthrew  the  Burmese  power.  But  it  was  neither  the 
Mongol  invasion  nor  the  successful  revolt  of  Tarabya  that 
destroyed  the  Pagan  monarchy.  The  Tartars  rather  tried  to 
re-establish  the  old  dynasty  in  its  place  and  to  help  the 
country  to  revert  to  its  normal  conditions.  But  this  was  not 
to  be.  The  Shans,  a   virile  race  of  nomadic  habits  from 
the  north,  were  fast  spreading  south,  east  and  west; 
they  practically  swept  the  whole  of  Burma,  swamping 
Burmans  and  Talaings  alike,  and  hardly  caring  anything 
for  religion  and  culture.  Both  Upper  and  Lower  Burma 
thus  passed  over  to  the  Shans  who  at  first  serving 
as  chiefs  at  Myinsaing,  Mekkaya  and  Pinle  under 
Chinese  authority,  established  their  capital  at  Pinya 
(Pali :  Vijayapura)  and  then  at  Ava  (Pali  :   Ratanapura) 
in  1312.  They  founded  another  centre  at  Pegu  in  Lower 
Burma  in  about  1287  under  the  leadership  of  Wareru 
(1287-96),  a   Shan  pedlar,  who  had  wrested  power  from 
Tarabya,  the  successful  rebel.  All  these  naturally  had  their 
22-H45B

--- PAGE 189 ---
170 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
repercussions  on  the  life  and  activities  of  the  Order  which 
being  intimately  connected  with  the  royal  authority, 
could  not  remain  uninfluenced  by  such  changes  in  power. 
Monastic  scholarship  and  activities  sank  down,  as  a   result,  to 
a   low  ebb,  though  the  daily  round  of  the  life  of  a   bhikkhu 
continued  as  usual  in  many  a   monastery. 
The  Shans  could  not  long  resist  the  appeal  the 
religion  of  the  country  made  to  them ;   indeed,  within  a 
generation  after  their  first  settlement  in  the  country,  one  of 
their  kings  took  initiation  into  Buddhism.  He  was  Thihathu, 
one  of  the  three  Shan  brothers  who  had  come  in  virtual  control 
of  upper  Burma  after  the  Mongol  conquest,  admittedly  under 
the  formal  authority  of  the  Chinese  Court.  Thihathu’s  elder 
brothers  Athinkaya  and  Yazathinkaya  were  also  probably 
Buddhists,  for,  according  to  the  Hmannan,  the  three  brothers 
are  credited  with  having  built  a   monastery  at  Myinsaing,  be- 
sides building  the  Nandawye  pagoda  at  the  same  place.  1  The 
Sasanavamsa  does  not  speak  of  this  monastery,  but  mentions 
that  a   good  many  monks  belonging  to  the  three  sects 
founded  by  Shin  Arahan,  Capata  and  Ananda  settled  at 
Myinsaing,  evidently  at  the  instance  of  the  Shan  brothers, 
but  that  no  works  were  produced  there.  2  Nineteenth  century 
chroniclers  regard  Thihathu  not  only  as  a   Buddhist, 
unlike  some  of  his  successors  who  were  nothing  less  than 
savages,  but  also  as  a   builder  of  pagodas,  and  a   devout 
follower  of  the  religion.  He  had  a   monk  as  his  teacher. 
Even  after  the  tragic  fate  that  befell  Pagan  in  1287,  glory 
still  clung  to  her  for  some  time.  As  late  as  the  year  1343, 
Narathihapate’s  daughter  Mi  saw  U   who  was  queen  to  her 
l  Hmannan ,  1,  368.  This  may  not  be  altogether  improbable,  for  the  three  Shan 
brothers,  sons  of  a   hill  chief  who  hachfledl  in  about  1260  to  Myinsaing  where  there 
was  already  a   Shan  colony,  were  brought  up  and  trained  in  Narathihapate’s  court, 
and  thus  came  presumably  under  the  great  influence  Buddhism  exerted  at  that  time 
ip  Pagan. 
?  Sasana,  p,  82,

--- PAGE 190 ---
1 
THE  GREAT  REFORMATION  AND  ITS  PREAMBLE  171 
brother  Kyawswa  (1287-98)  and  afterwards  to  his  supplanter 
Thihathu  (1312-24)  pined  for  her  early  days  in  Pagan  and 
built  a   monastery  there. 
This  realm  of  Pagan  is  so  named  because  it  is  the  fairest  and  dearest  of  lands. 
It  is  also  called  Arimaddana  because  its  people  are  warriors  who  vanquish  their 
foes,  and  even  its  name  is  terrible.  Its  folk  are  free  from  pain  or  danger,  they  are 
skilled  in  every  craft,  they  are  wealthy,  the  revenues  are  past  telling,  and  the 
land  is  full  of  useful  things.  Verily  it  is  a   land  more  to  be  desired  than  fairy 
land.  It  is  a   glorious  realm  and  its  people  are  famed  for  their  splendour  and 
power,  The  monastery  I   have  built  stands  to  the  east  of  the  capital.”  3 
Scholarly  activities  were  pursued  in  the  monasteries  of 
Pagan  yet  for  sometime,  so  that  we  hear  of  works  written 
by  monks  of  Pagan  roughly  throughout  the  fourteenth 
century.  Saddhammanana,  ascribed'  to  the  early  part  of 
this  century,  4  is  said  to  have  written  the  V ibhaty attha ,  a 
book  on  Pali  cases,  but  his  more  important  works  were  the 
ChandasaratthaOi^asirii 6  (called  also  V uttodayapancifya),  a 
work  on  metres,  and  the  Chapaccayadtparii 11  a   book  on 
prosody.  He  is  also  said  to  have  translated  the  Sanskrit 
Kalapa  Vya\arana  into  Pali;  it  follows,  therefore,  that  this 
learneJ  scholar  besides  knowing  Pali  was  also  well  conversant 
with  Sanskrit.  Not  much  later  than  Saddhammanana  came 
Mangala  who  wrote  a   work  on  grammar  entitled  Gandhatthi,'1 
and  Sirisaddhammavilasa  who  wrote  a   tifyd  on  Kaccayana, 
named  Saddh.ammana.sini. 8  Another  fourteenth  century 
author  who  worked  and  flourished  in  Pagan  was  Saddhamma- 
pala,  referred  to  as  Saddhammaguru  in  the  Sasanavamsa 
(p.  90)  which  states  that  he  worked  at  Pinya.  But  the 
Gandhavamsa,  the  earlier  work,  says  (p.  67)  that  he  worked 
3  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya  and  Ava ,  1899,  p.  134. 
4  Forchammer,  Essay,  p.  36;  Faiisboll,  Cat.  Mand.  MSS ,  p.  50. 
5  Pitakatthamain,  p.  74;  FaushoM,  op.  cit .,  pp.  51,  52;  Forchammer,  Essay, 
p.  86,  List,  p.  xxiii. 
6  Forchammer,  Essay,  p.  36. 
7  Forchammer,  Report ,  p,  2;  List,  p»  xx, 
*  Cf.  Cat.  Mand.  MSS,  p.  48,  where  Saddhammavilasa’s  work  is  referred  to  as 
Kaccayanasaratika  I   Forchammer,  Ibid. 
\

--- PAGE 191 ---
172 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  Pagan,  which  is  supported  by  the  Pita\atthamain  { 
p.  71) 
and  by  Forchammer  as  well  {Essay,  p.  36)  who  says  that  he 
worked  in  a   monastery  of  the  Burmese  Order  near  the 
capital  city.  Saddhammapala  was  the  author  of  Saddavutti 
or  Saddavuttipakasaka,  a   work  on  grammar.  He  was 
also  probably  the  author  of  Niruttisaramanjusa,  a   commentary 
on  the  Nirutti,  ascribed  to  Kaccayana.  (Cf.  Faiisboll,  Cat. 
Mand.  Mss.  p.  49). 
Thihathu,  youngest  of  the  three  Shan  brothers,  finds  a 
place  in  the  Sasanavamsa u  for  his  patronage  of  Buddhism 
and  Buddhist  scholarship.  He  chose  Piny  a   as  his  capital 
which  he  founded  in  1312.  A   new  era  of  comparative 
peace  and  good  government  ensued,  and  the  religion  began 
to  flourish  in  Pinya  where  a   large  number  of  monasteries 
had  been  founded  and  thousands  of  bhikkhus  had  settled 
down.  Literary  activities  were  also  gradually  revived. 
Sirisumahgala  or  Sirimangala,  according  to  the  Pitakattha- 
main,  was  a   learned  scholar  and  divine  of  this  time  who 
engaged  himself  in  preparing  commentaries  on  Buddha- 
ghosa's  Samantapasadikd,  Atthasaliniand Sammohavinodirii ,M> 
But  it  was  during  or  immediately  after  Thihathu’s  reign  that 
the  Samanakuttaka  heresy  which  had  been  suppressed  by  the 
combined  efforts  of  Anawrahta  and  Shin  Arahan  received  a 
new  lease  of  life.11  The  identity  of  the  Samanakuttakas 
with  the  Aris  is  strengthened  among  other  arguments  by  the 
specific  mention  of  the  Aris  (after  their  overthrow  by 
Anawrahta)  about  this  time  (1314)  in  connection  with 
Thihathu’s  son  Sawyun  who  counted  the  Aris  among  his 
armed  retainers. 
Besides  the  revival  of  the  Samanakuttaka  heresy,  an 
ugly  discord  among  the  bhikkhus  also  undermined  the 
9  In  the  Sasanavamsa  he  is  named  Sihasura,  p.  82  ff, 
10  Pitakfltthamain,  p,  40, 
11  Sa$ana,  pp.  82-89,  86-8 7,

--- PAGE 192 ---
THE  GREAT  REFORMATION  AND  ITS  PREAMBLE  173 
prestige  of  the  Order  at  this  time.  The  bone  of  discord 
was  the  due  share  of  the  produce  of  the  monastery  lands 
which  the  monks  used  to  receive  from  the  tillers  of  the  soil. 
For  the  monks  this  was  certainly  an  unseemly  behaviour, 
and  the  Sasanavamsa  account  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
quarrel  was  carried  so  far  as  finally  to  lead  to  the  founding 
of  a   new  sect  whose  members  left  the  viharas  and  retired 
to  the  solitude  of  the  forests. 
Thihathu’s  step-son,  Uzana,  was  also  an  upholder  of  the 
religion.  He  built  seven  great  monasteries  (viharas) along  with 
gifts  of  land  attached  to  them  and  gave  them  unto  the  theras, 
among  whom  there  were  a   few  who  belonged  to  the  sect 
founded  by  Ananda,.12  Uzana’s  nephew  Kyawswa-nge 
(135 1)13  proved  himself  to  be  a   patron  of  monastic  scholarship. 
An  important  officer  of  his  court,  a   Caturangabalamacca,  wrote 
a   commentary  or  Samvannana  on  the  Abhidhanappadipika  of 
Moggallana.14  He  also  wrote  two  other  commentaries,  one 
on  the  Koladdhaja  and  another  on  the  Dandippa\arana  ir' 
Nagita,  a   monk  of  Sagu,  otherwise  known  as  Kantaka- 
khipa,16  wrote  the  Saddasaratthajalini,  a   work  on  Pali 
grammar.  Navavimalabuddhi,  otherwise  known  as  Culla- 
vimalabuddhi,'7  wrote  a   ti\a  on  the  Vuttodaya  of  Samgharak- 
kh’ta  18  (of  Ceylon),  and  another  work  called  Abhidhamma- 
pannarasatthana ,19  being  a   commentary  on  some  of  the 
passages  of  the  Abhidhamma.  Among  other  monk-scholars 
of  this  period  may  be  mentioned  the  names  of  Vepullabuddhi 
13  Sasana,  pp.  83-84.  * 
53  Sasanavamsa  names  him  Klttisihasura,  p.  86, 
-U  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  pp.  46,  51. 
16  Sasana,  p,  88;  Gandha ,  pp.  63,  73. 
Sasana ,  p.  88;  Gandha,  p.  74;  Forchammer,  List,  xx. 
17  According  to  Forchammer,  Report,  p.  2;  List,  p.  xxiii,  and  the  Pitakatiha - 
main t  p,  74,  he  worked  in  Pagan ;   but  see  Gandha,  p.  67. 
18  Sasana,  pp.  34,  75. 
19  Gandha,  pp.  64,  74,

--- PAGE 193 ---
\74 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  Cullavajirabuddhi  who  wrote  on  grammatical,  exegetical 
and  metaphysical  subjects.20 
From  Pinya  the  Shans  moved  their  capital  to  Saggaing, 
and  next  to  Ava  in  1 364  when  Thadominbya  was  the  king 
(referred  to  in  the  SasanaVamsa  as  Sativa-raja).  Thadominbya 
was  primitive  in  his  instincts,  and  had  no  respect  for 
Buddhism.  But  his  successor  Minkyiswasawke  (1368-1401) 
seems  to  have  some  concern  for  the  religion.  He  built 
the  Shwethetlut  pagoda  at  Thayetmyo  in  1373, 21  and  appoin- 
ted an  Arakanese  monk  as  his  primate.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
if  the  Shwethetlut  was  the  same  as  the  Ca-nah-khum  cetiya 
mentioned  in  the  SasanaVamsa  as  having  been  built  by  Ma- 
na-kri-cek,  i.e.,  Minkyiswasawke.  The  name  of  the 
Arakanese  monk  who  was  made  the  head  of  the  Order  is 
given  in  the  SasanaVamsa  as  Khemacara. 
II 
RELIGION  AND  SCHOLARSHIP  IN  THE  TALAING  COUNTRY 
In  the  Talaing  country  Wareru  had  already  established  a 
Shan  principality  in  about  1 287  with  its  centre  first  at  Martaban 
(till  1363)  and  then  at  Pegu  (after  1369).  With  the  rise  of 
w areru  Buddhism  seems  to  have  had  a   new  lease  of  life ; 
the  new  king  soon  became  converted  to  Buddhism  and  began 
to  take  interest  in  the  scholarly  work  of  the  monks.22  Follow- 
ing Dhammavilasa  he  compiled  a   code  of  Law,  the  Wareru 
Dhammathat,  the  earliest  law-book  that  still  survives  in 
Burma.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  this  code  was 
20  For  the  works  of  these  two  scholars  and  the  confusion  regarding  them,  see 
Bode,  op.  cii. ,  pp,  28-29, 
.  21  Tun  Nyein,  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya  and  A Vcl,  pp.  146,  159. 
22  **  With  the  rise  of  Wareru,  king  of  Martaban,  a   new  impulse  had  been 
given  to  native  learning,  and  Buddhism  again  had  attained  Lo  exclusive  predomi- 
nance in  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Martaban/1  Forchammer,  Notes  on  the  Early 
History,  etc.,  ii#,p.  8.

--- PAGE 194 ---
RELIGION  AND  SCHOLARSHIP  IN  THE  TALAING  COUNTRY  175 
any  original  contribution  by  Wareru  to  legal  literature;  it 
was  rather  compiled  from  the  traditional  laws  of  the  Hindus 
brought  to  the  peninsula  by  colonists  and  emigrants  where 
it  survived  in  the  writings  of  the  Talaing  monks,  “   Wareru 
made  his  monks  produce  the  collection  known  by  his  name. 
It  is  Hindu,  but  not  Brahmanical,  and  the  sacredotal  element 
is  ignored,  marriage  no  longer  being  treated  as  a   sacrament ; 
it  forms  the  basis  of  Burmese  law  literature.”  28  .We  have 
seen  in  the  preceding  section  that  towards  the  end  of  the 
thirteenth  or  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  two 
important  Buddhist  sects  were  founded  in  Martaban  by  two 
notable  Talaing  theras  named  Buddhavamsa  and  Mahanaga. 
Both  of  them  had  gone  to  Ceylon  where  they  admitted  them- 
selves into  the  fold  of  the  Mahavihara  tradition  and  became 
believers  in  the  Sinhalese  views  of  orthodoxy. 
A   pilgrimage  to  Ceylon  had  become  almost  a   regular  prac- 
tice among  the  more  important  theras  in  Burma.  Indeed,  both 
Burman  Burma  and  Talaing  Burma  had  come  to  learn  by  this 
time  to  look  to  Ceylon  for  religious  guidance  and  inspiration. 
Medhamkara  was  a   noted  monkish  celebrity  in  the  Talaing 
country  of  this  time  ;   he  had  also  sojourned  for  some  time 
in  Ceylon  undergoing  a   course  of  study  there  and  probably 
also  imbibing  the  same  Mahavihara  tradition.  He  came  to 
live  afterwards  at  Martaban  where  he  was  appointed  religious 
preceptor  of  queen  Bhadda,  mother  of  Binnya  U   (mentioned 
in  the  Sasanavamsa  as  Selibhinda),  the  king  (1353-85)  who 
had  succeeded  Wareru  at  Martaban.  Medhamkara  was  the 
author  of  Lokadlpasara,  ‘  a   collection  of  chapters  on  different 
subjects,  arranged  according  to  a   cosmological  scheme.  24 
The  work  is  well-known  in  Burma  even  to-day.  After 
Medhamkara,  the  Sasanavamsa  (p.  48)  names  three  monk- 
53  Harvey,  History  of  Burma ,  p,  Hi;  Forchammer,  Essay,  p.  37 ;  See  also 
JBRS,  1940,  pp.  351  ff. 
24  Oldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  at  India  Office,  p.  126.  Medhamkara  is  called  Nava- 
Medhaipkara  in  the  Gandhavarns#.

--- PAGE 195 ---
176 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
scholars,  all  residents  of  Hamsavatl  (Pegu),  and  perhaps 
belonging  to  the  same  period.  They  were  Ananda  thera 
who  wrote  the  Madhurasaratthadlpanl,  a   Samvannanam  on 
the  Ahhidhammati\a,  Dhammabuddha  thera  who  composed 
the  Kavisara,  a   treatise  on  Chanda,  and  Saddhammalarikara- 
thera  who  wrote  the  “Patthanasaratthadipanlm  nama  pakara- 
nam.’ Another  important  monk-scholar  who  probably  belongs  to 
the  reign  of  Binnya  U   is  Mahayasa,  a   grammarian  of  repute. 2,7 
He  wrote  the  Kaccayanabheda  and  the  Kaccayansara, 
the  former  dealing  with  the  grammatical  aspect  and  the  latter 
being  a   short  sketch  of  the  great  grammarian  Kaccayana.2'1 
He  also  wrote  a   til^d  on  his  own  work,  the  Kaccayanasara. 
A   book  on  Abhidhamma  topics  entitled  A   
pheggusara 27  was 
written  about  this  time  in  Pegu  (Hamsavatl)  by  a   monk  whose 
>•  name  is  omitted  in  the  SasanaVamsa. 
Binnya  U   sent  a   mission  to  Ceylon  whence  they  brought 
a   relic  which  was  enshrined  by  the  king  in  a   pagoda  built  on 
the  spot  where  he  had  defeated  a   hostile  army  from  Chieng- 
mai.  He  also  repaired  the  Shwedagon  pagoda  of  Rangoon, 
raising  it  to  a   greater  height.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son 
Razadarit  (1385-1423),  referred  to  as  Rajadhiraja  in  the 
SasanaVamsa.  We  do  not  know  what  he  did  for  the  promo- 
tion of  the  religion  other  than  erecting  several  pagodas,  one 
of  which  was  the  famous  Shwemawdaw  of  Pegu  built  as  a 
thank-offering  for  the  repeated  defeats  he  inflicted  on  the 
Burmese  army.  He  held  a   seven  days’  festival  in  course  of 
which  he  fed  a   thousand  monks  and  offered  them  his  weight 
in  gold  ! 
26  For  the  date  of  Mahayasa,  see  Bode,  op.  cit. ,  p.  37. 
Gandha,  p.  74 ;   Sasanadlp,  V.,  1250.  Forchammer  gives  the  name  Rasa, 
an  inhabitant  of  Thaton,  to  the  author  of  these  two  works.  List,  pp.  xx,  xxi; 
Gandhavamsa  says  that  Dhammananda  was  the  author ;   but  the  Pitakatthatnain 
gives  the  name  as  Mahayasa. 
27  Sasana,  p.  48;  C/.  Forchammer.  List ,  p.  xviii.

--- PAGE 196 ---
THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY 
177 
III 
THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY 
The  fifteenth  century  opened  with  king  Minhkaung 
(1401-22)  on  the  throne  at  Ava.  The  SasanaVamsa  knows 
him  as  Adhikaraja  who  appointed  his  acariya  as  Samgharaja; 
but  it  is  somewhat  curious  that  PannasamI  excludes  him  from 
the  theraparampara.2s  It  was  during  the  reign  of  Adhikaraja 
that  Razadarit,  king  of  Ramanna  (Pegu),  threatened  a   siege 
of  his  capital,  but  what  is  interesting  is  that  the  king  invited 
his  counsellors  as  well  a   number  of  bhikkhus  to  parley 
with  his  ministers  as  to  what  could  be  done  to  resist  the 
impending  attack.  It  interests  us  to  read  further  that  one  of 
the  monks  convinced  the  king  and  took  upon  himself  to  meet 
the  invader  in  his®  own  camp.  He  did  so  and  exhorted 
Razadarit  (how,  we  are  not  told)  to  return  to  his  country 
without  attempting  the  siege.  The  story  is  interesting 
in  so  far  as  it  shows  the  extent  of  the  influence  the  bhikkhus 
often  exercised  in  the  royal  court  and  in  political  and  secular 
matters. 
Adhikaraja  or  Minhkaung  was  followed  by  Thihathu 
(1422-26),  Kalekyetaungnye  (1426-27)  &nd  Mohnyintha 
(1427-40).  It  is  probably  the  last  king  who  is  referred  to  in 
the  SasanaVamsa  as  Mrinnana.  It  was  during  his  reign  that 
two  mahatheras  from  Ceylon  came  to  Ava  and  settled  there 
to  advance  the  cause  of  the  religion.29  The  other  theras 
of  his  own  country  belonging  to  the  Arahantagana  of  Pagan 
prevailed  upon  the  king  to  change  the  era  80  that  had  so  long 
been  in  use  in  Burma. 
28  “   Tassa  pana  acariyo  Samghaiaja  lajjipakkam  na  bhanj  ti.  Ten’eva 
theraparamparaya  esa  na  samgahitabbo.*’  Sasana ,  p.  94. 
29  Sasana,  p.  95. 
30  Ibid.  According  to  the  Rajavamsa,  it  was  Saddhammaraja  who  changed 
the  era  because  of  an  evil  ornen.  Dr.  Bode  comments  on  this  change  of  era ; 
23-1445B

--- PAGE 197 ---
178 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
A   next  king,  Narapati  (1443-69),  was  also  a   good  patron 
of  the  religion.  Besides  building  the  Thuparama  (Tupayan 
pagoda)  cetiya,  he  appointed  Mahasamithera  as  his  acariya. 
MahasamI  went  to  Ceylon  where  he  studied  under  the  great 
thera  Sariputta  and  thus  came  to  belong  to  the  Later  Order, 
i.e.,  the  Sihala  Samgha.81 
All  this  time  the  country  had  been  in  a   state  of  constant 
political  turmoil ;   the  chroniclers  have  hardly  anything 
to  record  but  petty  intrigues  and  court-squabbles,  attacks  and 
counter-attacks,  not  always  without  a   dramatic  interest.  But 
the  Samgha  does  not  seem  to  have  suffered  much  from  this 
unsettled  state  of  affairs  which  were  more  or  less  the  concern 
of  the  capital,  the  court,  the  army,  the  royalty  and  the  nobility. 
The  ruling  families,  for  acquiring  merit,  or  as  a   matter  of  , 
age-old  practice,  or  for  drawing  the  support  of  the  Samgha  I 
which  often  proved  to  be  a   great  source  of  strength,  continued 
to  patronise  the  Order  and  gave  it  whatever  help  they  could 
in  the  shape  of  land,  money,  copies  of  sacred  texts,  and  other 
requisites  of  monastic  life.  The  example  of  the  royal  fami-  ) 
lies  was  followed  by  the  nobility  and  the  rich.  We,  therefore, 
find  monastic  learning  and  scholarship  in  a   flourishing  state  I 
even  during  the§e  turbulent  times',  and  meet  with  a   number  f 
of  learned  theras  among  whom  three  names,  those  of  Ariya-  f 
vamsa,  Sllavamsa  and  Ratthasara,  stand  out  prominently.  | 
Of  the  three,  Ariyavamsa  was  certainly  the  most  eminent. 
A   dignified  character  with  a   magnanimity  all  his  own,  and  a 
humility  possessed  only  by  the  truly  wise,  Ariyavamsa’s 
story  is  told  with  pride  and  enthusiasm  in  the  SasanaVamsa ,82 
**  it  is  an  interesting  and  an  usual  mention  (in  the  SasanaVamsa)  of  theras  acting 
as  astrologers  (their  advice  to  the  king  is  given  on  the  story  of  the  Vedasattha). 
There  is  no  hint  that  these  two  were  wanting  in  sacred  knowledge,  though  in 
another  passage  a   distinction  is  severely  made  between  the  higher  learning  and 
-secular  science.”  SasanaVamsa ,  
Intro,,  p.  30. 
31  Sasana ,  p.  95. 
32  Sasana,  pp,  95-98.  Ariyavamsa’s  career  which  gives  us  a   glimpse  into  the 
life  of  a   monastic  scholar  of  these  days,  has  been  summarised  by  Dr,  Bode  in  her 
Pali  Literature  of  Burma,  pp.  41-42,  and  need  not  be  recounted  here.

--- PAGE 198 ---
THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY 
179 
He  was  a   native  of  Pagan  and  belonged  to  the  Capata  sect, 
but  came  to  settle  in  Ava  in  the  reign  of  king  Narapati.  He 
wrote  a   commentary  on  the  AbhidhammatthavibhaVani 
(itself  a   commentary  on  the  Abhidhammatthasamgaha) 
called  Mdnisawtnanjusa.  As  he  wrote  the  different  chap- 
ters of  his  work,  he  read  them  out  to  the  monks  assembled 
on  uposatha  days  on  the  courtyard  of  Punnacetiya,  and 
invited  their  criticism.  His  other  works  were  the  Manldipa, 
a   tl\d  on  the  Atthasalirii  of  Buddhaghosa,  the  Gandha- 
bharana,  a   treatise  on  grammar,  and  the  ] ata\avisodhana, 
a   study  on  the  Jatakas.  All  these  works  were  in  Pali;  but 
he  wrote  also  in  the  Marammabhasa,  or  Burmese,  and  was 
thus  perhaps  one  of  those  pioneers  who  began  to  write  in 
the  vernacular  of  the  country.  He  wrote  an  atthayojana  or 
interpretation  of  the  A   nutted  on  the  Abhidhamma,  generally 
ascribed  to  Dhammapala.  He  is  also  said  to  have  written, 
according  to  the  GandhaVamsa,  another  work  called 
Mahanissara.  Following  a   very  well-practised  custom  of 
which  the  Sasanaoamsa  affords  numerous  examples,  Narapati 
established  Ariyavamsa  in  a   vihara  where  the  learned  thera- 
held  his  teachings.  The  king  himself  was  interested  and 
occasionally  came  to  the  vihara  to  hear  him. 
Closely  on  the  heels  of  Ariyavamsa  came  Silavamsa  or 
Maha-Sllavamsa,  who  was  a   native  of  Pabbatabbhantarana- 
gara  (Taung-dwin-gyi  in  Magwe  district).  There  in  his 
native  town  he  wrote  at  least  three  poetical  works,  the 
Sumedhakatha,  evidently  based  on  the  story  of  the  ascetic 
Sumedha  incorporated  in  the  Nidana  of  the  Jatakas, 
the  Buddhalamkara,  probably  on  the  life  of  the  Master 
himself,  and  the  Pabbatabbhantarapatisamayutta,  evidently 
on  his  native  town.  With  these  three  books  to  his  credit  he 
came  to  Ava  (Ratanapura)  at  the  age  of  thirty  in  the  re  gn  of 
Sirisudhammarajadhipati  (probably  Minhkaung  II,  1481- 
1502).  There  the  king  settled  him  in  the  Ratanavimana  near 
the  Thuparama  pagoda,  where  he  not  only  held  regular

--- PAGE 199 ---
180 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
teachings  on  the  sacred  texts,  but  also  composed  an 
atthayojana  of  the  NettipaJ^arana,  and  the  ParayanaVatthu, 
both  in  the  vernacular  (Marammabhasaya).  Besides  being  a 
poet,  he  was  thus  a   scholar  also  who  could  deal  equally 
effectively  with  religio-philosophical  subjects.88 
Born  in  1 468  ( Kaliyuge  timsadhi\a  atthaoassasate 
fyale  jale)  at  Ratanapura,  Ratthasara,  like  Sllavamsa, 
wrote  in  verse,  and  composed  poetical  versions  of  the 
Bhuridattajataka,  Hatthipalajataka  and  the  Sarnvarajataka . 34 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Pannasami  does  not  view  with 
appreciation  these  attempts  of  Sllavamsa  and  Ratthasara — 
namely,  composing  works,  even  religious  works,  in  verse. 
In  fact,  both  of  them  receive  his  censure.  On  Pannasami’ s 
authority  we  learn  that  it  is  for  this  reason  that  both  were 
excluded  from  the  theraparampara  by  the  ancient  chroniclers. 
According  to  them  as  well  as  to  Pannasami,  composing  or 
reciting  poems  was  a   transgression  of  Vinaya  rules,  and  as 
such,  was  a   matter  of  discipline  which  they  expected  all 
monks  strictly  to  follow.  Pannasami  refers  his  readers  to  the 
Uposathavinicchaya,  a   work  on  Vinaya  by  himself,  where, 
he  says,  the  subject  has  been  discussed  in  detail. 
The  Talaing  country  in  the  fifteenth  century  seems  to 
have  produced  very  few  religious  celebrities ;   at  least,  we 
have  record  of  only  a   few  of  them,  and  whomsoever  we 
meet  with  belongs  invariably  to  the  Sinhalese  tradition. 
Sevasuvannasobhana,  a   noted  thera  of  Martaban,  whom  the 
35  According  to  Harvey,  Shin  Thulawuntha  (Sflavaipsa)  was  expelled  from  the 
monastery  at  Taung -dwi-gyi  for  his  composing  works  in  poetry  which  the  monks 
considered  profane.  He  is  also  said  to  have  written  a   grammatical  work,  and 
““poems  such  as  Hsutaungganpye,  Taungdwinlapyo ,  Tada-u-ti-mawgun,  and  the 
Yazawingyau)  chronicle ,  the  earliest  history  extant/*  Among  other  vernacular 
writers  may  be  mentioned  the  names  of  Shin  Uttamagyaw  ‘who  for  twenty  years 
remained  a   monk,  and  then  went  to  Ava  where  he  was  often  invited  to  the  palace 
for  consultation  on  the  scriptures’  and  Shin  Agyathamahdi  (1479)  who  wrote 
poetic  versions  of  Jatakas.  History  of  Burma,  p.  104. 
34  Ratthasara  (or  Maharattathera)  also  composed  the  Keganpye  and  Metktilm 
Kanbidematvgun,  in  Burmese  verse*

--- PAGE 200 ---
THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY 
181 
Sasanavamsa  places  after  Medhamkara  
thera,°3 *  may  probably 
be  ascribed  to  the  middle  of  the  century.  He,  too,  like 
Medhamkara  and  some  of  his  predecessors  of  the  Talaing 
country,  went  to  Ceylon  and  there  at  the  Mahavihara  sat  at 
the  feet  of  learned  theras  receiving  anew  ( puna  sil^kham 
gahetva)  instructions  in  the  sacred  texts.  He  came  back  to 
Martaban,  but  simple  and  unostentatious,  eager  to  learn  and 
intelligent,  he  chose  to  live  and  practise  the  religion  in  the 
solitude  of  the  forest.  Suvannasobhana  lived  to  see  the 
great  reformation  of  Dhammaceti  and  played  the  part  of 
upajjhaya  in  the  upasampada  ceremony  after  the  return  of 
Dhammaceti 's  mission  from  Ceylon.  We  shall  have,  there- 
fore, occasion  to  refer  to  him  later  on.  However,  after  his 
return  from  Ceylon  he  settled  down  at  Martaban  where  he 
established  a   new  sect.  Medhamkara  and  Sevasuvannaso- 
bhana  are  together  said  to  have  introduced  the  acariyaparam - 
para  from  Ceylon  for  the  sixth  time.80 
Towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  Talaing 
country  or  the  Ramannadesa,  which,  by  the  way,  included 
Hamsavatl  (Pegu),  Muttima  (Martaban),  and  Suvannabhumi 
(Thaton),  was  approaching  a   great  religious  awakening. 
Dhammaceti,  a   monk  and  a   man  of  character,  had  by  an 
accident  come  to  the  throne  of  Pegu  in  1472,  Even  as  a 
monk  he  saw  the  corruptions  that  had  crept  into  the  Samgha 
and  watched  with  displeasure  the  various  contending  sects 
into  which  the  Samgha  had  come  to  be  divided.  He  also 
saw  how  the  various  sects  had  allowed  themselves  to  drift 
from  the  original  teachings  of  the  Master  and  violated  the 
rules  of  the  Vinaya.  When,  therefore,  he  came  to  the  throne, 
he  resolved  to  give  a   definite  lead  to  the  disorganised 
Order  to  which  he  had  once  belonged.  He  thus  sought 
to  effect  a   reformation  of  the  religion  at  a   time  when  it  was 
35  Sasana,  p.  42. 
36  Sasana,  pp.  42-43.

--- PAGE 201 ---
182 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
most  needed.  But  a   separate  section  must  be  reserved  for 
an  account  of  that  very  important  reformation,  the  way  how 
he  affected  it,  and  its  implications  and  results. 
IV 
DHAMMACETl’S  REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  : 
TRIUMPH  OF  THE  SINHALESE  SCHOOL 
(1476-80) 
Dhammaceti's  is  a   unique  career  and  personality  in  the 
whole  range  of  Burmese  history.  He  was  one  Burmese 
monarch  whose  fame  travelled  beyond  the  frontiers  of  his 
realm,  not  only  as  an  able  king  and  statesman,  but  also 
as  one  of  those  few  heroes  who  by  their  piety  and 
reforming  zeal  carved  out  a   place  for  themselves  in  the 
history  of  Buddhism.  He  was  an  ordinary  monk,  evidently 
residing  in  one  of  the  monasteries  of  Ava,  when  he  together 
with  another  monk  helped  Shin  Sawbu,  the  daughter  of 
Razadarit  of  Pegu,  to  take  to  flight  from  Ava  where  she  had 
been  taken  as  one  of  the  queens  of  Mohnyinthado  (1427-40). 
This  lady,  first  married  to  Thihathu  (1422-26),  was  later  made 
over  to  the  lord  of  Pagan  during  the  upheavals  that  followed 
Thihathu’s  death.  When  she  was  taken  as  the  queen  of 
Mohnyinthado,  she  had  already  become  disgusted  with  this 
sort  of  life  as  well  as  with  upper  Burma,  and  was  therefore 
thinking  of  getting  out  of  the  royal  palace.  She  took  the  help 
of  two  lalaing  monks  who  had  taught-  her  letters,  and 
managed  to  escape  to  Pegu.  One  of  these  monks  came  later 
on  to  be  known  as  Dhammaceti.  Shin  Sawbu  eventually 
became  queen  of  Pegu  (1453-72),  and  when  she  had  ruled  for 
several  years  she  wanted  to  retire,  and  retire  in  favour  of  one 
of  the  two  monks.  “   In  doubt  as  to  which  she  should 
choose,  she  left  it  to  Providence.  One  morning  when  they 
came  to  receive  the  royal  rice,  she  secreted  in  one  of  their 
bowls  a   pahse  (layman’s  dress)  together  with  little  models

--- PAGE 202 ---
DHAMMACETl’S  REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA 
183 
of  the  five  regalia ;   then,  having  prayed  that  the  lot  might 
fall  to  the  worthier,  she  returned  the  bowls.  Dammaceti,  to 
whom  the  fateful  bowl  fell,  left  the  Sacred  Order,  received 
Shin  Sarobu’s  daughter  in  marriage,  and  assumed 
the  government.”  87  Shin  Sawbu  went  in  retirement  to  Dagon 
where  she  occupied  herself  with  the  religion,  it  is  to  her 
care  and  munificence  that  the  Shwedagon  became  what  it  is 
to-day. 
Dhammaceti  left  the  Order,'  but  did  not  forget  it,  far 
less  neglect  it,  once  on  the  throne  as  he  was.  On  the 
contrary,  he  resolved  to  do  something  for  the  religion  which 
as  a   monk  he  had  neither  the  courage  nor  the  opportunity 
to  do.  The  monkish  zeal  for  propagation  and  reformation  of 
the  religion  was  still  fresh  in  his  mind.  He  not  only  built 
a   number  of  works  of  merit,  such  as  the  Shwegugyi  and  the 
Kyaikpon  at  Pegu,  but  sent  a   mission  to  Bodhgaya  in  1472 
to  take  plans  of  the  Bodhi  tree  and  the  Mahabodhi  temple, 
obviously  to  serve  as  models  for  temples  at  Pegu.88  But  the 
greatest  service  he  rendered  to  the  religion  was  the  reformation 
of  the  Samgha. 
Away  from  the  midst  of  the  Samgha  of  which  he  had 
once  been  a   member,  he  could  look  at  it  from  a   better  pers- 
pective and  have  a   better  view  of  real  state  of  affairs  of  the 
Samgha  and  its  constituents.  The  first  point  which  caught 
his  eye  must  have  been  the  various  contending  sects  into  which 
the  Samgha  had  become  divided,  and  the  bitter  rivalry  among 
the  different  sects.  The  next  point  was  probably  the  laxity 
in  the  rules  of  discipline  among  the  monks  of  various  sects 
which  meant  that  the  original  orthodoxy  was  gradually 
yielding  place  to  the  growing  pressure  of  individual  tastes  and 
preferences.  As  to  the  first,  the  only  remedy  lay  in  bringing 
all  the  sects  together  under  one  ecclesiastical  authority  through 
37  Harvey,  History  oj  Burma,  pp.  117-118, 
,  38  An  R.A.S.B.,  1914,  p.  II,

--- PAGE 203 ---
184 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
one  standard  and  absolute  upasampada  ordination.  The 
remedy  as  to  the  second  was  to  follow  as  a   consequence. 
Hailing  from  one  of  the  Ava  monasteries,  Dhammaceti, 
by  training  and  perhaps  by  conviction  as  well,  belonged  to 
the  Slhala  Samgha  and  held  fast  to  orthodox  views. 
Moreover,  numerous  pilgrimages  and  missions  of  Burmese 
monks  to  the  Mahavihara  of  Ceylon  during  the  last  four 
centuries  had  built  up  a   tradition  in  Burma  which  held  that  the 
religion  in  its  pure  and  unsullied  form  existed  there  alone,  and 
it  was  only  the  Mahavihara  of  Ceylon  that  one  might  go  to  seek 
guidance  and  inspiration  from.  When,  therefore,  Dhammaceti 
thought  of  effecting  a   reformation  of  the  Order,  he  had 
naturally  his  face  turned  towards  that  island  ;   and  it  may  be 
assumed  that  he  thought  of  unifying  the  contending  sections 
by  re-introducing  the  upasampada  ordination  from  the 
Mahavihara  of  Ceylon  and  making  it  absolute,  and  thus 
restoring  the  succession  of  theras  which  he  thought  had  been 
broken  in  the  Ramanna  country.  This  is  what  he  actually  did. 
We  have  already  referred  in  a   previous  section  to  the 
unfortunate  state  of  the  religion ;   at  one  time  in  Martaban 
alone  there  were  as  many  as  five  different  sects,  each  one 
claiming  supremacy  over  the  other.  The  degeneration  was 
so  complete  that  “   in  all  these  sects,”  the  KalyanI  inscriptions 
state,  *  ‘  there  were  none  who  were  well-versed  in  the 
Tripitaka.”  The  number  of  these  sects  gradually  increased 
with  increasing  rivalry  amongst  themselves,  and  though 
scholarly  works  from  monks  continued  to  be  produced 
there  was  dearth  of  real  wisdom,  for  there  was  none 
“   
qualified  to  investigate  and  ascertain  matters  regarding 
ecclesiastical  ceremonies.”  The  trouble  arose  in  connection 
with  the  question  of  right  consecration  of  a   sima  and  valid 
conferment  of  the  upasampada  ordination.  In  respect  to 
these  two  ecclesiastical  ceremonies  each  one  sect  had  its 
own  opinion,  and'  they  performed  the  ceremonies  in  their 
own  way.  Dhammaceti  wanted  to  put  an  end  to  this,  for,

--- PAGE 204 ---
DHAMMACETl’S  REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  185 
“The  upasampada  ordination  is  dependent  on  that  of  pabbajja,  and  the  basis  of 
the  religion  itself  is  the  upasampada  ordination,  which  in  order  to  be  appro- 
priate, inviolable  and  valid  must  be  possessed  of  five  characteristics,  namely, 
Stmasampatti,  V atthusampatti ,  Nattisampaiti ,  Parisasampatti  and  Anusavana~ 
sampatti.  Of  these  characteristics  there  exists  means  of  attesting  the  validity  of 
V atthusampatti  and  Nattisampatti,  owing  respectively  to  the  ability  of  a   candidate 
for  the  pure  form  of  upasampada  ordination  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  former, 
and  to  the  accessibility  of  qualified  acariyas,  who  would  recite  the  Kammavaca 
with  correct  intonation.”  39 
The  king  also  repeatedly  ‘investigated  and  considered  the 
ruling  of  the  Vinaya  as  regards  the  consecration  of  a   sima 
which  would  be  in  conformity  with  the  intention  of  the 
Blessed  One’.  At  last  he  personally  came  to  a   decision  in 
regard  to  these  two  and  other  ecclesiastical  ceremonies, 
evidently  in  accordance  with  Vinaya  rules.  But  he 
was  not  sure  if  the  theras  of  his  realm  would  argue  in  the 
same  manner  and  accept  his  decision.  He,  therefore,  invited 
the  leading  monks  and  asked  them  to  give  a   ruling  based  on 
the  Vinaya  in  regard  to  the  problems  he  set  forth  before 
them.  Eventually  it  was  agreed  upon  that  the  religion  had 
become  ‘impure  and  corrupt,’  and  that  they  must  set  them- 
selves to  reform  it.  With  this  end  in  view 
“King  Ramadhipati  (Ramannadhipati,  i\e.f  Dhammaceti)  invited  twenty-two 
theras,  headed  by  Moggalana,  and  addressed  them  thus:  'Revered  Sirs,  the 
upasampada  ordination  of  the  monks  of  the  Mfin  country  now  appears  to  us  to  be 
invalid.  Therefoie,  how  can  the  religion,  which  is  based  on  such  invalid  ordina- 
tion, last  to  the  end  of  5000  years  ?  Reverend  Sirs,  from  the  establishment  of  the 
religion  in  the  island  of  Ceylon  up  to  the  present  day,  there  has  been  existing  in 
that  island  an  exceedingly  pure  sect  of  monks,  who  were  the  spiiitual  successors  of 
the  monks,  of  the  Mahavihara,  a   Chapter,  wbo  are  pure  and  free  from  censure  and 
reproach  ;   receive  at  their  hands  the  upasampada  ordination  in  the  UdakukkKepa- 
sima  consecrated  on  the  Kalyani  river,  ......  and  if  you  make  this  form  of  the 
upasampada  ordination  the  seed  of  the  religion,  as  it  were,  plant  it  (after  you 
return  here  from  that  island),  and  cause  it  to  sprout  forth  by  conferring  such 
ordination  on  men  of  good  family  in  this  Mon  country,  who  have  faith  and  are 
desirous  of  taking  orders,  the  religion  will  become  pure  and  last  till  the  end  of 
5,000  years.  Reverend  Sirs,  by  your  going  to  the  island  of  Ceylon,  much  merit  and 
great  advantage  will  accrue  to  you.” 
33  Ep.  iii.  ii.,  p.  203. 
4°  Ep,  Birm.,  iii.  ii. ,  pp.  220-2!, 
24—1445B

--- PAGE 205 ---
186  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
So,  one  day  (January  9,  1476)  twenty-two  theras  with 
their  twenty-two  disciples  embarked  on  two  ships  consigned 
to  the  care  of  two  missionaries,  Citradutan  and  Ramadutan. 
In  Citradutan ’s  ship  went  eleven  theras  headed  by  Mahasi- 
vali,  while  Ramadutan’s  carried  another  eleven  theras  headed 
by  Moggallana.  A   month’s  voyage  took  Citradutan’s  ship  to 
the  island  and  on  February  23,  1476,  Citradutan  along  with 
the  theras  handed  over  to  Bhuvanekabahu,  the  king  of 
Ceylon,  Dhammaceti’s  letter  written  on  gold-plate  and  other 
valuable  presents  which  the  latter  had  sent  for  the  king  of 
Ceylon.  The  next  day  was  handed  over  to  the  clergy  of 
Ceylon  the  letter  of  Dhammaceti  meant  for  them  together 
with  some  other  presents.  Handicapped  by  adverse  winds 
and  adverse  circumstances  Ramadutan’s  ship  arrived  a   few 
months  later  (14th  June,  1476). 
To  cut  a   very  long  story  short,  the  king  of  Ceylon 
directed  the  clergy  of  the  Mahavihara  to  make  arrangements 
for  the  ordination  of  the  twenty-two  monks  with  their  twenty- 
two  disciples.  “In  conformity  with  the  custom  followed  by 
the  Sinhalese  Mahatheras  of  old,  whenever  monks  from 
foreign  countries  were  ordained,  the  forty-four  Mon  monks 
were  first  established  in  the  condition  of  laymen,  and  then 
admitted  to  the  Order  as  Samaneras,”  through  the  act  of 
Vanaratanamahathera  who  presented  them  with  yellow  robes, 
and  accepted  their  profession  of  faith  in  the  Three  Refuges. 
It  then  took  four  days  to  confer  the  upasampada  ordination 
on  all  the  forty-four  theras,  the  last  day  being  given  to  the 
twenty-two  younger  monks  (July,  17  to  20,  1476).  On  the 
first  day  Dhammakittimahathera  and  Pancaparivenavasimang- 
alamahathera  were  respectively  the  upajjhaya  and  afcariya. 
On  the  second  and  third  days  Vanaratanamahathera  and 
Pancaparivenavasimangalathera  acted  as  the  upajjhaya  and 
acariya  respectively,  while  on  the  last  day  Pancaparivenava- 
simangalathera and  Sihar  aj ayuvar  aj  acariya  thera  were  respec- 
tively the  upajjhaya  and  acariya.  The  names  of  the

--- PAGE 206 ---
DHAMMACETl’s  REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  187 
twenty-two  elder  monks  who  were  ordained  are  given  in  the 
Kalyani  inscriptions  and  may  be  of  some  interest  to  us. 
,  They  were  Moggallana,  Kumar akassapa,  Mahaslvall,  Sari- 
putta,  Nanasagara,  Sumana,  Kassapa,  Nanda,  JRahula, 
Buddhavamsa,  Sumarigala,  Khujjananda,  Sonuttara,  Guna- 
sagara,  Dhammarakkhita,  Culasumangala,  Javanapanna, 
Culakassapa,  Culasxvall,  Manisara,  Dhammarajika  and 
Candanasara.  After  the  ordination  the  king  invited  them  to 
a   meal,  presented  them  with  niceties  that  could  be  given  to 
monks,  and  conferred  various  titles  on  the  twenty-two  elder 
monks. 
In  time  one  batch  of  eleven  theras  with  their  eleven 
disciples  sailed  back  to  their  country  (August  21 ,  1476),  and 
Dhammaceti  received  them  with  due  ceremony.  The  other 
batch  of  eleven  theras  with  their  eleven  disciples  suffered  a 
series  of  misfortunes  that  led  to  the  death  of  six  theras  and 
four  young  monks  away  from  their  country  ;   the  rest  of 
the  party  reached  home  three  years  later  (November 
12,  1479).  However,  after  their  arrival,  the  king  carefully 
selected  a   gamakhetta  where  a   pure  sima  was  duly  conse- 
crated according  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya  for  the 
performance  of  the  uposatha,  pavarana,  upasampada 
and  other  ceremonies.  “Inasmuch  as  this  sima...  was 
consecrated  by  our  lords  who  went  to  the  'island  of  Ceylon 
and  received  the  upasampada  ordination  in  an  udakukkhe- 
paslma  arranged  on  the  Kalyani  river,  it  was  called  the 
Kalyanlsima.’’ 41  The  king  then  invited  all  monks  of  the 
realm  ‘who  possessed  faith  and  desired  to  receive  the 
upasampada  ordination  at  the  hands  of  the  monks  ordained 
in  Ceylon,’  to  come  to  the  Kalyani  sima  and  receive  ordina- 
tion. ‘Let  those  who  have  not  faith  and  do  not  desire 
to  receive  the  upasampada  ordination  of  the  Sinhalese,’ 
he  decreed,  ‘  remain  as  they  are  ! 5 
41  Ep .  Birm.,  Ill,  ii,  p.  249.

--- PAGE 207 ---
188  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
But  who  was  to  serve  as  the  upajjhaya  of  the  ordination 
ceremony  ?  None  of  the  monks  who  had  just  returned  from 
Ceylon  had  yet  completed  ten  years  since  their  ordination 
and  could  not  therefore  serve  as  upajjhaya.  The  choice 
then  fell  on  Suvannasobhana,  ‘a  worthy  monk,  one  who 
received  the  upasampada  ordination  of  the  succession  of 
Ceylon,  a   man  who  is  modest,  remorseful,  an  observer  of 
the  precepts,  a   dweller  in  the  forest,  with  few  desires,  easily 
satisfied,  eradicating  his  sins,  and  an  observer  of  the 
dhutarigas.’  The  upajjhaya  in  his  ordination  in  Ceylon  was 
Vanaratana,  while  Rahulabhadda  was  the  acariya,  and 
twenty-six  years  had  already  elapsed  since  he  had  received 
the  upasampada  ordination  of  the  Sinhalese  in  an 
udakukkhepaslma.42 
All  arrangements  were  now  complete,  and  what  now 
began  was  nothing  short  of  a   mass  ordination  so  that  after 
five  days  the  number  of  monks  newly  ordained  rose  to 
245,  while  the  king  himself  kep  twatch. 
44  Then  His  Majesty  Ramadhipati  sent  word  to  all  the  clergy  and  throughout  the 
whole  extent  of  this  M$n  country.  His  Majesty  caused  them  to  make  agreements 
and  make  appointments  in  this  wise  :  ‘What  is  past,  let  it  be  done  with  I   But  as 
for  monks  in  the  future,  after  these,  let  all  clergy  who  ordain  them  hereafter  see 
that  the  candidates  for  ordination  are  satisfactory,  and  then  ordain  them   ” 
He  proceeded  in  his  declaration  to  ban  all  monks  who 
were  without  faith  and  devotion,  who  were  not  perfect  in 
limbs,  who  practised  medicine  or  lived  by  tending  people’s 
diseases  or  by  following  some  arts  or  crafts  or  by  reciting  the 
Dhamma  aloud  or  who  transgressed  in  any  way  even  a   trifle 
of  the  Vinaya  rules,  who  possessed  goods,  paddy,  rice, 
slaves,  cattle,  or  any  kind  of  material  wealth,  and  threatened 
them  all  with  expulsion  from  the  Order.  Upasampada  ordi- 
nation could  in  no  way  be  conferred  on  them.  “If  you  do 
not  act  thus,  but  confer  the  upasampada  privily,  the  mother 
For  Suvannasobhana,  see  ante.  p.  181.

--- PAGE 208 ---
DHAMMACETI’  S  REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  189 
and  the  father  of  those  who  receive  such  ordination,  as  well 
as  their  relatives,  and  likewise  their  lay  supporters,  will  be 
visited  by  us  with  royal  penalties.” 
“Thus  did  His  Majesty  Ramadhipati  entirely  purge  and  expel  the  impurity  and 
corruption  of  religion  that  had  arisen,  and  caused  all  the  clergy  who  were  in  this 
Mon  country  to  form  one  single  sect.  All  the  clergy  who  dwelt  in  villages  or  in 
the  forest,  who  lived  within  this  Mon  country  ..  ..came  and  received  the  upasam- 
pada ordination  of  the  Sinhalese  ;   without  intermission  they  kept  on  coming  and 
receiving  it*’ 
till  the  number  swelled  by  thousands  (fifteen  thousand  six 
hundred  and  sixty-six).  To  cope  with  the  increasing 
requests  from  monks  for  the  new  ordination,  Dhammaceti 
consecrated  hundreds  of  slmas  (a  list  of  which  is  given  in 
the  inscriptions)  throughout  the  M6n  country. 
^Such  deeds  as  these  did  His  Majesty  Ramadhipati  do,  because  he  took  great 
delight  in  the  religion ;  desiring  that  those  who  received  the  upasampada  oadination 
should  be  firm  and  steadfast.  Hereafter,  also,  for  the  term  of  life  of  His  Majesty, 
for  every  Samanera  who  shall  desire  to  receive  the  upasampada  ordination,  His 
Majesty  will  make  preparation  in  like  maimer   Inasmuch  as  that  is  so,  may  the 
princes  who  are  replete  with  faith  and  with  wisdom,  who  shall  wield  the  sove- 
reignty of  the  city  of  Hamsavatl  hereafter,  also  impart  strength  to  the  religion  f  
* 
None  of  Dhammaceti’s  successors  took  the  same  great 
care  of  nor  devoted  themselves  so  steadfastly  to  the  cause  of 
the  religion.  Through  the  process  of  a   valid  upasampada 
ordination,  he  was  able  to  purge  the  Order  of  all  impurities 
and  corruption  that  had  crept  into  it  and  to  bring  all 
contending  sects  under  one  banner,  to  ‘  form  one 
single  sect’,  as  Dhammaceti  himself  puts  it.  He  had 
indeed  achieved  a   great  object  which  for  all  practical 
purposes  brought  to  a   close,  at  least  for  another  couple 
of  centuries,  the  dissensions  between  the  Maramma  Samgha 
and  the  Slhala  Samgha.  It  was  a   complete  triumph  for  the 
latter,  and  as  such,  for  the  orthodox  school.  We  have 
seen  that  Dhammaceti  held  Sinhalese  views  of  orthodoxy 
and  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  he  helped  the  Slhala 
Samgha  become  supreme,  indeed,  the  one  officially

--- PAGE 209 ---
190 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
recognised  Order,  in  the  land.  Henceforth  we  shall  hear 
less  of  the  Maramma  Samgha,  the  older  school  that  main- 
tained the  religion  in  the  country  presumably  from  the  time 
when  Sona  and  Uttara  introduced  the  religion  to  the  day 
when  Capata  returned  from  Ceylon  with  the  message  of 
the  Mahavihara. 
We  had  occasion  to  point  out  how  the  Sinhalese  School 
strove  to  adhere  strictly  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya.  Even 
the  transgression  of  a   trifle  monastic  rule  was  considered 
to  be  a   grave  offence,  and  hence  was  not  to  be  tolerated. 
Unfortunately,  the  various  sects  into  which  the  Slhala 
Samgha  saw  itself  divided  were  gradually  drifting  from 
the  orthodox  Mahavihara  tradition,  and  were  slowly  moving 
towards  what  was  evidently  a   relaxed  interpretation  of  the 
Vinaya  rules.  What  Dhammaceti  attempted  to  do  was  rigidly 
to  enforce  the  Vinaya  rules  according  to  orthodox  interpreta- 
tion ;   this  he  did  by  reviving  the  Mahavihara  tradition  through  a 
valid  upasampada  ordination.  This  explains  why  the  Kalyani 
inscriptions  contain  repeated  requests  to  monks  to  conform 
strictly  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya  ;   indeed,  the  king  himself 
frequently  refers  to  Vinaya  texts  and  decides  everything 
accordingly.  It  is  interesting  to  note  in  this  connection  how 
Dhammaceti  wanted  all  Samaneras  to  study  the  Vinaya  rules 
carefully  and  minutely  with  special  emphasis,  it  seems,  on  the 
Khuddakasilikha  and  the  PatimokMia,‘ii  and  to  lead  a   strict 
life  according  to  orthodox  rules  of  discipline,  with  a   view  to 
qualify  themselves  for  ordination.  Standard  authorities  on 
Vinaya  subjects  which  the  king  himself  consulted  and  in 
which  he  caused  research  and  investigation  to  be  made 
by  the  monks  are  also  mentioned.  They  were,  among 
others,  the  Vinayapali,  the  V inayalthal^atha,  the  Vinayalvka 
called  Saratthadipani,  the  Vinayati^a  called  Vimativinodarii, 
Ep.  Birm,,  111,  ii,  pp.  258-59,  261,  283,

--- PAGE 210 ---
DHAMMACETI’ S   REFORMATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  191 
the  Vinayatilia  written  by  Vajirabuddhithera,  the  Mati\aitha- 
katha  called  KanJ^havitarani  together  with  its  tlfya,  the  Vinaya- 
sangahapakarana,  the  Simalah\arapa\amna,  and  the  Sima- 
lanl^arasangaha .  It  is  significant  that  all  these  treatises  are 
of  Sinhalese  authorship. 
It  is  also  interesting  to  make  a   note  of  the  part  played  by 
Dhammaceti  himself  in  the  great  reformation.  The  initiative 
came  not  from  the  Order  of  monks  but  from  the  king 
himself,  and  in  all  the  acts  of  that  great  drama  he  was  the 
one  and  only  hero  ;   the  monks,  even  the  most  venerable 
ones,  to  whom  nevertheless  he  showed  throughout  the  most 
devoted  and  respectful  consideration,  were  completely  at  his 
bidding.  They  followed  him  loyally  and  allowed  themselves 
to  be  guided  and  protected  by  him.  This  gives  us  at  once  a 
glimpse  into  the  hold  the  king  had  on  the  Order,  as  well  as 
into  the  relations  between  the  Samgha  and  the  royal  authority. 
We  shall  see  later  on  that  the  nature  and  character  of  these 
relations  were  always  more  or  less  the  same. 
No  less  interesting  is  the  fact  that  even  from  the  very 
introduction  of  the  Slhala  Samgha  into  Burma,  the  royal 
authority  had  always  lent  its  support  to  the  new  Order  in 
preference  to  the  old  and  indigenous  fraternity,  and  thus 
showed  decided  preference  for  the  more  orthodox  school.  But 
for  Narapatisithu’s  active  help  and  support  the  Slhala  Samgha 
within  a   few  years  after  its  introduction,  could  not  have 
achieved  the  prestige  and  position  which  it  did  during  his 
reign.  And  every  king  that  followed  on  the  throne 
of  Pagan  or  elsewhere  chose  their  acariya  usually  from 
among  those  who  subscribed  to  the  Mahavihara  tradition, 
and  bestowed  their  bounties  mostly  on  them  alone.  Their 
benevolence,  real  and  sincere,  was  not  impartial..  The  last 
stage  was  reached  when  Dhammaceti  openly  and  frankly 
identified  himself  with  the  Slhala  Samgha. 
Dhammaceti’s  reformation  is  an  important  event  in  the 
history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma,  It  reveals  the  whole

--- PAGE 211 ---
192 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
character  of  the  religion  in  Burma,  not  only  during  the 
four  centuries  that  were  left  behind,  but  also  during  the 
centuries  that  lay  ahead.  Indeed,  that  character  was  now 
determined  once  and  for  all.  Dissensions  will  take  place  and 
controversies  will  in  future  lead  to  sectional  feuds  within 
the  Order,  laxity  of  discipline  will  from  time  to  time  disturb 
the  fraternity,  the  relation  between  the  Order  and  the  king 
will  give  cause  for  anxiety,  but  everything  will  at  last  be 
decided  in  consonance  with  the  na'.ure  and  character  brought 
forth  by  the  history  of  the  religion  so  far  pursued,  i.e., 
beginning  from  the  introduction  of  the  Sihala  Samgha  to 
the  reformation  of  Dhammaceti.  The  rest  of  the  history  has, 
therefore,  its  factual  interest  alone;  it  would  only  go  to 
confirm  what  we  already  know  of  the  nature  and  character  of 
the  religion. 
V 
A   Monastic  Library 
A   very  interesting  glimpse  into  the  studies  in  which  the 
monks  engaged  themselves  during  the  period  under  review 
is  afforded  by  a   well-known  inscription  recovered  from  the 
ruins  of  Pagan.  The  record  is  dated  B.E.  804  (1442  A. D.) 
and  is  of  considerable  value  inasmuch  as  it  furnishes  a 
picture  of  monastic  scholarship  in  upper  Burma  in  the 
fifteenth  century.  It  commemorates  a   gift  to  a   monastic  estab- 
lishment of  Pagan  by  the  ruler,  of  Taungdwin  and  his  wife. 
They  built  for  the  monks,  as  was  often  the  practice  with  the 
royalty  and  the  rich,  a   monastery,  and  made  over  to  them 
a   garden,  paddy  lands,  monastery  slaves,  and  a   large 
collection  of  texts  of  which  a   full  list  is  given  in  the 
inscription.44  Such  gifts  of  texts  to  monkish  orders  were  by 
4*  Forchammer,  Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Piny  a   and  A   va.  The  list  has  often 
been  reproduced,  e.g.,  in  Bode,  Pali  Literature  of  Burma,  pp.  102-09,  or  mentioned, 
e.g.,  in  Pelliot,  “   Deux  Itineraires,”  B.E.F  .E.O.,  V,  p.  183.  Dr.  Bode  stresses

--- PAGE 212 ---
A   MONASTIC  LIBRARY 
193 
no  means  unusual.  The  monastic  libraries  as  much  as 
the  monasteries  themselves  depended  on  the  bounties  of 
the  rich ;   and  whence  could  the  monks  get  their  books 
for  study  and  reference  unless  the  laity  provided  the  Order 
with  them?  But  it  must  be  admitted  that  extant  records  of 
such  gifts  are  rare ;   indeed  the  Taungdwin  record  is  unique 
in  this  respect,  it  gives  us  a   clear  idea  of  the  subjects  that 
were  generally  studied  in  the  monasteries  of  upper  Burma, 
and  presumably  also  of  lower  Burma,  in  the  fifteenth  century. 
A   careful  analysis  of  this  list  shows  that  it  is  not 
without  a   system  and  a   significance.  It  will  be  seen  that 
at  the  head  of  the  list  are  the  Vinaya  books  which  number 
as  many  as  twenty.  This  is  not  accidental,  but  just  as  one 
would  expect  to  find  in  Burma,  since  Vinaya  was  the  most 
important  subject  Buddhism  in  Burma  was  concerned  with, 
and  the  Vinaya  texts  had  already  come  to  play  a   most 
important  part  in  the  life  of  the  average  Burmese  monk.  It 
was  but  natural  that  they  should  be  given  the  place  of 
honour  in  a   monastery  library.  The  Vinaya  list  is  followed 
by  seventeen  Abhidhamma  texts'1'’  which  also  have  a   profound 
influence  on  Burmese  Buddhists  who  like  the  Buddhists  of 
Siam  and  Kamboj  look  upon  the  Abhidhamma  with  great 
respect.  But  the  number  of  Sutta  texts  that  follow  those 
of  the  Abhidhamma  are  by  far  the  largest.  With  their  rich 
store  of  stories,  legends,  verses  and  edificatory  discourses,  all 
tinged  with  a   deep  human  interest,  the  Sutta  texts  naturally 
commanded  the  widest  popularity,  not  only  among  the 
members  of  the  Order  but  also  among  those  of  the  laity. 
Whoever  has  had  any  opportunity  of  coming  in  intimate 
contact  with  the  Burmese  people  must  have  noticed 
what  a   deep  influence  the  Sutta  texts  exercise  on  their  life 
the  aid  afforded  by  the  list  to  *foim  some  notion  of  the  point  reached  by  the 
Sanskrit  scholars  in  Burma  in  the  fifteenth  century.’ 
45  Some  Abhidhamma  texts  are  also  mentioned  down  in  the  list,  e.g, ,  NosT 
111,  112,  etc, 
25-1445B

--- PAGE 213 ---
194 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  culture  even  to  this  day.  The  whole  idea  of  a   young 
Burman  about  good  and  bad,  merit  and  demerit  is,  indeed, 
drawn  from  these  texts.  After  the  Sutta  texts,  almost  in  a 
natural  sequence,  come  the  Jataka  and  Apadana  texts,  and 
then  are  listed  historical  chronicles,  etc.  Then  follow  texts  on 
grammar,  lexicography,  philology,  law,  polity,  medicine 
and  pharmacology,  astrology,  rhetoric  and  prosody,  logic 
and  other  minor  texts,  not  always  strictly  according  to 
subject.  Texts  on  grammar  and  lexicography,  and  even 
philology  and  rhetoric  were  almost  indispensable  for  a 
thorough  understanding  of  the  sacred  texts,  and  from  what 
we  know  of  the  syllabus  of  Buddhist  monastic  studies  in 
India  it  is  not  surprising  that  Burmese  monks  interested 
themselves  in  texts  on  such  secular  subjects  as  Medicine 
and  Pharmacology,  Polity  and  Astrology,  and  even  Military 
Science,  etc. 
Readers  will  notice  in  this  list  titles  of  a   good  number  of 
Sanskrit  works  as  well.  It  is  difficult  to  say  if  they  were  tran- 
slations of  Sanskrit  originals  or  the  originals  themselves  under 
the  disguise  of  Pali  and  even  Burmese  names.  These 
works  relate  themselves  to  such  subjects  as  Grammar  and 
■Rhetoric,  Astrology  and  Medicine,  Law  and  Polity,  Lexico- 
graphy and  the  like.  It  is  common  knowledge  today  that 
Sanskrit  learning  though  not  widely  practised  was  yet  quite 
familiar  in  Burma.  This  learning  was  in  the  keeping  of 
Brahmanical  priests,  court-astronomers  and  ministers  who 
were  all  held  in  high  esteem  in  the  courts  of  Burmese  kings 
and  were  persons  of  influence.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the 
Burmese  laity,  following  the  Hindu  colonists,  interested 
themselves  in  this  learning  as  well,  specially  in  Hindu  Polity, 
Law  and  Astrology  and  similar  other  subjects,  perhaps  to  help 
themselves  to  secure  positions  of  influence  with  the  king 
and  the  ruling  class.  The  Taungdwin  record  shows, 
however,  that  even  Buddhist  monks  were  interested  in  this 
essentially  Brahmanical  learning  and  took  pains  to  study

--- PAGE 214 ---
A   MONASTIC  LIBRARY 
195 
Sanskrit  texts  on  secular  subjects.  That  the  monks  did 
really  study  such  Brahmanical  texts  along  with  their  own 
sacred  books  is  proved  not  only  by  a   good  number  of 
Burmese  translations  of  several  Sanskrit  works  but  also  by 
the  epithet  *  V edasatthaJ^ovida  ’  (expert  in  Vedasatthas) 
sometimes  applied  to  certain  monks.  More  than  once  the 
SasanaVamsa 1(1  refers  to  learned  monks  who  were  experts  in 
Vedasatthas,  i.e.,  in  the  secular  learning  of  the  Brahmanas.47 
Needless  to  say,  -this  Brahmanical  learning  was  not 
favoured  by  certain  sections  of  the  monastic  Order ;   in  fact,  if 
the  SasanaVamsa  is  to  be  believed,  the  Order  as  a   whole 
frankly  disapproved  of  'them.  According  to  Pannasamx, 
these  Vedasatthakovidas  were  party  attipatipattisu  manda  : 
they  were  deficient  in  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  the 
religion,  and  the  old  chroniclers  did  not  consider  them 
eligible  to  be  reckoned  in  the  theraparampara  ( 
theraparam - 
paraya  na  ganenti  porana).46 
*6  e   g.  Sasana,  pp.  95,  105-109.  When  Saddharmaraja  changed  the  era  he  w*§ 
advised  by  two  learned  theras  who  acted  as  astrologers  and  the  advice  was  given 
on  the  strength  of  Vedasatthas. 
47  These  Vedasatthas  had,  however  nothing  to  do  with  Vedic  texts,  or  even 
rahmanical  religious  literature  as  such,  e.g.,  the  Upanisads,  Puranas,  etc.  Frankly, 
the  Burmese  knew  Brahmanical  texts  on  Astronomy,  and  Astrology,  perhaps  also  on 
Polity,  Law,  etc.,  as  Vedasatthas ,  and  anybody  who  had  proficiency  in  these  texts 
came  to  he  known  as  ‘  Vedasaithakovida.'  See,  Jardine,  Notes  on  Buddhist 
Lau)  IV.  Intro,  by  Forchammer,  p.  17,  Forchammer,  Reportt  pp.  5  ff.  Bode,  Pali 
Literature ,  pp.  50-51. 
48  Sasana,  p.  105.

--- PAGE 215 ---
CHAPTER  FOUR 
CLOUDS  GATHER 
Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Centuries 
I 
MARAMMARATTHA 
Burma,  after  the  fall  of  Pagan,  became  for  more  than 
two  centuries  and  a   half  a   victim  of  separatist  tendencies.  She 
was  ruled  over  by  contending  dynasties  of  kings  and  princes 
who  had  their  centres  at  different  places  of  the  country.  Even 
when  Dhammaceti  effected  the  reformation  of  the  religion,  the 
country  had  been  in  the  same  state  of  political  disruption. 
H.s  reformation  could  not  therefore  achieve  an  all-Burma 
character.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  its  effects  were 
confined  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Ramanna  country  alone 
The  SasanaVamsa' s  express  testimony  is  that  the  reformation 
went  deep  into  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  Marammarattha  as 
well  whence  bhikkhus  flocked  to  the  KalyanI  sima  to  receive 
the  upasampada  ordination.1 
But  clouds  came  hovering  to  enmesh  the  religion  in 
the  Marammarattha  into  a   dense  darkness.  In  1527  anew 
king  sat  on  the  throne  of  Ava.  He  was  Thohanbwa 
(called  Sirihamsva  or  Sahantva  in  the  SasanaVamsa) ,  son 
of  Sawlon.  Thohanbwa  was  a   downright  brute  and 
full-blooded  savage.  He  considered  all  temples  and  sacred 
shrines  as  so  many  secret  chambers  where  people  concealed 
their  treasures.  He  therefore  pillaged  all  those  that  were 
within  his  reach  and  appropriated  whatever  he  could  get  hold 
1  5a«anauamsaf,  p.  47.

--- PAGE 216 ---
MARAMMARAlTTJ-iA 
197 
of.  He  robbed  the  monasteries  of  sacred  texts  and  set  them 
in  flames  and  also  burnt  many  temples  and  pagodas.  The 
monks  he  considered  as  so  many  conspirators  who  whenever 
opportunity  offered  itself,  gathered  followers  round  them  and 
instigated  them  to  rebel  against  the  king.  At  least  this  was 
how  he  viewed  their  activities.  To  him  they  were  a   band 
of  men  without  wives  and  children,  and  were  thus  all  the 
more  dangerous.  He  therefore  contrived  to  put  end  to 
them.  At  Ton-bhi-luh  (Taungbalu)  near  Ava  he  erected 
a   big  maniapa  where  he  slaughtered  cows,  pigs,  buffaloes, 
fowls,  etc.,  for  a   feast  to  which  he  invited  a   good  number 
of  monks  from  Pinya,  Ava,  Myinsing  and  Saggaing. 
When  the  monks  were  all  inside  the  mandapa,  he  had  them 
surrounded  and  then  effected  a   wholesale  massacre.  The 
Sasanavamsa  says  that  he  succeeded  in  killing  three  thousand 
monks.  Buddhism  in  Burma  had  never  suffered  so  terrible 
and  so  shocking  and  devastating  a   savagery  ! 
Thohanbwa  met  the  fate  he  deserved.  Minkyiyanaung, 
a   Burman  officer  of  the  old  Ava  court  and  the  right-hand 
man  of  Thohanbwa  killed  him  (1543),  for,  Minkyiyanaung 
being  a   man  with  sincere  faith  in  the  religion  and  respect 
for  the  Order  could  no  more  stand  the  atrocities  of  his  master. 
“   He  reveres  not  the  Three  Gems,  he  regards  not  human 
life,  he  respects  not  other  men's  wives,  and  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  not  in  him.  We  shall  be  destroyed  unto  the 
seventh  generation.”  And  so  Minkyiyanaung  destroyed 
him,  but  did  not  want  to  take  his  throne.  He  was  a 
man  of  finer  taste,  religiously  disposed,  and  of  peaceful 
temperament.  So,  eventually  he  forsook  the  world  that 
had  tempted  him  so  much  with  pomp,  power  and  position, 
and  retired  to  a '  forest  monastery  near  Mekkaya  in  the 
Kyaukse  district,  and  there  passed  the  remaining  days  of  his 
life  in  the  peace  of  monastic  seclusion.  Where  in  those  days 
when  violent  political  convulsions,  dynastic  plots  and  court 
intrigues  were  the  usual  order,  could  one  with  finer  nature

--- PAGE 217 ---
198  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  with  faith  in  the  religion  escape  than  in  the  seclusion  of 
the  monasteries  ?  Even  in  such  dark  days  monasteries  were 
numerous  in  Ava  and  they  always  gave  asylum  to  those 
who  sought  refuge  in  them.  It  was  in  these  monasteries 
alone  that  the  torch  of  learning  and  culture  and  religion  was 
kept  burning,  sometimes  dim  and  pale,  but  never  quite 
extinct. 
There  was  indeed  no  dearth  of  devoted  monk-scholars. 
Two  of  them  are  known  to  us,  evidently  from  Ava ;   they 
were  Saddhammakitti  and  his  pupil  Tisasanadhaja,  who 
somehow  seem  to  have  escaped  the  cruel  persecution  of 
Thohanbwa.  But  they  had  to  seek  for  safety  elsewhere. 
Both  of  them  came  to  Ketumatl  (Toungoo),  the  capital  of  an 
independent  kingdom  where  Saddhammakitti  maintained 
the  scholastic  tradition  and  compiled  the  well-known  vocabu- 
lary, the  Ek.akk^arakosa-  Tisasanadhaja  has  been  styled 
Maha-sadhujjana ;   though  not  an  author  he  seems  to  have 
been  a   holy  man  of  repute.  After  the  death  of  Saddhamma- 
kitti he  went  to  Hamsavati  in  the  reign  of  Anekasetibhinda 
(Bayinnaung).  Later,  he  repaired  to  Jeyyapuranagara 
(Saggaing)  where  he  made  his  abode  in  a   cave  near  the 
Jetavanavihara.  Afterwards  when  Bayinnaung  conquered 
Ava,  he  built  a   vihara  which  he  made  over  to  Tisasanadhaja. 
The  Toungoo  fraternity,  which  was  in  comparative  peace, 
was  at  this  time  being  disturbed  by  a   very  interesting  contro- 
versy. It  centred  round  the  question  of  fermented  drinks 
which  was  forbidden  for  the  monks,  according  to  the  Vinaya. 
But  the  commentaries  on  the  Vinaya  seemed  to  suggest  that 
the  juice  of  the  palm  and  cocoanut  trees  might  be  taken 
even  by  monks.  As  usual,  opinions  among  the  monks 
of  Toungoo  differed  in  respect  of  the  commentarial 
interpretation  on  this  point.  The  matter  was  then 
referred  to  the  thera  Mahaparakkama  who  gave  a   ruling 
that  the  juice  of  the  palm  or  cocoanut  trees  might  be  taken 
just  after  it  had  been  taken  down  from  the  tree,  f.e.,  when

--- PAGE 218 ---
MARAMMARATTHA 
199 
fermentation  had  not  yet  set  in.  His  ruling  seems  to  have  put 
an  end  to  the  drink  controversy.  Mahaparakkama  afterwards 
wrote  a   book,  Suravinicchaya,  in  which  he  discussed  the 
question  in  detail.  At  this  time  the  king  of  Toungoo  was 
Mahasirijeyyasura  (Minkyinyo,  1486-1531)  who  was  a   pro- 
tector of  the  religion  and  built  cetiyas  and  viharas,  as  the 
Sasanavamsa  would  have  us  believe- 
Pinya  which  seems  to  have  survived  the  vandalism  of 
Thohanbwa  contributes  to  the  history  of  monastic  scholarship 
of  this  period  at  least  three  important  treatises  on  grammar 
by  two  reputed  theras.  One  Saddhammaguru  wrote 
the  SaddaVutti,  a   treatise  on  grammar ;   and  another 
Vijitavl,  wrote  the  Kaccayanavannana,  a   commentary 
on  the  Sandhi  section  of  Kaccayana’s  grammar,  and  the 
Vacafyopadesa  which  ‘treats  the  grammatical  categories  from 
a   logical  point  of  view.’  2 
Minkyinyo  was  succeeded  by  a   young  prince  of  worth  and 
valour,  Tabinshwehti  by  name  (1531-50).  He  captured 
Pegu  in  1 539  by  recourse  to  a   stratagem  and  without  even 
striking  a   blow,  and  later  took  Martaban  and  Prome. 
The  Talaing  kingdom  at  last  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  Burmese 
king  and  at  the  mercy  of  the  Burmese  army.  During  his 
reign  Ava  was  being  ruled  by  a   Shan  prince  who,  following 
on  the  footsteps  of  one  of  his  predecessors,  Thohanbwa, 
very  cruelly  persecuted  the  monks,  and  made  the  monasteries 
his  target  of  pillage  and  plunder. 
Brighter  days  were  however  in  store  for  the  religion 
during  the  reign  of  king  Bayinnaung  (1551-81)  of  the 
Toungoo  dynasty.  Starting  his  life  as  a   king  without  a 
kingdom  Bayinnaung  first  captured  Pegu  and  strangled 
Talaing  opposition.  He  then  set  out  on  a   career  of  conquest 
and  within  a   few  years  brought  the  whole  of  Burma  including 
even  the  Shan  States  under  his  control.  He  bestowed  liberal 
2  Cat.  Mand.  MSS.,  p.  45,  Sasana.  dip,  v,  1242;  Forchammer,  List,  p.  xxiiT 
Qldenberg,  Pali  MSS.  in  the  India  Office  Library,  p.  104.

--- PAGE 219 ---
200 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
bounties  on  the  viharasof  the  Talaing  country  where  monastic 
scholarship  came  to  receive  a   new  impetus.  We  therefore 
hear  of  such  scholars  as  Saddhammalamkara,  Ananda  and 
Dhammabuddha,  all  of  Hamsavatl.  Ananda  wrote  the 
Madhurasaratthadipanl ,  a   commentary  on  the  Abhidham- 
matifya,  while  Saddhammalamkara  wrote  a   pak.arana  entitled 
Patthanasaratthadipam.  They  are  both  placed  by  the 
Pitakatthamain  in  the  reign  of  Bayinnaung.'’1  Dhamma- 
buddha wrote  the  Kavisara,  a   treatise  on  Chanda. 
But  Bayinnaung  was  a   zealous  patron  of  the  religion 
and  he  did  something  more  than  mere  bestowing  bounties 
on  the  Samgha.  On  more  than  one  occasion  he  went  on 
pilgrimage  to  the  Shwedagon  at  Rangoon,  the  Shwesandaw 
at  Prome,  and  the  Shwezigon  at  Pagan.  At  the  Shwezigon 
he  once  made  offering  to  as  many  monks  as  there 
were  years  in  his  life.  There  he  set  up  a   great  bronze 
bell  (1557)  that  bears  an  inscription  in  three  languages,  Pali, 
Burmese  and  Talaing.  Bayinnaung’s  record  is  a   long  one, 
and  typical  of  him ;   every  line  of  it  breathes  the  pride  he  felt 
in  his  wide  conquests  and  in  the  work  he  did  for  the 
religion.  Like  Asoka,  it  seems,  he  decreed  that  within  his 
realm  there  should  | 
  
be  no  animal  sacrifices,  not  even 
during  the  Bakx-id  of  the  Mussalmans  or  by  the  foreign 
settlers  in  the  land.  “   In  Onbaung,  Momeik  and  the 
rest  of  the  Shan  country  when  a   sawbwa  died,  following 
heathen  doctrine,  men  used  to  kill  his  slaves  and  the  dear, 
horses  and  elephants  that  he  rode,  and  bury  them  in  the 
grave  with  him.  His  Majesty  forbade  such  evil  practices.” 
Among  the  people  of  the  villages  round  the  Popa  hill  there 
was  a   custom  of  sacrificing  such  animals  as  goats,  pigs, 
fowls,  buffaloes,  etc.,  to  the  Mahagiri  spirit.  He  also  put 
an  end  to  this ’custom.4 
3  Sasana,  p.  48.  The  author  of  the  Madhusaratthadipanl  was  Mahanama, 
according  to  tKe  Pitakatthamain ,  pp,  40,  41, 
4  Hrnannan,  II.  312,

--- PAGE 220 ---
MARAMMARATTHA 
201 
‘ '  Moreover,  seeing  that  religion  was  not  firmly  established,  he  built  pagodas 
at  Onbaung  and  Momeik,  and  ded.cated  lands  to  religion,  and  built  monasteries 
of  three  3tories  with  ten  surrounding  monasteries,  each  at  Onbaung  and  Momeik, 
and  invited  learned  monks  to  abide  there  practising  religion.  The  sawbwas  with 
all  their  counsellors  and  captains  listened  to  the  preaching  of  the  Law  four  holidays 
a   month,  and  learned  virtue.  His  Majesty  placed  one  half  the  scriptures  at  Onbaung 
and  the  other  half  at  Momeik.”  ^ 
Bayinnaung  unified  both  upper  and  lower  Burma  into 
one  empire,  and  throughout  his  realm,  on  all  his  subjects — 
Burman,  Taking,  Shan,  Muslim,  Portuguese — he  imposed 
the  religion  he  himself  professed.  It  was  indeed  a   most 
unreal  thing,  but  he  strictly  enforced  at  least  an  outward 
profession  of  Buddhism  by  all. 
Bayinnaung  sought  the  help  of  the  monks  and  dignitaries 
of  his  realm  to  prescribe  an  official  collection  of  law  books. 
The  Wareru  Dhammathat  was  accepted  as  the  standard 
authority,  and  the  monks  and  officials  compiled  the  Dhamma - 
thatkyaw  and  Kosaurigchok-1' 
Like  some  of  his  predecessors  Bayinnaung  made  presents 
of  copies  of  sacred  texts  to  monasteries,  organised  regular 
feeding  of  monks  and  built  works  of  merit  wherever  he  could 
throughout  his  conquered  territories,  even  as  far  as  Ayuthia 
(Siam).7 
He  adorned  the  spires  of  the  Shwedag6n  and  Shwemaw- 
daw  pagodas  with  jewels  of  his  crown — a   royal  custom — 
and  repaired  the  Shwedag6n,  adding  a   new  spire,  after  the 
earthquake  of  1 564.  Around  many  an  important  pagoda 
he  built  as  many  monasteries  as  there  were  years  in  his  life. 
On  many  an  occasion  he  bore  the  cost  of  the  ordination 
of  monks,  and  himself  supervised  mass  ordination  ceremonies 
at  the  Kalyanl  slma  near  Pegu.  His  chief  work  of  merit 
was  the  Mahazedi  pagoda  at  Pegu,  an  imposing  monument, 
where  he  is  said  to  have  enshrined  a   begging  bowl  and  a. 
tooth  relic  sent  by  a   Sinhalese  prince. 
5  Hmannan,  II.  324. 
6  Forchammer,  Essay ,  p.  67. 
7  Hmannan,  II.  376. 
26— 1445B

--- PAGE 221 ---
202 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
It  is  curious  that  the  Sasanavamsa  is  very  reticent 
about  him.  The  only  important  fact  recorded  is  that 
Bayinnaung  (Anekasetibhinda)  appointed  his  eldest  son 
Anuruddha  the  viceroy  of  Yonakarattha  (which  included  the 
countries  of  Haribhunja,8  Kamboja,  Khemavara  and 
Ayuddha  9  with  the  cities  of  Sokkaiaya  1(1  and  Kapunna),11 
and  sent  him  there  with  a   large  number  of  counsellors  to 
rule  as  his  representative.  Bayinnaung  also  appointed  a 
learned  thera  named  SaddhammacakkasamI  to  accompany 
the  prince  to  the  conquered  territory  for  the  ‘  purification  of 
the  religion’  there.12  Saddhammacakkasaml’s  work  seems 
to  have  been  crowned  with  success ;   for,  soon  we  read  of 
important  treatises  in  Pali  being  written  by  the  monks  of 
that  country.  Two  names  at  least  are  mentioned  in  the 
Sasanavamsa,  those  of  Nanavilasa  who  was  the  author  of 
the  Safikhyapakasaka  18  and  Sirimangala  who  wrote  the 
Mahgaladipam,  a   commentary,  and  a   ti\a  on  Nanavilasa’s 
work.  We  have  already  referred  to  a   wise  thera,  Tisasana- 
dhaja  who  flourished  during  Bayinnaung’s  reign.  Tisasana 
had  a   large  number  of  disciples  some  of  whom  were  special 
experts  in  Pariyatti  (pariyattifyovida).  An  interesting 
incident  is  recorded  of  his  times  in  the  Sasanavamsa.  A 
bhikkhu  belonging  to  the  Arhantagana  went  about  with  a 
headgear  and  used  a   palmyra  fan  coloured  in  variegated 
hues,  a   practice  that  went  against  the  rule  of  the  Vinaya. 
The  incident  is  briefly  touched  upon,  but  its  significance 
cannot  be  lose  sight  of  (p.  102). 
Bayinnaung’s  son  Nandabayin  (1581-99)  was  much  unlike 
his  father.  Himself  a   Burman,  he  had  a   deep  hatred  of  the 
8  Haribhufija  is  certainly  Haripunjaya  of  Tibetan  texts  and  tbe  Mainamatl 
copperplate  of  Ranavankamalla. 
9  Ayuddha  is  modern  Ayuthia  in  Siam. 
10  Sokkataya  is  certainly  Sukhodaya  in  Siam. 
11  Sasana,  p.  49. 
13  Sasana ,  p.  57. 
38  Hmannan,  III.  1 18.

--- PAGE 222 ---
MARAMMARATTHA 
203 
Talaings  though  he  had  his  capital  in  the  heart  of 
the  Talaing  country,  and  lived  surrounded  by  the  Talaings. 
He  introduced  conscription  and  branded  them  on  the  right 
hand  with  their  names,  rank  and  village.  Once  he  instituted 
a   large  scale  massacre  of  them  and  practically  brought  about 
a   reign  of  terror  among  them.  To  evade  his  cruel  persecu- 
tion many  of  them  fled  to  Arakan  and  Siam .  Quite  a   good 
number  took  refuge  in  the  Order,  but  even  then  Nandabayin 
would  not  let  them  escape  his  wrath.  He  had  them 
hounded  out  and  compelled  them  to  give  up  their  yellow 
robes.  He  did  not  even  trust  the  old  and  venerable  Talaing 
monks  whom  he  got  rid  of  by  banishing  them  in  Ava 
and  the  Shan  States. 
Pegu  was  gradually  losing  her  importance.  Frequent 
invasions  and  the  vandalism  of  her  own  .  rulers  were  mainly 
responsible  for  it;  but  the  Arakanese  inroads  of  1599-1600 
all  but  destroyed  the  Pegu  city.  The  rest  was  the  work  of 
Philip  di  Brito,  a   Portuguese  adventurer  who  successfully 
sought  his  way  to  official  recognition.  These  were  dark 
days  for  the  Talaings  and  for  the  religion.  Di  Brito  pleased 
himself  by  regularly  pillaging  the  pagodas  and  monas- 
teries and  appropriating  the  riches  for  himself.  He  would 
take  the  precious  stones  and  all  the  gold  from  the  images 
and  sell  them.14  To  such  a   downright  barbarian  religion 
and  religious  establishments  were  no  consideration,  and  it 
is  only  likely  that  the  monks  did  not  fare  well  in  his  hands.18 
This  “   sacrilegious  wretch  ”   was  done  to  death  by 
Mahadhammaraja  (Anaukpetlun,  1 605-28)  who  seems  to 
have  been  a   good  patron  of  the  religion.  The  king’s  bounty 
was  responsible  for  the  building  of  a   good  number  of 
li  Hmannan,  III.  118. 
]5  Di  Brito*  nicknamed  Nga  Zinga,  had  taken  an  Arakanese  wife  by  whom 
he  had  two  daughters,  Nandabhaya  and  Supabhadevl.  The  two  co-operated  in 
building  a   pagoda  in  the  Henzada  district.  Perhaps  they  wanted  to  atone  for  the 
sins  of  their  father  1   See,  An,  R.A.S.B, ,  1915,  p.  33.

--- PAGE 223 ---
204 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
monasteries  which  he  made  over  to  celebrated  theras  like 
Mahasamghanatha.  Some  of  them  were  experts  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Pariyatti,  and  perhaps  also  wrote  works  in 
Pali,  which,  however,  are  not  unfortunately  mentioned. 
Two  works  in  Burmese  written  by  monks  residing  in  the 
monasteries  built  by  him  find  honourable  mention ;   one  is  the 
Mani'kundalavatthu  by  Varabhisamghanalha,  and  the  other, 
Sattaraja-dhammavatthu,  by  another  monk  whose  name  is 
not  given.  Mahasamghanatha  was  a   great  expert  in  Pariyatti 
( 
ativiyapariyattivisarado )   and  it  was  perhaps  for  this  reason 
that  Mahadhammaraja,  the  king,  appointed  him  Samgharaja. 
Three  or  four  lines  of  the  Sasanavamsa  in  connection  with 
Mahadhammaraja’s  reign  introduces  us  to  a   very  interesting 
point  in  the  history  of  the  religion  of  this  time.  Two  monks 
who  had  come  from  the  Ramanna  country  gradually  gained, 
we  are  not  told  how,  the  favour  of  the  king  for  their 
knowledge  and  aptitude  for  affairs  of  the  world  {lo\adhammesu 
chekataya) .  For  them  the  king  built  two  viharas.  They 
were  also  vedasatthakovidasi  i.e.,  experts  in  Brahmanical 
learning,  but  were  weak  in  the  knowledge  of  Pariyatti,  and 
hence  were  excluded  from  the  theraparampara . 
II 
THE  BURMANS  AND  THE  TALAINGS 
Ever  since  the  coming  into  power  of  the  Anawrahta 
dynasty  holding  sway  also  over  the  Talaing  country  a 
keen  rivalry  had  grown  up  between  the  Burmans  and  the 
Talaings  which  manifested  itself  in  courtintrigues,  dynastic 
squabbles,  and  even  in  open  fights  and  large  scale  massacres. 
This  rivalry  was  the  keenest  when  the  Toungoo  dynasty  came 
to  occupy  lower  Burma  and  choose  Pegu  to  be  their  centre  of 
administration.  For  about  a   century  (1  539-1635)  they  lived  in 
the  heart  of  the  Talaing  country,  sometimes  befriending, 
but  often  fighting  with  and  effecting  a   massacre  of  them,  or

--- PAGE 224 ---
MarammaRattha 
205 
treating  them  so  cruelly  as  to  oblige  them  to  seek  shelter  in 
other  lands.  Like  the  Pagan  dynasty  the  Toungoo 
dynasty  also  effected  an  unification  of  Burma,  and  moreover, 
it  had  its  seat  of  government  in  the  midst  of  the  Talaings, 
but  the  two  races  could  not  evolve  a   better  understanding 
between  themselves.  On  the  contrary,  every  succeeding 
generation  witnessed  the  bitterness  grow  from  more  to 
more  till  at  last  the  Burmans,  being  a   more  virile  race  owing 
to  periodical  infusion  of  new  blood  from  the  north,  drove  the 
Talaings  to  a   position  of  least  importance.  Yet  the  Talaings 
were  the  people  who  had  transmitted  their*  finer  and  superior 
culture  and  civilisation  to  the  rude  Burmans  of  the  north. 
Even  the  monks  themselves  were  not  free  from  this 
racial  rivalry.  It  is  evident  from  the  Sasanavamsa  which 
is  written  frankly  from  the  Burmese  point  of  view  that 
Pannasami  hardly  cares  to  give  a   full  account  of  the  religion 
or  of  monastic  activities  among  the  Talaings  ;   indeed  his 
knowledge  of  the  activities  of  the  Taking  Samgha  is 
extremely  meagre.  Burmese  monks  had  no  very  high  regard 
for  the  religion  or  religious  scholarship .   in  the  Talaing 
country  ;   nor  had  the  Talaing  monks  any  better  idea  of, 
or  regard  for,  the  monks  of  upper  Burma,  i.e.,  the  land 
proper  of  the  Burmans.  A   very  interesting  glimpse  into 
this  racial  rivalry  is  afforded  by  a   story  recorded  in  the 
Sasanavamsa  which  will  presently  be  alluded  to. 
The  story  refers  to  the  reign  of  king  Ukkamsika,  other- 
wise known  as  Thalun  (1829-48),  an  important  figure  in  the 
history  of  the  religion.  He  was  personally  interested  in  the 
welfare  of  the  religion  and  built  a   number  of  monasteries, 
mostly  in  upper  Burma  which  he  made  over  as  gifts 
to  learned  and  venerable  theras  of  his  time.  Of  these 
monks  Tipitakalamkara,  Ariyalamkara,  Tisasanalamkara, 
Aggadhammalamkara,  Tilokaguru  and  Jambudhaja  were  the 
foremost.  Ukkamsika  came  to  the  throne  with  the  blessings  of 
the  Order  as  it  were,  for,  when  the  king  was  consecrated  and

--- PAGE 225 ---
206  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
took  the  title  of  Sirisudhammarajamahadhipati,  a   learned 
thera,  expert  in  Sanskrit,  rhetoric  and  poetics,  Maharatana- 
kara  by  name,  composed  the  Rajindarajabhidhayyadlpanl,10 
a   book  of  Pali  verses  eulogising  the  king. 
Both  Tipitakalamkara  and  Ariyalamkara  must  have  enjoyed 
wide  reputation,  for,  the  Sasanavamsa  gives  a   comparatively 
more  detailed  account  of  their  work  and  career.  Of  the  two, 
Tipitakalamkara  was  undoubtedly  the  more  versatile,  and  his 
career  more  interesting.  He  was  originally  named  Badara- 
vanavasi  thera,  expert  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Pariyatti  and 
belonged  to  the  Capata  sect.  Born  in  1578,  he  entered  the 
Order  at  the  age  of  thirteen.  He  then  came  to  Prome 
and  even  when  he  was  fifteen  composed  a   poetical  version 
of  the  V essantara  Jataka,  the  most  popular  of  the  birth 
stories  in  Burma.  At  twenty  he  received  the  upasampada 
ordination  at  Srlksetra  under  the  patronage  of  king  Veravijaya. 
Not  long  after  Prome  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  kings  of  the 
Toungoo  dynasty  of  Ratanapura  (Ava),  and  Badaravanavasi 
was  brought  by  the  king  to  the  royal  capital  where  on  the 
banks  of  the  Irrawaddy  the  younger  brother  of  king  Surakltti, 
eldest  son  of  Bayinnaung,  built  for  him  a   vihara,  while  the 
king  himself  gave  him  the  title  of  Tipitakalamkara.  Here 
Tipitakalamkara  seems  to  have  lived  for  a   long  time  ;   but  as 
he  grew  old  he  chose  to  retire  to  a   life  of  peace  and  solitude. 
So,  at  the  age  of  sixty  he  withdrew  to  the  Tiriyapabbata  where 
in  sylvan  seclusion  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  study  of  the 
Vinaya  and  produced  a   book  named  Vinayalamkara.  But  he 
could  not  long  remain  in  his  peaceful  retreat.  Even  while 
at  Prome  his  fame  had  already  spread  far  and  wide 
and  nowit  was  almost  impossible  for  him  to  keep  himself 
away  from"  active  life.  ,Two  years  later,  therefore,  the 
king  called  him  back,  built  for  him  a   new  vihara,  this 
time  at  Jeyyapura  (Saggaing)  on  the  Irrawaddy..  [While 
Sasana,  p.  102„

--- PAGE 226 ---
MARAMMARATTHA  207 
residing  here  he  engaged  himself  in  the  study  of  the 
Abhidhamma  and  brought  out  a   commentary  of  the  intro- 
ductory verses  of  the  Atthasalim.  He  also  wrote  another 
work,  the  YasaVJiddhanaVatthu,  at  the  request  of  the  king 
who  happened  to  be  the  younger  brother  of  king  Surak'tti. 
White  with  age,  Tipitakalamkara  was  at  the  height  of 
wisdom  and  glory  when  Ukkamsika  transferred  the  dynastic 
seat  of  administration  from  Pegu  to  Ava  in  Burma  proper. 
Ukkamsika  was  not  slow  to  recognise  his  merit  and  to 
honour  him  accordingly.  He  chose  him  to  be  one  of  his 
trusted  advisers  and  always  sought  his  good  counsel. 
Of  the  same  age  and  temperament  was  the  thera 
Ariyalamkara,  also  residing  at  Ava.  But  while  the  former 
was  a   versatile  intellect  expert  in  many  sacred  texts,  the 
latter  was  more  interested  in  grammar.  Both  of  them 
however  became  the  preceptors  of  king  Ukkamsika.  Ariya- 
lamkara had  a   disciple,  known  as  the  second  or  younger 
Ariyalamkara,  who  also,  evidently  by  his  learning  and 
character,  made  himself  known  and  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  king  who  built  for  him  a   monastery. 
At  this  time,  once  while  king  Ukkamsika  was  sojourning 
at  Pegu  he  heard  the  Talaings  (Ramannaratthavasina)  remark, 
“The  monks  of  the  Maramma  country  are  experts  neither  in 
the  Pariyatti  (sacred  texts)  nor  in  the  Vedasatthas”. 
Naturally  the  king,  himself  a   Marammaratthika,  felt  his 
racial  pride  hurt.  He  therefore  sent  a   message  to  the  thera 
residing  in  the  large  vihara  of  his  city  to  send  to  him  at  Pegu 
several  bhikkhus  between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age  and 
well-versed  in  the  sacred  texts  and  the  Vedasatthas.  The 
thera  accordingly  sent  Tipitakalamkara,  Tilokalamkara  and 
Tisasanalamkara  with  thirty  disciples  to  Harasavatxnagara 
(Pegu)  where  they  settled  themselves  in  a   vihara  built 
for  them  by  the  king.  Then  on  uposatha  days  he  invited 
the  monks  of  the  Ramanna  country  to  the  Sudhammasala 
to  hold  discussions  with  the  theras  who  had  come

--- PAGE 227 ---
208 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
from  the  Maramma  country.  After  several  discussions  the 
Talaing  monks  admitted  that  the  Burmese  monks  were  not  so 
devoid  of  wisdom  as  they  had  considered  them  to  have  been. 
And  they  said,  “Formerly  we  thought  that  in  the  Maramma 
country  there  were  no  monks  learned  in  the  sacred  texts  and 
in  the  V edasatihas  ;   now  we  find  that  they  indeed  are  great 
experts  in  the  texts  and  the  saUkas.”  This  was  indeed  a 
triumph  for  the  Burmese  monks ;   but  they  themselves  were  all 
humility.  Before  leaving  Pegu  they  went  to  see  and  pay  their 
respects  to  the  wise  and  venerable  Talaing  thera,  Tilokaguru, 
the  chief  among  the  theras  of  the  Ramannarattha.  Tilokaguru 
had  a   discussion  with  them  and  he  was  evidently  very  much 
impressed  by  their  character  and  wisdom. 
At  this  time  Ukkamsika’s  younger  brother  died,  and  his 
death  was  followed  by  a   dramatic  episode  which  forms  p   art  of 
a   well-laid  court  intrigue.  As  a   political  incident  it  has 
very  little  importance,  but  in  the  Sasanavamsa  it  is  described 
in  some  detail,  evidently  to  bring  forth  in  prominent 
relief  the  very  important  role  Buddhist  monks  often  played 
in  court  and  state  affairs.  The  story  is  therefore  of  interest 
and  may  be  recounted  here. 
On  the  death  of  the  king’s  younger  brother,  the  king’s 
son,  the  governor  (bhojaka)  of  Uccanagara  conspired  to 
dethrone  his  father  and  suddenly  sieged  the  palace.  Taken 
by  surprise  the  king  fled,  taking  away  with  him  some  of  the 
precious  royal  jewels  and  accompanied  by  two  amatyas, 
Nandajeya  and  Rajayodha.  When  they  came  upon  the  river 
(evidently  the  Irrawaddy)  they  saw  a   samanera  about  to  cross 
it ;   they  therefore  entreated  him  to  take  them  on  his  boat. 
Eventually  he  agreed  and  when  they  had  crossed  the  river 
they  went  to  the  four-storied  vihara  where  theiy  disclosed 
their  identity  and  relating  the  whole  story  to  the  thera-in- 
charge  sought  the  protection  of  the  vihara.  And  the  thera 
of  the  four-storied  vihara  spoke  thus  to  the  king,  “O  king, 
we  are  samanas,  we  are  not  able  to  prevent  this  calamity.

--- PAGE 228 ---
MARAMMARATTHA 
209 
But  there  is  one  way  out.  The  thera  living  in  the  Nisinna- 
vihara  is  very  clever  and  intelligent  in  worldly  matters  (gihi- 
kammesu  ativiya  cheJ^o).  You  would  therefore  do  well  to  go 
to  him  and  discuss  matters  with  him .  
”   So  the  king  with 
his  amatyas  went  there  and  explained  to  the  thera  the  whole 
affair,  on  which  the  latter  replied,  “O  king,  you  have  no 
reason  to  fear”  and  so  saying  gave  him  shelter.  The  thera 
did  also  some  thing  more ;   he  called  together  all  the  bhikkhus 
of  his  own  vihara  as  well  as  those  of  another  vihara  close 
by,  and  arming  them  with  dandas  posted  them  on  all  sides  of 
the  vihara  in  such  a   way  as  to  form  a   stout  barricade.  The 
king’s  son  and  his  followers  were  not  prepared  for  such  a 
defence  ;   they  were  overawed  and  outwitted  and  went  back. 
The  attempted  coup  failed  ;   the  king  went  back  to  the 
capital  and  mounted  again  on  the  throne.17  As  a   mark  of 
gratefulness  and  rejoicing  he  invited  his  saviours  the  theras  to 
the  palace  and  treated  them  to  a   feast.  And  more,  he  built  a 
number  of  viharas  and  made  them  over  to  wise  and  venerable 
theras  on  some  of  whom  he  also  conferred  honours  and  titles ; 
for  example,  he  installed  a   bhikkhu  expert  in  the  Vedasatthas 
in  one  of  his  newly  built  viharas  and  conferred  on  him 
the  title  of  Dhammanandarajaguru.  But  Ukkamsika’s  bounties 
did  not  end  there.  In  fact  the  Sasanavamsa  devotes  a 
number  of  pages  in  giving  an  account  of  his  work  for 
the  religion  and  monastic  scholarship  during  his  reign. 
Nor  were  his  bounties  confined  to  upper  Burma.  He 
erected  the  Rajamanicula  cetiya  at  Sirikhettanagara,  on  four 
sides  of  which  he  again  built  four  viharas.  One  of  these 
was  destroyed  by  fire,  while  the  three  others  were  made  over 
to  three  theras  learned  in  sacred  texts:  The  mahathera  resi- 
ding in  the  Dakkhinavanarama  expounded  in  Burmese  a 
commentary  of  the  Kaccayanagandha  while  the  thera  residing 
in  the  western  monastery  brought  out  an  edition  of  the  Nyasa. 
W   The  story  of  the  coup  as  given  in  the  jRajaOamsa  Yazauotn  is  slightly  differ- 
ent.  See,  Phayre,  History  of  Burma ,  pp.  135-36? 
27— H45B

--- PAGE 229 ---
210 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Ukkamsika  was  also  privileged  to  extend  patronage  to 
another  learned  thera  named  Jambudhaja  of  Kukhananagara 
(or  Pukhananagara  ?= Pagan)  for  whom  the  king  built  a 
vihara.  He  was  introduced  to  Ukkamsika  by  the  thera  dwell- 
ing in  the  Tiriyapabbatavihara,  evidently  Tipitakalamkara 
himself ;   the  latter  was  greatly  impressed,  in  course  of  a   dis- 
cussion, with  the  learning  and  wisdom  of  Jambudhaja  (named 
by  the  king  as  jambudlpadhaja).  Jambudhaja  was  a   saddhi- 
viharika  of  Dhammanandathera  who  in  his  turn  was  the 
monk-brother  of  Jotipunnathera,  and  all  of  them  belonged  to 
the  Arhanta  sect.  Jambudhaja  is  credited  with  having 
written  a   commentary  in  Burmese  of  the  Vinayattha\atha .1S 
One  of  his  colleagues,  Maniratana  thera  translated  in 
Burmese,  evidently  for  those  who  could  not  read  the  Pali 
texts,  the  Atthasalini,  the  Sammohavinodanl,  the  Kafikha- 
vitarani,  the  Abhidhammatfhavibhavani  and  the  Sankhepa- 
vannani i.19 
Ukkamsika ’s  successor  Sirinandadhammaraja-pavaradhi- 
patiraja  (Pindale,  1648-61)  continued  the  work  of  his  prede- 
cessor, and  the  tradition  of  monastic  learning  was  kept  alive 
in  the  viharas  that  the  king’s  bounties  had  reared  up.  He 
made  over  one  vihara  to  Tilokalamkara  thera  and  another  at 
Saggaing  to  Dathanagarajaguru  thera.  The  latter  wrote  a 
tikja  called  Nirutiisaramanjusa  of  the  Nyasa. 
A   clear  glimpse  of  the  primitive  Nat-worship  durring 
Pindale ’s  reign  is  afforded  by  a   passage  of  the  SasanaVamsa. 
The  date  is  given  as  1012  of  the  Burmese  era  (=  1650)  when 
the  king  and  his  people  were  troubled  by  an  evil  omen  that  ■ 
suggested  the  leaving  of  the  capital  by  the  tutelary  gods  or 
18  He  is  also  said  to  have  been  the  author  of  the  Sarnvannananayadipam,  the 
Niruttisamgaha  and  the  Sarvajnanayadipani.  See,  Nevill,  Catalogue.  Another 
book  ascribed  to  him  is  the  Rupabhedapa\asani.  Fausboll.  Cat.  Mand ,  Mss.,  p,  50. 
19  The  first  two,  being  Buddhaghosa’s  commentary  on  Dhammasangani  and 
Vibhanga }  are  concerned  with  the  A   bhidhamma  ;   so  are  the  last  two  which  are 
later  ti\as  on  the  Ahhidhamma,  The  third  alone,  being  Buddhaghosa’s  commen- 
tary on  the  Patimokkha ,  is  concerned  with  the  Vinaya,

--- PAGE 230 ---
MARAMMARAT"rHA 
21 1 
the  Nat  spirits  of  the  city.  Terror-stricken  the  people  offered 
worship  to  the  gods  ;   but  nothing  could  avert  the 
danger  that  came  hovering  over  the  political  horizon  of 
the  country,  and  threatened  the  peaceful  career  of  the 
religion.  Chinese  free-booters  swarmed  downwards  and 
trampling  all  opposition  reached  as  far  as  Taungbalu 
and  Tada-U  near  Ava.  They  plundered  the  villages, 
slaughtered  the  men-folk,  carried  off  women  and  burnt 
monasteries,  while  the  monks  fled  in  terror  to  the 
woods.  For  three  years  the  Chinese  continued  their  depre- 
dations carrying  their  ravages  as  far  down  as  Pagan.  The 
incident  is  only  touched  upon  in  the  Sasanavamsa  and  a 
line  is  added  to  say  that  as  a   result  of  these  Chinese  raids  the 
religion  was  dimmed  as  the  moon  by  clouds  ( 
  Tasmin  c a   ^a/e 
Ctnaranno  yodha  agantva  Marammarattham  dusesum. 
Sasanam  abbhapaticchanno  Viya  cando  dubbalam  ahosi). 
The  comment  of  our  chronicle  is  brief,  but  it  is  not  without 
significance.  Times  were  really  bad  and  troublesome,  and 
not  at  all  conducive  to  peaceful  scholarly  pursuits ;   indeed,  at 
times  it  seemed  that  monastic  learning  and  activities  would 
come  to  a   standstill.  It  is  therefore  important  to  read  in  the 
Sasanavamsa  itself  that  once  the  thera  residing  in  the 
Tiriyapabbata  vihara  (doubtless,  Tipitakalamkara),  said, 
perhaps  half  seriously  and  half  in  jest,  to  Aggadhammalam- 
kara,  “After  my  death  you  will  be  the  only  scholar  in  the 
world  well-read  in  sacred  texts .  
’  *  Tipitakalamkara  perhaps 
hinted  at  the  unfortunate  state  of  monastic  scholarship  that 
he  lived  to  witness ;   he  may  have  exaggerated  in  jest  the  real 
state  of  things,  but  it  appears  there  was  some  truth  in  his 
utterance.  Aggadhammalamkara  in  his  humility  did  not 
accept  the  compliment  so  proffered,  and  pointed  out  to 
Ariyalamkara  thera  who  alone,  he  thought,  had  a   legitimate 
claim  to  such  a   compliment. 
But  no  calamity  seems  to  have  been  so  overpowering  as  to 
curb  the  zeal-  and  ardour  of  the  kings  of  Burma  for  their

--- PAGE 231 ---
2 1 2 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
religion;  they  were  good  Buddhists,  and  never  did  they  waver 
from  their  kingly  duty  of  acting  as  the  patron-guardian  of  the 
faith  of  the  country.  Moreover,  whatever  their  numerical 
strength,  the  monks  were  the  real  spokesmen  of  the  people 
and  the  monasteries  were  the  popular  assemblies  as  it  were ; 
and  each  king  that  came  to  the  throne  sought  to  win  the 
monks  over  to  his  side.  We  therefore  see  kings  building 
new  viharas  even  in  the  midst  of  great  political  turmoil 
and  social  and  economic  trouble  and  extending  generous 
bounties  to  the  Samgha.  Pindale  was  no  exception  ;   it  was  at 
his  instance  that  one  of  the  viharas  to  the  east  of  the  royal  city 
was  made  over  to  the  great  thera  Aggadhammalamkara.  In 
the  seclusion  of  his  vihara  he  brought  out  Burmese  transla- 
tions of  Kaccayana,  the  Abhidhammatthasangaha,  the  Matilda 
(of  the  Dhammasang am),  the  Dh.atuk.atha,  the  Yamaka  and 
the  Patthana.  It  also  fell  to  his  lot  to  be  a   chronicler,  for,  at 
the  request  of  the  next  king  (Mahapavaradhammaraja, 
1661-72),  he  wrote  the  Rajavamsasankhepa,  a   summary  of 
the  RajaVamsa  or  the  Chronicle  of  Kings.  Among  other 
wise  and  venerable  theras  of  this  time  were  Jinaramathera, 
Gunagandhathera,  Gunasarathera,  and  Sujatathera,  the  last 
having  been  a   disciple  of  Gunagandhathera. 
The  next  king  Narawara  (1672-73)  styled  Mahaslhasura- 
dhammaraja)  even  within  the  span  of  about  a   year  that  he 
lived  to  reign  built  several  viharas  and  became  the  patron  of 
venerable  theras  like  Tilokaguru  (or  Tilogagaru),  his 
comrade  (Saddhiviharil^a)  Tejodipa,  and  of  Tilokalamkara. 
Tejodipa  is  said  to  have  written  a   ti\a  on  the  Paritta  during 
the  reign  of  Narawara.  Perhaps  it  was  also  during  his 
reign  that  a   thera,  a   resident  of  the  Pubbarama  vihara  of 
Mulavasagama  (in  the  Ava  district)  wrote  the  Gulatthadlparii 
and  the  Visuddhimaggaganthipadattha  in  Pali,  and  translated 
the  Nettipa\arctna  in  Burmese.  A   very  curious  tale  is  told 
about  him  which  throws  some  light  on  the  strictness  of 
monastic  discipline  in  those  days.  The  thera,  contrary  to

--- PAGE 232 ---
marammarattha  213 
Vinaya  rules,  used  to  reside  within  the  boundaries  of  the 
village,  and  comfort  himself  by  using  a   head-covering 
(sisavethana)  and  a   palmyra  fan  (talapattani).  Doubtless, 
other  theras  did  not  like  this  kind  of  Vinayavilomacara,  and 
the  thera  had  afterwards  to  give  up  these  practices  and  go  to 
live  in  the  forest.  The  Sasanavamsa  gives  him  a   compliment 
when  it  says  that  he  was  nevertheless  deeply  learned  and  was 
an  expert  in  grammar. 
Narawara’s  younger  brother  who  came  to  the  throne  was 
equally  an  enthusiast  in  the  cause  of  the  religion.  The  kingly 
duty  of  building  viharas  was  continued,  and  at  least  two  wise 
theras  received  his  good  patronage.  They  were  Sirisad- 
dhammathera  and  Devacakkobhasathera  ;   of  the  two, 
Devacakkobhasa  endeared  himself  to  the  king  more,  perhaps 
for  his  expert  knowledge  of  the  vedasatthas — he  was 
admittedly  weak  jjgp  the  knowledge  of  sacred  texts.  But 
whatever  may  have  been  the  extent  of  his  knowledge, 
his  proficiency  in  the  Abhidhamma  and  his  system  of 
teaching  the  Patthana  ( 
Pa\arana ) 20  was  very  much  admired 
by  the  king.  He  commanded  that  the  Pait'hana  should  be 
studied  in  all  the  monasteries  in  Marammarattha  as  well  as  in 
Ramannarattha . 
But  in  spite  of  books  being  written  and  viharas  being 
built,  the  religion  itself  was  languishing ;   inwardly  it  was 
showing  signs  of  devitalisation,  owing  perhaps  to  monks 
themselves  often  behaving  contrary  to  Vinaya  rules  and 
kings  distributing  patronage  indiscriminately.  In  fact, 
the  Sasanavamsa  refers  to  such  indiscriminate  distribution 
of  patronage  by  the  last  few  kings  of  the  Toungoo 
dynasty.2'  The  succession  of  the  theras  no  doubt  conti- 
nued unbroken,  but  laxity  in  discipline  and  occasional 
transgression  by  monks  of  Vinaya  rules  were  only  symp- 
toms of  a   deeper  trouble  brewing  up  within  the  Order. 
20  The  seventh  book  of  the  A   bhidhamma > 
21  From  NaraWara,  1672-73  to  Mahaclhammayazaclipali,  1 773-52^

--- PAGE 233 ---
1 14  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
It  was  the  old  story  of  conflict  between  the  orthodox  school 
that  always  strived  to  conform  to  the  spirit  and  letter  of  the 
Vinaya  code  of  discipline  and  the  heterodox  school  (acariyapa- 
veni)  that  drifted  more  and  more  from  the  original  buddhaVa- 
canam  to  their  own  interpretation  of  them.  The  Sasana- 
Vamsa  frankly  disapproves  of  this  hetferodox  school,22  and 
says  that  the  moon  of  the  religion  was  not  very  clear  at  this 
time  ( 
jinasasanam  abbhantare  cande  viya  atiparisuddhatn 
na  ahosi). 
This  brings  us  almost  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth 
century  (1698),  and  we  may  now  pause  to  review  the 
main  traits  of  our  account  of  the  religion  during  the 
two  centuries  we  are  leaving  behind.  The  sixteenth  century 
started  with  the  drive  of  a   religious  reformation  that  was 
still  fresh  in  memory  ;   
it  was  yet  potent  to  keep  the' purity  of 
monastic  tradition  alive  for  a   few  more  decides.  There  was 
no  particular  dissension  within  the  Order,  and  no  disturbing 
movement  of  any  importance  ;   but  as  years  rolled  on  the 
Samgha  began  to  show  signs  of  disruption  and  disintegration. 
Controversies  centering  round  questions  of  monastic  discipline 
gave  rise  to  factions  within  the  church  and  even  before  the 
seventeenth  century  was  out,  the  Order  divided  itself  into  two 
large  contending  sections  that  came  to  engage  themselves  in  a 
long  struggle.  In  course  of  the  struggle  the  Samgha  effected 
a   purging  of  the  undesirable  elements  that  had  accumulated 
during  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries. 
The  history  of  Burma  during  these  two  centuries  is  but  a 
series  of  petty  squabbles,  intrigues  and  counter  intrigues  and 
wars  and  rebellions  in  which  the  kings  always  played  the 
most  important  role  ;   yet  it  fills  one  with  admiration  to  see 
that  even  in  the  midst  of  such  unsettled  state  of  affairs  the 
kings  found  time  and  interest  in  the  activities  of  the  religious 
order  to  which  they  never  shirked  their  duty,  whatever 
22  Sasatiavatnsa,  p.  117.

--- PAGE 234 ---
MARAMMARATTHA 
215 
the  motive  of  their  rich  patronage  and  vigilant  care.  Vandals 
and  sacriligious  wretches  some  of  them  indeed  were,  but 
they  were  not  many  ;   and  persons  were  not  wanting  to 
repair  the  damage  done  to  the  religion  by  such  people. 
And,  because  the  majority  of  the  kings  were  good 
Buddhists  •  we  hear  of  the  realm  being  continually  studded 
with  cetiyas  and  viharas  in  whose  seclusion  the  monks 
carried  on  their  scholarly  pursuits,  it  is  often  tedious  to  detail 
their  names  and  works  and  the  foundations  to  which  they 
belonged,  but  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  may  get  an 
idea  of  the  monastic  life  of  the  times  and  the  branches  of 
learning  in  which  they  were  interested.  A   careful  analysis 
of  the  subjects  dealt  with  by  the  monks  will  show  that 
though  grammatical  treatises  continued  to  be  written  interest 
in  grammar  which  had  been  the  main  subject  of  study  in 
the  preceding  centuries  had  comparatively  thinned.  The 
main  interest  now  centred  round  the  more  abstract  study 
of  the  Abhiddhamma,.  and  the  large  majority  of  the  works 
of  this  period  relates  to  that  subject.  It  is  permissible  to 
assume  that  not  individual  theras  alone  but  collectively  all 
samanas  in  the  monasteries  in  upper  Burma  during  the 
seventeenth  century  interested  themselves  more  in  the 
Abhidhamma  than  in  anything  else.28 
Another  point  to  be  noticed  in  this  connection  is  the 
growing  number  of  scholars  writing  or  translating  works  in 
Burmese.  This  may  have  been  due,  it  seems,  more  than 
anything  else  to  the  widening  circle  of  readers  interested  in 
the  study  of  the  sacred  texts  of  the  religion,  and  to  the 
growth  of  the  vernacular  language  itself  which  had  by  this 
time  reached  a   stage  so  as  to  be  able  to  express  the  most 
abstruse  ideas  of  metaphysics.  Moreover,  the  teachers  of 
the  religion  perhaps  thought,  and  rightly  so,  that  they  should 
be  able  to  reach  a   wider  public  through  a   language  they 
?3  This  has  also  been  enphasised  by  Dr,  Bode,  pp,  58-59,  61.

--- PAGE 235 ---
216 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
learnt  from  the  cradle  than  through  Pali  which  required  at 
least  a   few  years  of  strenuous  study.  Incidentally,  this  gives 
us  an  idea  of  the  numerical  strength  of  the  Order  which 
seems  to  have  grown  larger,  as  well  as  of  the  people  who 
were  outside  it  but  no  less  interested  in  the  religion.  It 
was  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  not  unoften  members  of 
the  laity  joined  the  Order  in  numbers  not  always  for  the  love 
of  monastic  life,  but  just  to  escape  from  the  stormy  and 
calamitous  days  in  which  their  lot  was  cast.

--- PAGE 236 ---
CHAPTER  FIVE 
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
Eighteenth  Century  and  after 
I 
THE  background 
With  the  coining  to  the  throne  of  King  Sirimahaslhasura- 
sudhammaraja  (Sane,  1693-1714),  son  of  his  predecessor 
Myinrekyawdin,  the  history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma  enters  a 
new  chapter.  We  have  seen  that  the  few  events  of  impor- 
tance that  turned  the  course  of  this  history  or  enthused  the 
Samgha  into  creative  activity  were  all  concerned  with  the 
preservation  or  resuscitation  of  the  original  disciplinary  purity 
of  the  faith,  and  centred  therefore  round  the  Vinaya  rules 
of  monastic  discipline.  That  history  was  to  repeat 
itself.  The  dawn  of  the  eighteenth  century  found  the 
Samgha  in  Burma  divided  into  two  opposing  camps, 
plunging  itself  into  a   century-long  feud  that  came  essentially 
to  centre  round  certain  Vinaya  rules,  and  not  in  regard  to 
any  deep  ethical  or  metaphysical  question  or  speculation  in 
respect  of  the  religion.  To  men  outside  the  Order,  the  rules 
whose  transgression  caused  so  much  heat  and  controversy 
may  have  appeared  trivial  and  uninteresting,  but  to  those  who 
were  inside  it  and  took  sides  willingly  or  otherwise,  the  con- 
troversy raised  issues  which  appeared  to  be  so  vital  that  they 
could  even  lay  down  their  lives  and  make  of  themselves 
martyrs  to  their  cause;  indeed,  some  of  them  did  really 
stake  their  lives  for  their  convictions.  To  one  who  reads 
8  -1445B

--- PAGE 237 ---
2i8 
THERA. VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
through  the  whole  length  of  the  Sasanavamsa  account  of  the 
Parupana-Ekamsika  controversy,  as  it  is  conveniently  called, 
the  story  would  seem  to  be  not  only  tedious  but  out  of  all 
proportion,  since  it  carries  hardly  any  import  of  real  signi- 
ficance for  the  modern  reader.  But  at  the  same  time  it  brings 
forth  at  once  the  importance  that  contemporary  Buddhist 
church  of  Burma  attached  to  it.  We  must  not  forget  that  the 
Sasanavamsa  account  is  rendered  by  a   member  of  one  of  the 
two  opposing  factions  of  the  Order,  namely  PannasamT  who 
flourished  some  fifty  years  after  the  curtain  had  been  finally 
dropped  on  that  eventful  drama.  It  is  likely  that  other 
members  of  the  Order  also  felt  equally  strongly  about  it. 
This  will  be  evident  from  the  passionate  zeal  with  which  the 
participants  in  the  feud  fought  for  their  respective  causes.  To 
the  Order,  therefore,  the  struggle  was  as  real  as  it  was 
momentous.  It  is  clear  that  Pannasami  relates  the  whole  story 
in  a   partisan  spirit,  an  ardent  upholder  of  Parupana  viewthat 
he  was,  but  nevertheless  he  helps  us  to  form  a   correct  idea 
of  the  struggle  and  its  importance. 
It  will  further  be  seen  that  the  story  of  this  controversy 
occupies  the  whole  canvas  of  the  history  of  the  religion 
for  more  than  a   century,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  any 
account  of  monastic  scholarship,  nothing  to  speak  of 
political  vicissitudes  that  affected  the  Samgha.  This 
was  evidently  due  to  the  fact  that  it  was  the  only  important 
event  which  the  Samgha  was  all  this  time  interested 
in,  so  much  so  that  the  history  of  the  feud 
was  really  the  history  of  the  Samgha.  Moreover,  the 
Samgha  was  so  wholly  taken  up  with  the  controversy  and 
politically  the  country  was  in  such  a   state  of  chaos  and 
anarchy  that  scholarly  pursuits  in  the  monasteries  and  other 
activities  of  the  Order  could  hardly  have  a   flourishing  exis- 
tence. Mention  is  made  of  a   large  number  of  theras,  but  of 
their  scholarly  activities  that  can  be  compared  with  those 
of  the  preceding  centuries  there  is  hardly  any  evidence,

--- PAGE 238 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
219 
II 
BEGINNING  OF  THE  CONTROVERSY 
In  or  about  the  year  1 700  when  Sane  was  on  the  throne 
at  Ava,  a   thera  named  Gunabhilamkara,  residing  in  the 
village  of  Tunna,  indulged,  while  in  his  daily  round  in  the 
village,  in  the  luxuries  of  using  a   head-covering  and  a 
palmyra-fan.’  Moreover,  he  used  to,  and  this  was  a   most 
objectionable  practice,  wear  the  uttarasanga  or  upper  robe 
in  such  a   way  as  to  leave  his  one  shoulder  un- 
covered. Gunabhilamkara’ s  indulgence  in  such  forbidden 
luxuries  emboldened  some  of  his  comrades  to  follow 
in  his  steps,  and  soon  he  gathered  around  him  a   consider- 
able number  of  followers  who  came  to  be  known  as 
Ekamsikas  (i.e.,  those  who  covered  only  one  of  their 
shoulders).  The  Ekamsikas,  moreover,  it  is  alleged  in  the 
Sasanavamsa,  were  not  strong  in  the  sacred  texts.  The 
heterodox  practices  of  the  Ekamsikas  were  obviously  not 
liked  by  the  orthodox  sections  of  the  Order  who  presumably 
constituted  the  majority.  They,  under  their  leaders 
Buddhankarathera,  Cittathera,  Sunandathera  and  Kalyana- 
thera,  continued  in  their  old  and  usual  practice,  i.e.,  they 
used  to  cover  both  their  shoulders  when  out  on  their  daily 
village  rounds  for  alms,  and  uncovered  one  only  when  they 
met  a   superior,  to  show  him  respect.  They  thus  came  to  be 
known  as  Parupanas.  The  Parupanas  had  sanction  of  their 
practices,  so  they  held,  in  their  sacred  texts  ;   in  fact,  they 
clung  strictly  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya.  It  was  here  that  the 
Ekamsikas  were  at  a   disadvantage,  for  they  had  really  no 
authoritative  sanction  of  their  practices  in  any  of  the  sacred 
texts.  To  get  over  this  disadvantage  the  Ekamsikas  did  some- 
1  Readers  will  remember  tbat  an  exactly  similar  transgression  of  Vinaya  rules 
took  place  in  one  of  the  viharas  of  Ava  during  the  reign  of  Narwara  (1672-73).  It 
appears  that  there  was  a   definite  movement  among  certain  sections  of  the  Saipgha 
against  the  more  orthodox  sections*

--- PAGE 239 ---
220  THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
thing  that  not  only  revealed  the  inherent  weakness  of  their 
cause,  but  brought  as  well  their  own  defeat.  They  asserted 
(a  false  assertion,  no  doubt)  that  they  followed  the  practices 
taught  by  an  orthodox  thera  named  Saddhammacari  who  had 
once  visited  Ceylon ;   but  what  was  worse,  they  bribed  a 
monk  of  disreputable  character,  one  who  had  long  left  the 
Order,  and  had  a   book  written  by  him  supporting  their  view 
and  practice.  When  the  controversy  between  the  Ekamsikas 
and  the  Parupanas  was  slowly  brewing  up,  the  Samgha  came 
to  be  disturbed  further  by  another  dispute. 
A   certain  thera  became  the  leader  of  a   group  of  monks 
residing  in  the  villages,  and  began  to  persuade  the  monks 
residing  in  the  solitary  retreat  of  forests  to  leave  their  forest 
abodes  and  come  to  the  village  viharas.  The  matter  took 
such  a   turn  that  the  king  had  to  issue  an  order  asking  the 
monks  residing  in  villages  not  to  enter  the  precincts  of  monks 
residing  in  forests.  The  Parupana-Ekarnsika  controversy  had 
not  yet,  however,  been  brought  to  a   fighting  point  to  engage 
the  attention  of  the  king. 
It  was  about  this  time — in  I   709 — that  Captain  Alex. 
Hamilton  visited  Syriam.  He  pays  a   striking  tribute  to  the 
hospitality  and  kindness  of  the  Buddhist  Samgha  of  Burma ; 
his  account  also  furnishes  an  incidental  picture  of  the  life  of 
average  Burmese  monks : 
lf  When  shipwrecked  mariners  come  to  their  Baws,  they  find  a   great  deal  of 
hospitality,  both  in  food  and  raiment,  and  have  letters  of  recommendation  from  the 
Priests  of  one  Convent  to  those  of  another  on  the  road  they  design  to  travel,  where 
they  may  expect  vessels  to  transport  them  to  Syriam ;   and  if  any  be  sick  or  maim’d 
the  Priests,  who  are  the  Peguers’  chief  physicians,  keep  them  in  their  Convent,  till 
they  are  cured,  and  then  furnish  them  with  letters,  as  is  above  observed,  for  they 
never  enquire  which  way  a   stranger  worships  God,  but  if  he  is  human,  he  is  the 
object  of  their  charity.” 
The  reign  of  the  next  king  (Mahaslhasuradhammarajadhi- 
raja  (Hshinpyushin,  1714-33)  introduces  us  to  a   learned 
thera,  Ukkamsamala,  who  had  been  installed  in  a   large 
monastery  at  Ava  built  by  a   certain  high  military  official.

--- PAGE 240 ---
2  21 
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
Ukkamsamala  was  an  expert  in  sacred  texts  and  in  other 
books,  and  wrote  the  Vannabodhana  and  the  Likhananaya, 
both  evidently  being  treatises  on  grammar.  He  was  a 
Parupana  and  the  recognised  leader  of  that  party  ;   he  tried 
to  prove  that  the  Parupana  practice  had  its  sanction  in  ancient 
sacred  texts,  but  the  Ekamsikas  opposed  his  claim  saying  that 
the  Parupana  practice  was  against  their  own  traditions. 
The  king  now  felt  called  upon  to  intervene.  He 
appointed  a   committee  of  four  theras,  including  among 
others,  Suhatthathera  and  Buddhankurathera,  and  asked 
them  to  give  a   decision  on  the  basis  of  evidence  to  be  put 
forward  by  the  representatives  of  both  parties  who  were  to  be 
invited  to  present  their  case  before  the  committee.  But  the 
members  of  the  committee  were  not  well-read  enough  in  the 
sacred  texts,  and  being  favourites  of  the  king  wanted  only  to 
please  him.  However,  the  Ekamsikas  could  not  convince  the 
king  of  the  justness  of  their  cause,  and  the  question  remained 
unsettled. 
The  year  1 733  saw  Mahadammayazadipati  (1733-52)  on 
the  throne  at  Ava.  He  was  a   weak  personality  and  always 
allowed  things  to  drift.  His  reign  suffered  severe  military 
reverses  from  various  quarters,  and  at  last  saw  the  final 
extinction  of  the  dynasty  to  which  he  belonged.  Nor  did 
he  fare  better  in  his  role  as  referee  in  the  religious  dispute 
that  was  daily  growing  bitter.  But  he  seems  to  have  been  a 
good  patron  of  the  faith.  The  SasanaVamsa  refers  to  his 
religious  foundations  and  patronage  of  religious  teachers,  one 
of  whom  was  the  wise  thera  Nanavara.  Nana  vara  hailed  from 
the  village  of  Jalasutta  near  Kukhananagara  (evidently 
Pagan)  whence  he  was  brought  by  the  king  and  installed  as 
his  acariya.  Coming  to  the  capital,  he  devoted  himself  to 
scholarly  pursuits  and  for  the  benefit  of  his  pupils  he  first 
wrote  a   ganthipadattha  (a  commentary  on  the  difficult 
words)  of  the  Abhidhammatthasamgaha-pakarana.  Next 
he  wrote  two  other  books,  one  a   glossary  on  the  difficult

--- PAGE 241 ---
222 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
words  or  a   ganthipadattha  of  the  A   tthasalini,  and  another 
the  SuraVinicchaya.  Nanavara’s  scholarship  drew  the 
admiration  of  the  king,  and  as  a   good  Buddhist  he  asked  his 
acariya  to  bring  out  in  Burmese  a   commentary  on  the 
Abhidhanappadipifya  which  he  did  with  evident  pleasure ; 
he  also  brought  out,  obviously  to  please  his  patron,  the  Raja- 
dhirajanamatthappakasini,  a   book  on  the  naming  of  kings, 
an  essay  in  royal  eulogy.1"  But  with  all  his  scholarship  and 
royal  patronage  at  his  back  he  proved  himself  to  be  an 
unsuccessful  spouse  of  his  party  in  the  great  religious 
dispute  of  his  time. 
Nanavara  was  a   Parupana,  and  as  he  was  the  royal 
acariya  he  naturally  led  the  party  holding  Parupana  views, 
while  the  Ekamsikas  found  a   leader  in  Pasamsathera.  They 
engaged  themselves  in  a   bitter  strife  which  was  referred  to  by 
the  king  to  one  of  his  favourite  theras  for  decision.  This 
thera  was  thoroughly  incompetent  for  the  responsible  task 
that  devolved  on  him.  He  was  ignorant  of  sacred 
texts ;   the  SasanaVamsa  states  with  bitter  sarcasm  that 
his  knowledge  did  not  go  beyond  being  able  to  turn  the 
plough’s  head  to  the  east  or  west  ( 
yatha  pana  ayam  puratthi- 
madisa  ayam  pana  pacchimadisa  ti  evam  adina  disavavattha- 
namattam  yeVa  katum  samattham  nangala  k.otiya  samvad- 
dhantam...)  and  that  he  had  hardly  the  capacity  to  decide 
which  of  the  two  views  was  right  ( 
tesam  dvinnam  pakhhanam 
dvisu  Vadesu  ayam  bhuto  ayam  abhuto  ti  vattum  na  sakkd)- 
Pannasami  bitterly  comments  on  the  ignorance  of  the  man  who 
is  compared  by  him  with  a   buffalo  that  cannot  distinguish 
between  the  music  of  the  playing  of  a   Vina  by  a   devagan- 
dhabba  and  the  striking  of  a   bamboo  stick  by  a   village  boy 
( 
Seyyatha  pi  nama  mahimso  attano  samipe  thatva  devagitam 
gayitva  devavinam  Vadentassa  devagandhabbasa  Velusala\am 
paharantassa  ca  gamadara\assa  saddesu  \inci  visesam  na 
According  to  the  Pilakatthamain  (p,  41)  Saradassi  who  too  was  a   resident 
of  Pagan,  was  a   contemporary  of  ftanavara,  and  wrote  the  Dhatu\aihayojana.

--- PAGE 242 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
223 
jdnanti).  Such  being  the  position  the  king  had  no  other  way 
than  to  issue  a   communique  asking  the  bhikkhus  to  observe 
whatever  practices  they  liked.  This  was  evidently  no  decision 
at  all,  and  the  religious  dispute  stood  where  it  did  ( 
tesam 
vivado  tada  na  vupasami). 
When  the  Samgha  was  still  thus  being  disturbed  by 
internal  strife,  the  political  horizon  became  dark  with  over- 
hanging clouds.  Ava  was  destroyed  in  1113  Kaliyuga 
(=  1 75  1),  by  whom,  the  Sasanavamsa  does  not  tell  us.  In 
fact,  PannasamI  relates,  in  about  half  a   dozen  sentences,  how 
at  last  a   certain  king  was  able  to  restore  peace  in  the  second 
year  (evidently  of  his  reign)  after  having  brought  the  whole 
of  Burma  including  the  Ramanna  country  under  his  rule. 
But  the  situation  was  far  more  serious  than  the  Sasanavamsa 
seems  to  suggest,  and  deserves  therefore  a   fuller  narration. 
„   III 
THE  CRUSHING  OF  THE  TALAINGS 
We  have  seen  in  a   previous  chapter  how  the  Burmans 
and  the  Talaings  fostered  between  themselves  a   deadly 
enmity  against  each  other,  and  how  the  former  persisted  in 
their  cruel  campaigns  to  crush  the  Talaings.  But  the  Talaings 
did  not  take  them  lying  down;  they  burned  with  rage  within 
themselves  and  sought  every  opportunity  to  avenge  the 
indignities  wrought  on  them  during  the  past  centuries.  Now, 
with  the  weakening  of  the  Toungoo  dynasty  came  their 
chance.  Mahadammayazadipati  was  already  being  troubled 
by  Manipuri  invaders  as  well  as  by  the  Shans  when  the 
Talaings  began  to  stir  themselves  up  at  Pegu  under  their 
leader  Smim  Htaw  Buddhaketi  (1740-47)  who  had  been 
elected  king.  They  soon  came  to  hold  Prome  and  Toungoo 
and  began  an  annual  raid  of  upper  Burma  as  far  as  Ava. 
In  1747  the  Talaings  set  up  as  king,  first  a   thera  named 
Neko,  and  then,  a   few  days  later,  Binnya  Dala,  an  efficient

--- PAGE 243 ---
224 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
and  capable  leader  of  men  (1747-57).  It  was  under  his 
kingship,  if  not  his  leadership,  that  Ava  was  sacked  in 
1751-52,  and  the  Ava  dynasty  put  an  end  to.  But  the 
Burmese  themselves  had  not  come  to  the  end  of  their 
resources.  From  the  ranks  there  arose  a   man  who  proved 
himself  to  be  the  saviour  of  the  race.  He  was  Alaungpaya 
(1752-60),  hailing  from  Shwebo  where  he  was  born  in  1714. 
Here  was  one  who  refused  to  do  homage  to  the  small  Talaing 
detachment  who  was  there  to  exact  the  oath  of  allegiance. 
He  did  something  more ;   he  drove  out  the  Talaing  detachment 
and  stood  to  resist  their  inroads,  and  thus  plunged  himself 
in  a   big  offensive  which  he  alone  could  lead.  His  people 
were  roused  to  enthusiasm  and  rallied  round  him,  hailing 
him  as  their  king.  It  was  only  a   question  of  days  not  only 
to  drive  away  the  Talaings  from  all  their  northern  outposts, 
to  quell  the  Shans  and  Manipuris,  and  to  bring  round  the 
French  finally  to  his  aid,  but  also  to  advance  as  far  as 
Rangoon  which  he  besieged.  Finally  in  1 756-57,  he  laid 
siege  to  Pegu  itself,  the  last  hold  of  the  Talaings  whose 
efforts  to  resist  the  Burman  hero  were  in  vain.  At  last,  in 
despair,  they  sent  out  a   deputation  to  Alaungpaya  in  which 
Shan,  Burmese  and  Talaing  monks  figured  most  promi- 
nently. Alaungpaya  gave  them  all  a   cordial  reception 
and  spoke  to  them  nobly  and  with  humility,  as  kings 
always  did  to  monks.  The  monk-deputationists  argued 
for  peace  lest  the  religion  should  be  in  danger  and  cited  the 
precedent  of  king  Razadarit  who  at  the  time  of  his  invasion 
of  upper  Burma  yielded  to  the  intercession  of  monks.  But 
Alaungpaya  pointed  out  that  Razadarit ’s  was  ho  precedent, 
for  the  Burmans  had  even  then  been  fighting  on  equal  terms 
and  Razadarit  had  not  yet  established  his  claims  on  any 
territory,  while  he  himself  had  practically  annexed  Pegu,  and 
there  could  be  no  talk  of  withdrawing  his  army.  Moreover, 
the  monks,  he  argued  with  them,  had  nothing  to  fear  from 
him ;   they  did  not  stand  to  lose  anything,  since  after  all  he

--- PAGE 244 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
225 
was  a   Budihist  king,  and  mare,  he  was  a   divine  incarnation 
and  wanted  to  become  a   Buddha  himself  by  not  only  being  a 
patron  of  the  religion,  but  himself  practising  the  religion  and 
upholding  the  cause  of  mercy,  justice  and  truth  !2  No 
intercession  was  thus  of  any  avail,  and  Alaungpaya  with  his 
Burmese  detachments,  each  individual  soldier  crying  for  the 
blood  of  Talaing  dogs  as  the  Burmans  characterised  the 
Talaings  burst  headlong  upon  the  city,  and  in  their  fury 
spared  not  women  and  children,  nor  even  monks.  Binaya 
Dala  was  killed  with  his  sons,  daughters  and  wives. 
And  since  the  monks  had  helped  the  town  to  resist, 
    he  threw  more  than  3,000  of  them  to  the  elephants,  the  elephants  trampled 
on  them,  the  elephants  killed  them.  Th sir  velvet  and  satin  robes,  the  olieers  of 
Alaungpaya  wore ;   their  cotton  robes,  men  used  for  pillows,  rice-bags,  and  towels 
to  wipe  their  feet.  They  were  strewn  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  the  holy  robes; 
their  alms  bowls  were  turned  into  household  pots.  The  monks  who  still  lived  Hed 
east  of  the  Sittang  river  to  the  towns  of  Sittaung,  Pan,  Shweyyin,  Martaban,  Labun, 
Zimme,  Yodaya  and  to  the  Shan  towns.  The  Burmese  soldiers  seized  all  the  people 
of  the  Talaing  country,  men  and  women,  and  sold  them  .....and  made  merry  with 
the  price.  Sons  could  not  find  their  mothers,  nor  mothers  their  sons,  and  there 
was  weeping  throughout  the  land.3 
Thus  were  the  Talaings  crushed  and  the  whole  of 
modem  Burma  brought  under  Alaungpaya’ s  scepter. 
For  the  Burmans  themselves  it  was  a   singular  triumph; 
we  are  told  in  the  Sasanavamsa  that  all  in  the 
Maramma  country  was  very  much  pleased,  so  much  so  that 
Alaungpaya’s  conquest  of  the  Talaing  country  and  consequent 
unification  of  Burma  are  considered  by  PannasamI  almost  as  a 
religious  event  of  importance.  The  people  of  Burma  are 
reported  to  have  shouted  out.  in  glee.  'O,  our  king  veritably 
is  a   Bodhisattwa’  !   Racial  hatred  dies  hard,  even  in  a   Buddhist 
Samgha,  even  amongst  men  who  are  supposed  to  have 
dedicated  themselves  to  the  service  of  love  and  piety. 
2  For  Alaungpaya’s  career  see  Alaungpaya  Ayedawhon ,  Hanthawady  Press, 
Rangoon,  1900,  and  Konbaungset  Yazaixnn ,  Mandalay  Taing  Press,  Mandalay, 
1905.  - 
3  Sayadaw  Athwa  III,  143.  Translated  in  F(arvey,  History  of  Burh\af  p,  2,35, 
— 1445B

--- PAGE 245 ---
226 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
PannasamI  was  a   wise  and  a   learned  thera,  but  even  he  clean 
managed  to  forget  the  unfortunate  end  of  hundreds  of  his  own 
Order  ;   he  even  hailed  the  man  who  was  responsible  for  the 
horrible  crime,  no  doubt  because  the  victims  happened  to  be 
Talaings  and  he  himself  belonged  to  the  race  of  the 
conqueror. 
But  Alaungpaya  was  a   clever  man,  determined  to  leave 
for  himself  a   name  in  the  history  of  the  religion*.  The 
Sasanavamsa  chronicler  tells  us  that  he  invited  to  the  palace 
on  every  aposatha  day  (four  such  days  in  every  month)  the 
entire  bhikkhu-samgha  of  the  royal  city  and  entertained  them 
to  feasts.  At  that  time  all  amatyas  and  members  of  the  royal 
household  were  required  to  observe  uposatha  and  were  given 
opportunities  for  study  and  discussion  with  the  monks. 
Somehow,  conditions  were  again  such  as  to  foster  an  atmos- 
phere for  religious  activities,  and  the  time  came  when  the 
Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute  raised  its  head  again. 
IV 
THE  PEAK  OF  THE  CONTROVERSY 
Thera  Atula  Yasadhamma  was  the  king’s  preceptor4  at 
this  time  and  since  he  was  an  ardent  Ekamsika  he  fully 
exploited  his  position  to  make  the  Ekamsika  practices  popular. 
With  the  leading  theras  of  the  Parupana  party — by  far  the 
larger  party — this  was  a   matter  of  grave  concern.  They 
therefore  addressed  a   letter  to  the  king  setting  forth  their 
views,  and  requesting  the  king  to  arbitrate  in  the  matter. 
Atula  thera  on  behalf  of  the  Ekamsikas  retorted  by  saying 
that  the  controversy  had  definitely  been  settled  during  the 
previous  reign  and  could  not  be  re-opened.  Alaungpaya 
4  Alaungpaya  had  als'o  appointed  him  as  the  Samgharaja  or  Head  of  the  Order. 
See,  "A  Preliminary  Study  of  the  Po:  U:  Daung  Inscription/*  Ind,  Ant.f 
Vol.  xxii,  p,  8.  “Atula  Sayadaw  retained  his  ofiice  throughout  the  reign  of  five 
lungs,  and  \yas  removed  by  Bo-do-p’aya  for  his  schismatic  doctri^eg/*

--- PAGE 246 ---
Ill 
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
was,  however,  willing  to  go  deeply  into  the  whole  matter,  so 
we  are  told  by  ParmasamI,  but  he  wrote  back  to  the  contending 
parties  to  say  that  as  he  was  just  then  very  busy  with  state 
affairs  that  required  immediate  attention  he  was  unable  to  do 
as  requested.  He,  however,  assured  them  that  he  would  take 
the  matter  up  after  having  done  with  state  affairs.  In  the 
mean  time  he  directed  them  to  follow  the  views  and  practices 
of  his  own  acariya,  i.e.,  of  Atula  {Idani  mama  Vijite  sabbe 
pi  bhibJihu  mama  acariyassa  matim  anuvattitva  carantu  ft). 
The  king’s  decree  placed  the  Parupanas  in  an  awkward 
position.  They  had  either  to  give  up  their  views  and  practices 
and  obey  the  royal  command  or  face  the  inevitable  fate  that 
disobedience  meant.  The  royal  order  was  generally  obeyed, 
but  there  were  at  least  a   few  among  the  Parupanas  who  were 
built  of  sterner  metal.  Two  theras  of  Sahassarodhagama 
held  steadfasdy  to  their  old  practices  and  preached  their  old 
views.  T  his  was  too  much  for  Atula  who  had  them  brought 
to  the  capital  and  tried  to  discredit  them  before  the  people, 
but  was  thwarted  in  his  attempt,  the  Sasanavamsa  wants  us 
to  believe,  by  some  supernatural  power. 
Another  passive  resister  was  thera  Munindaghosa  of 
Nlpagama  near  Pagan  where  he  had  a   very  large  and  influen- 
tial following.  His  disobedience  was  brought  to  the  notice 
of  the  king  who  summoned  him  to  appear  in  the  Sudham- 
masabha  before  the  king,  the  royal  preceptor  and  other 
learned  theras.  Undaunted,  Munindaghosa  appeared 
before  the  assembly  and  when  accused  of  his  guilt  he 
told  them  that  he  was  treading  the  right  path  laid  down 
by  his  Master.  When  further  asked  who  his  Master  was,  he 
turned  to  the  Buddha  image  installed  in  the  Sudhammasabha 
and  paying  his  respectful  homage,  said  with  folded  hands, 
‘Here  is  my  Master.  So  long  as  there  is  life  in  me  1   shall 
serve  him  and  shall  not  swerve  from  what  I   have 
learnt  from  him’.  The  king  perhaps  was  not  prepared  for 
such  exhibition  of  courage  by  a   thera,  and  though  a   despot,

--- PAGE 247 ---
228  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
dared  not  take  his  life.  He  decreed,  however,  that  he  should 
not  be  allowed  to  live  within  his  kingdom,  &ftd  banished  him 
to  a   distant  place  in  the  frontiers. 
Munindaghosa’s  was  indeed  an  undaunted  spirit  ;   in  his 
banishment  he  devoted  himself  to  the  cause  of  teaching 
amongst  those  who  clustered  round  him  from  all  quarters, 
and  what  else  could  he  teach  than  the  views  and  practices  he 
himself  held  dear  and  practised  with  devotion.  There  in 
banishment  he  translated  the  Abhidhammatthasamgaha  into 
Burmese,  evidently  for  the  benefit  of  his  own  students,  but 
even  there  he  was  not  allowed  to  rest  in  peace.  The  king 
heard  that  he  had  gathered  a   following  even  in  banishment 
and  had  been  continuing  in  the  defiance  of  his  decree.  He 
wa3  again  summoned  before  the  king  to  answer  his  charge. 
Munindaghosa  was  sure  that  the  king  was  intent  to  kill  him ; 
nevertheless  he  appeared  before  him,  and  laying  aside  his 
monastic  vows  and  putting  off  his  monkish  garb,  said,.  ‘You 
have  summoned  me  with  the  intent  of  slaying  me,  so  be  it. 
But  if  you  slay  me  while  I   am  still  holding  my  monastic  vows 
and  putting  on  my  monkish  garb  you  will  be  guilty  of  heavy 
sin.  I   have  therefore  laid  aside  my  vows  and  put  off  
.  my 
robes.  Now,  if  you  want  to  slay  me,  slay.’  But  the  king 
dared  not.  He  only  flung  him  into  prison  and  then  marched 
on  to  Siam  on  a   military  call.  That  was  his  last  campaign, 
for  he  died  on  his  way  back  home.  Munindaghosa  also  is 
heard  of  no  more. 
Alaungpaya  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,  the  crown 
prince,  who  became  king,  under  the  name  of  Siripavanamaha- 
dhammaraja  (Naungdawgyi,  1760-63).  He  had  to  forsake 
Ava  but  rebuilt  Saggaing,  and  brought  from  Taungdwin  a 
learned  thera  named  Nana  or  analamkara-mahadhamnuaraja 
whbm  he  appointed  as  his  own  acariya.  Nana  held  Parupana 
views,  and  the  Parupana  party  naturally  hoped  to  get  the 
king  on  their  side.  But  Atula  thera  who  had  not  yet 
lost  his  influence  frustrated  their  attempt  saying  .that  the

--- PAGE 248 ---
A  GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
229 
matter  had  already  been  decided.  The  question,  therefore, 
remained  unsettled.  f3analamkara  seems  to  have  been  a 
learned  thera;  he  could  teach  nine  or  ten  chapters  a   day,  and 
brought  out  a   number  of  works;  the  Padaoibhaga,  evidently 
a   book  on  grammar,  and  commentaries  in  Burmese  on  the 
Nyasa,  the  Yamaha,  and  the  Mahapatthana  amongst  others 
unknown  to  us. 
Siripavara-sudhammamaharajindadhipati  or  Setibhinda 
(Hsinbyushin,  1763-76)  who  succeeded  Naungdawgyi,  trans- 
ferred his  capital  to  Ava.  He  proved  himself  to  be  a   generous 
patron  of  learning  ;   he  had  Brahmins  brought  from  Benares 
with  whom  he"  discussed  matters  of  State.  The  Maungdaung 
Sayadaw  whom  the  king  had  appointed  for  the  purpose  took 
their  help  to  translate  into  Burmese  a   number  of  Sanskrit  works 
on  astrology,  polity,  law,  medicine  and  grammar.5  The 
monks  played  a   large  part  in  the  Pali  and  Burmese  translations 
of  Hindu  legal  codes  ascribed  to  Manu.  The  king 
appointed  Candovara  whom  he  renamed  Jambudlpa-Ananta- 
dhaja,  as  his  tutor;  he  wrote  a   commentary  on  the  Vinaya- 
Vinicchaya.  We  hear  nothing  of  the  Parupana-Ekamsika 
dispute  during  his  reign ;   
but  reference  is  made  in  the  Sasana - 
Vamsa 0  to  a   certain  kind  of  heresy  in  practice  which  was 
severely  dealt  with,  and  the  heretics  were  compelled  to 
conform  to  the  true  faith.  It  is  idle  to  speculate  what  was  the 
kind  of  heresy  practised  or  who  were  the  people  who  practised 
it  ;   
but  one  may  be  interested  to  read  that  “about  fifty  years 
ago  a   class  of  metaphysicians  arose  in  Ava  called  Paramata 
who  respect  only  the  Abhidhamma  arid  reject  the  other  books 
that  the  Buddhists  consider  as  sacred,  saying  that  they  are 
only  a   compilation  of  fables.  The  founder  of  the  sect,  Kosan, 
with  about  fifty  of  his  followers,  was  put  to  death  by  order 
8  Forchammer,  Jardine  Prize  Essay,  p,  104. 
*8  Sasana,  p.  128.  Tassa  rafino  kale  eka.ace  manu$sa-difthi~vipallaaa  aheaum} 
te  pi  pakk°sapetva  sammaditthim  ganhapesi) .

--- PAGE 249 ---
230 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
of  the  king.”7  Spence  Hardy  wrote  these  lines,  first  brought 
to  notice  by  Dr.  Bode,  in  or  about  1850,  and  his  remarks 
refer  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.  It  is  not  improb- 
able that  the  Paramats  were  the  heretical  sect  that  was  put 
down  by  Hsinbyushin.  The  Po :  U :  Daung  inscription 
refers  to  one  meritorious  act  of  the  king ;   this  was  the  crowning 
of  the  Shwedagon  at  Rangoon.8 
Hsinbyushin  was  succeeded  by  his  nineteen  year  old  son 
Ma'.iadhammarajadhiraja  (Singu,  1776-82).  A.  man  of 
ordinary  talents  Singu  nevertheless  interested  himself  in  the 
cause  of  the  religion.  He  built  a   vihara  for  a   thera  Maya- 
vattaka  by  name,  and  gave  him  the  title  of  Gunamuninda- 
bhisasanadhammarajadhirajaguru.  Early  he  came  under  the 
influence  of  another  thera  named  Nandamala,  who  in  the 
retreat  of  his  vihara  near  Calanganagara  had  devoted  himself 
to  the  teaching  of  the  sa  man  eras  entrusted  to  his  care.  The 
king,  through  the  medium  of  a   strange  dream,  so  we  are  told, 
came  to  know  of  him  and  had  him  brought  to  stay  near  him. 
He  belonged  to  the  Capata  sect  and  even  not  long  after  he 
had  taken  the  upasampada  ordination  he  translated  into 
Burmese  such  sacred  texts  as  the  old  Vinayavinicchaya,  the 
Suttasamgaha  and  the  MahaVaggatthafyatha.  He  also  wrote 
the  Sasanasuddhidipika,  a   manual  regarding  the  purification 
of  the  religion,  evidently  a   book  on  Vinaya.9  It  seems  from 
the  works  he  chose  to  write  or  translate  that  he  interested 
himself  and  specialised  in  questions  of  monastic  discipline, 
and  as  such  it  was  likely  that  he  would  have  his  own 
opinions  on  the  Pampana-Ekamsika  controversy.  Such 
indeed  was  the  case.  Nandamala  himself  held  Parupana 
views,  and  now  that  he  was  so  near  the  king  he  sought  to 
?  SpenCe  Hardy,  Eastern  Monachism,  p.  331.  See  also,  Sasanavamsa,  Disser- 
tation by  Dr.  Bode,  pp.  42-43,  note. 
8  This  fact  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Sasanavamsa. 
9  Nandamala  may  have  also  been  the  author  of  another  book,  a   commentary 
on  the  Vinayasamgaha  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Pitakkatthamain  as  having  been 
written  by  the  preceptor  of  king  Singu,  at  Ava,  p.  43.

--- PAGE 250 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
231 
win  the  latter  to  his  views.  He  convinced  him  that  Parupana 
practices  were  upheld  by  the  sacred  texts  while  those  of  the 
Ekamsikas  had  no  textual  authority  on  their  side.  Success- 
j   fully  did  he  try  to  interest  the  king  who  at  last  summoned  the 
' 
 leaders  of  both  parties  to  a   discussion.  In  the  debate  that 
followed  the  Ekamsikas  were  worsted ;   they  were  unable  to 
show  any  textual  authority  on  which  they  could  reasonably 
base  their  views  and  practices,  and  thus  lost  their  cause.  The 
king  issued  a   decree  forbidding  Ekamsika  practices  and 
imposing  Parupana  practices  on  all  the  members  of  the  Order. 
Nandamala  got  his  reward  ;   he  was  appointed  Samgharaja  or 
the  supreme  head  of  the  Order.  But  strangely  enough  the 
dispute  did  not  end  here. 
When  Bodawpaya  (1782-1819),  the  fifth  son  of  Alaung- 
paya,  came  to  the  throne,  the  question  was  again  revived, 
and  this  time  by  the  king  himself.  He  held  that  his  prede- 
cessors had  not  been  able  to  decide  the  controversy  in  a 
satisfactory  manner,  since  the  discussion  or  debate  was  always 
held  in  the  king’s  assembly  hall  in  the  presence  of  the  king 
himself  which  was  fair  to  neither  party.  In  the  circums- 
tance few  dared  speak  freely  according  to  their  conviction. 
He,  therefore,  planned  to  send  itinerant  commissioners  to  the 
viharas  all  over  the  country  to  gather  reliable  first-hand 
r  ' 
 evidence  locally  from  the  theras  who,  it  was  expected,  would 
l   in  that  case  state  their  views  without  fear  of  intimidation  or 
I 
 prospect  of  favour.  As  he  planned,  so  he  worked;  the 
|   commissioners  over  whom  the  king  appointed  a   high  military 
official  ( 
antoyuddhanayaka ) 
  
as  their  leader,  were  sent  out  on 
•  their  mission.  It  turned  out,  strangely  indeed,  that  the  leader 
of  the  Ekamsika  party  deposed  that  their  views  and  practices 
had  no  sanction  of  sacred  texts,  but  were  authorised  by 
I 
 acariyapaveni,  i.e.,  by  tradition  handed  down  from  teacher 
|   to  teacher  ( amhehi  vuttavacanam  pali-adisu  na  dissati.  Atha 
|   k_ho  pana  acariya  pavenivasen’  eva  mayam  carimha  ti  anuja- 
nirnsu.)  The  deposition  of  the  Ekamsikas  practically  sealed

--- PAGE 251 ---
232 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
the  fate  of  their  cause,  and  the  king  issued  a   decree  enjoining 
strict  conformity  to  Parupana  practices  throughout  the 
kingdom.  The  controversy  for  the  time  being  seemed 
closed  for  good. 
What  Bodawpaya  held  about  the  decisions  of  those  that 
had  gone  before  him  was  undoubtedly  true  to  a   very  great 
extent,  and  what  he  planned  was  also  the  right  thing  to 
do.  But  it  is  really  very  strange  that  the  Ekamsikas  who 
had  fought  obstinately  for  generations  for  recognition  of 
their  views  and  practices  would  at  their  deposition  before 
the  commission  so  readily  agree  to  what  practically  was 
an  admission  of  defeat.  This  on  the  very  face  of  it 
arouses  suspicion  that  grow  as  one  acquaints  himself  more 
and  more  with  king  Bodawpaya’s  ways  and  methods. 
Bodawpaya  secured  the  throne  through  blood,  iron 
and  fire,  making  a   clean  sweep  of  his  rivals  and  their 
followers,  servants  and  children,  and  burning  women  of  the 
harem  alive  with  their  babies  in  arms.  He  had  no  faith  in 
mortal  man,  not  even  in  his  nearest  kin  or  in  the  wisest 
monk.  Nothing  was  too  mean  or  cruel  for  him,  and  coercion 
and  intimidation  were  his  usual  methods ;   disregard  of  his 
will  meant  death,  death  in  a   manner  that  ensured  maximum 
of  pain.  It  is,  therefore,  hard  to  believe  that  such  a   king  as 
Bodawpaya  happened  to  be  used  no  means  of  coercion  or 
intimidation  to  have  the  Ekamsikas  to  depose  as  they  did.  In 
fact,  Bodawpaya  seems  to  have  been  won  over  to  the  Paru- 
pana side  before  the  holding  of  the  commission  was  decided 
upon ;   for  Nana  thera,  whom  he  had  appointed  his 
preceptor  and  given  the  high  sounding  name  of  Nanabhisasa- 
nadhajamahadhammarajaguru,  was  himself  a   Parupana,  and 
it  is  only  likely  that  he  had  already  influenced  the  king’s 
opinion  in  the  matter. 
Nana  thera  hailed  from  Sahassarodhogama,  the  village 
whence  came  the  first  passive  resisters  after  Alaungpaya  had 
4egided  in  favour  of  the  Ekamsikas.  He  was  a   great  favourite

--- PAGE 252 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
233 
of  the  king  who  built  for  hint  a   monastery.  Meanwhile  Bodaw- 
paya  had  transferred  his  capital  to  Amarapura  where  he  was 
consecrated  with  due  ceremony.  He  then  asked  his  preceptor 
to  commemorate  the  event ;   and  Nana  edited  and  corrected 
(parisodhetva)  the  Rajabh.isek.agan.dha,  adding  a   commentary 
to  it  in  Burmese. 
Bodawpaya  was  a   man  of  curious  opposites.  The 
number  of  religious  foundations  he  reared  up  and  maintained 
seems  to  have  kept  proportipn  with  the  amount  of  blood  he 
shed  not  only  in  war  but  in  atrocities  perpetrated  to  satisfy 
his  whims.  PannasamI  gives  a   long  list  of  viharas  he  built 
for  theras  who  were  reputed  for  their  piety,  learning  and 
wisdom,  and  adds  that  he  could  give  a   still  longer  list  but 
refrained  lest  his  book  would  grow  in  length  !   It  is  noteworthy 
that  in  this  work  of  merit  the  entire  royal  family  and  the 
nobility  participated  along  with  the  king. 
A   report,  being  the  “   Observations  on  the  present  state  of 
the  kingdom  of  Ava  and  Pegu  and  the  means  of  joining 
them  to  the  British  dominions  in  India,”  drawn  up  by  a 
Frenchman,  Melchior  La  Beaume,  dated  16th  January,  1730, 
refres  to  the  reign  of  Bodawpaya  and  throws  welcome  light 
on  the  condition  of  the  Samgha  in  Burma  during  his  reign : 
11  The  clergy  is  very  well-regulated.  Every  person  may  embrace  that 
profession,  but  must  perform  a   noviciate  to  learn  theology  and  the  sciences  which 
they  afterwards  teach  to  all  grades.  By  their  institution  the  Talpoons  (Talapoins) 
make  the  vow  of  celibacy,  poverty,  mortification,  humility  and  all  other  mental  and 
corporal  exercise.  They  are  much  respected,  and  by  means  of  the  alms  they 
receive,  they  are  as  well  fed,  lodged  and  clothed.  They  quit  their  profession  the 
moment  they  are  disposed  to  do.” 
V 
RE-ORGANISATION  OF  THE  SAMGHA  :   END  OF  THE 
CONTROVERSY 
Bodawpaya  may  not  have  had  any  motive  in  the  re- 
organisation that  he  effected  of  the  administrative  machinery 
30— 1445 B

--- PAGE 253 ---
234 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
of  the  Samgha.  He  appointed  four  aged  and  wise  theras  to 
each  of  whom  he  gave  the  title  of  Samgharaja,  and  charged 
them  with  the  work  of  the  purification  of  the  religion.  To 
help  those  who  were  old  and  weak  he  appointed  four  others 
with  evidently  the  same  status  and  designation .  Over  this 
group  of  eight10  was  placed  his  preceptor  Nanabhisasanadha- 
jamahadhammarajaguruthera  with  the  title  Mahasamgharaja. 
All  this  he  did  for  the  purification  of  the  religion,  so  we  are 
told ;   and  5Jana,  the  supreme  head,  did  his  part  of  the  work 
well.  He  was  an  active  teacher,  and  though  placed  at  the 
head  of  the  church  organisation,  he  condescended  to  visit 
one  by  one,  by  rotation,  all  the  viharas  assigned  to  his  care 
and  used  to  teach  the  inmates  thereof  the  precepts  and 
practices  of  the  religion.11  He  was  ripe  with  wisdom  and 
was  vastly  learned ;   within  five  years  of  his  upasampada 
ordination  he  had  already  written  a   tl\a  called  Petalarhfyara 
on  the  Nettipa.\arana.  At  eighteen  he  became  Samgharaja 
and  not  long  after  wrote  a   tik.a  entitled  Sadhujjanavilasini 
on  the  Dighaniliaya.  Among  his  other  works  were  the 
Ariyavarnsdlam\dra,  a   commentary  on  the  J atakatthafyathd 
at  the  request  of  the  king,  the  Catasamaneravatthu,  the 
RajoVadaVatthu  Tigumbathomana,  the  Chaddantanagarajup- 
pattikatha  and  the  Rajadhirajavil°sint,12  the  last  with  the 
help  of  the  materials  supplied  by  the  king  himself. 
KavindabhisaddharnmapavaramahadhammarSjaguru, 
Tipitakalamkaradhaja       , 
Cakkindabhidhaja    
    , 
Paramasirivamsadhaja          , 
Janindabhipavara 
Mahajnanabhidhaja           , 
5Janalamkarasaddhammadbaja      ,  and 
Nanabhisasanadhaja      , 
11  He  directed  the  monks  in  tbe  study  of  botb  the  Vibhangas ,  and  himseli 
daily  practised  at  least  one  of  tbe  (thirteen)  dhutartgas,  It  shows  how  deeply 
interested  he  was  in  the  Vinaya,  not  only  in  the  studies  of  monastic  discipline,  but 
also  in  observing  the  discipline  himself. 
1?  For  comments  on  this  work,  see  Bode,  pp,  79-82,

--- PAGE 254 ---
A   GREAT  CONTROVERSY 
235 
Now  that  a   new  organisation  of  the  Samgi: a   had  been 
effected,  the  Ekamsikas  hoped  to  get  a   better  hearing. 
They  knew  that  the  king’s  preceptor  whose  views  had 
hitherto  been  the  most  important  factor  in  all  religious 
disputations  was  a   Parupana,  but  now  that  eight  other  theras 
were  also  there  to  influence  a   decision  they  thought  they 
would  rather  take  a   chance.  So  long  they  had  no  scriptural 
authority  ;   now  they  found  out  one.  Their  leader  Atula 
who  had  still  some  influence  with  the  king  addressed  an 
epistle  to  the  latter  pointing  out  that  the  wearing  of  the 
upper  robe  with  one  shoulder  bare  and  of  a   girdle  round  the 
body  had  been  sanctioned  in  a   text  named  Culaganthipada. 
The  king  now  summoned  another  assembly  to  which  he 
invited  the  leaders  of  both  parties.  In  the  debate  that 
followed  Atula  represented  the  Ekamsikas,  and  presented 
their  case  ably  and  well.  He  argued  that  the  Culaganthipada 
was  a   work  of  the  venerable  thera  Moggallana  who  had  long 
ago  sanctioned  the  Ekamsika  practices.  These  facts,  he 
maintained,  could  be  gathered  from  the  Pita\attayalaWana - 
gandha,  a   text  alleged  to  have  been  brought  to  Burma  by 
Buddhaghosa  from  Ceylon.  But  the  leader  of  the  Parupana 
party  pointed  out  that  the  text  which  Atula  referred  to  was 
the  Vinayaganthipada  and  not  Culaganthipada,  written 
by  a   thera  Moggallana  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of 
king  Parakkamabahu  (1 1 53-1 1 84),  and  not  by  the  old  and 
more  famous  Moggallana.  Once  a   fraud  was  hinted  at, 
Atula  was  attacked  by  volleys  of  questions  to  none  of  which 
he  could  give  satisfactory  reply.  The  account  of  the  debate 
as  recorded  by  Pannasami  is  long,13  but  it  does  not  contain 
much  that  is  of  historical  interest,  though  somewhat  of  a 
dramatic  element  at  times  enlivens  the  record.  We  find  that 
Atula  suffered  three  successive  series  of  defeats  in  each  of 
which  he  was  put  into  a   very  tight  corner.  For  the  Parupanas 
33  Sasartdi  p£>.  136-142.

--- PAGE 255 ---
236 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
it  was  a   decisive  victory ;   and  the  king  who  had  always  his 
sympathy  with  the  Parupanas  lost  no  time  in  issuing  a   decree 
imposing  strict  observance  of  Parupana  practices  throughout 
his  realm.  Thus  ended  a   long  and  bitter  struggle  that  had 
agitated  the  Samgha  for  well  nigh  over  a   century.  Scriptural 
authority  was  eventually  upheld,  orthodoxy  finally  emerged 
triumphant  and  the  pristine  ideal  of  monastic  discipline  was 
once  more  held  aloft.

--- PAGE 256 ---
CHAPTER  SIX 
BURMA’S  RETURN  GIFTS  TO  CEYLON' 
NINETEENTH  CENTURY  AND  AFTER  :   THE  “AMARAPURA 
SAMGHA’  ’  OF  CEYLON  :   BODAWPAYA,  BAGYIDAW 
AND  MINDON-MIN 
The  final  settlement  of  the  Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute 
was  not,  however,  the  most  important  religious  event  of 
Bodawpaya’s  reign ;   more  significant  was  the  establishment  of 
the  “Amarapura  School”  of  Buddhism  in  Ceylon.  The 
religion  in  that  island  was  under  a   temporary  eclipse.  During 
latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  Sinhalese  Samgha 
had  adopted  certain  disciplinary  measures,  presumably  at  the 
instance  of  the  royal  authority,  that  were  frankly  contrary  to 
the  original  teachings  of  Buddhism.  Naturally,  there  were 
monks  within  the  Order  who  did  not  like  such  interference 
with  their  code  of  conduct,  and  they  sought  help  and 
guidance  from  the  fraternities  of  monks  in  other  realms. 
They  turned  first  to  Siam  where,  they  presumed,  the  religion 
retained  its  purity  and  where  persecuted  Talaing  monks  had 
already  from  time  to  time  found  an  asylum.  But  now 
they  thought  of  sending  their  missions  to  Burma,  and  two 
missions  came  during  the  reign  of  Bodawpaya,  one  in 
1800,  and  another  in  about  1812.  The  first  mission  was 
indeed  significant.  The  Sinhalese  king  Klrti  Siri  Raja  Simha 
(1 748-78)  had  issued  a   decree,  presumably  approved  arid 
authorised  by  the  Samgha,  that  none  other  than  belonging 
to  the  highest  caste  (mainly,  the  agricultural  class)  could 
receive  the  upasampada  ordination  and  be  admitted  into  the 
Order.  This  roused  considerable  indignation  among  tKe 
samaneras  of  the  lower  castes,  who,  smarting  for  some  time

--- PAGE 257 ---
238 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
under  the  royal  decree,  at  last  thought  of  receiving  their 
ordination  elsewhere.  This  time  they  decided  to  go  to 
Burma.  For,  there  alone,  they  thought,  the  religion  shone 
purest  in  spite  of  periodical  attacks  on  its  orthodoxy.  They 
had  also  probably  heard  of  the  scholarly  reputation  of 
the  Burmese  Samgharaja  Flanabbivamsa  and  of  his  deep 
knowledge  of  the  Vinaya.  They  were  perhaps  also  actuated 
by  the  idea  that  the  theraparampara  could  only  be  maintained 
in  an  unbroken  line  by  their  receiving  the  consecration  at 
the  hands  of  the  Burmese  Samgha.  So,  in  1 800,  according  to 
Pannasami,  a   group  of  bold  Sinhalese  novices  belonging  to 
lower  castes  and  headed  by  a   thera  named  Ambagahapati 
came  to  the  Burmese  capital  where  they  were  given  a   cordial 
and  magnificant  reception  by  the  king  himself.  They  were 
presented  with  due  ceremony  to  fiJanabhivamsa,  the  Samgha- 
raja, who  gave  them  the  upasampada  ordination.  They 
then  returned  to  Ceylon  (1802)  with  a   full  chapter  of  five 
Burmese  monks,  a   letter  from  Nanabhivamsa  to  the  Ceylonese 
Samgharaja,  and  a   large  number  of  Pali  sacred  texts.  On 
their  arrival  they  proceeded  to  ordain  many  more  novices 
who  sought  it,  and  eventually  came  to  establish  what  is 
known  to  this  day  in  Ceylon  as  the  * '  Amarapura  Samgha  ’  
• 
or  “   Buramagama.”  Their  aim  is  to  hold  strictly  to  the 
pristine  purity  of  the  religion ;   they  allow  ordination  to  all 
castes,  high  and  low,  and  go  about  with  both  shoulders 
covered,  just  as  the  members  of  the  Maramma  Samgha  do,  1 
while  the  members  of  the  older  Siamese  school  known  as  the 
“   Siyamagama  ”   who  had  already  adopted  heterodox 
practices  restrict  ordination  to  higher  castes  alone,  and  go 
about  with  one  shoulder  uncovered. 2 
1  Spence  Hardy,  Eastern  Monachism ,  pp.  328-29. 
2  Sasana,  Dissertation,  p.  37,  note  2 ;   for  the  history  of  the  inauguration  of  the 
**  Amarapura  Samgha  "   or  *  Buramagama  *’  in  Ceylon,  see,  Spence  Hardy,  Eastern 
Monachism,  pp.  327-29;  Tennent,  Christianity  in  Ceylon,  pp.  224-226;  Despatch 
from  Governor  General  of  India  to  Court  of  Directors^  dated  March  4,  1812, 
para.  29.

--- PAGE 258 ---
BURMA’S  RETURN  GIFTS  TO  CEYLON  239 
The  establishment  of  the  “   Amarapura  School  ”   in 
Ceylon  is  a   significant  event  in  the  history  of  Buddhism  in 
Burma.  Six  hundred  and  ten  years  ago  a   Burmese  samanera, 
Capata,  received  his  ordination  at  the  hands  of  the  fraternity 
of  monks  of  Ceylon,  returned  to  his  native  land  with  a   full 
chapter  of  monks  ordained  in  that  island,  and  was  instru- 
mental in  founding  what  came  to  be  known  as  the  “   Slhala 
Samgha  ”   in  Burma.  For  six  centuries  Burma  maintained, 
though  not  always  with  vigour  or  without  opposition,  the  purity 
and  orthodoxy  of  the  Mahavihara  tradition  and  therewith 
the  thera-parampara  in  unbroken  succession.  Now  that  the 
tradition  had  become  weak  in  Ceylon  itself,  her  sons  turned 
to  Burma  and  became  instrumental  in  founding  the  “   Burama- 
gama  ”   or  the  “   Amarapura  Samgha  ”   in  Ceylon.  It  was 
indeed  the  first  return  gift  of  Burma  to  Ceylon. 
Bodawpaya  solicited  the  favour  of  the  Samgha,  as  all 
kings  did  in  Burma,  but  he  had  hardly  any  consideration  for 
the  monks,  nor  had  he  any  faith  in  their  honesty  and  sincerity. 
He  was  sure  of  his  position  as  the  Protector  of  the  Order  so 
long  as  the  Samgharaja  was  by  his  side,  and  neither  the 
Samgharaja  nor  the  Samgha  itself  seem  to  have  protested 
when  the  king  was  once  seized  by  the  idea  that  the  clergy 
were  getting  more  than  they  could  really  claim  to.  At  once 
he  ordered  a   collection  of  all  dedicatory  inscriptions  through- 
out his  realm,  recording  gifts  of  lands  to  the  Samgha  and 
their  share  of  produce.  3  |We  do  not  know  what  came  out 
of  the  scrutiny,  but  we  are  told  that  certain  church  lands  were 
confiscated ;   but  the  Samgha  do  not  seem  to  have  suffered 
much  so  far  as  their  resources  were  concered.  He  was  indeed 
3  In  all  there  were  not  less  than  1000  records  collected,  now  deposited  in  the 
galleries  of  the  Arakan  Pagoda,  Mandalay,  and  in  those  of  the  Patodawgyi  Pagoda, 
Amarapura.  These  records  were  published  in  two  sets  the  first  in  two  volumes 
containing  those  deposited  in  the  Arakan  Pagpda  were  published  ip  1897,  and  th<$ 
Secpnd  containing  those  of  the  Patodawgyi  Pagoda  jn  1 915-

--- PAGE 259 ---
240 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
jealous  of  the  monks,  for  they  were  the  people,  he  thought, 
that  received  the  homage  and  respect  of  the  people,  not  the 
king  and  his  court,  and  the  monasteries  were  the  real  source 
of  power  and  prestige.  He  therefore  sought  to  deprive  the 
monks  of  some  of  their  honours,  and  directed  that  no  monk 
should  use  the  title  of  ‘Phongyi’  which  meant  ‘Great  Glory.’ 
He  was  not  the  man  to  share  glory  with  monks,  and  wanted 
therefore  to  keep  it  entirely  for  himself  !   On  another  occa? 
sion  he  thought  that  monks  were  too  numerous  in  the  country  : 
he  therefore  caused  an  enquiry  into  the  conduct  of  the 
monks  majority  of  whom  were  found  to  spend  their  time 
without  doing  anything,  not  even  caring  to  learn  the  sacred 
texts.  ,We  are  not  told  if  he  had  them  turned  out  of  the 
Sarngha,  but  we  gather  that  he  decreed  that  no  monk  could  be 
the  head  of  a   vihara  unless  by  virtue  of  his  personal  conduct, 
character,  learning  and  wisdom,  he  was  a   fit  person  to  adorn 
that  position.  Perhaps,  he  was  not  very  wrong  in  his 
estimation  of  the  Burmese  monks  of  the  time.  In  any  case 
he  thought  that  he  had  reasons  to  impose  these  restrictions, 
since  his  own  Samgharaja  had  once  failed  to  solve  some  of 
the  religious  and  metaphysical  questions  that  were  disturbing 
him.  A   very  interesting,  somewhat  curious  incident,  is  told 
of  him  by  the  European  sojourners  in  Burma  in  the  nineteenth 
century.  Once  he  thought,  seeing  that  most  of  the  monks  could 
not  satisfy  his  queries,  that  Buddhism  was  not  good  enough 
a   religion,  and  began  to  enquire  if  there  was  anything  better. 
He  was  told  that  Islam  was  so  strict  and  orthodox  a   religion 
that  a   follower  of  the  faith  would  rather  die  than  take  pork. 
He  felt  a   sort  of  admiration  for  the  faith  which  he  might  well 
adopt.  But  before  he  did  so  he  invited  the  maulvis  of  his 
capital  to  a   dinner  at  his  palace,  and  had  pork  served 
before  them.  At  once  the  maulvis  realised  what  the  king 
was  after,  but  to  disregard  his  command  was  to  court  death 
which  they  were  not  prepared  to.  do.  So  they  ate  the 
pork,  and  the  king’s  admiration  for  the  faith  vanished

--- PAGE 260 ---
BURMA’S  RETURN  GIFTS  TO  CEYLON 
241 
rthwith.4 5 * 7  
He  often  executed  Burmese  religious  heretics/’  and 
prescribed  death  for  those  who  drank  intoxicants 
;   even  selling 
of  liquor  was  prohibited.  
Smoking  of  opium  and  killing  of 
ox  or  buffalo  or  any  large  animal  were  also  grave  offences 
and  were  ^punished  with  death/ 
Bodawpaya,  we  have  seen,  was  a   builder  on  a   large 
scale;  he  built  pagodas  by  scores,  and  the  largest  was 
doubtless  the  Mingun  in  Saggaing  district,  an  unfinished 
edifice  that  impresses  only  by  its  heaviness.  When  he 
was  engaged  in  the  building  of  the  pagoda,  it  was  revealed 
unto  him  one  day  that  he  was  the  Bodhisattawa 
Arimittiya  or  the  future  Buddha.  He  seriously  claimed 
to  be  recognised  as  such,  but  the  Samgha  resolutely 
resisted  the  claim  and  refused  to  confer  on  him  the 
sought-for  distinction/  They  must  have  been  bold  enough 
to  resist  such  a   king  as  Bodawpaya ;   and  this  was 
sufficient  indictment  for  one  who,  the  people  and  even  the 
clergy  knew,  could  wring  opinions  from  them  just  as  he 
wished,  on  pain  of  death/ 
Siritribhuvanadityapavaramandita  (Bagyidaw,  1819-37) 
who  succeeded  Bodawpaya  was  a   charming  and  dignified 
personality,  exceptionally  kind,  and  was  loved  and  revered 
4  For  the  many  curious  eccentricities  of  the  king  that  include  the  few  noted 
above,  see  Sangermano,  A   Description  of  the  Burmese  Empire ,  1885 ,  p.  92;  Cox, 
Journal  of  a   Residence  in  the  Burmese  Empire ,  1821,  p.  230;  Crawfurd,  Journal  of 
an  Embassy  from  the  Governor  General  of  India  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  1834,  Vol.  I, 
p,  399;  Gouger,  Personal  Narrative  of  Two  Years'  Imprisonment  in  Burma ,  I860, 
pp.  96-100. 
5  Gibson,  MeiktHa  Settlement  Report,  1900,  p.  51. 
*  Sangermano,  op.  cit 
p.  68;  Gouger,  op.  cit. ,  p.  278. 
7  Sangermano,  op.  cit ,  p.  61. 
s  But  Bodawpaya  had  some  admirable  qualities  among  which  was  bis  sincere 
patronage  of  literature.  Among  the  nobility  of  his  court  there  was  a   number  of 
literary  men  who  produced  works,  mainly  in  Burmese,  on  history,  law  and  other 
subjects.  The  most  important  from  our  point  of  view  was  the  translation  by  Twin- 
thintaikwun,  first  the  monk-tutor  of  Bodawpaya  and  later  a   high  official  of  the 
State,  of  66  Jatakas  in  Burmese,  and  a   very  fine  Burmese  prose-rendering  by 
Awbatha,  a   monk,  of  the  MahajanahA  Jataka * 
2M445B

--- PAGE 261 ---
242  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
by  all.  He  changed  the  capital  from  Amarapura  to  Ava. 
The  Sasanavamsa  records  a   few  of  his  religious  foundations 
which  were  made  over  to  venerable  theras.  Pafinaslha  was 
one  of  such  theras  ;   he  was  made  the  royal  preceptor,  given 
the  long  title  of  Munindabhisirisaddhammadhajamaha- 
dhammarajadhirajaguru  and  appointed  also  as  the  head 
of  the  Order.  Bagyidaw  seems  to  have  had  some  concern 
for  the  religion;  the  Sasanavamsa  devotes  some  space  in 
recording  three  discussions  in  which  the  king  showed  his 
deep  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Samgha.  The  last  two  are 
concerned  with  a   subject  that  vitally  affected  the  resources  of 
the  Samgha  and  are  therefore  worth  recording  here.  We  have 
seen  that  Bodawpaya  took  a   stock  of  church  lands  and  made 
a   scrutiny  ;   he  was  frankly  jealous  of  the  temporal  possessions 
of  the  monks.  But  Bagyidaw  seems  to  have  been  drawn  in 
to  these  discussions  by  sheer  curiosity.  He  enquired  about 
the  earliest  king  that  made  grants  of  lands  to  celiyas  and 
Viharas,  and  wanted  to  know  how  the  later  kings  dealt  with 
those  land-grants  made  by  earlier  kings,  in  other  words,  what 
the  respective  rights  of  the  king  and  the  clergy  were  with 
regard  to  these  lands.  He  was  told  that  such  grants  of  lands 
had  been  in  vogue  as  far  back  as  the  days  of  Bhagavata 
Sujata,  and  further  on  the  authority  of  the  Vinaya  and  the 
Aiihakaiha,  that  the  lands,  once  granted  to  cetiyas  and 
viharas,  i.e.,  to  the  Samgha,  always  belonged  to  the  Samgha. 
The  later  kings  could  not  therefore  claim  any  land  (or  its 
produce)  that  had  been  once  donated  to  the  Samgha  by 
earlier  kings.  The  king  also  held  a   discussion  in  respect  of 
his  duty  to  the  fraternity. 
Bagyidaw’s  last  days  were  tragic.  In  1824  the  English 
declared  war  and  two  years  later  .annexed  Lower  Burma. 
Suffering  from  terrible  depression  and  melancholia,  he  was 
dethroned  by  Tharwaddy-Min  (Siripavaradityalokadhipati- 
vijayamahadhamma)  who  succeeded  him  in  1837.  Probably 
jipt  long  after,  Tharwaddy  issued  a   decree  announcing  the

--- PAGE 262 ---
BURMA  *  
S   RETURN  GIFTS  TO  CEYLON  243 
appointment  of  his  preceptor,  Suriyavamsathera ,  as  the 
supreme  head  of  the  Order,  and  gave  him  as  usual  a   long 
title.  Suriyavamsa  seems  to  have  been  respected  by  the  king 
and  the  people,  for,  when  he  died  great  funeral  honours  were 
heaped  on  him.  His  pupil  Neyyadhamma  was  then  appointed 
head  of  the  Order,  and  it  was  during  his  time  that  another 
Sinhalese  mission  headed  by  thera  Pannatissa  who  was 
•  accompanied  by  bhikkhu  Sunanda  .and  novice  Indasara  visited 
Amarapura.  The  Samgharaja  obliged  the  mission  with  his 
religious  teachings  and  advice.  Pannatissa  however  died  a 
year  after  while  he  was  yet  receiving  instructions  from 
Nteyyadhamma  at  Amarapura.  After  the  death  of  Pannatissa 
the  task  of  receiving  the  highest  teaching  and  transmitting 
it  to  his  pupils  fell  naturally  on  bhikku  Sunanda. 
Neyyadharma  also  ordained  the  samanera  Indasara,  and  then 
a   year  after  sent  both  Sunanda  and  Indasara  back  to  Ceylon 
accompanied  by  an  amatya  of  the  city-mayor  (nagarajettha) 
of  Bassein.  Neyyadhamma  emended  the  text  of  the 
Sacldhammapajjotikd ,  a   commentary  on  the  Mahaniddesa, 
and  translated  it' into  Burmese.  « 
Tharwaddy-Min  died  insane  and  was  succeeded  by 
his  son  Pagan-Min  (Siripavaradityavijayanantayasamaha- 
dhammarajadhiraja,  1846-52)  in  whose  reign  religious 
scholarship  seems  to  have  received  a   fillip.  Pannajotabhidhaja, 
a   disciple  of  Suriyavamsa,  was  apppinted  Samgharaja.  He 
wrote  a   commentary  in  Burmese  of  the  Anguttara-nikaya 
and  its  tika.  N'eyyadhammabhivamsa,  another  scholar  of 
this  time,  brought  out  a   Burmese  translation  of  the 
Saddhammavilasirii,  the  commentary  on  the  P atisambhida- 
magga.  Maniyotasaddhammalamkara  and  MedhavivamSa, 
two  other  monk  scholars,  wrote  two  commentaries  in  Burmese 
of  the  Samyuttaniliaya  and  Dighanikaya,  respectively, 
along  with  their  fifcas.  Neyyadhamma’s  chief  disciple 
Pannasami  (who  later  became  the  author  of  the  SasanaVamsa) 
began  to  come  into  prominence  even  from  this  time.  ^Within

--- PAGE 263 ---
244  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
five  years  of  his  ordination  he  translated  in  Burmese  a 
commentary  ( 
Ganthipadatthavannanam )   of  the  Saddattha- 
bhedacinta.  Another  five  years  later  he  brought  out  a 
Burmese  translation  of  the  commentary  on  the  A   bhidhanap- 
padipilza,  the  text  of  which  he  had  emended  after  having 
compared  it  with  other  existing  versions. 
iW e   are  now  drawing  towards  the  close  of  the  mediaeval 
age  in  Burma  as  well  as  of  the  characteristically  mediaeval 
outlook  that  has  so  long  marked  the  religion  in  that  country. 
Another  quarter  of  a   century  and  the  old  order  will  fade 
out  of  our  vision  and  a   new  order  will  gradually  emerge 
under  new  conditions .  But  before  the  narrative  is  closed 
with  the  passing  away  of  the  old  order,  one  is  happy  to  dwell 
on  an  era  of  all-round  peace  and  progress  for  the  religion. 
The  short  span  of  twenty-five  years  (1852-77)  that 
Mindon-Min  (son  of  Pagan-Min)  was  given  to  rule  was 
indeed  a   golden  era  for  the  Order  that  came  to  enjoy  sincere 
and  vigorous  patronage  of  the  king.  He  infused  new  life 
into  the  Samgha  by  not  only  interesting  himself  but  all 
around  him  in  the  affairs  of  the  Samgha.  Religious  studies 
were  pursued  with  zeal  and  vigour  and  the  enthusiasm 
thus  aroused  filtered  down  to  the  common  people  who  began 
to  take  a   renewed  interest  in  matters  religious  and  vie  with 
one  another  in  observing  the  precepts  of  the  Master.  It  is 
no  wonder,  therefore,  that  Pannasami,  who  later  on  succeeded 
his  teacher  Neyyadhammabhivamsa  as  the  royal  preceptor  and 
became  more  over  the  supreme  head  of  the  Order,  extends 
a   most  sincere  and  dignified  compliment  to  the  kindly 
patron  of  the  Samgha,  not  only  in  the  Sasanavamsa  but 
also  in  the  Nagarajuppattikatha  which  was  written  at  the 
request  of  his  teacher  and  the  then  Samgharaja  Neyya- 
dhamma  to  commemorate  the  foundation  of  the  new  capital 
at  Ratanapura  (i.e.,  Mandalay). 
Neyyadbamma  himself  composed  at  the  king's  request 
a   work  entitled  Surajamaggadipant.  He  was  an  erudite

--- PAGE 264 ---
Burma’s  return  gifts  to  ceylon  245 
teacher  taking  delight  in  expounding  the  commentary  on  the 
Mayhimanifyaya  (of  which  a   Burmese  translation  was  pre- 
pared at  his  instance  by  a   pupil  of  his)  along  with  his  own 
interpretation  of  the  text.  Thera  Medhavivamsa  wrote  a 
commentary  in  Burmese  of  the  Pali  Jatakas.  But  the 
largest  number  of  works  was  produced  by  Pannasami 
himself  when  he  had  become  the  supreme  head  of  the 
Order.  He  wrote  the  Sila\atha  and  the  Upaya\atha  at  the 
request  of  the  queen  (aggamahesi) ,  while  the  king’s  tutor 
induced  him  to  bring  out  the  A\\h.aravisodh.am  and  the 
Apattivinicchaya.  His  own  teacher  Neyyadhamma  success- 
fully urged  him  to  write  the  Voharatthabheda  and  Vivadavi - 
nicchaya  besides  the  NagarajuppattiJiatha .  Two  amaiyas 
and  one  maha-amatya  were  instrumental  in  having  two 
works,  the  RajaseVal^adlpani  and  the  Nirayafyathadipaka 
written  by  him.  He  also  wrote  the  Uposathavinicchaya 
at  the  request  of  an  upasak.a  as  well  as  a   Pali  commentary 
on  the  Saddamti  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  came  to  attend 
his  lessons  ( 
bahuhi  sotujanehi ) 
.  All  the  works  of  Panna- 
sami seem  to  have  been  written  in  Pali,  not  in  Burmese  as 
had  hitherto  been  the  practice  with  the  majority  of  monk- 
scholars.  Probably  he  wanted  to  revive  the  tradition  of 
Pali  scholarship  as  well  as  the  older  religious  tradition;  and 
it  is  not  unlikely  that  his  patron  Mindon-Min  had  some 
hand  in  it. 
Indeed,  Mindon-Min's  religious  activities  lay  in  that 
direction.  Only  a   year  after  he  had  transferred  his  capital 
to  Mandalay,  the  last  centre  of  Burmese  monarchy,  laxity 
in  monastic  discipline  was  in  evidence  in  the  Samgha.  He 
saw  with  grave  concern  that  the  Samgha  was  gradually 
drifting  from  its  age-old  and  vigilantly  preserved  ortho- 
doxy towards  a   way  of  life  that  was  contrary  to  the 
disciplinary  code  of  the  monks.  Some  of  the  monks 
were  in  the  habit  of  using  gold  arid  silver  and  other 
metals,  some  took  betel  (tambulam)  in  the  afternoon  (an 
6

--- PAGE 265 ---
246 
THERA.VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
unprescribed  hour),  some  indulged  in  smoking  and  other 
intoxicants,  some  again  entered  the  villages  with  shoes  on 
and  holding  umbrellas,  and  acted  in  violation  of  other 
Vinaya  rules  ( aoinayanulomcare  caranti).  The  king  thought 
that  such  contrary  practices  could  only  be  put  an  end 
to  by  imposing  a   vow  ( 
patinna ) 
  on  the  monks  to  be  taken 
before  the  (image  of  the)  Buddha  (buddhassa  sammukhe 
buddham  safykhim  katVa).  But  before  he  could  translate  his 
ideas  into  action  he  consulted  the  Samgharaja  Neyyadiiamma- 
bhivamsa.  The  latter  advised  him  to  summon  an  assembly 
of  mahatheras  to  ascertain  the  views  of  the  Samgha.  So  an 
assembly  
was  convened  
in  the  vihara  
of  the  
haraja9 *  
11 
where  the  mahatheras  were  told  of  the  idea  of  the  king  and 
were  requested  to  give  their  opinion.  One  group  of 
mahatheras  headed  by  the  Samgharaja  was  of  opinion  that 
since  the  king  was  earnestly  desirous  of  the  reformation  of 
the  Samgha  and  was  thus  actuated  by  the  best  of  motives,  he 
would  be  justified  in  imposing  the  vow.  But  the  opposition 
headed  by  Panditabhidhaja  Munindaghosa  held  that  there  was 
no  use  imposing  such  a   vow  on  the  monks,  for  there  was 
every  likelihood  of  the  vow  being  broken,  and  a   vow  taken 
before  the  image  of  the  Buddha,  if  broken,  would  burden  the 
transgressor  with  a   heavy  sin.  The  reply  to  the  opposition 
was  made  by  Pannasami,  a   pupil  of  the  Samgharaja,  at  the 
bidding  of  the  latter.  A   very  learned  speech  was  then 
delivered  by  the  young  thera  who  brought  to  bear  on  his 
discourse  relevant  passages  from  the  Vinaya,  the  Patimokkha, 
the  Parivara  and  the  Suttavibhanga,  along  with  Buddha- 
ghosha’s  interpretations  thereof.  He  pointed  out  that  newly 
ordained  bhikkhus  had  to  take  vows  at  the  instance  of  the 
upajjhayas  at  the  time  of  the  apasampada  ordination ;   the 
9  It  is  noteworthy  that  Mindon-Min  did  not  convene  the  assembly  in  his  own 
palace  as  had  hitherto  been  the  practice  with  the  kings  when  summoning  theras 
to  a   religious  discussion  or  debate,  nor  was  he  present  when  the  debate  took 
place*

--- PAGE 266 ---
Burma’s  return  gifts  no  ceylon 
247 
samaneras  had  to  take  a   vow  to  observe  the  precepts  of  the 
religion  at  the  time  of  their  taking  the  pabbajja;  they  had 
also  to  take  another  vow  when  they  began  their  religious 
•  studies  under  their  upajjhayas.  Thus  the  taking  of  a   vow 
was  not  an  unusual  thing  in  the  religious  life  that  Buddhism 
prescribed.  And,  what  the  king  wanted  to  do  was  not 
anything  different  from  prescribed  vows  or  anything  not 
approved  of  or  authorised  by  the  sacred  texts.  Pannasami’s 
speech  had  the  desired  effect ;  the  mahatheras  were  all 
convinced,  and  they  resolved  that  the  king  would  be  justified 
in  imposing  a   vow.  So  the  king  decreed  that  all  monks 
should  take  a   vow  before  the  Buddha  to  conform  strictly  to 
the  rules  of  the  Vinaya.  The  order  was  obeyed  and  those 
who  have  been  acting  contrary  to  the  rules  were  made  to 
conform  to  the  stricter  code.  Monastic  orthodoxy  once  more 
emerged  triumphant. 
It  will  be  observed,  and  this  is  of  some  significance,  that 
the  point  in  the  debate  was  not  so,  much  whether  the  king 
had  any  right  to  impose  the  vow  as  whether  the  vow 
itself  was  necessary  and  ’  was  approved  of  by  the  sacred 
texts.  The  king’s  fight  to  impose  the  vow  was  not  even 
questioned ;   in  fact,  it  looked  as  if  it  were  an  accepted  fact 
sanctioned  by  long  use  and  tradition. 
Meanwhile,  the  “   Amarapura  Samgha  ”   in  Ceylon  was 
being  agitated  by  a   controversy  centring  round  an  ancient  sima. 
The  sima  in  question  was  situated  on  the  bank  of  a   certain 
river  over  which  a   bridge  was  built  for  easy  passage  of  the 
bhikkhus  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  This  involved  what 
is  called  sarn\aradosa,  i.e.,  confusion  of  boundaries  of  the 
sima,  which  invalidated  a   particular  sima  for  the  upasampada 
ordination.  This,  as  well  as  other  religious  ceremonies 
(upasampadadi  vinaya\ammani)  were  being  performed  in  that 
sima  for  several  years  past  by  a   thera  named  Nanalamkara,  but 
now  a   section  of  the  Samgha  headed  by  Dhir ananda  refused  to 
perform  religious  cerempnies  in  that  sima.  Thus  two  parties

--- PAGE 267 ---
248 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
came  into  being,  one  following  the  lead  of  Nanalamkara  and 
another  of  Dhirananda.  They  jointly  sent  a   deputation  con- 
sisting of  two  bhikkhus,  Dhammakkhandha  and  Vanaratana, 
to  Mandalay  to  seek  advice  and  decision  on  this  point  from 
the  Samgharaja.  They  were  very  hospitably  received  and 
were  housed  in  a   vihara  newly  built  for  them.  The 
Samgharaja  after  hearing  both  sides  of  the  dispute  and 
consulting  many  (sacred)  texts,  gave  his  decision.  He  told 
them  that  such  a   place  as  the  sima  in  question  was  really 
invalid  owing  to  sam\aradosa.  It  was  again  a   decision  in 
fovour  of  orthodoxy ;   indeed  the  Vinaya  rules  were  upheld 
once  more  and  strictest  discipline  was  insisted  upon. 
However,  the  two  bhikkhus  received  instructions  in  the  sacred 
texts  for  a   second  time  from  the  Samgharaja,  and  when  they 
left  for  Ceylon  the  king  presented  them  with  valuable  gifts. 
A   second  deputation  from  Ceylon  reached  Mandalay 
almost  immediately  after,  this  time  consisting  of  two  bhi- 
kkhus, Vimalajoti  arid  Dhammananda,  and  four  upasakas 
along  with  Ariyalamkar a,  a   samanera.  They  were  also  very 
cordially  received  and  housed  in  a   vihara  in  the  monastery 
of  the  Samgharaja  who  re-iterated  his  decision  to  the  new 
deputation.  The  two  bhikkhus  received  instructions  from 
him  and  the  samanera  his  upasampada  ordination,  after 
which  they  presumably  sailed  back  home.  It  was  perhaps 
on  their  arrival  that  a   third  and  larger  deputation  consisting 
of  two  bhikkhus,  three  samaneras  and  four  upasakas,  came 
to  the  king  with  valuable  presents  of  a   gold  and  silver  casket, 
a   sacred  relic,  an  ivory  image,  and  leaves,  bark  and  branch 
of  the  bodhi  tree.  They  were  also  cordially  received  and 
confortably  housed  \   the  two  bhikkhus  underwent  instructions 
in  the  sacred  texts,  the  samaneras  received  the  upasampada 
ordination,  and  the  upasakas  took  the  pabbajja  after  due 
ceremony. 
These  religious  missions  from  Ceylon  were  as  it  were  just 
what  was  needed  to  round  off  the  history  of  the  Buddhist

--- PAGE 268 ---
BURMA’S  RETURN  GIFTS  TO  CEYLON  249 
Samgha  of  Burma.  We  have  seen  how  the  founding  of  the 
“   Amarapura  School  ”   in  Ceylon  was  the  first  return  gift  of 
Burma  to  Ceylon.  These  missions  now  afforded  a   chance  to 
Burma  to  make  the  second  return  gift  to  that  island.  As 
one  reads  the  story  of  these  missions  and  deputations  and 
the  reasons  and  circumstances  that  inspired  them,  one’s 
memory  naturally  travels  back  to  those  days  four  hundred 
years  ago,  when  king  Dharmaceti  sent  out  his  mission  to 
Ceylon  to  bring  back  to  his  country  a   valid  upasampada 
ordination. 
Mindon-Min’s  work  for  the  religion  did  not,  however, 
end  here.  He  emulated  the  examples  of  Asoka  of  olden 
days,  and  sincerely  tried  to  revive  the  ancient  tradition 
of  the  religion.  At  the  instance  of  the  king  a 
great  assembly  of  all  learned  monks  in  the  realm  was 
summoned  at  the  capital  with  a   view  to  making  a   new  redac- 
tion of  the  three  Pitakas .  For  more  than  three  years  (1868- 
7 1 ) 
  
the  assembly  continued  to  meet  under  the  presidentship 
of  the  king  himself  when  the  monks  read  out  or  recited  the 
sacred  texts,  one  by  one,  to  restore  the  best  and  the  most 
correct  reading.  The  work  finished,  the  complete  text  of  the 
Tipitaka  was  engraved,  by  order  of  the  king,  on  729  marble 
slabs10  which'  the  visitor  to  Mandalay  can  see  even  today 
posted  vertically  at  regular  intervals  over  a   wide  green  grassy 
lawn  within  the  enclosure  of  the  Kutho-daw  pagoda.  The 
Samgha  in  deep  gratitude  conferred  on  him  the  title  of 
‘  Convenor  of  the  Fifth  Council,’  a   title  which  Mindon-Min 
treasured  the  most.  As  a   memorial  of  this  Council  Mindon- 
Min  presented  a   new  spire,  coated  with  gold  and  studded 
with  jewels,  to  the  Shwedagon  pagoda. 
In  1885  the  English  occupied  Mandalay,  the  Gity  of 
Mindon-Min,  and  signalised  the  dawn  of  the  modern  age 
in  Burma. 
>0  Upper  Burma  Gazetteer,  I,  p.  66, 
33-1445B

--- PAGE 269 ---
CHAPTER  SEVEN 
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
1 
SUMMARY 
It  is  nothing  curious  that  all  traditions  of  the  people  of 
Burma  and  all  their  chronicles  hark  back  to  India.  They 
claim  to  have  received  the  first  message  of  culture  and 
civilisation  through  a   Sakyan  migration  from  the  Madhyadesa 
or  Middle  Country  of  India;  the  kings  of  Burma  are  also  said 
to  have  been  ‘  originally  descended  from  the  noble  Sun 
dynasty  (Surya-vamsa)  of  the  Sakyan.’  They  even  claim 
Gautama  the  Buddha,  who  actually  did  never  stir  out  of  the 
Middle  Country,  to  have  more  than  once  visited  Lekaing,  a 
village  of  merchants  in  Aparanta.  1  Today  we  dismiss  these 
claims  as  mere  expressions  of  a   human  weakness  natural  in 
early  colonists  and  converts  and  hence  in  later  chroniclers  of 
Burma ;   their  national  vanity  actuated  them  to  affiliate  their 
history  and  culture  and  their  religion  to  a   hoary  past  and  a 
sacred  tradition.  But  one  thing  is  clearly  brought  out  by 
these  accounts.  These  native  historians,  even  as  late  as  the 
seventeenth,  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries  when  most 
of  the  chronicles  were  written  and  when  direct  relations, 
religious  and  cultural,  with  India  had  long  been  cut  off, 
nevertheless  recognised  India  as  the  source  of  their  history, 
their  religion  and  their  culture  and  interpreted  them  accord- 
ingly. And  so  must  we.  For  the  history  of  Buddhism  in 
Burma  up  till  at  least  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  and 
even  occasionally  afterwards,  is  almost  invariably  connected 
1  This  Aparanta,  according  to  Burmese  Geography,  was  in  Burma.  See,  ante*

--- PAGE 270 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT  251 
with  India,  and  later  with  Ceylon,  and  can  only  be 
understood  in  the  light  of  these  connections. 
Buddha  originated  Buddhism,  but  it  was  to  the  practical 
idealism  and  proselytising  zeal  of  Asoka  that  the  religion 
spread  not  only  in  all  the  countries  of  India  but  also  outside, 
in  Egypt,  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  and  Ceylon.  The  tradition 
that  he  included  Suvannabhumi  as  well  within  the  orbit  of 
his  missionary  campaigns  falls  quite  in  a   line  with  what  we 
know  of  his  actual  proselytising  activities,  and  we  have  seen 
that  there  is  nothing  “   antecedently  improbable  ”   in  it.  But, 
even  then,  the  difficulty  of  the  historian  remains,  and  he 
cannot  yet  treat  it  as  a   fact  of  history  though  circumstantially 
the  tradition  seems  to  stand  within  the  bounds  of  probability. 
Other  traditions  of  early  relations  with  India  are  often  alluded 
to  in  the  local  chronicles,  but  none  concerns  itself  with 
Buddhism,  nor,  it  seems,  with  sober  and  authentic  history. 
Four  centuries  later  or  thereabout  we  hear  of  the  Sinhalese 
fraternity  of  monks  converting  the  Kirata  country  to  the 
faith  Jo  the  Buddha.  This  country  in  all  likelihood  was 
identical,  as  we  have  tried  to  show,  with  a   part  of  what  is 
now  known  as  Burma.  Almost  simultaneously  we  seem  to 
strike  on  a   piece  of  definite  evidence  of  the  existence  of 
Buddhism  in  the  country.  Our  source  of  information  this 
time  is  Chinese  which,  though  of  a   casual  nature,  is  neverthe- 
less of  considerable  value  inasmuch  as  it  affords  the  earliest 
authentic  reference  to  Buddhism  in  Burma,  subject 
to  the  acceptance  of  the  identification  of  Lin-yang 
with  some  place  in  Burma.  Circumstantially,  the  existence 
of  Buddhism  in  Burma  in  the  third  century  A.D., 
apart  from  the  Asokan  tradition  of  an  earlier  introduction  of 
the  religion,  is  not  anything  improbable.  The  religion  existed 
in  Fii-nan  side  by  side  with  Brahmanism  2  and  perhaps  also 
in  Tun-hsiin  which,  about  two  centuries  later,  was  a 
>L  Pelliot,  B.E.F .£,0.,  **  Le  Fou-nan,”  p.  994.

--- PAGE 271 ---
252 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
dependency  of  Fii-nan. 8  In  Java  also  Buddhism  appears  to 
have  spread  remarkably  between  414  and  431  
A.D.3  
4 
With  the  fifth  and  subsequent  centuries,  however, 
we  are  on  surer  grounds ;   there  is  no  more  speculation, 
no  more  working  on  suspicious  traditions  or  uncertain 
identifications.  Epigraphic  records  and  objects  of  archaeolo- 
gical interest  are  henceforth  numerous  and  they  furnish 
more  or  less  definite  evidence  of  a   flourishing  state  of 
Buddhism  in  the  metropolis  of  the  realm  of  the  Pyus, 
indicating  at  the  same  time  a   very  intimate  intercourse 
of  coastal  Burma  with  Eastern  India  and  the  Andhra-Pallava 
countries  of  South  India  which  are  known  to  have  been 
the  home  of  such  Buddhist  celebrities  as  Buddhaghosa, 
Buddhagupta  and  others.  Some  form  of  Sanskrit  Buddhism, 
evidently  Sarvastivada,  was  not  also  unknown.  Buddhist 
records  in  Sanskrit  are  also  known  and  they  point  to  a   very 
close  relation  with  the  countries  of  Eastern  India.  Epigraphic 
records  are  supplemented  by  quite  a   good  number  of 
Buddhist  monuments,  sculptures  and  terracotta  tablets  which 
have  been  unearthed  in  course  of  the  last  40  years  or  so  and 
which  are  datable  on  stylistic  and  paleographic  grounds  from 
about  the  sixth  to  about  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries. 
The  discoveries  of  a   number  of  Pali  epigraphs  in  what  is 
called  the  Kadamba-Telegu  script  and  datable  in  the  fifth  and 
sixth  centuries  and  of  a   number  of  Buddhist  sculptures  worked 
out  in  the  artistic  tradition  of  the  Andhra-Pallava  country 
3  At  Tun-hsiin,  identified  tentatively  with  Tennasserim,  Brahmanism  was 
however  the  most  popular  religion  at  this  period  (5th  cent.),  “   The  kingdom  of 
Tun-hsun  depends  on  Fii-nan  ;   the  king  is  called  K’un-lun,  In  this  country  there 
are  500  families  of  Hu  of  India  (probably  referring  to  the  merchants),  two  Fo^-Fu, 
and  more  than  a   thousand  brahmanas  of  India,  The  (people  of)  Tun-hsiin  practise 
their  doctrine,  and  do  nothing  but  read  the  holy  book  of  the  heavenly  spirits’*  (i\e., 
Brahmanical  texts). 
“   Fo-Fu  means  sometimes  the  Buddha,  sometimes  Stupa;  the  expression  might 
signify  a   Buddhist,  but  the  construction  is  abnormal  and  the  number  scarcely 
admissible.”— Pelliot,  B.E.F.E.O.,  1903,  p,  272, 
*  See  B.E.F.E.O.,  1904,  p,  275*

--- PAGE 272 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT  253 
and  datable  in  the  same  period,  point  to  a   sudden  resurgence 
of  the  religion  in  the  old  kingdom  of  Prome  in  about  the 
fifth  and  sixth  centuries.  Could  it  have  been  due  to  the 
impetus  given  to  it  by  the  celebrated  Buddhist  scholar  and 
divine  Buddhaghosa  who  is  claimed  to  have  visited  Burma 
and  helped  the  propagation  of  the  religion  in  that  country  ? 
Independently  the  Buddhaghosa  tradition  cannot  of  course 
be  said  to  stand  on  firm  historical  ground,  but  when  viewed 
from  the  angle  of  coincidence  I   have  ventured  to  present, 
it  may  not  be  judged  to  be  without  a   foundation. 
The  seventh  and  eighth  centuries  bring  forth  still  more 
evidences  of  a   flourishing  existence  of  the  religion  in  Lower 
Burma.  Thus,  1-tsing  testifies  to  the  prevalence  of 
Buddhism,  probably  of  the  Mulasarvastivada  school,  in 
Srlksetra  (Old  Prome)  and  Lang-chia-shu  or  Lankasu  which 
has  been  tentatively  identified  with  a   place  in  Burma.  Fifty 
years  later,  Buddhism  is  stated  in  the  T’ang  chronicles  to 
have  been  the  religion  of  not  only  the  State  but  of  a   consider- 
able section  of  the  people  as  well.  Archaeological  objects  of 
all  description  furnish  materials  for  an  understanding  of 
the  state  of  the  religion  during  the  subsequent  centuries. 
In  about  1000-1050  A.D.  Buddhism  in  the  realm  of  Pegu 
seems  to  have  come  into  conflict  with  Brahmanical  Hinduism 
which  by  this  time  had  come  to  gain  some  hold  on  certain 
sections  of  the  people  of  Lower  Burma.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  from  at  least  the  third  or  fourth  century  Buddhism 
had  to  measure  strength  with  Brahmanism  in  Prome  and 
Pegu  as  elsewhere,  but  the  latter  not  only  maintained  its 
ground,  but  continued  to  flourish  as  it  really  did  in  Thaton 
before  the  fateful  invasion  of  Anawartha  in  1057-58  A.D. 
The  story  of  this  invasion,  as  related  in  the  local  chronicles, 
really  indicates  a   very  flourishing  state  of  the  religion  in  the  * 
city  of  Manuha,  and  we  have  reasons  to  assume  that  similar 
conditions  prevailed  in  other  important  localities  of  Lower 
Burma.

--- PAGE 273 ---
254  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
The  scene  of  history  now  shifts  from  the  peninsular 
country  to  the  upper  regions  of  the  Irrawady,  and  centres 
round  Pagan,  the  seat  of  the  Anawrahta  dynasty.  It  is 
onwards  from  this  time  also  that  local  chronicles  and  contem- 
porary Mon,  Burmese  and  Pali  epigraphs  enable  us  to  get  a 
continuous  narrative  of  the  vicissitudes  of  the  religion  through 
the  subsequent  centuries.  Ridden  with  primitive  heathenism 
and  a   very  base  sort  of  what  has  been  identified  as  Maha- 
yanist  Tantrikism,  imported  from  Tibet,  Bengal  and  Assam, 
Pagan  found  in  the  Theravada,  the  new  religion  introduced 
from  the  land  of  the  Takings,  a   purer  and  and  simpler  faith, 
a   religion  with  a   more  direct  appeal  and  a   fresh  message  of 
deliverance.  With  Shin  Arahan  at  the  head  of  the  Samgha 
and  the  support  of  the  throne  and  the  state  at  its  back, 
the  new  faith  soon  secured  a   solid  ground  and  spread  far 
on  all  sides.  Even  during  the  reign  of  Anawrahta  the 
fame  of  Pagan  as  a   centre  of  the  Theravada  faith  was  so 
well  established  that  she  exchanged  religious  gifts  with 
Ceylon,  and,  what  is  more,  established  direct  religious  rela- 
tions with  that  island  where  Pali  Buddhism  had  built  up 
its  new  home  after  a   long  period  of  cruel  Cola  persecution 
and  its  eventual  banishment  from  South  India.  Relations 
with  Eastern  India  were  maintained  mainly  through  periodi- 
cal embassies  deputed  to  worship  at  the  Bodhgaya  shrine, 
and  through  Buddhist  monks  and  Brahmana  priests  from 
India,  but  it  was  with  Ceylon  that  she  came  eventually  to  be 
linked  up  in  all  matters  connected  with  Theravada 
Buddhism.  This,  ,we  have  already  explained,  was  but 
inevitable.  Since  India  had  already  ceased  to  be  the  home 
of  Theravada  Buddhism  and  Ceylon  had  now  become 
the  land  where  the  religion  found  a   congenial  abode,  the 
Buddhist  monks  of  Burma  came  to  look  up  to  the 
brotherhood  of  that  island  as  the  source  of  all  inspiration,  of 
wisdom  and  purity  and  of  the  religion  itself  in  its 
pristine  form  and  character.  In  fact,  the  Mahavihara  of

--- PAGE 274 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
255 
Ceylon  came  to  be  considered  as  their  Mecca;  and  this 
attitude  of  the  Burmese  brotherhood  was  in  reality 
responsible  for  the  introduction  of  the  Slhala  Samgha  and 
the  division  of  the  Buddhist  Church  of  Burma  into  two 
opposing  factions,  the  Maramma  Samgha  or  the  older 
organisation  that  presumably  came  to  being  as  a   result  of 
contact  with  South  India,  and  the  Slhala  Samgha  or  the  new 
organisation  that  owed  its  life  and  inspiration  to  the 
Mahavihara  of  Ceylon.  The  Sxhala  Samgha  in  course  of 
time  was  further  divided  into  various  factions,  one  differing 
from  the  other  not  on  any  important  metaphysical  doctrine, 
but  on  subtle  questions  of  the  Vinaya.  In  their  opposition 
to  the  Maramma.  Samgha,  however,  the  different  factions  of 
the  Slhala  Samgha  chose  to  offer  a   united  front. 
The  Sxhala  Samgha  gradually  established  itself  in  the 
Mon  or  Talaing  country  as  well  where  too  there  grew  up  a 
number  of  contending  factions.  Such  splitting  up  into  various 
factions  naturally  led  to  the  disintegration  of  the  factions 
themselves  as  well  as  to  the  degeneration  of  the  religious 
Order,  an  unfortunate  state  of  things  which  is  faithfully 
reflected  in  the  preamble  of  the  Kalyani  inscriptions.  A   move 
towards  unity  and  strength,  towards  infusion  of  new  life  into 
the  religion  was  the  need  of  the  day ;   and  it  came  as  if  in 
response  to  a   great  social  demand  when  Dhammaceti  was 
crowned  king  of  Pegu  (1472).  Again  the  Sinhalese  brother- 
hood of  the  Mahavihara  came  to  the  aid  of  the  religion  in 
Burma,  and  the  reformation  of  Dhammaceti  practically  led  to 
the  final  triumph  of  the  Slhala  Samgha  as  well  as  to  the  better 
consolidation  of  the  Samgha  in  Burma.  It  is  important  here 
to  note  that  from  the  very  introduction  of  the  Sinhalese 
fraternity  the  royal  authority  had  always  lent  its  support  to  the 
new  order  in  preference  to  the  old,  which  was  not.  a   little 
responsible  for  the  position  of  supremacy  the  Sinhalese 
Satngha  came  eventually  to  acquire  in  Burma.  The  triumph 
pf  the  Slhala  Samgha  was  indeed  the  triumph  of  the  Maha-

--- PAGE 275 ---
256 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
vihara  tradition  that  stood  for  orthodoxy ;   and  this  orthodoxy 
by  which  is  meant  strict  comformity  to  the  rules  of  the  Vinaya 
according  to  orthodox  interpretation  was  ever  the  character 
and  ideal  of  the  religion  in  Burma. 
We  may  here  pause  to  consider  the  extent  reached  by  the 
various  forms  of  Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma.  It  has 
already  been  pointed  out  that  Theravada  was  not  the  only 
form  of  Buddhism  in  the  country.  Sarvastivada,  on  the 
evidence  of  Sanskrit  Buddhist  epigraphs  as  well  as  on  that  of 
I-tsing,  was  a   prevalent  form  of  the  religion  in  about  the 
seventh  and  eighth  centuries  A.D. ;   and,  if  the  local 
chronicles  are  to  be  believed,  some  sort  of  Mahayanism 
and  Mahayanist  Tantrikism  had  also  penetrated  into  Upper 
Burma,  probably  by  the  land-route  by  way  of  Tibet,  Assam 
and  Manipur.  In  fact,  when  Anawrahta  introduced 
Theravada  to  Pagan  there  had  already  been  in  existence 
some  sort  of  Buddhist  Tantrik  worship  which  orthodox 
Buddhism  considered  as  heresy.  Besides,  there  were  the 
Samanakuttakas,  probably  the  same  as  the  Aris,  who  had  a 
powerful  following  at  least  in  and  around  Pagan.  Their 
existence  is  proved  by  the  paintings  on  the  walls  of  some  of 
the  temples  of  Pagan  as  well  as  by  the  discoveries  of  sculp- 
tures, bronzes  and  terracotta  plaques  representing 
Tantrik  Buddhist  divinities.  The  prevalence  of  Mahayana 
and  Mantrayana  is  also  testified  to  by  more  than  one 
Tibetan  text.  Regular  and  determined  attempts  were 
made  by  successive  kings  to  exterminate  the  Aris,  but 
they  were  successful  not  until  the  reformation  of  Dhamma- 
ceti.  Somehow  or  other  Tantrik  Buddhist  texts  and 
Mahayanist  texts  on  logic  were  made  subjects  of  study  by 
monks  of  Theravada  affiliation ;   a   few  such  texts  were 
preserved  in  a   monastic  library  of  Upper  Burma  as  late  as 
1442  A.D. 
The  reformation  of  Dhammaceti  bade  well  for  the  religion 
for  some  time  at  least;  but  the  majority  of  the  kings  of  Burma

--- PAGE 276 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
257 
were  swarthy  tyrants  and  relentless  vandals  caring  but  little 
for  the  religion.  Some  of  them  even  delighted  in  killing 
monks  and  robbing  monasteries  of  their  treasures.  Of  course 
there  were  many  also,  not  necessarily  religious  in  any  way 
or  having  any  high  spiritual  ideals  and  aspirations,  who  strove 
to  play  the  part  of  guardian-patrons  of  the  religion  by 
bestowing  bounties  on  the  monasteries  and  establishing  new 
religious  foundations.  Not  unoften  the  motive  behind  each 
benefaction  was  to  secure  the  support  of  the  religious  brother- 
hood who  were  the  only  organised  band  capable  of  influencing 
social  and  political  opinion.  Thus  the  history  of  the  religion 
during  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  is  the  history 
of  alternate  inroads  on  and  benevolent  patronage  of^  the 
Church  just  as  it  pleased  the  individual  on  the  throne  or  in 
power.  Not  unoften  personal  or  political  considerations 
played  their  part  and  determined  the  attitude  of  the  .ruling 
authorities.  However,  as  years  rolled  on  towards  the  end  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  the  Samgha  again  began  to  show 
signs  of  disintegration.  The  only  way  to  stop  the  rut 
was  to  activise  the  Samgha  by  tightening  up  the 
disciplinary  controls  and  by  a   general  levelling  up  monastic 
standards.  Factions  due  to  difference  of  opinion  as  to 
questions  of  monastic  discipline  were  already  disturbing  the 
Samgha  and  unrest  was  slowly  brewing  up.  Soon  the 
contending  parties  came  to  engage  themselves  in  a   long  and 
bitter  struggle  in  course  of  which  the  Samgha  purged  itself 
again  of  the  impurities  that  had  gathered  during  the  last  two 
centuries. 
The  struggle  centred  round  what  came  to  be  known  as 
the  Purupana-Ekamasika  Controversy.  With  the  dawn  of 
the  eighteenth  century  when  the  controversy  came  to  the 
surface  the  history  of  the  religion  in  Burma  enters  a   new 
phase.  Readers  of  the  foregoing  pages  must  have  noted 
that  the  few  events  of  importance  that  turned  the  course  of 
this  history  or  infused  new  life  and  enthusiasm  into  the 
33-14456

--- PAGE 277 ---
258 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
religion  itself  were  all  concerned  with  the  preservation  or 
resuscitation  of  the  pristine  purity  of  the  faith,  and  were  there- 
fore connected  with  the  Vinaya  rules  of  monastic  discipline. 
That  story  was  to  repeat  itself  ;   indeed,  the  whole  canvas  of 
the  history  of  the  religion  in  the  next  century  is  covered  by 
questions  centering  round  monastic  discipline  and  consolidation. 
The  Parupana-Ekarnsika  controversy  passed  through  many 
vicissitudes,  sometime  the  heterodox  school  won,  sometime 
the  orthodox,  but,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  final 
triumph  lay  eventually  with  the  orthodox  school,  that  is, 
with  those  who  strove  to  keep  strictly  to  the  word  and  spirit 
of  the  original  teachings  of  the  Master  so  far  as  monastic 
discipline  and  consolidation  were  concerned. 
The  dawn  of  the  nineteenth  century  saw  the  introduction 
of  the  “Amarapura  School”  or,  “Burama  Samgha”  (Burmese 
Order)  in  Ceylon,  a   significant  event  in  the  history  of 
Buddhism  in  Burma,  which  it  is  possible  to  interpret  as  the 
first  return  gift  of  Burma  to  Ceylon.  About  sixty  years  later 
two  deputations  from  Ceylon  came  to  Burma  with  a   view  to 
receiving  valid  upasampada  ordination  from  the  Burmese 
fraternity,  and  Burma  was  thus  able  to  return  the  gift 
Ceylon  had  made  in  the  fifteenth  century.  Before  the 
curtain  drops  on  the  stage  of  the  mediaeval  period  of 
Burmese  history  with  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Mindon-Min 
and  the  British  annexation  of  Upper  Burma  the  history 
of  the  religion  records  another  triumph  for  the  orthodox 
school.  Mindon-Min  observed  with  regret  that  laxity  in 
monastic  discipline  was  in  evidence  in  the  Samgha  which 
was  gradually  drifting  from  its  age-old  orthodoxy  towards 
a   way  of  life  that  was  contrary  to  the  disciplinary  code  of 
the  monks.  He  therefore  thought  it  necessary  to  impose  a 
vow  enjoining  strict  conformity  to  Vinaya  discipline  and  saw 
to  it  that  the  vow  was  kept  in  word  and  spirit. 
In  1 885  the  British  occupied  Mandalay  and  thus  came 
into  possession  of  the  whole  of  Burma,  It  signalised  the

--- PAGE 278 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT  259 
termination  of  the  old  order  of  things  and  beginning  of  the 
new,  in  fact,  of  the  modern  age  in  Burma.  Naturally  it 
meant  a   great  deal  to  the  religion  and  to  its  history  which 
had  so  long  followed  a   course  that  found  itself  incompatible 
with  the  new  age  and  new  order  of  things. 
The  history  of  Buddhism  in  Burma  is  also  the  history 
of  monastic  scholarship  ;   one  is  complemetary  to  the  other. 
True,  for  the  early  period  of  our  history  we  have  practi- 
cally no  evidence  of  the  scholarly  activities  of  the  monks ; 
but  the  interest  in  Abhidhamma  treatises  is  evident. 
However,  with  the  introduction  of  the  faith  into  Pagan  and 
better  hnd  sounder  organisation  of  the  Samgha  we  get  a 
glimpse  of  the  scholarly  pursuits  of  the  monks  inside  the 
seclusion  of  the  monasteries.  For  centuries  these  monasteries 
had  been  busy  centres  of  scholarly  activities ;   there  in  the 
darkness  and  solitude  of  the  library-hall  of  the  monastery 
generations  of  monks  strove  hard,  day  in  and  day  out,  to 
master  the  sacred  texts  of  their  religion  and  other  works 
most  suited  to  their  lines  of  study.  No  subject  was  too 
unworthy  for  their  pursuit  and  attention  ;   and  though 
naturally  Buddhism  in  all  its  various  aspects  and 
branches  demanded  the  most  serious  and  careful  attention, 
subjects  like  grammar,  logic,  medicine,  astrology,  astronomy, 
philosophy,  polity,  law,  prosody,  metres  and  even  military 
science  claimed  their  time  and  labour,  grammar  of  course 
being  one  of  the  most  important  and  favourite.  But  studies 
alone  did  not  satisfy  the  scholarly  craving  of  the  monks j 
they  were  authors  as  well  and  produced  works,  mostly 
commentarial,  on  Buddhist  ethics  and  metaphysics,  myths 
and  legends,  morals  and  law,  on  grammar  and  prosody,  on 
logic  and  astrology,  on  medicine  and  astronomy  and  other 
arts  and  sciences.  The  Sasanavamsa,  the  Gandhavamsa, 
the  Pitakatthamain  and  other  chronicles  give  long  lists 
of  such  monk-scholars  and  philosophers,  and  a   longer  list 
of  their  works,  but  even  these  lists  must  represent  only  a

--- PAGE 279 ---
260 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
fraction  of  the  good  and  continuous  work  that  was  carried 
on  in  the  network  of  monasteries  all  over  the  country,  A 
careful  analysis  of  the  works  mentioned  in  the  lists  will 
show  that  a   large  majority  of  texts  concerned  themselves  with 
the  Vinaya  which  was  the  subject  nearest  to  the  heart  of 
the  monks  of  Burma ;   Abhidhamma  and  Sutta  treatises 
followed  close  next. 
Political  intrigues  and  unrest,  court  squabbles  and 
periodical  acts  of  vandalism  were  often,  it  is  true,  respon- 
sible for  disturbing  the  quiet  life  of  the  monasteries.  And 
as  the  monasteries,  not  unoften,  depended  to  a   great  extent 
on  royal  bounties,  scholarly  pursuits  suffered  whenever 
there  was  any  severe  political  confusion  in  the  country  or 
an  unsympathetic  authority  sat  on  the  throne.  It  is  on 
such  occasions  that  one  can  see  a   lull  in  the  scholarly 
pursuits  of  the  monks,  but  seldom  do  we  find  them  giving 
up  their  studies  altogether  or  forsaking  the  life  and  ideal  to 
which  they  had  devoted  themselves.  Often  the  religion 
shone  dim  and  pale,  but  never  did  the  flame  go  out ;   the 
monks  carried  the  torch  ever  with  unfailing  zeal  and  earnest- 
ness till  it  again  burnt  bright  after  unfortunate  interludes. 
II 
CHARACTER  AND  IDEAL  OF  THE  RELIGION 
If  one  is  allowed  to  conclude  anything  from  the  frag- 
mentary Pali  inscriptions  found  at  the  old  city  of  the  Pyus, 
it  may  be  said  that  the  earliest  phase  of  the  Theravada 
faith  in  Burma  was  mostly  concerned  with  the  metaphysical 
aspect  of  the  religion.  But  the  material  at  our  disposal  is 
too  scanty  to  enable  us  to  form  any  idea  as  to  the  character 
of  the  religion  at  that  early  period.  In  fact,  that  character 
was  not  determined  until  some  time  after  the  introduction  of 
the  faith  into  Upper  Burma.  It  invariably  takes  some  time 
for  a   new  faith  to  determine  its  own  character  and  find  out

--- PAGE 280 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
26 1 
its  ideal  under  given  local  conditions  and  not  unoften  they 
are  determined  by  the  force  of  socio-economic  circumstances 
that  mould  its  course  of  history.  Indeed,  the  linking  up  of 
the  career  of  Buddhism  of  Burma  with  the  Mahavihara 
tradition  of  Ceylon  was  primarily  responsible  for  the 
character  the  religion  in  Burma  came  to  assume  and  the 
ideal  it  came  to  cherish.  The  Mahavihara  stood  for  orthodoxy, 
for  essential  purity  of  life  and  conduct  as  well  as  for  monas- 
tic consolidation;  the  slightest  deviation  from  the  Vinaya 
code  of  discipline  was  sternly  and  rigidly  criticised  and 
punished.  To  this  tradition  the  Burmese  Samgha  gradually 
came  to  be  affiliated  until  finally  it  identified  itself  with  the 
character  and  ideal  of  the  Sinhalese  Church  as  represented 
by  the  Mahavihara. 
Burmese  Buddhism  thus  came  to  be  less  concerned  with 
deep  metaphysical  problems  of  the  religion,  and  though  the 
Abhidhamma  continued  to  engage  the  attention  of  the  monks 
— the  seventeenth  century  was  pre-eminently  the  century 
of  Abhidhamma  studies — Vinaya  was  undoubtedly  their  first 
love.  All  along  the  course  of  history  the  religion  stresses 
more  and  more 'on  a   disciplined  and  consolidated  monastic 
life  ;   it  is  on  Vinaya  rules  that  Burmese  Buddhism  takes  its 
stand.  It  is  interesting  to  find  that  all  the  major  movements 
for  reform,  all  priestly  or  kingly  acts  of  importance  in 
connection  with  religion,  and  all  minor  disturbances  within 
the  Samgha  were  in  one  way  or  other  concerned  with  rules 
of  monastic  discipline.  It  is  curious  that  no  deep  spiritual 
or  metaphysical  doctrine  ever  moved  the- religious  order  to 
its  depths.  In  Burma  the  purity  of  the  religion  has  again 
and  again  been  threatened  by  inroads  from  other  religions, 
for  example,  Mahayanism  and  Mahay anist  Tantrikism  and 
Brahmanism,  by  deep-seated  primitive  faiths  and  practices, 
by  individual  members  within  the  Samgha  itself  as  well  as 
by  contending  ideas  and  ideals.  But  eventually  it  always 
emerged  triumphant  from  amidst  all  trials  and  struggles,

--- PAGE 281 ---
262  theravada  buddhism  in  burma 
and  upheld  the  ideal  of  monastic  discipline  as  laid  down  by 
the  Master.  There  had  been  occasional  lapses,  but  move- 
ments for  reform  were  immediately  set  on  foot  to  bring 
the  Order  back  to  its  original  ideal  of  purity  and  improve 
its  moral  fibre.  Not  for  once  had  the  orthodox  cause  had 
a   defeat,  and  it  is  an  important  consideration  that  it  had 
always  the  royal  authority  on  its  side.  Burmese  Buddhism 
therefore  underwent  very  little  transformation  with  the  march 
of  time ;   it  was  thus  practically  the  same  in  the  time  of 
Mindon-Min  as  it  had  been  when  we  first  catch  a   clear 
glimpse  of  it  after  the  introduction  and  consolidation  of  the 
Sihala  Samgha,  or,  in  other  words,  of  the  orthodox  Thera- 
vada School.  If,  therefore,  anybody  wants  to  know  and 
see  Buddhism  as  conceived  and  preached  by  the  Buddha 
himself  so  far  as  Samgha  life  goes  one  can  see  a   nearest 
approach  to  it  in  the  monasteries  of  Burma. 
But  Burma  has  hardly  any  creative  contribution  to 
Buddhist  logic  and  metaphysics  to  her  credit.  Buddhism 
as  an  intellectual  and  emotional  discipline  certainly  engaged 
their  attention ;   but  there  is  hardly  any  evidence  throughout 
the  centuries  of  their  having  ever  made  any  conscious  attempt 
to  expand  or  interpret  creatively  the  Buddhist  way  and 
philosophy  of  life.  There  have  been  recent  attempts  towards 
such  contribution,  but  on  the  whole  Buddhism  in  Burma 
remained  and  still  does  remain  a   colonial  religion. 
Ill 
WHAT  BUDDHISM  HAS  DONE  FOR  BURMA 
.  * 
Of  all  the  Indianised  lands  of  South-eastern  Asia,  Burma 
is  indeed  the  only  country  where  monastic  Buddhism  of  the 
Theravada  nikaya  survives  to  this  day  in  its  pristine  purity 
and  glory.  In  Campa  and  Kamboj  as  well  as  in  Java  and 
Sumatra,  Theravada  Buddhism  could  hardly  make  any  head- 
way against  Brahmanical  Hinduism  and  Mahayanism  and

--- PAGE 282 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
263 
its  allied  cults ;   in  Siam  priestly  corruption  had  undermined 
its  purity ;   but  in  Burma  the  religion  survived  every  attack 
directed  against  it,  and  successfully  swallowed  all  the 
religions  that  came  to  contend  its  claim  to  superiority. 
Even  the  heathen  with  powerful  gods  of  primitive  belief, 
the  Nat  spirits,  for  example,  came  slowly  and  gradually 
to  merge  themselves  into  the  more  pure,  simple  and 
direct  faith  that  brought  light  into  the  land,  and  hope 
and  solace  into  the  minds  of  thousands.  To  ask  what 
Burma  owes  to  Buddhism  is  to  be  told  at  once  that  it  was 
Buddhism  that  brought  Burma  into  the  arena  of  culture  and 
civilisation  and  in  one  line  with  the  other  countries  of  the 
Indian  Orient.  Indeed,  Buddhism  was  the  one  civilising 
factor  in  Burmese  life  society. 
Besides,  Buddhism  gave  to  the  people  of  Burma  a 
religion  that  replaced  the  gross  and  primitive  heathenism  of 
earlier  centuries.  In  the  place  of  rude  and  barbaric  cults 
fostering  animistic  and  totemistic  worship  they  had 
received  one  of  the  simplest  and  purest  faiths  mankind 
has  ever  known.  To  speculate  what  Burma  would  have 
been  without  Buddhism  is  to  imagine  Burma  given  up  to 
those  barbarous  images  of  heathen  gods,  the  Nat  spirits, 
that  stand  as  it  were  with  folded  hands  round  the  more 
important  sacred  shrines  of  Buddhism  (e.g.,  the  Shwezigon 
in  Pagan).  Anawrahta,  asked  why  he  had  allowed  them 
in  a   Buddhist  shrine,  said,  “   Men  will  not  come  for  the 
sake  of  the  new  faith.  Let  them  come  for  their  old  gods 
and  gradually  they  will  be  won  over.”  And  eventually, 
they  were  indeed  won  over. 
Buddhism,  moreover,  exercised  a   most  sobering  influence 
on  the  rude  semi-civilised  Burmans  and  the  ruder  northern 
invaders,  particularly  the  Shans  that  later  on  came  to 
occupy  a   large  portion  of  Burma  as  their  realm.  It  was 
through  Buddhism  that  they  came  in  touch  with  civilisation  ; 
it  moulded  them  into  a   new  people,  as  it  were,  it  gave  them

--- PAGE 283 ---
264 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
self-expression  and  brought  out  the  very  best  that  was  in 
them.  The  spirit  of  the  religion  moved  the  peoples  of 
Burma  to  such  depths  that  a   whole  realm  pressed  itself  to 
its  service ;   it  enthused  them  to  activities  in  all  spheres  that 
make  life  beautiful  and  worth  living — in  art,  in  literature 
and  in  general  culture.  To  contemplate  rude  and  primitive 
tribes  like  the  Burmans  and  the  Shans  given  up  to  the 
building  of  beautiful  and  magnificent  temples  and  decorating 
them  with  sculptures  and  paintings,  or  to  think  how 
thousands  enjoined  upon  themselves  the  strict  vows  of 
a   monkish  life  in  the  seclusion  of  monasteries  busying 
themselves  there  in  enriching  the  store  of  knowledge  of  the 
world  or  in  seeking  deliverance  for  themselves  and  their 
fellow  creatures,  is  to  admire  the  wonderful  magic  that 
Buddhism  wrought  on  the  people  of  Burma.  To-day  all 
that  is  beautiful  and  attractive  in  Burmese  life  and  society 
and  manners  and  customs  come  in  fact  from  Buddhism. 
The  religion  gave  them  deeper  thoughts  to  contemplate 
upon,  higher  principles  to  live  for  and  nobler  ideals  to  aspire 
after.  It  gave  them  a   new  outlook  on  life,  and  influenced 
the  notions  and  beliefs  of  the  average  Burman  to  a 
considerable  extent. 
Buddhism  has  also  been  a   great  unifying  factor  in  Burma. 
Racial  jealousies  and  rivalries  did  indeed  exist  even  within 
the  Samgha,  but  it  was  Buddhism  that  eventually  brought 
the  Talaings  and  the  Pyus,  the  Burmans  and  the  Shans,  the 
Thais  and  the  Karens  and  numerous  other  smaller  ethnic 
groups  under  one  banner  in  the  name  of  one  common 
religion,  and  unified  them  as  one  whole,  though  racially 
they  had  hardly  anything  in  common  and  were  even  hostile 
to  one  another.  Buddha  was  their  common  teacher, 
Dharma  was  their  one  common  goal  and  Samgha  was  their 
one  common  meeting  ground. 
Buddhism  gave  to  Burma  a   society  based  on  the  theory  of 
equality  of  social  standards.  Discarding  wealth .  as  well

--- PAGE 284 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT  265 
as  caste  as  Buddhism  did,  society  in  Burma  hardly  knew 
any  grading  based  either  on  material  possession  or  on 
birth.  Very  few  countries  in  fact  enjoy  such  a   demo- 
cratic social  life  as  Burma  does  even  to-day ;   and  whoever 
has  cared  to  enter  into  its  spirit  and  understand  the  meaning 
thereof  knows  very  well  that  it  is  one  of  those  remarkable 
gifts  Buddhism  has  given  to  Burma.  Another  gift  of 
Buddhism  to  Burmese  life  is  the  very  high  percentage  of 
literacy  among  the  Burmese  people.  This  is  even  to-day, 
as  it  was  in  olden  times,  the  work  of  the  Buddhist  monks 
whose  one  duty  is  to  initiate  every  boy  and  girl  of  the 
neighbourhood  into  the  art  of  reading  and  writing  so  as  to 
enable  him  or  her  to  read  and  understand  the  most  essential 
texts  of  the  religion.  Every  village  or  a   cluster  of  neigh- 
bouring villages  in  Burma  has  even  to  this  day  a   monastery 
school  ( 
phongyi  kyaung),  and  until  recent  times  every  boy  and 
girl,  within  a   certain  specified  age,  of  the  neighbourhood  had 
to  spend  a   specified  time  as  a   novice  in  the  monastery  school 
after  which  he  or  she  was  at  liberty  to  go  back  to  a   layman’s 
life  or  take  to  the  life  of  a   monk  or  nun  as  he  or  she  chose. 
It  is  in  these  monasteries  that  Burmese  boys  and  girls  received 
their  early  training,  and  as  the  system  was  almost  obligatory. 
Buddhism  had  been  instrumental  in  carrying  education  and 
a   particular  attitude  towards  life  and  society  to  almost  every 
home  in  Burma. 
Buddhism  had  also  an  indirect  influence  on  the  growth 
of  Burmese  language  and  literature.  Burmese  originally  was 
a   primitive  language,  poor  in  ideas  and  vocabulary  and  in 
phrases  and  idioms  and  unable  to  express  the  most  abstruse 
and  abstract  thoughts  of  Buddhism.  Pali,  the  language  of 
Theravada  Buddhism,  was  therefore  its  only  guide,  and 
through  that  sacred  literature,  and  that  of  the  Mons  or 
Talaings,  also  deeply  indebted  to  Pali,  Burma  found  its  surest 
way  to  intellectual  development.  Their  lisping  native  tongue 
exercised  itself  through  the  language  and  literature  of  a 
34—14458

--- PAGE 285 ---
266 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
religion  which  they  had  accepted  for  themselves,  and 
gradually  they  learnt  to  express  themselves  in  the  language  of 
their  own.  In  that  adapting  process  Burmese  language  and 
literature  became  endowed  with  the  richness  of  Pali,  and  a 
primitive  non-Indian  mind  raised  itself  to  a   level  so  as  to  be 
able  to  claim  kinship  with  the  highly  developed  Indian 
thought  and  culture. 
IV 
THE  SAMGHA  AND  THE  SOCIETY 
•J 
It  would  be  a   sad  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  Buddhist 
monks  of  Burma  lived  an  isolated  and  self-complacent 
existence.  Indeed,  nothing  could  be  further  from  truth. 
To  read  the  large  number  of  inscriptions  of  the  Pagan 
dynasty  and  all  other  kings  that  followed  them  is  to  know 
what  intimate  ties  of  mutual  help  and  understading,  of  love 
and  respect  bound  the  Samgha  and  the  people  together. 
In  fact  the  Samgha  constituted  an  essential  element — by  far 
the  most  effective  and  powerful  element — of  the  entire 
social  fabric  of  the  peoples  of  Burma.  If  those  who  had  the 
means  reared  up  and  maintained  temples,  stupas  and 
monasteries  and  whoever  could  afford  supplied  the  means 
wherewith  the  monks  not  only  met  the  daily  requirements 
of  their  earthly  existence  but  also  fulfilled  the  duties  demanded 
of  them  by  their  religion,  or  if  hundreds  of  men  and  women 
offered  themselves  as  slaves  to  religious  establishments  they 
did  so  because  the  members  of  the  Samgha  reciprocated  such 
gifts  and  services  with  commendable  responsibility  and 
with  a   good  will  and  noble  heart  that  no  body  failed  to 
appreciate.  No  doubt  the  high  ethical  and  spiritual  values 
of  Buddhism  and  the  generally  high  moral  tone  of  the 
Samgha  were  the  main  inspiration  that  drew  people  to  the 
services  of  the  monks  and  their  organisation  ;   but  one  cannot

--- PAGE 286 ---
Summary  and  retrospect  267 
but  recognise  that  the  people  were  deeply  conscious  of  the 
services  rendered  to  them  by  the  monks. 
The  most  important  of  services  directly  rendered  was 
in  the  sphere  of  education,  both  secular  and  religious.  Since 
every  Burmese  male  over  seven  years  of  age  had  to  spend 
a   certain  specified  period  of  their  young  lives  in  the  monas- 
teries where  they  not  only  learnt  to  read  and  write  but  also 
imbibed  the  teachings  of  Buddhism  and  the  Buddhist 
way  of  life,  the  monasteries  were  rightly  considered  to 
be  the  centres  whence  radiated  education  and  enlightenment.- 
Indeed,  until  he  completed  his  novitiate  a   Burmese  boy  was 
not  considered  as  having  reached  maturity  in  membership 
of  the  society.  This  explains  the  hold  the  Samgha  used 
to  exercise  on  the  people  of  Burma. 
In  every  generation  there  has  been  a   considerable 
number  of  monks  who  were  men  of  outstanding  piety  and 
learning  ;   their  lives  have  been  commendable  examples  of 
devotion  and  prayer,  of  integrity  and  discipline,  of  love 
and  piety,  of  tolerance  and  forgiveness,  of  patience  and 
unselfishness,  of  charity  and  service.  Their  day  to  day 
life,  lived  for  the  good  and  solicitude  of  others  around  them, 
helped  the  people  to  imbibe  some  of  the  noblest  of  human 
values  that  Buddhism  sought  to  hold  aloft.  The  kindness 
and  hospitality  that  any  sojourner  in  Burma  receives  from 
the  common  folk,  the  tolerance  and  the  tenderness,  the 
piety  and  devotion  that  one  still  notices  in  an  average 
Burmese  village-man  or  woman  are  direct  contributions  of 
the  monks  to  Burmese  life.  ,When  you  see  a   wooden  house 
by  the  road  side,  containing  earthen  pots  full  of  cold  drinking 
water  daily  replenished  by  one  who  feels  for  the  thirsty 
traveller,  or  a   zayat  or  rest-house  where  you  can  rest  for 
the  night  without  paying  a   single  cowrie,  or  you  find  a   host 
of  parentless  children  adopted  by  kindly  neighbours,  or 
daily  feeding  of  birds  and  beasts  by  the  ordinary  folk,  or  a 
whole  village  well-provided  by  some  folk  who  thinks  kindly

--- PAGE 287 ---
268 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
of  his  fellow-men,  or  when  you  see  any  one  going  out  to 
call  a   monk  from  the  nearest  monastery  to  attend  on  the 
sick  in  his  house,  you  will  at  once  know  what  part  the 
monks  and  the  monasteries  play  in  the  life  of  the  people. 
Not  without  reason  the  Buddhist  monk  in  Burma  is  called 
“Phongyi”  or  “Great  Glory”  which  explains  the  great 
respect  and  admiration  in  which  he  is  held  by  the  people. 
Any  one  who  has  spent  a   whole*  year  in  Burma  must 
have  seen  and  enjoyed  the  gay  and  colourful  seasonal 
festivals — notably  the  Thin-gyan  or  water-festival  in  early 
April,  the  Wa  or  rainy  season  festival  in  early  July  and 
the  Thadin-gyut  festival  in  late  September  or  early  October — 
in  which  men  and  women,  rich  and  poor  all  alike  take  part. 
Or,  he  may  have  witnessed  the  festival  connected  with  the 
cremation  of  a   well-known  Buddhist  monk.  Practically  all 
such  festivals  that  are  today  important  elements  of  Burmese 
social  life  had  originally  nothing  to  do  with  Buddhism, 
but  came  down  from  primitive  tribal  worship  and  rituals, 
not  even  excluding  the  cremation  festival  which  is  just  a 
form  of  primitive  ancestor  worship.  Some  of  them  were 
even  connected  with  Nat  worship.  Today,  however,  they 
have  all  clustered  round  Buddhism,  and  the  centre  of  all 
festivals  is  the  pagoda-shrine  where  the  first  offerings  are 
made,  and  not  a   little  of  the  gaiety  and  entertainment  of  all 
such  festivals  is  provided  by  the  performances  of  one  of  the 
ten- great  birth-stories  of  the  Buddha.  The  integration  of 
some  of  the  gay  and  colourful  aspects  of  primitive  life  into 
the  functional  side  of  Buddhism  that  holds  that  ‘  all  is 
suffering,  all  is  transitory’  must  be  considered  to  be  the 
work  of  Burmese  monks  and  the  Burmese  people  holding 
together  and  fostering  a   common  understanding. 
Equally  significant  is  the  belief  in  and  worship  of  spirits 
and  faith  in  omens  and  magic  that  go  hand  in  hand  with 
Buddhism  in  Burma,  not  only  amongst  the  people  but 
inside  the  monasteries  as  well  where  the  more  learned

--- PAGE 288 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT  269 
and  wise  theras  no  doubt  look  down  on  them.  Most  of 
the  indigenous  peoples  of  Burma  came  down  from  the  hills 
of  Tibetan  and  Chinese  borders  and  carried  along  with  them 
their  animistic  faiths  and  practices  that  manifested  itself 
in  the  worship  of  Nats  or  spirits  of  various  forms,  classes 
and  descriptions.  Tribal  memories  and  traditions  die  hard ; 
even  when  the  peoples  of  Burma  accepted  Buddhism 
they  did  not  wholly  give  up  or  forget  their  old  gods  and 
faiths  that  are  generally  though  not  always  regarded  as 
malevolent.  In  fact,  there  is  in  every  village  a   Nat-sin  or 
shrine  for  the  local  spirits  and  they  are  regularly  propitiated. 
Burmese  Buddhism  has  no  quarrel  with  them  and  it  appears 
that  they  are  gladly  tolerated.  This  attitude  of  Buddhist 
monks  has  gone  far  towards  drawing  the  people  nearer  to 
them  and  to  Buddhism  and  building  up  a   common  ground 
from  which  the  rational  and  the  emotional,  the  intellectual  and 
the  primitive  can  equally  draw  their  sustenance  and  inspiration. 
The  Buddhist  monks  thus  played  the  most  important  social 
role  of  civilising  a   primitive  mind  through  a   process  of 
rational  synthetisation  and  yet  without  letting  it  feel  that  it 
was  being  cut  off  from  its  tribal  and  primitive  moorings. 
V 
THE  SAMGHA  AND  THE  KING  :  SAMGHA’S  POLITICAL 
• 
 • 
ACTIVITIES 
The  picture  of  a   monk  in  Burma  is  not  that  of  a   recluse 
cut  off  from  society,  rapt  in  calm  contemplation,  and 
completely  given  up  to  meditation ;   he  is  not  the  embodiment 
of  spirituality  detached  from  all  and  above  all  joys  and 
sorrows.  His  is  a   simple  and  modest  life,  but  he  is  no  ideal 
of  renunciation  as  it  is  generally  understood.  He  is  thus  as 
good  a   member  of  the  society  as  anybody  else,  takifig  interest 
in  matters  spiritual  as  well  as  temporal.  He  is  a   member  of  a 
brotherhood  that  is  closely  in  touch  with  society  and  shares

--- PAGE 289 ---
270  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
in  its  strength  and  weakness,  in  its  joys  and  sorrows.  Its 
more  wise  and  experienced  members  not  unoften  become 
advisers  to  kings  and  ministers  of  state  and  participate  in 
political  discussions  and  struggles  just  as  any  lay  man  does, 
while  its  ordinary  members  take  part,  whenever  there 
is  need  of  them,  in  court-intrigues  and  party  squabbles  just 
as  easily  as  they  shut  themselves  up  within  the  sequestered 
life  of  the  monasteries.  On  several  occasions  in  our  history 
do  the  monks  take  active  part  in  the  political  intrigues  and 
turmoils  of  the  times,  sometime  in  support  of  the  reigning 
monarch,  sometime  against.  Of  instances  of  church- 
elders  becoming  or  playing  the  part  of  trusted  advisers  of 
kings  we  have  good  many ;   they  were  often  s   o   powerful  as 
to  determine  the  major  policies  of  the  state;  on  more  than 
one  occasion  they  indeed  acted  as  peace-makers  and  negotia- 
tors in  grave  affairs  of  state.  In  matters  of  disputes  concern- 
ing the  church  the  king  is  usually  and  perhaps  naturally 
under  the  influence  of  his  preceptor  who  is  also  the  supreme 
head  of  the  Samgha;  it  is  according  to  the  latter’s  conviction 
and  affiliation  that  the  king  forms  his  own  opinion  and 
lends  his  support  accordingly. 
More  than  the  political  occupations  of  the  monks  or 
their  authority  in  matters  of  state  was  the  authority  of  the 
king  in  the  affairs  of  the  church.  This  authority  seems  to 
have  been  generally  recognised  and  accepted  by  the  Samgha 
from  the  very  beginning.  Not  only  that  he  appoints  the 
Samgharaja,  but  it  is  he  who  takes  the  initiative  and  provides 
the  funds  and  other  necessities  in  all  movements  for  reform, 
beginning  from  Anawrahta’s  time  and  terminating  with 
Mindon-Min’s.  He  plays  the  part  of  the  guardian-patron 
of  the  church,  and  we  have  more  than  one  instance  when 
he  even  prescribes  particular  subjects  and  courses  of  religious 
study,  or  commands  monk-teachers  to  go  hither  and  thither 
in  connection  with  the  work  of  the  church.  No  member  of 
the  Samgha  ever  questioned  the  king’s  authority  over  such

--- PAGE 290 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
271 
matters,  nor  considered  that  he  was  interfering  in.  a   matter 
that  was  outside  his  ordinary  jurisdiction.  The  Samgha  as 
a   whole  even  fully  recognised  the  king’s  authority  to  decide 
religious  controversies  by  royal  decrees ;   in  fact,  the 
Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute  was  actually  decided  in  this 
way.  Also,  they  recognised  the  king’s  authority  to  impose 
vows  on  the  monks ;   the  point  at  issue  was  not  so  much 
whether  the  king,  Mindon-Min  in  this  case,  had  any  right 
to  impose  the  vow  as  whether  the  vow  itself  was  necessary 
and  was  approved  of  by  the  sacred  texts.  For  themselves, 
the  kings  sincerely  held  that  ecclesiastical  affairs  were  quite 
within  the  jurisdiction  of  their  authority .  There  is  nothing 
to  doubt  that  some  of  them  were  deeply  influenced  by  the 
pure  and  sublime  ideal  of  the  religion  and  had  a   real  love 
for  it;  they  considered  themselves  as  members  of  the  Samgha 
and  did  all  they  could  to  further  its  cause. 
The  Samgha  generally  was  loyal  to  the  king  and 
reciprocated  faithfully  and  well  the  good  work  done  by  him. 
His  authority  seems  to  have  not  only  been  recognised  but 
gladly  acquiesced  in  by  the  monks  in  general.  In  more  than 
one  instance  they  also  stood  by  him  in  his  distress.  “The 
Order,  though  enriched  by  the  gifts  of  pious  lay  men,  yet 
depends,  in  the  last  resort,  upon  the  king.  Under  such 
despotic  rule  no  man’s  property  or  labour  is  his  own;  the 
means  of  supporting  the  Samgha  may  be  withdrawn  from 
any  subject  who  is  under  royal  displeasure.  The  peaceful 
easy  life  dear  to  the  Burmese  bhikkhu,  the  necessary  calm 
for  study  ■  or  the  writing  of  books,  the  land  or  water  to  be 
set  apart  for  ecclesiastic  ceremonies  (a  fitting  place  for 
which  is  of  the  highest  importance),  all  these  are  only  secured 
by  the  king’s  favour  and  protection.  If  this  be  borne  in 
mind,  the  general  loyalty  of  the  Samgha  to  the  head  of  the 
state  is  easy  to  understand.-’5 
5  Bode,  Sasanatarpsa ,  Intro.,  pp.  53-54,  where  she  gives  a   brilliant  analysis 
of  the  relation  between  thfe  Samgha  and  the  state,

--- PAGE 291 ---
2 72  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
But  this  loyalty  must  not  be  understood  to  be  the  same 
as  abject  surrender.  It  is  true  the  Samgha  had  largely 
to  depend  on  the  king’s  favour,  but  they  did  not  surrender 
their  souls  for  the  royal  mess  of  pottage.  In  fact,  we  have 
numerous  instances  of  monks,  high  and  noble  souls,  caring 
little  for  the  king’s  favour  or  disfavour,  bravely  challenging  the 
royal  will  and  courting  imprisonment,  banishment  and  even 
death.  Once  a   royal  preceptor  and  primate  of  the  realm 
refused  to  abide  ifi  the  kingdom  of  an  unscrupulous  king 
and  went  to  self- banishment  in  disgust;  again,  a   venerable 
monk  recorded  his  strong  disapproval  of  the  building  of  a 
monastery  by  forced  labour ;   at  another  time  members  of 
the  Order  refused  to  accept  gifts  made  by  the  king,  gifts 
secured  by  coercion  from  the  people  in  times  of  widespread 
misery  and  poverty.  On  another  occasion,  another  monk 
steadfastly  stuck  to  his  own  views  in  contravention  of  the 
royal  decree,  and  bravely  faced  the  angry  king  who  threatened 
him  with  imprisonment  and  death.  Still,  at  another  time 
the  Samgha  stoutly  and  successfully  resisted  the  claim  of 
another  king  to  be  recognised  as  the  final  Buddha,  and  not 
long  after  also  the  claims  of  two  kings  to  the  right  of  royal 
forfeiture  of  properties  once  made  over  as  gifts  to  the 
Samgha.  It  is  easy  to  multiply  similar  instances  besides 
those  already  cited  in  the  foregoing  chapters. 
VI 
THE  SAMGHA  AND  ITS  CONSTITUTION  :   THE  SAMGHARAJA 
THE  RESOURCES  OF  THE  SAMGHA 
is 
Buddhism  brought  with  it  its  own  church  organisation  as 
well,  and  the  constitution  and  organisation  of  the  Samgha  in 
Burma  were  much  the  same  as  in  India.  .Within  the 
monasteries  life  as  in  Buddhism  followed  its  usual  course 
with  the  chief  monk  at  the  head  of  the  monastic  household.

--- PAGE 292 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
273 
Each  monastery  was  thus  under  a   chief  thera,  and  each 
single  monastery  was  an  autonomous  institution  manag- 
ing its  own  internal  affairs.  They  had  to  find  their 
own  resources  and  tend  to  the  religious  needs  of  the 
locality  in  which  they  were  situated.  Monasteries  situated 
within  a   particular  geographical  or  racial  area  and  affiliated 
to  a   common  Samgha  often  combined  to  form  one  unit 
without  however  losing  their  autonomy,  but  that  was  no 
essential  element  in  the  church  organisation.  All  the 
monasteries  of  the  kingdom  participated  in  a   common 
federation  of  which  each  autonomous  monastery  was  a 
member,  it  being  represented  in  the  federation  by  its 
chief  thera.  This  federation  of  monasteries  subscribing 
to  the  creed  and  discipline  of  a   particular  school,  the 
Sinhalese  or  Burmese,  is  what  constituted  the  Samgha.  At 
the  head  of  the  Samgha  was  the  Samgharaja,  the  king  as  it 
were  of  the  church  organisation,  with  almost  the  same 
supreme  authority  as  that  of  the  temporal  king,  in  matters, 
relating  to  the  church.  True,  we  do  not  hear  of  a. 
Samgharaja  mentioned  as  such  before  the  fifteenth  century, 
but  all  the  same,  we  have  always  a   supreme  head  of  the 
Samgha  from  the  beginning  of  our  recorded  history,  i.e., 
from  1057  A.D.  Shin  Arahan  was  indeed  the  first 
Samgharaja  followed  by  Panthagu  and  Uttarajiva.  More 
often  than  not  the  Samgharaja  was  no  other  than  the  king’s 
own  tutor  and  preceptor ;  from  the  very  beginning  successive 
preceptors  of  the  king  were  accepted  as  primates  of  the 
realm..  Throughout  the  course  of  our  history  nobody  seems  to 
have  ever  questioned  this  practice  and  procedure.  It  will  be 
seen,  that  the  exalted  position  of  the  Samgharaja  was  not 
elective  which  it  ought  to  have  been;  on  the  contrary 
he  was  appointed  by  the  king.  With  the  death,  abdication 
or  deposition  of  the  king,  therefore,  there  was  almost 
invariably  a   replacement  of  the  Samgharaja  by  one  who 
happened  to  be  the  .acariya  of  the  new  monarch,  This 
35-1445B

--- PAGE 293 ---
274 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
gives  us  perhaps  the  key  to  the  understanding  of  the  king’s 
authority  in  ecclesiastical  affairs. 
It  is  true  that  the  Samgharaja  was  the  supreme  head  of 
the  church,  but  his  authority  was  not  absolute.  On 
occasions  when  there  were  differences  of  opinion  or  on  matters 
that  vitally  concerned  the  church  he  invited  other  prominent 
elders  of  the  organisation  to  a   conference  and  took  their 
opinions  into  consideration.  The  initiative  almost  always 
came  from  the  king  and  the  Samgharaja,  again  at  the  king’s 
initiative,  consulted  the  chief  theras  as  well.  From  this 
practice  there  gradually  grew  up  a   consultative  council 
of  Mahatheras  consisting  of  four  members,  each  desig- 
nated as  Samgharaja  and  collectively  placed  at  the 
head  of  the  Samgha,  under  the  presidentship  of  the 
supreme  head  of  the  Order  known  as  the  Maha- 
samgharaja.  When  Bodawpaya  made  an  attempt  to 
further  strengthen  the  church  organization  he  added  four 
more  members  to  the  already  existing  council  of  four,  thus 
making  a   total  of  eight  members,  each  with  the  title  of 
Samgharaja.  The  supreme  head  of  the  Order  was  also 
there  at  the  head  of  the  committee  of  eight ;   and  like  him  all 
the  eight  Samgharajas  also  were  appointed  by  the  king.  The 
members  of  this  consultative  church  council  were  all  paid  by 
the  king  who  was  the  head  of  the  church.  The  duties  of 
this  council  were  many  and  various.  They  had  to  maintain 
a   regular  register  of  all  monks  of  the  realm  with  particulars 
of  age,  locality  and  ordination,  to  administer  monastic  discip- 
line and  punish  offending  monks,  to  manage  church-lands 
and  other  properties  of  the  Samgha,  to  prevent  schism  and 
arbitrate  or  give  decisions  on  questions  of  monastic  discipline 
and  doctrinal  differences.  The  ' council  was  thus  the  main 
instrument  through  which  the  king  not  only  guided  and 
controlled  the  entire  network  of  monastic  organisation  through- 
out the  realm  but  also  kept  himself  and  his  administrative 
machinery  in  touch  with  the  people  over  whom  the  Samgha

--- PAGE 294 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
275 
had  considerable  sway.  British  administration,  essen- 
tially secular  in  aim  and  ideal,  allowed  this  council  to  lapse 
and  slowly  but  eventually  made  itself  independent  of  any 
relation  with  the  Samgha  and  its  constituents,  and'  hence  to  a 
very  large  extent  isolated  from  the  people.  To  this 
undoubtedly  is  due  much  of  the  misunderstanding  and 
consequent  trouble  and  unrest  that  exist  to-day  between  the 
Government  on  the  one  hand  and  the  large  army  of  monks 
on  the  other. 
“In  1887,  the  primate  and  thirteen  bishops  met  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Sir 
Frederick  Roberts,  offering  to  preach  submission  to  the  English  in  every  village 
throughout  the  land,  if  their  jurisdiction  was  confirmed.  The  staff  trained  by  the 
English  in  Lower  Burma  for  two  generations  included  Burmese  Buddhist  extra 
Commissioners  who  could  have  represented  the  Chief  Commissioner  on  the 
Primate's  Board.  But  English  administrators,  being  citizens  of  the  modern  secular- 
ist state,  did  not  even  consider  the  Primate's  proposal;  they  merely  expressed  polite 
benevolence,  and  the  ecclesiastical  commission  lapsed.  To-day  schism  is  ripe,  any 
charlatan  can  dress  as  a   cieric  and  swindle  the  faithful,  and  criminals  often  wear  the 
robe  and  live  in  a   monastery  to  elude  the  police.  As  Sir  Edward  Siaden,  one  of  the 
few  Englishmen  who  had  seen  native  institutions  as  they  really  were,  said,  “the 
English  non-possumus  was  not  neutrality  but  interference  in  religion.”  (Harvey,  in 
1 
 the  Cambridge  History  of  India,  Vol.  V.) 
The  resources  of  the  Samgha  were  mainly  limited  to 
private  benefactions  and  royal  bounties.  There  was 
fortunately  no  dearth  of  pious  lay  men,  and  on  auspicious  and 
ceremonial  occasions  they  used  to  make  endowments  of  rice- 
fields,  fruit-trees,  cattle,  and  even  books  and  all  other 
necessaries  of  monastic  life  to  temples  and  monasteries. 
Gifts  of  servants  and  slaves  were  also  made  and  we  have 
numerous  references  to  them  in  chronicles  and  inscriptions. 
The  more  bounteous  gifts  of  land,  of  water  for  valid  slmas, 
of  temples  and  viharas,  or  of  libraries,  were  generally  received 
from  the  king  and  the  nobles  who  usually  were  generous 
givers.  On  the  whole  occasional  depressions  apart,  the 
monasteries  of  Burma  fared  well,  and  financially  they  had 
hardly  any  long  periods  of  stress  and  struggle  ;   we  have 
indeed  no  instance  of  monasteries  suffering  from  want  of

--- PAGE 295 ---
276  THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
material  needs  which  however  were  modest  and  very  limited. 
It  is  certainly  an  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  love  and 
fostering  care  which  the  Burmese  people,  the  court  and  the 
nobility  bestowed  on  the  Samgha  and  its  numerous  establish- 
ments. Only  on  one  occasion  did  a   king,  Bodawpaya, 
become  jealous  enough  of  the  resources  of  the  Samgha  and 
his  successor  Bagyidaw  made  inquiries  if  he  could,  according 
to  law,  forfeit  the  lands  once  bostowed  on  the  Samgha.  His 
ministers  pointed  out,  however,  that  he  could  not  do  so,  for 
the  Order  could,  according  to  the  Vinaya  and  the  Atthakatha, 
continue  to  claim  all  rights  bestowed  by  individuals  in  the 
past. 
VII 
THE  NEW  CONDITIONS 
It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  British  annexation 
of  Burma  signalised  the  termination  of  the  old  order  of  things 
and  the  beginning  of  the  new,  in  fact,  of  the  modern  age  in 
the  country.  Buddhism  still  weilds  a   most  powerful 
influence,  just  as  it  did  in  the  past,  on  the  life  of  the  people, 
and  is  still  a   great  social  force.  British  administration 
allowed  the  ecclesiastical  council  to  lapse  and  thus  lost  the 
main  prop  on  which  rested  the  social  fabric  of  the  Burmese 
people,  but  could  not  ignore  the  religion  that  was  the  most 
vital  factor  of  Burmese  life,  and  had  to  frame  its  laws  in 
accordance  with  the  religious  laws  and  customs  of  the  land. 
Within  the  monastery  the  chief  thera  is  still  the  supreme 
authority,  and  the  monks  pursue  the  daily  routine  in  much 
the  same  usual  way ;   their  literary  occupations  are  also  as 
potent,  and  their  social  and  spiritual  authority  with  the 
people  as  effective. 
But  the  Samgha  is  no  more  in  a   position  to  exert  the  same 
direct  influence  on  the  social  and  political  affairs  of  the 
country.  Modern  conditions  of  life.  Western  science,  education

--- PAGE 296 ---
SUMMARY  AND  RETROSPECT 
277 
and  philosophy  and  state  policy  which  are  now  strong  forces 
to  be  reckoned  with  in  Burmese  life  and  society  as  elsewhere 
in  the  East  are  slowly  but  steadily  creating  new  values  and 
ideals  of  life  and  bringing  a   new  society  into  being.  The 
resources  of  the  Samgha  have  also  consequently  suffered  to 
a   considerable  extent.  Moreover,  it  is  being  seriously 
doubted  if  a   small  country  like  Burma  can  really  support 
such  a   large  monkish  population  under  modern  conditions  of 
life  and  society  without  their  doing  some  work  that  is  socially 
and  economically  creative.  Various  other  forces  have  also 
combined  to  oblige  them  to  withdraw  themselves  within  the 
four  walls  of  the  monasteries  where  they  confine  their 
activities  strictly  to  religious  and  literary  pursuits,  except  for 
occasional  inroads  into  the  realm  of  active  politics.  Their 
participation  in  contemporary  social  and  political  activities 
and  their  influence  on  the  ruling  authority  have  generally 
been  thrown  into  the  background.  Indeed,  present-day 
state  policy  and  administration  have  failed  to  understand  the 
social  implications  of  the  Buddhist  monastic  organisation 
and  to  recognise  it  as  a   great  social  factor  in  Burmese  life 
and  politics.  As  things  stand,  any  future  administration 
to  be  socially  responsible  to  the  land  and  its  people  must 
be  able  to  harness  the  immense  potentialities  that  reside  in 
the  Buddhist  Samgha  and  exploit  creatively  its  large  social 
sweep.  Invested  with  responsibility  and  confidence,  the 
Samgha  also  will  feel  the  call  to  rid  itself  of  the  abuses  it 
suffers  from  at  the  present  moment.

--- PAGE 297 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 298 ---
SELECT  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
I.  Original  Sources  :  Literary 
Pali  and  Sanskrit 
Dipavamsa,  ed.  by  Geiger.  PTS.  London. 
Mahavamsa,  „   „ 
 „   „ 
Cullavamsa,  „   „ 
 „   „ 
Sasanavamsa,  „   Bode  „   ,, 
Gandhavamsa,  „   Minayefb  JPTS.  London. 
Sasanavamsadipa.  Colombo. 
Burmese 
Yazawin  Gyaw,  by  Shin  Thilawnntha.  Burma  Re- 
search Scoiety,  Rangoon. 
Hmannan  Yazawin.  Mandalay.  1921.  Translated  in 
part,  in  English  by  Pe  Maung  Tin  and  Luce  : 
Glass  Palace  Chronicle  of  the  kings  of  Burma. 
Oxford  University  Press.  1928. 
Mahayazawingyi,  by  Maung  Kala.  Burma  Research 
Society.  Rangoon.  1926. 
Slapat  ragawon  dataw  surim  rou.  Buch  des  Ragawon, 
der  kfinigsgeschichte.  Ed.  by  Schmidt.  Vienna. 
1910. 
Paklat  Talaing  Chronicle  :  Thudemmawati-yaza- 
wantha  Thihaya-Zadiyazawuntha.  Paklat. 
Siam.  1910. 
Pibakatthamain.  Rangoon. 
Chinese  and  Tibetan 
Lama  Taranath’s  History  of  Buddhism  in  India 
(Tibetan).  Translated  into  German  by 
Schiefner :  Geschichte  des  Buddhismus  in 
Indien,  St,  Petersberg.  1869,

--- PAGE 299 ---
280 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Pag  Sam  Jon  Zang.  Ed.  by  S.  C.  Das.  Calcutta. 
I  do  not  know  Chinese  and  whatever  information 
from  Chinese  sources  I  have  been  able  to  utilise  has 
been  chiefly  derived  from  :  .  . 
BEFEO,  IV,  pp.  131-413.  Pelliot,  Paul.  Deux  Iti- 
neraires .... 
JBRS,  XIV,  Part  2.  Luce,  G.  H.  A   study  of  early 
Chinese  (and  Greek)  texts  relating  to  Burma. 
Luce  exploits  Chinese  sources  with  utmost  advantage 
in  almost  all  his  contributions  (see  below).  He  gives 
a   complete  bibliography  of  relevant  Chinese  sources 
in  JBRS,  XXIX,  Part  3,  pp.  274-76." 
Fa  Hien.  Travels.  Ed.  by  Legge.  Oxford.  1886. 
Hsuan  Chuang  (Yuan  Chwang  or  Hiuen  Tsiang). 
-On  Yuan  Chwang’s  Travels.  ,  Ed.  by  Watters. 
2  vols.  Life  of  Hiuen.  Tsiang.  Ed.  by  Beal. 
2  vols.  London.  1911. 
I-Tsing.  A   Record  of  the  Buddhist  Religion.  Ed. 
by  Takakusu.  Oxford.  1896. 
Chau  Ju-Kua.  Travels.  Ed.  by  Hirth  and  Rockhill. 
European 
Periplus  of  the  Erythrean  Sea.  Ed.  and  translated 
by  Schoff,  Longmans.  1912. 
Ptolemy.  Ancient  India.  Translated,  by  
-  McCrindle. 
,  Ed.  by  S.  X.  Majumdar.  Calcutta.  ,1927. 
Journal  of  Residence  in  the  Burman  Empire.  By 
H.  Cox.  Warren  and  Whittaker.  London. 
1821. 
.  Journal  of  an  Embassy  from  the  Governor- General 
of  India  to.  the  Court  of  Ava.  2  vols.  By 
     J,  Crawfurd.  Colburn.  London.  ,1834. 
.Personal  Narrative  of  two  yearsT  Ijmprisonment  in 
Burma,  By  H,  Qonger.  Murray.  London,  I860,

--- PAGE 300 ---
SELECT  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
281 
A   Description  of  the  Burmese  Empire.  By  Sanger- 
mano.  Rangoon.  1885. 
A   Narrative  of  the  Mission  sent  by  the  Governor- 
General  of  India  to  the  Court  of  Ava  in  1855. 
London.  1858. 
An  Account  of  the  American  Baptist  Mission  to  the 
Burman  Empire.  By  Mrs.  Judson.  London. 
1823, 
II.  Original  Sources  :  Archaeological 
EpigrapMc 
Fragments  of  Stone  Inscriptions  found  at  the  Baw- 
bawgyi  Pagoda,  Hmawza.  Ep,  Ind.,  V. 
ARASB,  and  JA.  1924,  XX 
Maunggan  Gold  Plates,  Hmawza.  ARASB,  1938-39. 
Kyundwza  Gold  Plates,  Hmawza.  Unedited. 
Sanskrit-Pyu  Stone  Inscription  on  the  Pedestal  of  a 
Buddha  Image,  Hmawza.  Unedited. 
Smaller  Sanskrit,  Pali  and  Pyu  Epigraphs  on  funerary 
urns,  terracotta  tablets,  stone  fragments,  etc., 
Hmawza,  mostly  noticed  in  the  ARASI, 
ARASB  and  Ep.  Ind. 
Smaller  Sanskrit,  Pali  and  mixed  Epigraphs  on  terra- 
cotta tablets,  etc..  Pagan,  Rangoon  and  else- 
where, mostly  noticed  in  the  ARASI  and 
ARASB. 
All  Mon  (Talaing)  Inscriptions.  Ed.  by  Blagden  and 
Duroiselle,  in  the  Ep.  Birm.  Archaeological 
Survey,  Burma. 
Pali  and  Burmese  Jataka  Labels  from  the  temples 
of  Pagan.  Ed.  by  Duroiselle,  in  the  Ep.  Birm. 
Archaeological  Survey,  Burma. 
36-1445B

--- PAGE 301 ---
282 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Sanskrit  Stone  Inscription  of  king  Anandachandra, 
Mrohaung,  Arakan.  Noticed  in  ARASB.  1926. 
Unedited. 
Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya  and  Ava.  Rangoon. 
1892. 
Inscriptions  copied  from  the  stones  collected  by 
Bodawpaya.  2  vols.  Rangoon.  1897. 
Inscriptions  collected  in  Upper  Burma.  2  vols. 
Rangoon.  1900  and  1903. 
Original  inscriptions  collected  by  king  Bodawpaya 
in  Upper  Burma,  now  in  the  Patodawgyi 
Pagoda,  Amarapura.  Rangoon.  1913. 
Inscriptions  of  Burma  (1131-1300  A.D.).  University 
of  Rangoon.  Humphrey  Milford. 
Rock  Edicts  II,  V   and  XIII  of  Asoka.  Ed.vby 
Hultzsch.  OH.  I. 
Naga r j unikonda  Inscriptions.  Ed.  by  Vogel.  Ep.  Ind. 
XX. 
Monumental 
Monuments  in  situ,  and  excavated  and  preserved 
sites,  at  Hmawza,  Prome,  Thaton,  Rangoon, 
Pegu,  Pagan,  Shwebo,  Ava,  Amarapura, 
Saggaing,  Mingun,  Mandalay  and  other  less 
important  places.  Described  mostly  in  ARASI, 
ARASB,  and  in  the  Amended  list  of  Ancient 
Monuments  in  Burma.  Rangoon.  1921. 
Sculptures  in  situ  and  stone  sculptures,  bronzes, 
terracotta  tablets,  etc.,  at  the  above  places  of 
archaeological  importance,  and  in  the  Museums 
at  Rangoon,  Hmawza,  Pagan  and  Mandalay. 
Described  mostly  in  ARASI  and  ARASB. 
Paintings  on  the  walls  of  the  temples  of  Pagan. 
Noticed  in  ARASI  and  ARASB. 
Annual  Albums  of  photographs,  drawings,  sketches, 
etc.,  of  the  monuments  of  Burma,  preserved

--- PAGE 302 ---
SELECT?  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
283 
in  the-  offices  of  the  Superintendent,  ASB., 
Mandalay,  Director-General  of  Archaeology  in 
India,  Simla,  and  in  the  library  of  the  Archaeo- 
logical Section  of  the  Indian  Museum,  Cal- 
cutta, from  1901  to  1940.  London.  1882. 
Numismatic 
Coins  of  Arakan,  Pegu  and  Burma.  Edited  and 
described  by  Arthui  Phayre.  London.  1882. 
III.  Secondary  Sources  :  General 
Bigandet,  Bishop.  An  Outline  of  the  History  of  the 
Catholic  Burmese  Mission  from  the  year  1720 
to  1887.  Rangoon.  1887. 
Bird,  Geo.  Wanderings  in  Burma. 
Bowrey,  T.  Geographical  Account  of  Countries  round 
the  Bay  of  Bengal,  1669-79.  Ed.  by  Richard 
Temple.  Cambridge.  1905. 
British  Burma  Gazetteer.  2  vols.  Rangoon. 
Burney,  Colonel.  Translations  from  the  Rajavamsa. 
*JASB,  IV. 
Cambridge  History  of  India.  Chaps,  on  Burma,  vols. 
Ill,  IV,  V. 
Chittagong  Gazetteer.  Calcutta.  1908. 
,  Cochrane,  W.  W.  The  Shans.  Rangoon.  1915. 
Cordier,  H.  Essai  d’une  bibliographic  des  ouvrages 
relatifs  a’la  presqu’ile  indo-chionese.  Premiere 
Partie,  Birmanie  et  Assam,  in  Toung  Pao,  II, 
vi. 
Coedes,  George.  Texts  d’auteurs  grecs  et  latins 
relatifs  a   1’extreme-orient  depuis  le  IVe  siecle 
av.  J.  C.  jusqu’aco  XlVe  siecle.  Leroux. 
Paris.  Also  notes  and  papers  relative  to  the 
subject  in  BEEEO.

--- PAGE 303 ---
284 
THJSRAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Duroiselle,  Charles.  A   List  of  Inscriptions  found  in 
Burma.  Rangoon.  1921. 
„   The  Aris  of  Burma  and  Tantrik  Buddhism. 
ARASI. 
„   [Stray  notes  and  reports,  mainly  in  ARASB, 
ARASI,  JBRS  and  BEFEO]. 
„   Notes  on  the  Ancient  Geography  of  Burma. 
Rangoon.  1906. 
„   Stone  Sculptures  in  the  Ananda  Pagoda. 
Pagan.  ARASI.  1913-14. 
„   The  Ananda  Temple.  Pagan.  MASI. 
„   The  Alphabetical  list  of  MSS.  and  books  in 
the  Bernard  Free  Library.  Rangoon. 
Forbes.  Legendary  History  of  Burma  and  Arakan. 
Forchammer,  E.  Notes  on  the  Early  History  and 
Geography  of  British  Burma.  Rangoon.  1884. 
„   Report  on  the  Kyaukku  Temple  at  Pagan. 
Rangoon.  1919. 
„   Arakan.  Rangoon.  1891. 
Ferrand,  G.  Relations  de  voyages  et  de  Textes  geo- 
graphiques  arabes,  persans,  et  turcs  relatifs  a 
Textreme  orient  du  VIHe  and  XVIIIe  siecles. 
2  vols.  Leroux.  Paris.  1913. 
Furnivall,  J.  S.  Myingyan  Settlement  Report.  Ran- 
goon. 1913. 
„   Syrian  Gazetteer.  Rangoon.  1914. 
Fytche,  A.  Burma :  Past  and  Present.  2  vols. 
London.  1878. 
Gait,  E.  A.  A   History  of  Assam.  2nd.  edn. 
Gerini,  G.  E.  Researches  on  Ptolemy’s  Geography 
of  Eastern .  Asia.  London.  1909. 
Gazetteer  of  Upper  Burma  and  the  Shan  States. 
5  vols.  Rangoon.  1900. 
Halliday,  R.  S.  The  Takings.  Rangoon.  1917. 
Harvey,  G.  E.  History  of  Burma.  London.  1925.

--- PAGE 304 ---
SELECT  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
285 
Ko,  Taw  Sein.  Burmese  Sketches.  2  vols.  Rangoon. 
1913  and  1920. 
,,  A   Guide  to  Pagan.  Rangoon.  1925. 
Lewis,  C.  C.  Tribes  of  Burma.  Rangoon.  1910. 
Luce,  G.  H.  Burma  with  Special  Reference  to  her 
Relations  with  China.  JBRS.  XIV.  1935. 
„   Burma  down  to  the  Pall  of  Pagan  (jointly 
with  Pe  Maung  Tin).  JBRS.  XXIX.  1939. 
„   Economic  Life  of  the  Early  Burman.  JBRS. 
XXX.  1940. 
„   The  Ancient  Pyu.  JBRS;  XXVII.  1937. 
„   Burma’s  Debt  to  Pagan.  JBRS.  XXII.  1932. 
„   Names  of  the  Pyus.  JBRS.  XXII.  1932. 
Majumdar,,  R.  C.  Ancient  Indian  Colonies:  Champa. 
Calcutta. 
„   Ancient  Indian  Colonies  :  Suvarnadvipa.  2 
vols.  Calcutta. 
Mookerji,  R.  K.  Indian  Shipping  and  Maritime 
Activity.  1910. 
Parker,  E.  H.  Burma  with  Special  Reference  to  her 
Relations  with  China.  Rangoon.  1893. 
Pe  Maung  Tin.  Women  in  the  Inscriptions  of  Pagan. 
JBRS.  XXV.  1935. 
Pegu  Gazetteer.*  Ed.  by  J.  A.  Stewart.  Rangoon. 
1917. 
Phayre,  A.  P.  History  of  Burma.  London.  1883-84. 
Sainson,  C.  Nan-tchao  ye-che,  traduction  d’une  his- 
toire  de  l’ancien  Yun-nan.  Leroux.  Paris. 
1904. 
Stewart,  J.  A.  Kyaukse  Settlement  Report.  Ran- 
goon. 1922. 
Stuart,  J.  M.  B.  Old  Burmese  Irrigation  Works. 
Rangoon.  1913. 
Scott,  J.  G.  Burma,  a   Handbook  of  Practical  In- 
formation. London.  1906.

--- PAGE 305 ---
286 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Scott,  G.  (Shway  Yoo).  The  Burman,  His  Life  and 
Notions.  London.  1896. 
Scott,  O’Conner.  Mandalay  and  other  Cities  of  Burma. 
London.  1907. 
Symes,  M.  An  Account  of  an  Embassy  to  the  Kingdom 
of  Ava.  London.  1800. 
Wayland,  E.  A   Memoir  of  the  Life  and  Labours  of 
the  Rev.  Adoniram  Judson.  2  vols.  London. 
1853. 
Westlake.  Kyaukse  Settlement  Report.  Rangoon. 
1892. 
Whiteway,  R.  S.  The  Rise  of  the  Portuguese  Power 
in  India,  1497-1550.  London.  1899. 
Yule,  Henry.  The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo.  Revised 
by  Henri  Cordier.  2  vols.  London.  1903. 
„   Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither.  Revised  by 
Henri  Cordier.  4  vols.  London.  1915. 
IV.  Secondary  Sources  :  Religious  and  Cultural 
Anthology  of  Burmese  literature.  Rangoon.  1921. 
Appleton,  G.  Buddhism  in  Burma.  Longmans.  Cal- 
cutta. 1943. 
Bode,  Mabel  Haynes  (ed.).  Sasanavamsa.  PTS. 
London.  1897.  1 
„   Pali  Literature  of  Burma.  RAS.  London. 
1909. 
Brown,  Grant.  The  pre- Buddhist  Religion  of  the 
Burmese.  Folk-Lore.  1921. 
Bhattasali,  N.  K.  Buddhist  and  Brahmanical  Sculp- 
tures in  the  Dacca  Museum.  Dacca. 
Rhys  Davids.  Buddhist  India.  London. 
Elliot.  Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  vol.  III. 
Forchammer,  E.  The  Jar  dine  Prize  Essay  :  An  essay 
on  the  sources  and  development  of  Burmese 
Law.  Rangoon.  1885.

--- PAGE 306 ---
SELECT  BIBLIOGRAPHY 
287 
Fausboll.  Catalogue  of  Mandalay  MSS.  in  the  India 
Office  Library. 
Finot,  Louis.  Buddhaghosa  Legend,  trans.  by  P.  C. 
Bagchi.  Calcutta  Review. 
Furnivall,  ,J.  S.  Manu  in  Burmese  Dhammathats. 
JBRS.  XXX.  1940. 
Gray,  J.  Niti  Literature  of  Burma. 
Hardy,  R.  S.  Eastern  Monarchism. 
„   Manual  of  Buddhism. 
Kern,  H.  Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism. 
Law,  B.  C.  Buddhaghosa.  Calcutta. 
Luce,  G.  H.  Prayers  of  Ancient  Burma.  JBRS. 
XXVI.  1936. 
Pe  Maung  Tin.  Buddhism  in  the  Inscriptions  of 
Pagan.  JBRS.  XXVI.  1936. 
Ray,  N.  Brahmanical  Gods  in  Burma.  Calcutta.  1 932. 
„   Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma.  Calcutta.  1936. 
„   Indo-Burmese  Art.  Calcutta.  1946. 
Smith,  V.  A.  Asoka.  London.^ 
„   Alleged  Asoka-Mission  to  Pegu.  Ind.  Ant. 
Thomas,  E.  J.  The  Life  of  the  Buddha  :  History 
and  Legend.  London. 
„   Buddhist  Thought.  London. 
Temple,  R.  C.  The  Thirty-Seven  Nats,  a   phase 
of  spirit-worship  prevailing  in  Burma. 
London.  1906. 
Wickremsinghe.  Catalogue  of  Sinhalese  MSS.  in  the 
British  Museum. 
Zoysa,  De.  Report  on  the  Inspection  of  Temple 
Libraries  in  Ceylon. 
V.  Secondary  Sources  :  Periodicals 
(with  abbreviations) 
Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of 
Burma  (An  RASB  or  ARASB).

--- PAGE 307 ---
288 
THEBAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BUBMA 
Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India 
(An  RASI  or  ARASI). 
Memoirs  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  India 
(MASI). 
Bulletin  de  l’Ecole  Francaise  de  Extreme  Orient 
(BEFEO). 
Epigraphia  Birminiea  (Ep.  Birm.). 
Epigraphia  Indica  (Ep.  Ind.). 
Indian  Antiquary  (Ind.  Ant.). 
Journal  Asiatique  (JA.). 
Journal  of  the  Indian  Society  of  Oriental  Art  (JISOA). 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  i(JRAS). 
Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal  (JASB). 
Journal  of  the  Greater  India  Society  (JGIS). 
Journal  of  the  Burma  Research  Society  (JBRS). 
Journal  of  the  Pali  Text  Society  (JPTS). 
Pali  Text  Society  (PTS). 
Toung  Pao. 
This  Bibliography  does  not  claim  to  be  exhaustive. 
Fuller  references  will  be  found  in  the  footnotes  to  the  text. 
Abbreviations  used  in  the  footnotes  would  be  easily 
intelligible,  I   hope.  Some  of  the  abbreviations  used  have 
been  given  above.

--- PAGE 308 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  INDEX 
Abhidhamma-pannarasatthana,  173 
Abhidhamma-tlka,  1 76,  200 
Abhidhammattha-samgaha,  179,  212,  228 
Abhidhammattha-samgaha-pakarana,  22 1 
Abhidhammatthasamgaha,  41,  127 
Abhidhammatthasamgaha-tlka,  128 
Abhidhammavatara,  61 
Abhidhamma-vibhavani,  1 79 
Abhidhanappadipika,  173,  222,  2 44 
Akkharavisodhanl,  245 
Alaungpaya  Ayedawbon,  225 
Ancient  Geography  of  India,  23 
Ancient  Inscriptions  of  Ceylon,  99 
Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological 
Survey  of  Burma,  36ff,  59,  306ff,  138ff, 
147,  162ff,  I67tf,  183,  203 
Annual  Report  of  the  Archaeological 
Survey  of  India,  43,  6 Ilf,  62,  64ff,  87, 
103,  II Off,  I34£F,  140ff,  143,  145ff, 
148ff 
Annual  Report  of  South  Indian ,  
Epi- 
graphy,'44 
Anutlka,  179 
Apheggusara,  176 
Archaeological  Survey  of  South  India,  44 
AriyavaipsSlamkara,  234 
Artha^astra,  4,  6 
Asoka  (Smith),  9 
 , 
Atthakatha,  92 
AtthasalinT,  172,  179,  207,  210,  222 
BalavatSra,  128 
Bhilsa  Topes.  The,  8 
Brahmanical  Gods  in  Burma  (Ray),  56, 
146;  73,  148,  150 
Brhaja,  128 
Brhajjataka,  128 
Brhatkath^,  6 
Prhatkatha^lokasamgraha,  5 
Brhatsamhita,  5,  17 
British  Burma  Gazetteer,  77 
Buch  desRagawan,  des  Konigsgeschichte, 
75 
Buddhagaya  (Mitra),  107 
Buddhalamkara,  179 
Buddhist  India,  8 
Buddhist  Records  of  the'  Western  World, 
48ff 
Bulletin  de  1’Ecole  Frangaise  d  Extreme 
Orient,  19,  22,  24,  47ff,  50ff,  56,  87, 
1 92,  252 
Burma  with  special  reference  to  the 
relations  with  China,  56 
Burmese  Code  of  Manu,  25 
Calcutta  Review,  28 
Cambridge  History  of  India,  275 
37— 1445 B 
Catalogue  (Nevill),  210 
Catalogue  of  Indian  Manuscripts,  126 
Catalogue  of  Mandalay  Manuscripts,  1 27, 
129,  17Iff,  399,  210 
Catu-samanera-vatthu,  234 
Cetivakatha,'  94 
Cetivamsa,  94 
Chaddanta-nagarajuppattikatha,  234 
Chanda-sarattha-vikasinT,  171 
Chau-ju-kua,  50ff 
Cha-paccaya-dipanT,  1 7 1 
Chin-t’ang-shu,  55 
Christianity  in  Ceylon,  238 
Chronicle,  Glass  Palace,  78ff,  81,  94, 
lllff,  117,  123 
„   Great,  26,  94,  99 
,,  Hugappyittaung,  94 
,,  Middle,  26 
„   New,  79,  94 
,,  New  Pagan,  94 
,,  Pagan,  94 
,,  Paklat  Talaing,  80fF 
„   Pegu, 94 
,,  Rakhaing,  94 
„   Tagaung,  94 
„   Talaing,  94 
,,  Tavoy,  94 
,,  Tharekittara,  94 
,,  Thaton,  26 
,,  Yazawingyaw,  180 
Chronicles,  T’ang,  253 
Cula-ganthi-pada,  235 
Cullavarpsa,  46,  91,  99,  155,  158 
Dandippakara^a,  173 
Description  of  the  Burmese  Emphe,  A , 
241 
Deux  Itineraires,  48,  56 
Dhammapada,  41,  68 
DhammasanganI,  29,  36,  41,  43,  210, 
Dhammathat,  131 
Dhammathat-kyaw,  201 
Dhammathat,  Wareru,  201 
Dhatukatha,  212 
212 
Dhatukatha-yojana,  222 
Dlpavamsa,  7,  13,  15,  26 
Divyavadana,  4ff 
Eastern  monachism,  230,  238 
Ekakkhara-kosa,  198  * 
Epigraphia  Birminica,  3,  lift,  91,  lG3fr, 
P113ff,  1 17ff,  120ff,  133,  1528F,  156,  185, 
187,190 
Epigraphia  Indica,  4,  33,  42,  61 
Essay  (Forchammer) ,  17  Iff,  175,  201 
Etimasamidlpam,  104 
Etudes  Asiatiques,  4

--- PAGE 309 ---
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
290 
Fii-nan  chi,  21 
Ganapatha,  5 
Gandhabharana,  179 
Gandhatthi,  171 
Gandhavamsa,  91,  104,  123,  1251?,  171, 
173,  176,  179,  259 
Gand'hisara,  127 
Ganthi-padattha-vannanam,  244 
Ganthisara,  127 
Gulhattha-dlpanl,  212 
HarivamSa,  15 
Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  14,  28 
History  of  Burma  (Harvey)  48,  94$,  100, 
124,  175,  180,  183,  225 
History  of  Burma  (Phayre) ,  209 
History  of  Indian  and  Eastern  Architec- 
ture, 107 
Hmannan,  81$,  96,  99$,  109,  112$,  170, 
200$ 
Hmannan  Yazawin.  25,  94$ 
Hsin-t’ang-shu,  55$ 
Hsutaungganpye,  180 
Indian  Antiquary,  3,  9,  25$,  80,  91,  226 
Indian  Culture,  28 
Inscription,  Gopalpur  Bricks,  42 
, ,  Kasia,  42 
Kurram  casket,  42 
,,  Mamamatl  Copper-plate,  202 
,,  Po-U-Daung,  3,  226,  230 
Inscriptions  of  Pagan,  Pinya  and  Ava, 
124,  126,  171,  174,  192 
I-tsing’s  Records  of  the  Buddhist  Religion 
45,  47 
I   wu  chih,  20 
Jar  dine  Prize  Essay,  127,  131,229 
Jataka,  4,  6,  179 
,,  Aggika,  135 
,,  Aggikabharadvaja,  135 
,,  Bhuridatta,  146,  180 
,,  Dlghifikosala,  134 
„   Hatthipala,  180 
, ,  Kosal  araja,  1 34 
,,  Mahagovinda,  134 
»,  Mahajanaka,  4,  133,  146,  241 
,,  Mahaummagga,  133,  136,  146 
,,  Mahosadha,  133 
, ,  Mugapakkha,  66 
,,  Nemi,  146 
,,  Potthapada,  135 
,,  Radha,  135 
,,  Sama,  133,  146 
»,  Samvara,  180 
,,  Sumedhapandita,  134 
,,  Supparaka,  4 
>>  Temiya,  146 
m   Velama,  134 
»,  Vessantara,  133,  146,  206 
>f  ,  Vidhura,  146 
>,  Vidhurapandita,  146 
Jatakamala,  4 
Jatakatthakaf  h«i .  41,  234 
Ja  t   aka  -v  i   sodha  n   a ,  1 79 
Journal  Asiatique,  5,  14,  19,  33,  51,  56, 
61 
Journal  of  the  Burma  Research  Society, 
19$,  48,  50,52,  54,  131,  160$,  165, 
167$,  175 
Journal  of  an  Embassy  from  the  Governor 
General  of  India  to  the  court  of  Ava, 
241 
Journal  of  Indian  Archaeology,  5 1 
Journal  of  the  Pali  Text  Society,  91 
Journal  of  a   Residence  in  the  Burmese 
Empire,  241 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  42,  54 
Kaccayana,  212 
  bheda,  176 
  gandha,  209 
   *  sara,  176 
    sara-ttka,  171 
  suttaniddesa,  127 
    vannana,  199 
  — *  yoga,  128 
Kalapa  Vyakarana,  171 
Kalyani  Inscriptions,  3,  11$,  26$,  76,  80, 
82/91,  99,  113$,  117,  119$,  130$,  154$, 
157$,  184,  187,  190,  255 
KankhavitaranT,  191,  210 
Karika,  104,  1*26 
KavisSra,  176,  210 
Keddah  Annals,  5 1 
Keganpye,  180 
Khuddakasikkha,  116,  190 
Koladdhaja,  173 
Konbaungset  Yazawin,  225 
Kosaungchok,  201 
Kurmavibhaga,  17 
Lalitavistara,  65 
Law  Code,  131 
Liang  Shu,  19,  51 
Life  of  the  Buddha,  8 
Life  and  work  of  Buddhaghosa,  25,  30 
Likhananaya,  221 
Lingatthavivarana,  1 28 
Lingatthavivaranappakasaka*  128 
Lingatthavivarana-tika,  128 
T 
 m 
i 
■  v*  m7\.  176, 199 
List  of  Inscriptions  found  in  Burma,  128$, 
162$,  167$ 
Lives  of  the  Pilgrims,  49 
Lokadipasara,  175 
Lokuppatti,  128 
Madhura-sarattha-dtpanl,  176 
Madhu-sarattha-dlpanl,  200 
Mahabharata,  15 
Mahakarmavibhanga,  4,  14 
Maha-niddesa,  243 
Maha-nissara,  179 
Mahn-pnjjhann,  229 
Mahanipiitu,  I   33 
Maharajavamsa,  92 
Mahatika,  129 
Mahavagga,  41

--- PAGE 310 ---
Bibliographical  index 
291 
■ 
 ..  .   .  ,  «  :l  .«.r.  II , 
iViUnu Vcuijou,  4  iit  "j*  i->,  15,  30 j  46,  91,  99, 
112 
Mahavastu,  65 
V.V  r!";v.v.-.  202 
 -,  .iV 
Manikundala-vatthu,  204 
Manlsara-manjusa,  179 
Manorathapuranl,  32,  73 
Manual  of  Buddhism,  24 
Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism,  9 
Matikatthadlpanl,  127 
r  
PL.tr-.  
37,  4?* 
V,  k   i-  .i.:  ..  :  180 
Y:.  '■<  R   
^   t,  241 
Milindapanha,  4ff,  15,  17 
M-ld-nTra'V.dT--7.  128 
M : k       .  129 
Myazedi  Inscription,  106,  124 
Nagarjunikonda  Inscription,  17,  45 
?44fF 
■■•"v.  -.42 
NgmacaradipanT,  
127 
Nan  chou  i   wu  chih,  20ff 
Nan  hai  chi  kuei  nai  fa  ch’nan,  47 
Nettipakarana,  180,  212,  234 
Nidanakatha,  32,  102ff 
Niddesa,  4ff 
,,  Maha,  4 
Nikaya,  Anguttara,  29,  32,  34ff,  40ff,  73, 
243 
„   iDigha,  34ff,  41,234,  243 
,,  Khuddaka,  41 
,,  Majjhima,  34,  40ff,  245 
,,  Samyutta,  40,  243 
Nirayakatha-dlpaka,  245 
Nirutti,  172 
Nirutti- samgaha,  210 
Nirutti-sara-manjusa,  172,  210 
Notes  on  the  Ancient  Geography  of 
Burma,  29 
Notes  on  Buddhist  Law,  131,  195 
Notes  on  Early  History  etc,  (Forchammer) 
174 
Nyasa,  128,  209ff,  229 
Nyasappadlpatika,  128 
Pabbatabbhantara-patisamayutta,  1 79 
Padavibhaga,  229 
Pali  Literature  of  Burma,  92,  104,  125ff, 
178,192,195 
Pali  MSS.  at  the  India  Office,  127,  175, 
199 
Pancatantra,  15 
Parajika-kanda,  35 
Paramatthavindu,  123 
Parayanavatthu,  180 
Paiitta,  212 
Patimokkha,  190,  210,  246 
Patisambhidamagga,  41,  243 
Patthana,  43,  212 
Patthanagananaya,  127 
Patthanapakararia,  213 
Patthanasarattha-dlpanT,  176,  200 
Pawtugi  Yazawin,  94 
Pei  Shih,  50 
Periplus  of  the  Erythrean  Sea  (Schoff) , 
2ff,  5 
Personal  Narrative  of  two  years’  Imprison- 
ment in  Burma,  241 
Petalamkara,  234 
Pitakattaya-lakkhana-gandha ,  235 
Pifakatth amain,  91,  94,  123,  126ff,  171  If, 
176,  200,  222,  230,  259 
Punnabhisandavagga,  35 
Purana,  5,  15,  17,  49,  146 
Purana,  Markandeya,  15ff 
Rajabhisekagandha,  233 
Rv”;!1  *  r*  ..-r-"- v11  222 
R-; «  '■  i 
  
■  ■■■  ,  -’if 
Rajasevaka-dlpanl,  245 
Rajavamsa,  92,  177 
Rajasankhepa,  212 
Rajayazawin,  209 
Rajinda-rajabhidheyya-dipani,  206 
Rajovadavatthu  Tigumbathomana,  234 
Ramayana,  17,  146 
Razadaiit  Ayedawpon,  94 
Religieux  Eminents,  47,  49,  52ff 
Report  (Duroiselle) ,  43 
Report  (Forchammer),  79,  129,  171,  173, 
195 
Rock  Edicts  of  Asoka,  10,  12 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  4 
Saddamti,  126,  245 
Sadda-saratlha-jalinT,  1 73 
Saddatthabheda-cinta,  244 
Saddavindu,  123 
Saddavutti,  172,-  189 
Saddapakasaka,  172 
Saddhamma-nasim,  171 
Saddappajotika,  243 
Saddavilasini,  243 
Sadhujjana-vilasinT,  234 
Samantapasadika,  172 
Sambandhacinta,  129 
Sambandhacinta-tlka,  129 
Samkhepavannana,  127,  210 
SammohavinodanT,  28,  172,  210 
Samvannana-naya-dipani,  210 
Sankhyapakasaka,  202 
Sanskrit  Buddhism  in  Burma  (Ray),  48, 
55,  69,  86,  149,  151 
Saratthadtpant,  190 
SarvajSanayadlpanl,  210 
Sasan asuddhi-dipika,  230 
Sasanavarasa,  14,  26,  76,  79ff,  91ff,  101, 
105,  1*1 3ff,  120ff,  123,  125ff,  155,  168, 
170ff,  181,  195ff,  199ff,  202,  204ff,  208, 
210ff,  213H,  218ff,  221ff,  225ff,  229ff, 
235,  238,  242ff,  259,  271 
Sasanavamsadipa,  126 
Sasanavamsadfpani,  176,  199 
Satta-rajadhamma-vatthu,  204 
Shui  Ching  Chu,  21  * 
Shwegugyi  Inscription,  109,  124,  152 
SilakathS,  245 
Slmalankara,  127 
SimSlankara  .pakarana  ,191

--- PAGE 311 ---
292 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Simalarikara-samgaba,  1 9 1 
Slapat  Rajawan,  74 
Sui  shu,  50f 
Sumedhakatha,  179 
Surajamagga-dipanl,  244 
Suravinicchaya,  199,  222 
Sutra,  Pratityasamutpada,  42 
SGtias,  Mahayana,  54 
Sutta,  Ambattha,  35 
M   Mahaparinibbana,  35,  41 
,,  Paticcasamutpada,  40 
,,  Pitaka,  35 
Sutta,  Samannaphala,  35 
Suttasamgaha,  230 
Suttasaiiglti,  35 
Suttaniddesa,  127 
Suttavibbariga,  35,  246 
T   
ada-u-ti-mawgun ,  180 
T’ai-p’ing  yu  lan,  201? 
Taungdwinlapya,  180 
Textes  (Coedes),  3 
Tbamaing,  96 
•  »  Hop-U,  97 
„   Ke-Hkayaina,  97 
ff  Shwemadaw,  75,  97 
„   Sbwenattaung,  97 
,,  Shwesandaw,  97 
, ,  Shwezigon  Lirika,  67 
,,  Thaton  Shwezayan  Hpayazi, 
97 
,,  Zat-ngaya,  97 
T'oung  Pao,  50 
Udana,  34,  41 
Upayakatha,  245 
UposatKavinicchaya,  189,  245 
Upper  Burma  Gazetteer,  249 
Vacakopadesa,  199 
Vacavacaka,  129 
<S|accavacaka,  129 
VamsadTpanT,  94 
Vannabodbana,  221 
Varttika,  5 
Vibhanga,  23fF,  34,  37,  40,  210,  234 
Vibhatyattha,  123,  129,  171 
Vimanavatlbu,  5 
Vimativinodam,  190 
Vinaya,  246 
Vinayagantbipada,  235 
VinayagujhattbadlpanT,  127 
Vinayalamkara,  206 
Vinayapakarana,  191 
Vinaya  Pitakam,  40ff,  117,  127 
Vinayasamgaba,  230 
Vinayasamuttbanadipanl,  127 
Vinayattbakatba,  190,  210 
Vinayaviniccbaya,  233 
Visuddhimagga,  25,  28,  41 
Visuddbimaggagantbi,  127 
Visuddbimagga-ganthapadattba,  2 1 2 
Vivadavinicchaya,  245 
Vobaratthabbeda,  245 
Vuttodaya,  173 
Vuttopancika,  171 
Yamaka,  212,  233 
Yasavaddbanavattbu,  207 
Yazawingyaw,  94 
Ye-ngwe  Inscription,  105 
Ywan-Cbwang,  54

--- PAGE 312 ---
GENERAL  INDEX 
Abeyadana,  136,  149f 
Abhaya,  129 
Acaw,  164 
Acyutavikr&ma,  61 
Acyutavikranta,  61 
Adhikaraja,  77 
Aggadhammalamkara,  205,  21  Iff 
Aggapandila,  128 
Aggavamsa,  126 
Alaungpaya,  223,  2250,  228,  23 Iff 
Alaungsithu,  1060,  109,  124 
Alavaka  140ff 
Alberuni,  5 
Alexander,  8 
Alikasudara,  8 
Amarapura,  233,  239,  242fF 
Amara(pura)samgha,  238,  239,  247 
Amara  School,  237,  239,  249,  258 
Amaravatl,  44,  68,  86 
Amba-gahapati,  238 
Amtekina,  8 
Ananda,  64,  12 Iff,  170,  173,  176,  200 
Ananda,  Elder,  107,  131 
Ananda,  mahathera,  113,  116ff 
Ananda  temple,  lOIff,  126,  133ff,  137ff, 
140,  156 
Anaukpetlun,  203 
Anawrahta,  760,  80,  820,  85,  87ff,  90, 
93,  96ff,  1180,  125,  130,  I34ff,  142ff, 
148ff,  151,  155,  157ff,  172,  204,  2530, 
256,  263,  970 
Ariawrahtaminsaw,  78 
Andhra,  14,  44,  590,  71 
Andhra-Kadamba  Script,  69,  86 
Andhra-Pallava  Script,  71 
Anekasetibhinda,  198,  202 
Angkor  Borei,  22 
Aniruddhadeva,  143 
Annam,  47,  49,  5 1 
Antibolei,  15 
Antigonos,  8 
Antiochus,  8 
Anuruddha,  90,  127,  202 
Anuruddhadeva,  101 
Aparanta,  9,  250 
Aparantaka,  7,  15 
Aparantarattha,  93 
Arabs,  5 
Arabia,  1 
Arahan,  Mahathera,  156 
Arahantagana,  177,  202,  210 
Arahanta  Saipgha,  121 
Arahan  tathera,  101 
Arakan,  16,  18,  26,  107,  203 
Arakan  hill,  1 
Arakan  Pagoda,  239  \ 
Arakan  yoma,  3 
Arb  78,  80,  107,  140,  159 
Arimaddana,  81,  93,  99,  127,  155,  L 
171 
Arimaddanapura,  81,90,  93,  1 05,  1 06 
Arimittiya,  106 
Aiimittiya  (Bodhisattva),  241 
Aris,  172,  256 
Ariyalaipkara,  2050,  211,  248 
Ariyarchantapakkha  bhikkhusarpgha,  120 
Ariyarahanta  Samgha,  130 
Ariyavamsa,  178ft 
Aryamahasamghika  nikaya,  53 
Aryamulasarvastivada  nikaya,  53 
Aryasammiti  nikaya,  47,  53 
Aryasthavira  nikaya,  53 
Asariga,  54 
Ashin  Anomadassi,  26 
,,  Arahan,  78 
,,  Mahasobhita.  26 
,,  Mahasomadatta,  26 
,,  Sobhaga,  26 
,,  Somadatta,  26 
,,  Sumantissa  26 
Asia,  262 
Asia  minor,  251 
Asitanjana,  29 
Asoka,  7ff,  18,  26,  45,  83,  86,  90,  93  105 
200,  249,  251 
Assam,  If,  254,  256 
Astrology,  159 
Athinkaya,  170 
Athwa,  225 
Atula,  2270,  235 
Atula  Yasadhamma,  226 
Aupadhas,  15 
Aupamadha,  15 
Ava,  77,  169,  174,  177,  1790,  182,  184, 
1960,  203,  2060,  2110,  2190,  2230, 
2280,  233,  242 
Avalokita,  139 
Avalokite^vara,  69,  139,  150,  15 1 
Avaramta,  14 
Avici,  164 
Awbatha,  241 
Ayuddha,  202 
Ayuthia,  48,  2010 
BadaravanavasI,  206 
Bagchi,  P.  C.,  28,  42, 
Bagyidaw,  95,  141f,  276 
Bakr-id,  200  ’  ...  % 
Barbaras,  16 
Barua,  B,  M.,  28 
Bassein,  1 120,  243 
Bawbawgyi,  35,  42,  56,  58,  69,  72 
Bayinnaung,  1980,206 
Bay  of  Bengal,  17

--- PAGE 313 ---
294 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Beal,  48 
Bebe,  58,  67,  72 
Benares,  66,  229 
Bengal,  72,  113,  137f,  149,  254 
Bernard  Free  Library,  91 
Besyngeitai)  3 
Bhadda,  175 
Bhaddasala,  8 
BhadradevI,  74 
Bhallika,  65 
Bhangiri,  25 
Bharatavarsa,  5,  16 
Bharukaccha,  47,  152 
Bhuvanekabahu,  186 
Bidagataik,  80 
Bibar,  72,  137ft,  149 
Bilugyan,  91 
Binnya  Dal  a,  94,  223,  225 
Binnya  U,  175ff 
Blagden,  C.O.,  Ilf,  6 Of,  91 
Bodawpaya,  23 Iff,  237,  239,  241f,  274, 
276 
Bode,  Mabel,  91ff,  104,  123,  12'gff,  132, 
174,  177ff,  192,  195,  215,  230,  234,  271 
Bodbgaya,  70,  105,  107,  S23,  138f,  141, 
144,152,183,254 
Bodhi,  139ff 
Bodhi,  Elder,  107 
Bodhisattva,  54,  68fF,  71,  102,  134,  138ff, 
150,  162,  225 
Bodhi  tree,  183 
Bo-doy-p’aya,  226 
Borneo,  18 
Brahma,  I48f 
Brahmadiw,  106 
Brahmapala,  106 
Brahmi  script,  44,  62ff 
Buddhadatta,  61 
/uddhaghosa,  24ff,  44ff,  84,  127,  172,  179, 
210,  235  ,  246,  25 If 
Buddhagupta,  252 
Buddhankara,  2 1 9 
Buddhankura,  221 
Buddhavamsa,  175,  187 
Buddh  a   va  ms  a-mahath  era ,  121 
Biihler,  61 
Buramagama,  238fF,  258 
Burmans,  264 
Burmese  Order,  258 
Burmese  Samgha,  261 
Burmese  School,  92 
Burney,  77 
Cakkindabhidhaja,  234 
Calanganagara,  230 
Calcutta  University,  73,  86if 
Calukyas,  43 
Cambodia,  l9ff,  27,  52 
Campa,  18,  47f,  52,  262 
Ca-nah-khum ,  1 74 
Candanasara,  187 
Candovara,  229 
Canton,  53 
Capata,  45,  112ff,  I26ff,  154,  157,  170, 
179,  190,  206,  230,239 
Caturafigavijay,  159 
Caw,  Queen,  165 
Caw  Rahan,  159 
Ceylon,  8.  11,  17,  25ff,  30,  44ff,  53ff,  81, 
89ff,  99ff,  109ff,  1 16ff,  119,  121ff,  126ff, 
133,  154ff,  157ff,  173,  175ff,  181,  184ff, 
190,  220,  235,  237ff,  243,  247ff,  251, 
254ff,  258,  261 
Chakravarti,  N.  P.,  42 
Chandone,  22 
Ch’ang  chun,  50 
Chaukpala,  1 1 1 
Chavannes,  47ff,  52ff 
Chen-Ia,  52 
Chia-mo-lang-chia,  48f,  52 
Chia  Tin,  48 
Chiengmai,  176 
Chih-ngan,  53 
Ch’ih-tu,  50 
Childers,  47 
China,  1,  46,  54ff,  135 
Chin-Ch’en,  2Gff,  84 
Chin-chi,  19 
Chindwin,  3 
Chin-lin,  I8ff,  84 
Chryse  Chersonesus,  3 
Chryse  Chora,  3 
Chu  Chih,  21 
Chu-li,  19f 
Ch’u-tu-kun,  19 
Chu  ying,  19 
Cilada,  15 
Cilata,  14ff  17,84,86 
Clna,  4,  14f.  17,211 
Cmarattha  93 
Cirrhadae,  15 
Citradutan,  186 
Citta,  73,  219 
Coedes,  51 
Col  (l)a,  61,  105 
Colas,  99,  254 
Coii,  152 
Conjeeveram,  30 
Cordier,  51 
Coromondal,  28 
Cowell,  4 
Cox,  241 
Culakassapa,  187 
Culasivali,  187 
Culasumangala,  187 
Cullavajirabuddhi,  174 
Cullavimalabuddhi,  173 
Cunningham,  8,  22ff 
Dagon ,  1 83 
Dakkhinavanarama,  209 
Dala,  1 19# 
Damila,  14,  99 
Dammayazaka.  1 1 1 
Da^avatara,  148 
Dathanagarajaguru,  210 
Deccan,  14,  18,25,44 
Deer  Park,  66 
Devacakkobhasa,  23 
Dhamek  stupa,  72 
Dhammabuddha,  176,  200 
Dhammacari,  127

--- PAGE 314 ---
GENERAL  INDEX 
295 
Dhammaceti,  3 ,  II,  28,  76  892IT,  155#, 
181  IF,  18911,  196,  249,  255# 
Dhammadassi,  129 
Dhammakltti,  30,  186 
Dhammakkhandha,  248 
Dhammananda,  176,  210,  248 
Dhammananda- ra  jag  uru,  209 
Dhammapaia,  179 
Dhammaraja,  123 
Dhammarajika,  187 
Dhammarajika  temple,  134 
Dhammarakkhita,  7,  187 
Dhammasenapati,  104,  126 
Dhammavilasa,  120,  131,  154,  157,  174 
Dhammavilasa-mahathera,  121 
Dhammavilasa-thera,  1 1 9# 
Dliatusena,  99 
Dhirananda,  247f 
Dikshit,  K.  N.  62 
Dlpankara,  147 
Disapamokkha,  130,  168 
Disapramuk,  168 
Divine  Land,  54 
Dosarene,  15 
Dramilas,  112 
Duroiselle,  36,  43,  61,  102f,  105,  133,  135, 
137 
DutthagamanI,  9f 
Dva  (ra)  patl.  47 
Dvaravatl,  48  ff,  51# 
Eastern  India,  252,  254 
East  Indian  Characters,  144 
East  Zegu  tempie,  58# 
Egypt*  L  251 
Ekamsika,  218ft,  226,  23 Iff,  235,  237, 
257#,  271 
Eliot,  14,28 
(Fan)-hsun,  19 
(Fan) -wan,  19 
Fausbollj  4,41,  126#,  134,  136,  171# 
Ferrand,  5,  51,  56 
Finot,  L,  14,  26f,  33, 36,  61 
Forchammer,  27,  79,  127ff,  131,  171#,  192, 
195,  199,  201,229 
Fo-t'u,  24,  252 
Foulkes,  26 
Frontier  of  Gold,  20 
Fii-nan,  19#,  24,  52ff,251# 
Fergusson,  107 
Furnivall,  131 
Gandhakuti,  141 
Gandhara,  7f,  14f,  93 
Ganesa,  148f 
Garigasu,  164 
Ganges,  15 
Gautama,  68,  124 
Gavampati,  14 
Gawdawpalin  temple,  111,  123 
Geiger,  7#,  10 
Gibson,  241 
Gloria,  163 
Godavari,  30ff,  44 
Gotama,  64,  139 
Conger,  241 
Great  Black  Mountain,  47 
Greece,  1 ,  251 
Greek,  8 
Gunabhilamkara,  2 1 9 
Gunagandha,  212 
Guna-munindabhisasanadhammarajadhi- 
rajaguru,  230 
Gunasagara,  187 
Gunasara,  129,  212 
Gunong  Jerai,  51 
Gupta-Brahml,  60,  62,  69 
Guptas,  Later,  59 
Hackmann,  26# 
Hamilton,  220 
Hamsavati,  14,  29,  32,  73,  76,  93,  176, 
181,  189,  198,  200,  207 
Hanthawaddy,  225 
Hardy,  24,  230,  238 
Haribhunja,  202 
Haripunjaya ,  202 
Harivikrama,  60#,  63 
Harvey,  94#,  100,  124,  1/5,  183,  225,  275 
Hayagriva,  150 
Henbuiy,  106 
Henzada,  203 
Himalayan  country,  7ff,  13 
Himalayas,  16 
Hmayana,  53 IT,  69,  73,  136#,  151 
Hinayanism,  14,  28,  135 
Hirth,  50 
Hmawza,  23,  29#,  33,  37,  42,  44,  48,  55, 
57#,  60,  68#,  71# 
Ho-ling,  49,  52 
Hshinpyushin,  220 
Hsinbyushin,  229# 
Hsiian-Chuang,  23,  45,  48ff,  55# 
Htilominle,  122f 
Hu,  24,  252 
Huan  Chou,  47,  54 
I-ching.  44,  46ft ,  84,  86 
f-hsiian,  53 
Iksvaku,  14,  18,  44 
I-fang,  53 
Ilangasogam,  50# 
Indasara,  243 
India,  Iff,  16,  18,  24,  59,  250#,  254 
India  Extra-Gangem,  3 
Indo-China,  1,4,  12,  18,  46,  49,52,  56, 
95,  133 
Indonesia,  1 
Insulindia,  4 
Irrawaddy,  3,  27,  49,  77,  82,  115,  206, 
208 
I-tsing,  253 
Itthiya,  8 
Jaggayyepeta,  44 
Jagudas,  15 
Jambudhaja,  205,  210 
Jambudipa-Anantadhaja,  229 
JambudTpadhaja,  210 
Jambudvlpa,  8#,  25 
Jambupati,  139

--- PAGE 315 ---
296 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
janindabhipavara,  234 
Jardine,  195 
Java,  18,  49,  51  if,  252,  262 
Javanapafina,  187 
Jayachandravarman,  62 ff 
jesalya,  145 
Jetavana,  141 
JetavanavihSra,  198 
,  eyyapura,  198,  206 
.ina,  144 
.inarSma,  212 
Jotipufifia,  210 
Kaccayana,  25,  128,  17lff,  176,  199 
Kadamba,  61,  71 
Kadambas,  43 
Kadamba  Script,  29,  33,  43ff,  61 ,  64 
Kadamba-Telegu  Script,  60,  71,  252 
Kahnyaw,  91, 
Kahson,  124, 
Kakusandha,  64 
Kalacakrayana,  149 
Kaladevala,  141 
Kalagya,  109 
Kalekyetaungnye,  177 
Kaliyuga,  180,  233 
Kalyana,  219 
Kalyanl,  90 
Kalyanl  river,  185,  187 
Kalyanlsima,  89ff,  92,  146,  187,  196,  201 
Kamaiahka,  48,  50,  55 
Kgmarupa,  48 
Kamboj(a),  18,  113,  120ff,  154,  193,  202, 
262 
KSnada-Telegu  Script,  61 
Kaffcipura,  86,  1 13 
KSncipuram,  30ff»  44,  81,  116 
K’ang  Tai,  19,  20ff 
Kantakakhipa,  173 
Kan-wet-khaung-  kon,  72 
Kapunna,  202 
Karens,  264 
K&sab,  64 
Kaimlra,  7f,  13ff,  93 
Kassapa,  10,  41,  64,  187 
KstySyana,  5 
Kaungdwit,  26 
Kautilya,  4,  6 
Kaveri,  30ff 
Kaverlpattanam,  31,  44,  81 
Kavindathisaddbammapavara- 
mahadhammarajaguru,  234 
Kedab,  51 
Kedah  Peak,  51 
Kern,  9ff,  13 
Ketumati,  198 
Kharostbi  Script,  42 
Khemacara,  174 
Khemavara,  202 
Khujjananda,  187 
Kirata,  251 
Kiratas,  15ff,  84 
Kirata  country,  84,  86 
Kittistbasura,  173 
Kittisirirajasimba,  237 
Klacwa,  162ff,  167 
Klok  sa,  153ff 
Koki  land,  14,  151 
Konagamana,  64 
Konow,  S,  42 
Kon  Samben  daleri,  154 
Kosam,  229 
Kotbeiunayon,  111 
Kra,  Isthmus  of,  49ff 
Krom,  121 
Krom  market,  120 
KrsnS,  31,  44 
Kublai  Khan,  169 
Kubyaukgale,  140 
Kubyaukkyi,  135fei49l¥ 
Kukhanagara,  210,  221 
Kumarakassapa,  187 
K’un-lun,  252 
Kuotala,  43f 
Kutbo-daw,  249 
Kwan-chou,  47 
Kyaikpon,  183 
Kyanzitfcha,  JOOff,  104if,  124,  126,  134, 
149,  152,  156 
Kyanzittba  Onhmin,  125 
Kyaswa,  123ff,  129,  163 
Kyaukku  Onhmin,  125 
Kyaukse,  134,  153,  197 
Kyawsua,  171 
Kyawswa-nge,  173  „ 
Kyundawza,  42 
Labun,  225 
Lang*cbia,  49, 
Lang-cbia-sbu,  47 ff,  84,  253 
Lang-saka,  51 
Lang-ya,  50 
Lang-ya-hsin,  50 ff 
Lang-ya4isu,  50if 
Lang«ya-hsun,  50 
Lanka,  8,  99,  155 
Lankasu,  47if,  55,  84ff,  253 
Laos,  18 
Lappan,  109 
Laufer,  19 
Law,  B,  C.  25,  30 
Lekaing,  250 
Lemeytbna,  58,  67 
Lenkasuka,  50ff 
Letyaminnan  107 
L^vi.  S  
,  4ff,  15 
Liem-(d)iang,  21 
Ligor,  Isthmus  of,  51 
Li-Hsu,  55 
Lin-yang,  251 
Ling  ya-ssu,  50 
Ling-yu-ssu-cbia,  51 
Ling-ya-ssy-chia,  51 
Lin  i,  47ff,  52 
Lin-yang,  2 Iff,  84 
Linzin,  26 
Lobpuri,  32 
Locac,  51 
Lokanatba,  150 
Lokapsla  devas ,  65,  140 
Lon,  154

--- PAGE 316 ---
GENERAL  INDEX 
297 
Luce,  I9f,  22f,  50,  52,  56,  94,  109,  161 
Lu  Pe  Win,  37 
Madhariputa,  14 
Madhyadega,  54,  250 
Madhyamikas,  54 
Maga,  8 
Magadha,  24,  27ff,  54 
Magas,  8 
Magwe,  179 
Mahabodhi,  123,  183 
Mahadammayazadipati,  213,  221, 223 
Mahadeva,  7 
Mabadew,  1 54  . 
Mahadhammaraja,  203ff  **** 
Mahadhammarajadhipati,  130 
Mahadhammarakkhita,  7 
Mahadhi  Dbammarajaguru,  167 
Mahadhi  Rajaguru,  167 
Mahagiri,  200 
Mahajanaka,  4 
Mahakosali,  4 
Mahanaga,  121,  175 
Mahanama,  200 
Mahanaman,  25ff 
Mahafianabhidhaja,  234 
Mahaparakkama,  198f 
Mahapavaradhammaraja ,  2 1 2 
Maharakkhita,  7 
Maharatanakara,  206 
Maharatjha,  7,  9,  93 
Maharatthathera,  180 
Mahasadhujjana,  198 
Mahasamghanatha,  204 
Mahasamgharaja,  234 
MahasamT,  121,  178 
Mahasamghika  nikaya,  54 
Mahaslhasuradhammaraja,  212 
Mabasibasura-dbammarajadbiiaja,  220 
Mahgsiiavamsa,  179 
Mahasirijeyyasura,  199 
MabSsIvalt,  187 
Mabavibara,  90,  92,  114,  119,  121.  126, 
175, 181,  184ff,  190ff,  239,  255,  261 
Maba-Vimaiabuddbi,  128 
Mabayana,  53ft*,  86,  136,  141,  1491,  256 
Mabayanism,  14,  135,  148ff,  256,  26 Iff 
Mahayanist  Tantrikism,  254,  256,  261 
Mahgyasa,  176 
Mabazedi,  1 12,  201 
Mabirasakamandala,  93 
Mabinda,  8,  12,‘  114 
Mabisamandala,  7,  9 
Mab(i)sya  devl,  144 
Mahlaing,  1 65 
Mabtaw,  58 
Maitieya,  69,  106,  139,  150fF,  162 
Majapabit,  50 
Majjhantika,  7,  10 
Majibima,  7,  10 
Majumdar,  R.  C.  3,  5f 
Maka,  8 
Malay  Archipelago,  46 
Malay  Peninsula,  3,  6,  19ff,  22,  50fF,  116 
Malaya,  51 
Malayadipa  116 
38-  H45B 
Malayasia,  1,  4, 
Malay u,  64 
Ma-na-kri-cek,  174 
Mandalay,  94,  134,  225,  239,  244ff,  248ff. 
258 
Mangala,  171 
Manijota-Saddhammalankara,  243 
Manipur,  Iff,  48,  256 
Manipuri,  223f 
Maniratana,  210 
Manisara,  1 87 
ManjuSri,  150 
Manobar,  90 
Manohara,  104 
Manobari,  79,  90 
Mantrayana,  149,  256 
Manu,  131,229 
Manuba,  78ff,  90,  148,253 
Mara,  68,  103,  108,  139 
Marammadesa,  76,  101 
Marammamandala,  93,  118,  157 
Marammarattba,  196,  2Q7f,  210,  213, 
225 
Marammasamgha,  92,  110,  117,  121,  189ff, 
238,  255 
Marco  Polo,  51 
Marshall,  John,  59 
Martaban,  20f,  23,  25,  93,  118ff,  121,  174ff 
180f,  184,  199,225 
Martaban,  Gulf  of,  174 
Mattama,  1 1 8 
Maulana,  64 
Maungdaung  Sayadaw,  229 
Maunggan,  33 
Maung  Kala,  94 
Maung  Tin,  Pe,  94,  109,  160ff,  167 
Mayadevi,  140 
Mayavattaka,  230 
Mecca,  254 
Medhamkara,  175,  181 
Medhavivamsa,  243,  245 
Mekkaya,  169,  197 
Mekong,  22 
Melchior  La  Beaume,  233 
Menam,  49,  52 
Middle  Country,  250 
Mimalungkyaung,  1 1 1 
Minay  elf,  91 
Mindon-min,  92,  125,  244ff,  249,  258, 
262,  270ff 
Mingalazedi,  104,  124,  134 
Mingun,  239 
Minbkaung,  177 
Minhkaung,  II,  179 
Minkyinyo,  199 
Minkyiyannaung,  197 
Minsbinsaw,  I09ff 
Mi  Saw  U,  170 
Mitra,  Rajendralal,  107 
ttaya,  162 
jggaliputta  7,  9 
>ggaliputta  Tissa,  9,  12,  93,  106 
>ggallana,  64,  173,  185ff,  235 
>bnyintba,  177 
>bnyintbado,  182 
3meik,  200ff

--- PAGE 317 ---
298 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
M6n,  12,  26,  56,81,  90ff,  I13ff,  1 18,  120, 
141,  144,  146,  151,  153,  156,  185ff,  189, 
254ff,  265 
Mon  country,  12,  152 
Mon-khmer,  1 6 
Mongol,  J68,  169,  170 
Mrgadava,  59,  66 
Mrififia^a,  177 
Mucalinda,  138#, 
MuIasarvSstivSda,  253 
MalasarvSstivsda  niksya,  54,  85 
MtilavasagSma,  212 
Muller,  99 
Munindabhi-sirisaddhammadhaja- 
mahadhammarajadhirSjaguru,  242 
Munindaghosa,  227#,  246 
Muttima,  93,  118,  121,  181 
Myanzaine,  134 
Myazedi,  1 05 
Myingyan,  77 
Myinkabu,  79 
Myinkyiswasawke,  174 
Myinpagan,  139#,  142,  148 
Myinsaing,  169# 
Myinsing,  197 
Nsga,  147,  152 
Nfi  Gan  Da,  1 54 
Nagita,  1 73 
Nagarakrtagama,  50f 
Nagarjuna,  54 
NSgarjunikonda,  14,  18,  24,  44,  86 
NagaySn,  104,  142 
Nfigari  script,  59,  70# 
Nslagiri,  68,  102,  138# 
Nslanda.  70,  144 
NaLwoy,  154 
Na  Mrik,  154 
Nanda,  187 
Nandabayin,  202# 
Nandabhaya,  203 
Nandajeya,  208 
Nandamala,  230f 
Nandamanna,  150 
Nandawye,  134,  170 
Nanpaya,  79 
Narapali,  79,  111,  119,  126,  178# 
Narapatisithu,  1   lOf,  116,  119,  122,126, 
129,  134 
Naratheinka,  110 
Naratbihapate,  124,  169ff 
Narathu,  109# 
Narawara,  212#,  219 
Narayana,  148#,  152 
Nat-hlaung-kyaung,  148 
Natonmya,  164 
Nats,  100,  107,  148,  150,  152 
Nat-sin,  269 
Natspirits,  211,  263,  269 
Nat  worship,  213,  268 
Naungdawgyi,  228# 
Nava-medhamkara,  175 
Nava-vimalabuddhi,  173 
Neko,  223 
Nepal,  149 
Neyill,  210 
Nga  Dula,  75 
Nga  Zinga,  203 
Nicobar,  49,  52 
NlpagSma,  227 
Nisinnavihara,  209 
Nyang-U,  135,  154 
NgnHbhivaipsa,  234 
Ngnagambhira,  104 
N5nSlaipk5ra,  29,  228,  247# 
NSnarnahadhammarSja,  228 
NgnalamkSrasaddhammadhaJa,  234 
NSnaaagara,  128,  187 
Nanavara,  221# 
Nanavilgsa,  202 
Nana,  228,  232  ** 
NgnSbhisasanadhaja,  234 
Nanamahadhammarajaguru,  232,  234 
Neyyadhamma,  243# 
Neyyadhammabhivamsa,  244,  246 
Nonramkri,  164  ' 
Oldenberg,  40,  127,  175,  199 
Old  Prome,  253 
Onbaung,  200# 
Ou  yang  Hsin,  55 
Pabbatabbhantaranagara,  179 
Padippajeyya,  119 
Padumottara  Buddha,  32 
Pagan,  14,  55,  65,  69ff,  76#,  88#,  93,  95, 
97#,  101,  104#,  107,  111,  113#,  116#, 
119#,  123#,  132#,  140#,  145,  J47ff, 
163,  166,  168,  169#,  177,  179, 
182,  191#,  196,  200,  205,210#,  221. 
227,  254,  256,  259,  263,  266 
Pagan- Min,  243# 
Pagan  Museum,  149 
.Pagan  samgha,  123 
Pakhoi,  53 
Pala  sculptures,  72 
Palembang,  49# 
Pali  Buddhism,  254 
Pali  Text  Society,  35 
Pallava,  44,  59#,  64,  71 
Paloura,  14 
Pan,  225 
Pandya  country,  17 
Panini,  5 
Pannajotabhidhaja,  243 
Pannasami,  92,  132,  156,  168,  1 77#,  195, 
205,218,  222f,  225#,  233,  235,  238, 
243# 
Pannaslha,  242 
Paiinatissa,  243 
P’an-p’an,  52 
Panihagu,  45,  107,  109,  111,  167,  273 
Panthagugyi,  1 1 1 
Paradas,  24 
Paiakkamabahu,  112,235 
Paramata,  229# 
Paramattha  order,  81 
Pargiter,  15 
Parileyya,  102 
Parileyyaka,  140# 
Parker,  56 
P^rupana,  218#,  226#,  235#,  257#,  271

--- PAGE 318 ---
general  index 
299 
Pasamsathera,  222 
Patodawgyi,  239 
Patothamya,  141 
Payagyi,  58,  60 
Payama,  59 
Payathonzu,  141,  150 
Pegu,  11,  14,  26#,  29,  32,  73ff,  85,  87, 
89ff,  93,  169,  174,  176#,  18 Iff,  199, 
201,  203ff,  207ff,  223#,  233,  253,  255 
Peliiot,  Proh,  18ff,  4 7#,  50(f,  56,  87, 
192 
Petleik,  104,  134 
Phayre,  48,  209 
Philip  cli  Brito,  203  ^ 
Phonm  penh,  22 
P’iao,  52,  55ff,  60,  85 
Pi-king,  47 
Piladai,  15 
Pindale,  210,  212 
Pinle,  169 
Pinya,  77,  169,  171#,  174,  197,  199 
Popa  hill,  200 
Potthapada,  135 
Prome,  23,  28,  31,  43,  46,  48,  52,  56#, 
59ff,  62ff,  66,  70,  72,  84ff,  105,  137, 
152.  159,  168,  199ff,  206,  223,  253 
Ptolemy,  2ff,  8,  15#,  20 
t^ubbaramavihSra,  212 
Pugama,  1 13f 
Pukam,  114 
Pukham,  14,  116 
Pukhanagara,  210 
Pufinacetiya,  179 
Payama,  56 
Phyogingyi-kon,  43 
Pyu,  48,  52,  55,  71,84ff,  155,  159 
Pyus,  16;  43,  56,  59,  71,  73,  86#,  252, 
260,  264 
Pyu  script,  62 
Racasu,  162 
Radha,  135 
Rahul  a,  113,  116,  187, 
Rahulabhadda,  188 
Rajacakkavatti,  139 
Rajadhiraja,  176 
Rajagaha,  41,  68 
Rajaguru,  167 
Rajamanicula,  209 
Rajayodha,  208 
Rajendracola,  50# 
Rajjuggahamacca,  129 
RAlrlrhite  7 
Ramadhipati,  185,  188ff 
Ramadutan,  186 
Ramanna,  25,  177,  184,  196,  204,  223 
Ramannadesa,  3,  25,  32,  76,  80,  93,  101, 
131,  181 
Ramannadhipati,  89,  185 
Ramannarattha,  207#,  213 
Ranavankamalla,  202 
Rangoon,  29,  91,  94,  119,  126,  145#,  176, 
200,  224#,  230 
Rapay,  1 06 
Rasa,  176 
Ratanapura,  169,  179#,  206,  244 
Ratanavimana,  179 
Ratthasara,  178,  180 
Ray,  N.  R.,  56,  69,  73,  148f 
Razadarit,  176#,  182,  224 
Red  Province,  54 
Rhys  Davids,  8 
Roberts,  275 
Rockhill,  8,  50 
Rogers,  24 
Rome,  1 
Sabbannu,  107 
Saddhamma-cakkasamI,  202 
Saddhamma-cari,  202 
Saddhamma-guru,  17 1,  199 
Saddhammajotipala,  126 
Saddhammakltti,  198 
Saddhammalamkara,  176,  202 
Saddhamma-nana,  1 7 1 
Saddhammanandi,  129 
Saddhammapala,  171# 
Saddhammapura,  79 
Saddhammaraja,  177,  195 
Saddhammasiri,  128# 
Saesadai,  15 
Sagara,  129 
Saggaing,  110,  174,  197#,  206,  210,  >228, 
241 
Sagu,  173 
Sahantva,  196 
Sahassarodha-gama,  227,  230 
Sakka,  25 
Sakkrac,  110,  164# 
Sakmunalon,  106 
Sakti,  71,  150 
3akya,  141 
Sakyamuni,  80,  99 
Salween,  56 
Samanakuttaka,  79#,  93,  149,  172,  256 
Samatata,  48 
Sambala,  8 
Sameikshe,  70 
Saixigharaja,  130,  132,  167,  177 
Saipgharakkhita,  129 
Sainghasena,  106 
Sammitinikaya,  53 
Sammitiya  School,  54 
Samuti  order,  81 
Sane,  217,219 
San-Fo-c’hi,  50 
Sangermano,  241 
Sarigharakkhita,  173 
Sankran,  152 
Sanskrit  Buddhism,  252,  256 
Saradassi,  222 
Sariputta,  119#,  178,  187 
Sariputta  DhammavilasaK  131 
Sarnath,  59,  70,  72,  138,  144 
SarvSstivada,  54,  86,  252,  256 
Sarvastivada  nikSya,  47,  54# 
Sativa-raja,  174 
Savatthi,  69,  138#,  147 
Sawlun,  196 
Sawyun,  172 
Sayambu,  141 
Schlegel,  50

--- PAGE 319 ---
300 
THERA VADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Schmidt,  75 
Schoff,  3 
Seinnyekmin,  107 
Setibhinda,  175,  229 
Seva-suvanna-sobhana,  181 
Shans,  95,  1698F,  172,  174,  199ff,  203, 
223ff,  263ff 
Shan  Yun,  26 
She*ho-po-ti,  47$,  52 
Shih-ii-ch-a-ta-Io,  47ff,  52,  56 
Shin  Agyathamahdi,  180 
Shin  Arahan,  77fF,  80ff,  98,  lOOff,  104, 
106flf,  1 12ff,  117,  130fF,  154ff,  170,  172, 
254,  273 
Shin  Ariyavamsa,  1 1 1 
Shin  Mahindra,  112 
Shin  Sarobu,  1 83 
Shin  Sawbu,  182ff 
Shin  Sona,  1 12 
Shin  Thilawantha,  94 
Shin  Thulawantha,  180 
Shin  Uttamagyaw,  180 
Shu-Chuan,  47 
Shwebo,  224 
Shwedagon,  29,  138,  152tf,  176,  183, 
200f,  230,  249 
Shwegu,  107  ,'i 
Shwegugyi,  183 
Shwemawdaw,  176,  201 
Shwesandaw,  105,  134,200 
Shwethetlut,  174 
Shweyyin,  225 
Shwezayan,  145 
Shwezigon,  79,  100ff,  104,  124,  134,  150, 
153,200,263 
Siam,  1,  18f,  22,  32,  48,  52,  193,  20 Iff, 
228,  237,  263 
S’hala,  17,  93 
Slhaladlpa,  1 0 1 
Sihalapakkha-bhikkhusamgha,  120 
Sihala  Samgha,  92,  110,  114tf,  1 17ff,  121, 
128,  131,  178,  184,  189ff,  239,  255 
Sihara  ja-y  uvarajacariya-thera,  1 86 
Slhasura,  172 
Sihavikrama,  60,  63 
Sllavamsa,  178ff 
Sinbaung,  143 
Singu,  230 
Sinhalese  samgha,  237 
Sirihaipsva,  196 
Sirikhettanagara,  209 
Sirkmahasihasura-sudhammaraja,  2 1 8 
Siri-mangala,  172,202 
Siri-nanda-dhammarajapavaradhipatiraja., 
Siri-pavaraditya-lokadhipaii-vijaya* 
mahadhamn^,  242 
Siri*pavaradityaWijayananta-yasa-maha- 
dhamma-rajadhiraja,  243 
Siri  pavara  mahadhammaraja,  228 
Siri-pavara-sudhamma-maharajindadhi- 
pati,  229 
Siri-saddhamma,  213 
Siri-saddhammavilasa,  171 
Siri  samghabodhi,  99 
Siri*sudhamma-rSiadhipati,  179 
Siri-sudhamma  raja-mahadhipati,  206 
Siri-sumarigala,  172 
Siri-tribhuvanaditya-  paramadhammaraja, 
124 
Siri-tribhuvanaditya~pavaramandita,  24 1 
Sittana,  123 
Sittang,  225 
Siva,  149 
Sivali,  1 16fF,  121 
Sivli,  113,  116,  121 
Siyamagama,  238 
Sklin  singhuim,  143 
Siaden.  E.  275 
Smim,  Htaw  Buddhaketi,  223 
Smith,  Vincent,  9f,  12f,  26 
Sokkataya,  202 
Sona,  7flF,  26,  83,  90,  106,  112,  190 
Sona-mahathera,  I19£ 
Sona-thera,  8,  12,  1 14BF 
Sonuttara,  9$,  194 
South  China  Sea,  22 
South  India,  252,  254if 
Sr!  Bhoja,  54 
Sriksetra,  47ff,  5 Iff,  55ff,  73,  84,  206,  253 
Sr!  Prabhudevi,  6 1 ,  63 
Sri  Prabhuvarma,  61 
Sri  Prabhuvarman,  61,  63 
Srivijaya,  46,  50,  54 
Srl-vTrapurisadata,  14 
Ssu-ch’uan,  47 
Sthavira  nikaya,  45,  53ff 
Sthavira  School,  55 
Subhuticandana,  128 
Sudhamma,  117 
?* :  df  r.~r 
.t ^   a   ~   : r ^ ,  80,  100 
S-  V-  ,  101 
Sudhammasabha,  227 
Sudhammasala,  207 
SudhammavatT,  25,  73,  76,  80 
Sudhuim,  90,  114 
Suhattha,  221 
Sujsta,  73,  212,  242 
Sukhodaya,  202 
Sulamani,  111 
Sumana,  187 
Sumangala,  187 
Sumatra,  6,  50,  54,  262 
Sumedha,  106,  179 
Sunanda,  219,  243 
Sun  dynasty,  250 
SupabhadevI,  203 
Surakitti,  206£f 
Suriyavamsa,  243 
Suriyavikrama,  60f,  63 
SQryavaip^a,  250 . 
Suvannabhumi,  Iff,  18fF,  26,  37,  46,  73, 
81,83,  90,  93,  156ff,  181 
Suvannaparanta,  3 
 * 
Suvannapura,  5 
Suvannasobhana,  181,  188 
Suvarnabhumi,  6 
SuvarnadvTpa,  5#  * 
Suvarnakudyaka,  6 
Suvariiappra,  6 
,  Syriam,  220

--- PAGE 320 ---
general  INDEX 
301 
Tabinshwehti,  199 
Tada U,  211 
Tadagale,  147 
Tagaung,  95 
Takakusu,  45,  47ff,  54 
Takola,  4 
Taking,  101,  103,  105,  111,  118,  119, 
124,  136,  145,  148,  I55ff,  169,  174ff, 
180,  182,  I99ff,  203ff,  207ff,  223fF,  237, 
254ff,  264 
Takings,  16,  71,  80ff,  87,  95,98,  119, 
135,  156ff 
Taking  country,  32,  76,  85,  I30ff,  145ff, 
157 
Taking  Samgha,  205 
Talapoins,  *233 
Talpoons,  233 
Tamalin,  154,  157 
Tamalinda,  154,  157 
Tamalinda,  mahalhera,  113,  116ff, 
121  fF 
Tamalitti,  113 
Tamasas,  15 
Tambapamna,  14,  17ff,  84 
Tambapamni,  14,  I7f 
Tambapanni,  8,  12 
Tamils,  112 
Tampadlpa,  77 
Tamralipti,  4,  49,  52,  113 
Tamraparnl,  17ff 
Tamulinda,  116 
T’ang,  55fF,  60,  85 
Tanjore,  50 
Tan-mo-li-ti,  49 
Tantrayana,  137,  141,  148fF 
Tantrikism,  254,  256,  261 
Taodin,  49,  53 
Tapussa,  65 
Tara,  150 
Tarabya,  169 
Taranatha,  14,  151 
Tartars*  J   
69 
Taruks'Oee 
Tarukpyemin,  134,  168 
Tathagata,  143 
Taungbalu,  197,  211 
Taung-dwi-gyi,  180 
Taungdwin,  I92ff,  228 
Tavoy,*  52 
Taw  Sein  ko,  80,  91,  126 
Tejodlpa,  212 
T’e-mu,  22 
Tennasserim,  19,  24,  48f,  5  
Iff,  85,  87, 
252 
Tennent,  238 
Thadin-gynt,  268 
Thadominbya,  174 
Thaygapaya,  146 
Thais,  264 
Thalun,  205 
Thatnbula,  105,  124 
Thar  aba,  152 
Tharekhittara,  25,  95,  100 
Tharwaddy,  242 
Tharwaddy-min,  242f 
Thaton,  21,  23ff,  27 (T,  32,52,  73ff,  76ff, 
83,  85,  87ff,  93,  97ff,  100,  112ff,  118, 
130,  145£F,  155,  176,  181 
Thatpyinnu,  107 
Thayetmo,  174 
Thazi,  70 
Theravada,  53,  55,  58,  66,  71,  83,  85ff, 
99,  I49ff,  254,  256,  260 
Theravada  Buddhism,  29ff,  43ff,  76fF, 
80ff,  86f,  89,  97,  103,  107,  142f,  145, 
14 7ff,  154ff,  262,  265 
Theravada  nikaya,  262 
Theyet,  77 
Thihathu,  170ff,  177,  J82 
Thin-gyan,  268 
Thinlikyaung,  26 
Thiripyissaya,  25 
Thiyipyitsaya,  120,  138ff,  143,  157 
Thohanbwa,  196ff 
Thudammawadi,  80 
.Thuparama,  I78ff 
Tibet,  40,  149,  254,  256 
Tien-siin,  19 
Tiladal,  15 
Tilokaguru,  205,  208,  212 
Tilokalamkara.  207,  2 1   
Off 
Tilogagaru,  212 
Tinneveliy,  18 
Tipitakalamkara,  205ff,  210 
Tipitakalaipkaradhaja,  234 
Tiriyapabbata,  206,  21  Of 
Tisasanadhaja,  198,  202 
Tisasanaiamkara,  205,  207 
'  Tissa,  74ff 
Todo-po-ti,  48ff,  52 
Ton-bhiduh,  197 
Tosali,  14 
Toungoo,  198ff,  204ff,  213,  223 
Trans-Gangetic  India,  15 
Trayastrimk  heaven,  102,  138,  14! 
Trenckner,  15 
Tu-fan,  47 
Tu-k’un,  19ff 
Tun-Hsiin,  19,  20,  24,  87,  25 If 
Tunna,  219 
Tun  Nyein,  126,  174 
Tupayan,  178 
Turamaya,  8 
Turan,  159 
Twinthintaikwum,  24 1 
Uccanagara,  208 
Ukkala,  29 
Ukkamsamgla,  220ff 
Ukkamsika,  205,  207ff 
Uragapura,  31,  44,  61,  86 
Uraiyur,  61 
Utkala,  29 
Uttama,  128 
Uttara,  7ff,  26,  83,  90,  112,  119,  190 
Uttarajiva,  45,  11  Iff,  126,  273 
Uttara-mahathera,  119f 
Uttara-thera,  12,  114f 
Uttiya,  8 
Uzana,  123ff,  173

--- PAGE 321 ---
302 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Vacissara,  128 
Vajirabuddhi,  19 1 
Vajrasana,  107,  141 
Vajrayana,  136,  14 1,  148ff 
Vamga,  14 
Vanaiatana,  186,  188,  248 
Vanavasa,  7,  9,  15,  93 
Vanavasi,  14 
Varabhisamghanatha,  204 
Varahamihira,  128 
Vasubandhu,  14 
Vedasattha,  178,  207ff,  213 
Vepullabuddhi,  173 
Veravijaya,  206 
Vibhakti,  123 
Vienna,  75 
Vien  Tiane,  22 
Vijayabahu,  99,  1 55, .  1 58 
Vijayapura,  169 
VijitavT,  199 
Vilapa,  15 
Vilasa,  147 
Vimalabuddhi,  128 
Vimalajoti,  248 
Visnu,  148f 
Vyakarana,  159 
Vyadhapura,  22 
Wanchen,  20f 
Wareru,  169,  174ff 
Watters,  54ff 
We-lei,  53 
Wetkyi-in,  135 
Wheel  of  Law,  The,  66 
Yahandagu,  58,  67 
Yamaka-pratiharya,  141,  147 
Yamuna,  149 
Yasa,  144 
Yavana,  14 
Ya-wan,  154 
Yazakumara,  105fF 
Yazathinkaya,  170 
Yodaya,  225 
Yoga,  54 
Yogacara.  54 
Yona,  7,  15 
Yonaka-rattha,  93,  202 
Yule,  51,77 
Zabaj,  5 
Zeyathura  IVlingyi,  110 
Zeyyaput,  167

--- PAGE 322 ---
ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 
Page  Line 
13  31 
For 
Read 
Is  it  possible  that  Suvannabhumi  of  the  Sinhalese  tradition  refers 
not  to  Lower  Burma  but  to  Suvannagiri  of  Asokan  inscriptions, 
28 
18 
29 
25 
32 
12 
33-34 
35 
26 
36 
16,  20, 
41 
2 
41 
6,  10, 
43 
34 
44 
10,  23 
44 
24 
47 
15 
48 
2 
7 
** 
10 
56  foot-note  1 1 
somewhere  in  the  Deccan 
one  of  his  important  viceregal 
Sammohavinodint 
Dhammasahgani 
Jataka 
In  the  two  inscriptional  texts  for 
Sutta  Vihhahga,  of  the 
Dhammasahgani 
Abhidhammattha  Sahgaha 
Dhatnmasangani 
Andhra-Kuntala 
Kaveripattanam 
duhta 
DvarSvati 
Chia-mo  lang-chia 
To  lo*po-ti 
the  Far  South,  where  Asoka  had 
seats  ? 
Sommohavinodani 
Dhammasahgani 
Jataka 
cha  read  ca 
Sutta  vihhahga  of  the 
Dhammasahgani 
*  t 
A   bhidhammattha-'Sangaha 
Dhammasangani 
Andhra-Kuntala 
Kaveripattanam 
dhuta 
Dvaravatl 
Chia-mo-lang-chia 
To-lo-po-ti 
The  Man-shu  adds  that  the  Pyu  custom  is  “to  esteem  modesty  and 
decency.  Their  disposition  is  peaceful  and  good.  They  are  men 
of  few  words...  There  are  many  fortune-tellers  and  astrologers.” 
,,  foot-note  1 1 1   For  a   better  and  fuller  translation  of  the  passage,  see  JBRS,  1937, 
XXVII,  pp.  250-51,  where  (pp.  251-52)  a   passage  taken  from 
the  New  Tang  History  is  also  relevant  and  informative  in  this 
connection. 
57  16  Luce  thinks  that  the  P’iao  capital  of  the  T’ang  Chronicles  is  to 
be  identified  not  with  Prome  but  further  North  with  Halingyi. 
In  about  the  8th  century  the  “Little  Brahmanas”  of  Hu-kong 
valley  and  the  “Ta-ch’in  Brahmanas”  of  Manipur  were  under 
the  domination  of  Nanchao,  It  is  highly  probable  that  these 
“Little”  and  “Ta-ch’in”  Brahmanas  were  none  but  the  ^akadvTpT 
Brahmanas  who  had  by  this  time  migrated  to  Assam,  Manipur 
and  as  far  east  and  north  as  upper  Burma  and  South  China. 
It  is  now  an  admitted  fact  that  the  Sakadvlpl  Brahmanas 
were  responsible  for  giving  a   new  shape  and  form  to 
the  art  of  astrology  and  fortune-telling  in  India,  and 
thence  to  *   Assam,  Manipur,  Burma  and  further  east  and 
south  to  the  Indianised  colonies.  This  explains  to  a 
very  great  extent  the  numerous  references  to  Brahmana  court- 
astrologers  in  the  inscriptions  and  literature  of  Burma.  Indeed, 
they  were  very  popular  in  Burmese  courts,  and  the  modern 
Pauna  Brahmanas  of  Upper  Burma  seem  to  be  the  cultural  and 
traditional  descendants  of  the  Sakadvlpl  Brahmanas  of  old. 
64 
10 
Konagamana 
Konagamana 
65 
12 
Trapusa 
Tapussa 
70 
20 
Nagari 
Nagari 
79 
28 
micchaditthinam 
micchgdijthlnain 
91 
7 
Pitakattha-main 
Pitakattha-main 
* » 
39 
Pitakkatthamain 
Pitakattha-main 
93 
13 
Ka^mlra 
Kasmlra 
M 
20 
Suvannabhumi 
Suvannabhumi

--- PAGE 323 ---
304 
THERAVADA  BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Page 
Line 
For 
Read 
93 
21 
Samanakuttaka 
Samanakuttaka 
98 
21 
Tripitaka 
Tipitaka 
99 
34 
Vijayavahu 
Vijayabahu 
101 
33 
anlapitakatteya 
amtapitakattayena 
104 
34 
Vimamsesi 
vimaipsesi 
22 
Manohara 
Manohara 
107 
29 
Sabbanfia 
Sabbafinu 
113 
22 
panca~Vaggagana 
pancavaggagana 
115 
25 
paccagana 
pacchagana 
118 
13 
Muttima 
Muttima 
119 
18 
Kalyani 
Kalyani 
121 
18 
Kalyani 
Kalyani 
i  i 
31 
aggamahesi 
aggamahesi 
122 
12 
Mahathera 
Mahsthera 
127 
3 
Dhammacari 
Dhammacari 
•  > 
4 
Abhidhammattha 
A   bhidhmmaUha 
»» 
9 
V   
inayagulatthadipani 
V   
inayagulhatthadipani 
,, 
9 
Matikatthadiparii 
Mati\atthadipani 
128 
23 
Uttara 
Uttama 
,, 
24 
Vacissara 
Vacissaia 
129 
11 
RajjuggSh  amacca 
Rajjuggahamacca 
*, 
12 
sSmanera 
samanera 
13 
vacaVacaha 
Vacavacaka 
17 
sambandhacinta 
sambandJiacinta 
139 
1 
T   
rayatrimsa 
Trayastrim&a 
139 
1 
bhumisparafomudra 
bhumispar^amudia 
», 
12 
Rajachakkavatti 
Rajacakkavatti 
141 
23 
Trayatrimsa 
Trayastrim^a 
144 
32 
2935-36  * 
1935-36  * 
31 
T   
rilokavatamsaka 
Trilokavatamsaka 
146 
19 
Bhuridatta 
Bhuridatta 
,, 
24 
Sama 
Sama 
149 
30 
Samanakuttakas 
Samanakuttakas 
156 
13 
PanfiasamI 
Pafinasami 
158 
10 
Vijayavahu 
Vijayabahu 
159 
11 
slma 
slma 
165 
6 
kathina 
kafhina 
166 
19 
Paiiccasamuppada 
Paiiccasamuppada 
,, 
20 
Patisambhida 
Pajisambhida 
168 
19 
Disapamokkha 
Disapamokkkha 
172 
20 
Sammohavinodini 
SammohaVinodani 
t » 
24 
Samanakuttakas 
Samanakuttakas 
9  f 
30 
Samanakuttakas 
Samanakuttakas 
1  9 
32 
Sihasura 
Sihasura 
176 
5 
Saddhammalankara 
Saddhammalankara 
179 
8 
Mamdipa 
Manidipa 
180 
9 
Bhuridattajataha 
Bhuridattajataka 
.. 
36 
Maharattathera 
Maharatthathera 
183 
2 
Dammaceti 
Dhammaceti 
186 
34 
Siharajayuvarajacariyathera 
Siharajayuvarajacariyathera 
190 
33 
Saratthadipani 
Saratthadipani 
195 
18 
Saddharmaraja 
Saddh  ammaraja 
199 
15 
V   
acdkppadesa 
V   
acakopadesa 
200 
5 
Madhurasaratthadipani 
Madhurasaratthadipani 
f   » 
6 
A   b  
hi  dhammatihja. 
A   bhidhammafika 
19 
7 
Patthanasaratthadipani 
Patthanasaratthadipani 
202 
16 
San\hyapakasaka 
Sahlrfiyapakasaka. 
99 
17 
Mangaladipani 
Mangaladipani 
9  1 
17 
tika 
ftka 
204 
18 
chehjataya 
chekataya 
206  * 
3 
Rajindarajabhidhayyadlpanl 
Rajindarajabhidheyyadipani 
*  l 
10 
1R 
Badaravanavasi 
Badaravanavasi 
<» 
t  o 
20 
■  Surakltti 
Surakitti

--- PAGE 324 ---
ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 
Page Line 
For 
Read 
206 
22 
Tipitakalatokara 
Tipitakalamkara 
207 
4 
Y   
asaVaddhanaVatthu 
Y   asaVaddhanaVatthu 
5 
Surakltti 
Surakitti 
22 
R 
 h  
i   vn T   
- : 
RamafmaratthavasinS 
24 
I’cf.r* 
V   
edasatthas 
29 
gihikummesu 
208 
2 
gihikammesu 
20 
Vedasatthas 
V   
edasatthas 
31 
Dakkhinavanarama 
Dakkhinavanarama 
210 
32 
Rvpabhedapakasanl 
Rupabhedapahjasini 
211 
33 
Dhammasangani 
Dhammasangani 
15 
Marammaraftham 
Marammaraftham 
15 
dusesum 
dusesum 
16 
Sasanam 
Sasanam 
16 
duhbalam 
dubbalam 
212 
14 
A   bhidhammaitha 
A   bhidhammaitha 
15 
Dhammasangani 
Dhammasangani 
20 
Jinaramathera 
Jinaramathera 
30 
Pub  bar  am  a 
Pubbarama 
31 
Gulatthadipam 
5 
32 
ganthipadaitha 
213 
3 
talapattani 
talapattani 
3 
slsavetbana 
slsavetthana 
f 
15 
Vedasatthas 
Vedasatthas 
214 
8 
atiparisuddham 
atiparisuddharn 
217 
1 
slhasura 
sThasura 
218 
9.  16 
PannasamT 
Pannasami 
220 
4 
Saddhammacari 
Saddhammacari 
33 
Mahasiha 
Mahasiha 
221 
34 
Abhidhammattha 
Abhidhammattha 
222 
23 
samattham 
samattham 
» » 
23 
nahgala  Kotiya 
nahgala\otiya 
23,  24 
samvaddhantam 
samvaddhantam 
t  > 
25 
Pakkhanam 
Pakkhanam 
27 
PannasamT 
Pannasami 
, , 
31 
samipe 
samipe 
223 
34 
Saradassi 
Saradassi 
5 
vtt  pasami 
vupasami 
10 
PannasamT 
Pannasami 
225 
9 
Binaya 
Binnaya 
28 
PannasamT 
Pannasami 
227 
8 
ldani 
ldani 
9 
Carantu 
carantu 
228 
28 
Siripavana 
Siripavara 
f  # 
31 
analamkara 
^analamkara 
229 
33 
ranno 
ranno 
231 
28 
nayaka 
nayaka 
232 
33 
may  am 
may  am 
38 
gama 
gama 
234 
6 
ftanabhisasana 
Ranabhisasana 
18 
vilasirii 
vilasini 
>  9 
22 
TigumbatKomana 
T   igumbathomana 
23 
Rajadhirajavilasini 
30 
MV-  ii-.i 
Mahananabhidhaja 
235 
19 
lakkana 
lakkhana 
238 
19 
Kirti  i 
Kitti 
241 
37 
]ataka  5 
Jatakas 
243 
1,  3,  25 
Suriya 
Suriya 
15 
Neyyadliarma 
freyyadhamma 
t 
19 
Saddhammapajjotika 
Saddhammapajjotika 
30 
Maniyota 
Manijota 
f  f 
30 
Medhavivam&a 
Medhavtvamsa 
245 
4 
» » 
9  9  # 
35 
tambulam 
tambulam 
39 — 14458

--- PAGE 325 ---
306 
THERAVADA BUDDHISM  IN  BURMA 
Page 
Line 
For 
Read 
246 
4 
avinayalomcare 
avinayalomacare 
248 
21 
Samgharaja 
Samgharaja 
249 
8 
Dharmaceti 
Dhammaceti 
253 
30 
Anawartha 
Anawrahta 
256 
19 
Samanakuttakas 
Samanakuttakas 
259 
33 
Pitakatthamain 
Pitakattha-main 
273 
24 
Uttarajiva 
Uttarajiva 
287 
8 
Monarchism 
Monachism

--- PAGE 326 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 327 ---
[SCANNED PAGE IMAGE: 2 image plate(s) detected. No embedded digital text layer.]

--- PAGE 328 ---
jt: 
r' 
i 
/ 
Central  Archaeological  Library, 
NEW  DELHI. 
Call  Ncy 
KM 
Author—  /Z&y^  )l^a£Afrvj(Ui 
^^jj^Jh/o  ctu  ch  oh  h? 
■Sfuiy  ^ 
 L 
t'  r   i   m   Ba'vuwf'i.  i- 
isuon  I>at6  of  Return  ( 
Vr-~  »;  T)ate 
if”;-..'  t;V' 
•  y?i; ■ 
 ,v,.  , 
c; 
v’ : 
..  v  V 
' 
•   
'ffi: 
U 
m 
KEW  DELHI, 
Oiogy 
m 
•  
* 
'’%*  i 
-n V;‘ #  -V-  *  -vv  v  v *>  **  ••/•;/■':■  ,v-.t 
••••  ;•-.  y.  '■  
;V:>\..vVv' •  ' 
 iy  '■■  < --‘tt >'•  /  
•“•  •^.».;VV'-;: >. '  .’H’i Vj;  U:0i 
s.su  ui^oW. .;  ; 
 ';..v;;;vV'  |%JgS 
/ 
/

