t: + 


^ ie Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


TUNE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


E 


A Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


by 
Dr Ji Gonda 


. a . . - H 
Professor of Sanskrit and Indonesian Linguistics, 


Utrecht (E olland) 


y es 
S d 


Internation 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SARASVATI VIHARA SERIES 


EDITED BY 


RAGHU VIRA, M.A., PH.D., D. LITT. ET PHIL. 
Director, Iniernational Academy of 
Indian Culture, Nagpur 


IN COLLABORATION WITH 
OTHER SCHOLARS 


Volume 28 


SANSKRIT IN INDON ESIA 


2354 D 


E S : E Aql «a 
M, A Gra 


rāunerīuu 1 5 6 9 ] 


Published by 
Dr. Lokesh Chandra 
7 Secretary 
: he International Academy of Indian Culture 
Nagpur 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


CONTENTS 
5 
Preface. 5 o o s o 6 80 909 CO 22295 6 oc 6 ERR 
Abbreviations, . . . s « esu 939 9 2 RCRE DC 
* I. Introductory. 
1. On the IN. Languages in General. . „I eee 


9. On Loanwords in the IN. Languages in General. . . . . . . . . . 11 
3. The Ancient Connections between India and Indonesia. . . . . . . 17 
II. The Spread of Sanskrit over Indonesia. 
1. How did Sanskrit Reach Indonesia. . . . . . . A 
2. Indian Alphabets in Indonesia. „EE S enn So 
3. Indian Elements in the Minor Languages of Indonesia. . . . . . . 33 
(i) The Role of Malay and Javanese. . . . . . . « . . . . . . 88 
(ii) The Languages of Celebes. . . < . . . . . . . .«. . . . 38 
(iii) The Islands East of Bali. 2 e | I 


(iv) Borneo. «a a o we o9 0e JS 
(v) Philippine Languages. a © uc 
(vi) Languages of Sumatra: Gayo and Achehnese. . . . . . . . . 57 


(vii) Languages of Sumatra: Batak. . . . . . 2 2 «1s 999299962 
(vi)Nias. . © a & 5 75 aaa REDE OI 
(ix) Malagasy. = s < « 5-5 i. 2 392 292922 S E 


4. General Review of a Number of Wide-spread Words. . . . . . . . $80 
5. Borrowing by Way of Dravidian Tajās "HEN o wc EE : 
6. Borrowing by Two Ways. . . . . . JOE. “=. AS F 
7. The Infiltration of Sanskrit through the Sāka of vade and 

Written Texts. . . © . | ncs cs) hey, tae : 100 


IH. Sanskrit Loan-words from the Point of View of the History of Civilization.” 

. Gods, “Mythological and Legendary Figures, and Hindu Denominations.. 130 
. Death and the Life Hereafter: . . . . . . . . 2 7 2 2 2 
. Religion and Mysticism in General. . . . . . . . . a 

Rites, G$remonies and Law. . . . e e . . . ..-.. 
Medicine. . . = «© « a o 9» SO Z S 9 m QD 
„Arohitestūrē. . so s a 0919 S Ra EN. 
. Numerals and Chronology. . . . . . +... .. . 
8. Some Abstract Terms, < . . . . «© « «4. 
9. Botanical Names. . . . . . - à P. 
10. Names of Persons. |. . . . b 
11. Geographical Names. .. . . . 


CC-0. Prof. Saty: 


IV. Outward ise anoal the. j Foundatig lomeanngi and eGangotri 
1. Phonetic History of the Sanskrib Elowentin IN. Languages. . . ... 999 


(i) Anaptyxis or Svarabhakti. 231 
(ii) Dissimilation. 232 
(iii) Spontaneous Nasalization etc. 233 
(iv) Other Consonantal Epenthesis. . 236 
(v) Euphonic Iaeertion. . e e + +s s co * 237 
(vi) Haplology. o « « « 5 eoe or te ee tr tr rrr s s, 297 
(vii) Metathesia. . . e e «aa . DEI. A. aur us ROAST 
(viii) Treatment of Vowele. . . . e «s c or or on n n ew . 989 
(ix) The Vowel of the Penult.. . . «a s cr or ee we 241 
(x) The Vowel of the Antepenult. e a . o e a © + s o . . . 943 
(xi) More Incidental Vocalic Change. . . . . . . ... . « . . 944 
(xii) Some Groups Consisting of Consonant and Vowel.. . . . . . 9465 
CA Aene nm o o o 0 090 PIE WV: 
_ let) Goskediüxo o so o AIO ERN « , 948 
(xv) Treatment of Other Consonanta. . . . . . . . . . . . . 948 
(Gul) Ow o o o o o o es 5 
(svii) Treatment of Initial Nasal. . . . . . . . . . . . , . 989 
(xvii) wAlfernatingyNagals) e a mom oso] m s.s . . 958 
(xix) Dissyllabism and Apbaereeis. . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 
(59) Pako WOO lala s 8 s OR 
(xxi) Syncope. . . . . | 0 a o o 399 COLTS WC RR DEO: 
(xxii) More Sporadic OPEM o oo 5 et een Es cg 2 
* (xxiii) Variation as to the Form of the Word. . . . MEMS aon 


2 NOOR o g o 6 6 5 S tikās 970 


(i) Sanskrit Stems as Represented in Indonesia. . . DE Te 970 
(ii) Sanskrit Flection in Indonesia. . bab cus 


3. Mutual Influence of Words. pr 
(i) Secondary Bases in -i in Indonesia. x 
(ii) Blending. . oe 
(iii) Metanalysis. . N OR Bass 
(iv) Popular Etymology and ARCU E aci 
(Y) Retrograde Derivation. . . ii px 
(vi) Duplication. REN 28° 

^. e iyu c 0... 001 


4. Morphology II. ', say 3 
A (S PAS PA m EN Luo 19 
(ii) Compounds. . . . B ND M 
(iii) Hybrid Aggregations. SM 

5. Differentiation and the Devolopuent o wo 


(i) Differentiation, . . o. o o 6 
oa a o o Eri 


. 


f Kavas 


. 
. 


(iv) 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


. è OO S 


vija (ii) Homonyms. 
. 6. Various Etymological RSS, c. rel ES 
V. Change of Meaning. 
1. General Remarks. - - - + «= - 
2. Semantic Change and Historical Evolution. . . . 
9. Narrowing and Widening of Meaning. - - - +--+: * 
4. Metaphors and Other Semantic Changes. - e « - 


E 5. Tabu, Buphemism etc. di EE 
6. Mutual Influence of Words ion) the ‘Point of View of Semantics. . TC 

7. Complications and Problems: = = 302 e OE 977 

Langages of Literature and Courtesy. 383 


8. Special Semantic Changes in the 


VI. The Reaction of the IN. Languages to the Influence of Sanskrit. 


L4 1 The Structure of Words and Sentences. NUM 
9. Loan-Translations. ae are ARI SS T 
3. The Reception of n" Loans into the Standard Language and 
Special Vocabularios: <5 NIO SS s za (400) 
4, Sanskrit-Loans and Modern Times: kl EINEN S 491 
APPENDICES 


1. Sanskrit-Loans in Indonesia, Indian Sanskrit; and Sanskrit Lexicography. 428 


9. Sanskrit in the West by Way of Indonesia. . . <- + + + 

. INDICES i 

1. Sanskrit. . - - - m: 

9. Middle and New Indo- AES — «a <. cc 
3. Indonesian Languages. NE 

Addenda ei Corrigenda. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


PREFACE 


This book is primarily intended to meet the requirements of all 
those scholars and other readers who take an interest in the many 
aspects of the linguistic and cultural relations between India and 
Indonesia, The author, not aiming at anything like completeness, has 
given a prominent place to more important topics and established facts 
and bas focussed the attention not so much on etymological possibilities 
and speculations as on the main problems connected with the spread 
of Sanskrit in the Indonesian archipelago. 

'The publication of this work has been made possible by the 
activity and generosity of the International Academy of Indian Culture, 
Nagpur. The author therefore readily takes the opportunity of expres- 
sing his deep obligation to the Academy's director, Prof. Dr. Raghu 
Vira for his keen interest in the subject of the book and for his 
willingness to publish it in the Sarasvati Vihara Series. Tf this work 
will help in some measure to realise the noble aims and ideals which 
the Nagpur Academy has in view, the author's labour will be amply 
repaid. 

A special debt of gratitude is also due to the Academy's zealous 
secretary, Dr. Lokesh Chandra, who has been indefatigable in, correc- 
ting the proofs and in drawing the author's attention to lacunas in the 
press-copy. He, moreover, suggested adding many words and meanings 
to those already entered and was unremitting in the care with which he 
checked the author's statements in connection with Hindi aud other 
Indian words. 

‘The index which has been added to the volume will be found 
incomplete. We did not, indeed, try to make it exhaustive, but sugges- 
tive only ofthe Sanskrit elements discussed. 


J. Gonda 


(vii) 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Digitized A BB VoldktbI Mh Sana eGangotri 
A. LANGUAGES 


AMg. Arāhamāgadbī Mac. Macassar (Celebes) 
Arab. Arabio Mad. Madurese 

Bal. Balinese Mah. Mahārāstrī 

Bar. Bare'e (Celebes) Mal. Malay e 

Bat. Batak (Sumatra) Mar. Marathi 

Beng. Bengali MIA. Middle Indo-Aryan 
Bug. Buginese (Celebes), Min. Minangkabau 
Engl. English NIA. New Indo-Aryan 
Fr. Frenoh OJav. Old-Javanese 

Guj. Gujarati Pkt. Prakrit 

Hind. Hindustani, Hindi Saur. Sauraseni 

IE. Indo-European Singh. Singhalese 

IN. Indonesian Sp. Spanish 

It. Italian Sund. Sundanese (Java) 
Jav. Javanese Tag. Tagalog (Philippines) 
KBat. Karo-Batak Tam. Tamil 

Lat. Latin TBat. Toba-Batak 


B. BOOES AND PERIODICALS 


„Ādip. (The Old-Javanese) Adiparwa, edited by H. H. Juynboll, The 
Hague 1906. 

BhK. (The Old-Javsnese poem) Bhomakawys, edited by R. Friederich, 
VBG. XXIV, Batavia 1852. 

BKI. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- 


Indië, vol. 1-104, and Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 
vol. 105— edited by the Koninklijk Instituut, The Hague 1853—. 


Bmd. (The Old-Javanese) Brahmandapurana, edited by J. Gonda, Ban- 
dung 1932. 
BSO(A)S. Bulletin of the School of Oriental (and African) Studies, London. 
BY. (The Old-Javsnese poem) Bbárata-Yuddha, edited by J. G. H. 
Gunning, The Hague 1903. 
EJAS. . Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, Cambridge Mass. $ 
Hobson-Jobson H. Yuleand A. C. Barnell, Hobson-Jvbson, new ed. by W. Crooke. 
JAOS. Journal of the American Oriental Society, New Haven Conn. 
JRAS. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 
: London. 


Juynboll, Drie boeken: H. H. Jaynbol!, Drie boeken van het Oudjavaansche 
Mahabharata, Leyden 1893. 

Juynboll, Wdl. or Woordenlijst : H. H, Juynboll, Oudjavaansch-Nederlandsche 
Woordenlijst, Leyden 1943 


KBW. H.N. van der Tuuk, Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandech Woorden- 
book, 4 vol., Batavia 1897-1912. 
Kern, V. G. H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften, 15 vol., The Hague 1913-1929, 
A (ix) 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ābhārata. 
Mth. The Mahābhārata 9 vol., Mytilene. Greece 1932. 


1 Didien igh Dictionary, 3 x : 
ae en. Sonde da Dingaritiqué aw Pitis, Paris. E 
MW. M Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit-English Dictionary, new edition, 
Oxford 1899. š 

Nāg (Old-Javanese poem) Nagarakrtagamas edited by H. Kern, V.G. VII 
and VIII. s 

OJav. Ràm. The Old-Javanere Ramayana, edited by H. Kern. 

Pet. Dict. Petrograd Dictionary, ie. O. Bóht!ingk and H. Roth, Sanskrit- 
Worterbucb, 7 vol.. Petrograd 1855-1875. 

Pigeaud, Wdb. Tb. Pigeaud, Javaans-Nederlands Handwoordenbook, Groningen 
1938. 

Pischel, GPS. R. Pischel, Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen, Strassburg 1900. 

Rām. Ramayana. The Old-Javanere Rām. was edited by H. Kern, Tha 
Hague 1900. 

RV. Reveda-sambita. 

TBG. Tijdschrift van het Bataviaas Genootschap, i. e. Tijdechrift voor 


Indische Taal., Land- en Volkenkunde, edited by the Batavians 
Genootschap voor Kunsten en Wetenschappen, Batavia-Jakarta. 
van der Tuuk, KBW. : ree KBW. 


VBG. Verhandelingen van heb Bataviass Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen, Batavia-Jakarta, 
VKI. Verhandelingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Laud. 


en Volken-kunde, Batavia-Jakarta. 
"Wilkinson; MED : see MED. 


Wir. Wi-ataparvan : The Old-Javanese text waeeditedby H. H. Juynboll, 
The Hague 1919; part of it also by A. A. Fokker, The Hague 
1938. T 

ZDMG, Zeitschrift dər dentscben morgenländischen Gesellschaft, 


Leipsio. ~ 


€. GENERAL 


coll. colloquial 

esp. especial 

ide in the same meaning 

ifo. in fine compositi, i.e. at the end of a compound 

kd. kidung : the kidungs nre a class of ancient Javanese poen:g derling 


with historical, legendary and other themes, and written in a less 
high and artificial style than the kavya poems (kakawine) P 


d krama, i.e, the Javanoce vooabulary of courtesy 
ri. krama inggil, i.e. the limited Javan 

; , ese vocabulary used i - 
ing, or speaking of, highly placed persons Win iiey 
lit. literary (style) i 
mod. modern ca 
DE. ngoko, i.e. the Javaneve v iiari 
Dd A ANM ocabulary of familiarity and informal tpeesh 
reg. regional 


(x) 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 
` 


o 


< * "RH 

Digitized by AGERER AL REMARES ci and eGangotri — 5 

In instancing Indonesian words their orthography has bee 
harmony with the ueual method of transsribing Sanskrit; in otl 
modern orthography of the main languages has, in general, been ado 
of Old Javanese books etc. are, however, written in the Sanskrit way. 
In Modern-Javanese a final a is pronounced as the a in Eangi. wi 
written a in a penult preceding such an a likewise represents that sounds V 
consonant, & consonant preceded by its homorganic nasal, or ås follow. 
vowels are pronounced as the a in water in: mata, tampa, gaiisa- 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


orto 


Digitized by Arya Sam 
LINGUISTIC MAP Of INDONESIA 
Legenda 

Indonesian languages 

I PHILIPPINE GROUP 
1 Formosan 2 Batan 3 Tagalog 4 Iloko 5 Bicol 6 Bisaya 7 Ibanag 
8 Igorot 9 Magindanao 10 Tingyan 11 Dadayag 12 Sulu 13 Palau 

14 Sangirese and Talaud 14a Bantik 14b Bentenan 15 Bolaang-Monson- 

dow 16 Tombulu Tonsea Tondano sub-group 17 Tontemboan Tonsawang 
aub-group (14-17 usually called sub- Philippine languages) 

IE SUMATRA kis 
| Achehnese 2 Gayo 3 Batak idioms ( a Karo b Toba c Simalungun d 
Mandailing and Kāju 4 Minangkabau 4* Taubu 5 Malay (a Riau Malay 
b Jakarta Malay c Kubu d Moluccan Malay) 6 so-called Middle-Malay 
T Rejang S Lampong 9 Simalur 10 Nias 11 Mentaway 12 Engsano 
13 Iontjons 14 and 15 other Sumatran dialects 

VW JAVA GROUP 1 Sundanese 2 Javanese 3 Madurese 

TV BORNEO GROUP (so-called Dayak or Dyak languages) 
| Klemantan languages 2 Iban languages 3 Ot-Danum languages 4 Kenja 
group 5 Murut group 6 Milano 
B BAJO or language of the sea-r omads 

V BALINESE AND LANGUAGES WHICH. ARE NEARLY RELATED TO IT 


1 Balinese 9 Sasak 3 Sumbawa 


"VI GORONTALO GROUP 


1 Bulanga 2 Kaidipan 3 Gorontalo 4 Beool 
VIL TOMINI LANGUAGES 
VILLE TORAJA LANGUAGES 
1 Kaili 9 Kulawi 3 Pipikoro 4 Napu 5 Bada etc. 6 Leboni 7 Bare'e 
8 Wotu 
IN LOINANG GROUP [Na BANGGAT IDIOMS 
X BUNGKU-LĀKI GROUP 3 , 
XI. LANGUAGES OF SOUTH CELEBES 
1 Macassar 2 Buginese 3 Luwuidioms 4 Sa'dan 5-7 other idioms of 
South Celebes 
NIT LANGUAGES OF THE MUNA-BUTON (BUTUNG) GROUP 
NIII BIM A.SUMBA GROUP 
| Bima 2 Manggarai (Flores) 3 Ngad'a C1) 4 and 5 dialects uf Sumba 
6 Hawu 
NIV AMBON-TIMOR GROUP 
| Kroč 9 Solorese (language of Solor) 5 Timorese (language of Timor) 
7 Rotinese (language of Roti) 10 Kisar 11 Leti 13 Tanimbar 18 and 
19 Ceram languages 921 Banda 8, 4 ete. other languages 
XV SULA LANGUAGES 
NVI SOUTH HALMAHERA IDIOMS AND RELATED LANGUAGES 
1 South Halmahera idioms 2 Nufor 
Austro-Asiatic languages 
Non-Indonesian languages of North Halmahera 
Papua languages 
Melanesian languages 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


2 ey 


"n 
i 
| 
" 
| 
4 


rj 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


CHAPTER I 


SECTION 1 
ON THE INDONESIAN LANGUAGES IN GENERAL 


As is well known, the IN. tongues may be said to form a linguistic family 
of their own, or to belong to the much more extended group of tke Austronesian 
languages, which has evea been combined with other groups into the Austric 
family. So it would be impossible to deal with the subject proper of this book 
before giving a cursory survey of the most important characteristics of the IN- 
languages and showing at which points they differ from the structure of Sanskrit 
which is an Indoeuropean language. 

According to the adherents of a method of clas-ifying languages which has 
long enjoyed popularity and, at fies& sight, seems to' afford a good basis for 
distinguishing thom by ealieat features, IN. usod bo be considered as agglutinative, 
while IE. as inflectional or synthetic. Languages of the agglutinative type 
were held to be marked by agglutination into a single word of various elements 
each with a fixed connotation aud eacb, while preserving its individuality, 
mechanieally added £o the complex constituting a word. The synthetie or.inflec- 


Y 


tional elass was, on the other hand, regarded as distinguished from the aggluti- 


native typo in thai the elements composing words have now bezome so amalgamated 
with each other that, apart from an historical analysis, they can uo longer be 
separated from the complex as a whole, used as a word. 

This scheme of classification bas, however, proved inappropriate. It 
loads, for ono thing, to grave misunderstandings to say that in agglutinative 
languages individua! elements are, as a rule, mechanically added to or separated 
from the complex constituting a word, and devices supposed to be typical of them 
may also occur in languages belonging to other classes, and vice versa. Historical 
stages or supposed historical stages are, moreover, apt to be substituted for the 


contemporaneous or actual stages of the language. 

We shall, therefore, refrain from using the terminology adopted by those 
who favoured such systems of charaeterizing languages, and, for practical reasons, 
confine ourselves to presenting, in a comparative way, & general view of IN. 
languages as they were and are during the period in which they have been in- 
fluenced by Sanskrit.! 

Whereas in tha II. domain linguistic ailinities are often veiled by the influ- 
ence of internal factors as well asevents of osonomie, religious, and political nature 
which have been operative in prodvcing many such divergencies as exist, for exam- 
ple, between Hindi and English, between Sanskrit and South African Dutch: or 
between Latin and modern Persian, one of,the salient features in the IN. family, 
the territory of which consists almost exclusively of islands, is, in general and 
leaving aside more or less particular cases, the homogeneity of their structure and 
the comparatively high degree of resemblance they have to each other. There exist, 
of course, many conspicuous points of difference between Tagalog (Philippines) and 
Gayo (Sumatra), between Barée (Celebes) and Old-Javanese, but various traits of 
their grammar, their phonetics, morphology and syntax, outstanding charaateristics 
of which are essentially of the same nature. Pe Y 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennat and eGangotri i " " 
<hibi high degree of uniformity. 
y h 3 of IN. languages exhibit & hig g 
R uc d but not the vowels affected by a nasal, 
13 different vowels. In IN. languagos, however» the number of vowel n is, 
in general, limited. Although there is, of course, from the purely phonetical point of 


view, much room for nondistinctive variation of each phoneme, Tagalog possosses, 
; than a very simple threo-vowel system : a high 


phonologically speaking no more à hie 
front vowel (i), a low indifferent vowel (a), and a high back vowel (u). There is, 
hich is lacking in Sanskrit, but though 


er, a vowel, of frequent IN. occurrence w A i 
des EM ained; M re:embles the Hindi a šī or the ? (written a) in tak 
arise, the? (written e) in Ba 11. the dog. In Sanskrit many pairs of worda are is 
guished by the quantity of one of their vowels : dina- fza ‘day’: dine- q 
‘sad, weak’; suta- ga“ son’: sūta: Qi ‘charioteer. In Javanose, Malay and 
other languages of the Archipelago which borrowed many Sanskrit words such 
opposites are unknown, as there is, as a rule, no phonological gradation of 
quantity.! IN. languages and Sanskrit are in keeping with each other in that 
diphthongs play a limited part. Sanskrit has only ai and au, in IN. ai au ui 
are those which are most eommonly met with, but they only appear exceptionally 
in syllables other than the final, and some languages have modified, monophthon- 
gized or reduced them to one of their components. 

The consonant systan of an IN. language is, generally speaking: rather 
simple Si:haspirato serie: as kh @, ch 3 otc. are lacking except for a very 
interesting case like tho Midurese gh, jh, dh, dh, bh (no corresponding kh etc.). 
Whereas Javanese: like Saiskris, Prukrits, an 1 nodern Indian languages, possess9s 
a series of so-called retroflexes -ide by side wish the dentals (thus Jav. ¢ 
produced by raising the tip of the tongue or curling it back and upward beside 
t formed by the tongus approximating the tips of the teeth). Malay and other 
languages have only one series. In general spirants other than s are absent: 
Sanskrit likewise has no spiranta, three voiceless sibilants š 2, s d and s U 
kiss lu many of these idioms the glottal stop (g) is, however, a regular 
element. 


Sanskrit possesses, she diphthongs include 


Thus, the sounds of the Javaneso language might be arranged according to 
the following scheme :3 


Vowels: a 


OG to 9-8 
Consonants: p b m 
t d n l w 
+4 s h 
6 g, R 
k gù 


q (glottal stop) 

$ TS accent is, as a rule, not strongly marked and often difficult to deter- 
BPA Pa ta Bocen bation of individual languages may bo considerably 

ied. e ; ie” mn 
tes uw ne or the "prosodie features” in general—I prefer this term to 
i atuation , because, to mention only this, quantity often plays an 
important part in the phenomena meant by 'accontuation' in the gra 4 E is 
ad still insufficiently known, Yet, it is cloar that we ites io 
0 take into account the dominant accent of the breath-group, by which, th 
prosodic features of its components may be profoundly modified : fe th oat i ; 
ed. Another poin 


of moment is that stross, tone, quantity may very often be entirely disregarded 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 3 


from the phonologicel point of view. 

Passing on to the form of words we must first remaiķ that one of the most 
outstanding characteristics of the Archipelago consists in their tendency to a dis- 
syllabic structure. About 96 per cent of the ‘word-bases’ which are supposed to 
have existed already in Original IN. are dissyllabic*, and in modern Javanese 
over 85 per cent of them have two syllables. The same language, like most of 
the cognate idioms, prefers a regular alternation of con-onants and vowels to 
groups of phonemes of either class. Initial consonant clusters (which are frequent 
in Sanskrit): ksa W, ksva A> tra A> pya “A> stra 4, avd final groups of the 
same kind (which are rare) are, as a rule, not admitted; a group of three 
and many groups of two consonants are avoided in the middle of a word 
(in Sanskrit such clusters as pl “W pn N, my Tq, st SH, ty S ndr = eto. 
are far from being uncommon). Like Sanskrit, Javanese unquestionably refrains 
from two vowels following each other in the same word. Javanese and other IN. 
languages prefer a consonantal beginning of a word to a vocalic: in Malay the 
proportion is about 10:1, in Sanskrit about 44:1. Finals are, likewise, pre- 
ferably consonants; in Sanskrit, where consonants occurring as finals are limited, 
vowels are, comparatively speaking, frequent in that position. Thus, words 
like the Malay buruù ‘bird’, guna ‘mountain’, mulut ‘mouth’, kébun ‘enclosed 
garden’, rumah ‘house’, Javanese sugih ‘rich’, tipis ‘thin’, waras ‘recovered’ 


- belong, as to their outward form, to the most common type. But the type Mal. 


mata ‘eye’, Jav. kali ‘river’ is far from being infrequent. 

As regards the dissyllabie word-form, it must, however, be added that in 
practice many words of three or four syllables aro found, because two types of 
word-formation, whieh are the most outstanding, viz. derivation by means of 
affixes, and the formation by means of unsystematie insertion—both of which 
devices will bo dealt with later—result in longer words: Jav. babad am *elear- 
ing’ beside babad ‘to clear forests’ and kč-tčmu ‘found, met with’ beside tēmu 
‘meeting’ are instances of the former process, Gayo (Sumatra) témpapak be-ide 
tapak ‘palm (of the hand)’ acase of the latter. And as to clusters, some are 
admitted: in Javanese, for instance, pl, pr, gr, tl, etc. are, especially at the 
beginning of the word, frequently found» but never at tho end. In the interior 
of the dissyllabic IN. word-base the group occlusive and preceding homorganic 
nasal is very often mob with, the combinations of r or l with an occlusive are 
not scarce or only occasionally found. In modern Javanese. word-basas of the 
type represented by sémbah ‘the Indonesian aūjali', tambi ‘medicine’, tanda ‘signs 
mark’, burkar ‘unpacked’, number over 2300, and words with medial clusters 
like mpl, kr some hundreds. The IN. ‘internal’ nasals and liquids are, however, 
generally speaking, often rather debile: there are many variants of doublets 
(Mal. mēūkis: mékis ‘to defy’) and some native alphabets systematically omit 
writing the internal nasal before an ocelūsive or use distinct letters to indicate 
mp etc., in which the occlusive element is often weak or liable to change. 

A few words must be said about the analysis of words. Monosyllabio ‘roots’, 
as a rule consisting of consonant, vowel, consonant, and usually represented by 
the second syllable of the word-base, often occur unchanged—or changed in accor- 
dance with more or less definite principles or phonetic laws—through many series 
of words with similar meaning. These words or roots repeatedly recur in many 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


" Digitized by Arya Samj EBJAdatišn CRNE hd eGangotri_ M 


i ‘nis ‘thin, tenuous contains the same 
DEN m A E Bee oi erasing of thinness or smallness) as tho 
V Y o T o4 JT 2 
SRM. ennes tipis ‘thin, delicate’, the Opa ee lai n kt 
‘to reduce in sizo’, and so on. These IN. roots must not be regarded s resembling 
the Semitic root, in which the consonants are held together in different forms by 
characteristic vowels varying in accordance with the idea which it is dorired to 
express: in Hebrew, ganab "he bas stolen’, ganūb stolen, gonēb Bibl Hg S Nor 
must the Indoeuropean .’.blaut be considered a parallel either: this inherited 
systematio vowel gradation, which arose under accentual and other conditione of 
the parent spoech which were widely divergent from conditions in Original Indo- 
nesian, has come to perform important grammetical and semantic functions: Skt. 
deva- ča ‘god’: daiva- 34 ‘divine’; namyate aaa ‘to be bent or bowed’ passive 
beside namati aula "to bend’: nūmyate AF passive besido the causative ‘to cause 
to bow or sink’. But the IN. phenomenon of so-called root-variation does not, as 
a rule, convey regular differences or variations of meaning;only a tendency to 
sound-symbolism and other more or less unsystematic devices can be observed. 
Although there are roofs that can sorve as word-basea, and in several 
cases, bases may be formed from the doubled or reduplicated root (OJav. laklak ‘to 
peel’, Mal. kikir ‘file’), although, moreover, the process of developing an initial 
sound before the root (the so-called prothesis) is repeatedly instrumental in form- 
ing dissyllabic ‘bases’, the most common method of fashioning word-bases con- 
sists in the indissoluble union of a formative element (which in much the largest 
number of cases occupies tho first place) with the root. Thus, in Malay bali" 
circling round a central point’, giliù ‘rolling’, guli ‘rolling along’ we dis- 
tinguish a root -liù and the preformative elements ba-, gi-, gu-. Sanskrit words, on 
the other hand, are in great part analysable into roots (e.g. man-), suffixes of 
derivation (e.g. -as-), and endings of inflection (e.g. .e): manase; prefixes are, 
moreover, frequently added to words formed in this way: part- lsi-mo-t. 
MED S 1 Primitive or unsyatematic processes of word- 
evices , avery wide scope. Like all men 


JBosejepeeoti is produced to a degree worth mentioning under the influence of 
affective or emotive’ tendencies (for inatance 
2 ) 


AM children, the less cultivated groups 


ME. awed ā De. 
am our own society, emotional individuals such as poets or young girls) 
members of small communities, where the counter 
h A : m ANS. 
of gc MD literature: scientifie thought, etc. are almost entirely missing are 
compar i ci ily li i i 
paratively speaking, easily liable to certain devices of word-formation Unsys- 


tematic insertion of an arbitrar Y en, f tr 
7 y and oft fom U int w 

| i j ; A 3 iror the standpoint of those ho bry 
to d 9 sense of v ords, 


formen’ device, to use the German us CAN MERE ledājā 
side by side with sampah ‘rubbish’ 

by TG 4 " h , 
Variations upon familiar or newly lea ayo tempapak : tapak ‘palm of the hand’. 
Mal. témbikar: temberek "potsherd'; 


acting and rogularizing factors 


ra Tie Malay tali ‘rope, cord’ we 
? teen food’ : sayur. * ‘edi ; 
Nepali 1 « A yur-mayur edible vege 
i EA suga clothing and necessaries’; petrol setrol 
rien Pand symbolism are frequente, In a highly 
anskrit, which wag already early an instrument 


‘petrol and lubricants’, 
developed literary langua, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


rf 


» 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 5 


of expressing profound thought these devices had a very limited scope. The IN. 
word ia, to wind up with and speaking quite generally, to a higher degree subject 
to a tendency to variability than the Sanskrit word.” 


Turning now to a very succinct discussion of word-formation we must first 
.emark that such well-known mothods of creating words as abbreviation, metana- 
lysis, retrograde dorivation, popular etymology, etc., etc. are not less in use in these 
languages than in other linguistic families.? Thus Malay rèk ‘match’ comes from 
lorèk api ‘match’ (korèk ‘a pin or rome object like that for pricking etc.', api fire’); 
modern Javanese zarép-an front veranda! from narčp< iiarēp < older Jav. in arép 
‘in front’ (in ‘at, in, on, etc, arēp expressing the idea of ‘being before, in front’; 
so, the derivativa in -ax comes from the ‘secondary base sarēp and not from the 
base proper arép); the plant Sida rhombifolia, a shrub, the root of which is used 
as a medicinal simple, and which is called ia Malay, séléguri: sédaguri, sénaguri 
and so on, is sometimes, along the lines of ‘popular adaptation’, indicated as cina 
guri (cina ‘Chinese’). As these methods of forming and re-forming words are very 
often applied to elements borrowed from foreign languages, we chall have ample 
occasion for discussing the various problems connected with them. 


Many words have sprung from bases by doubting ( OJav. alin alii, often 
written aliit2 ‘a sereen’; Mal. labu? 'pipkin') or reduplieation ( Mentaway, west 
of Sumatra. gugujut ‘match’ beside gujut “to strike, scrape against' Mal. 
lēlabu=labu2). Is is often impossible to distinguish both devices from each other 
or to draw a hard-and-fast line between duplication or doubling ( the repetition 
of the whole word) and reduplication (which affects only a part of it) as a 
process in word-formation and ‘syntactical’ duplication. But they have many 
functions? and in contradistinetion to literary idioms which reflect the more ad- 
vanced stages of civilization and to the cultivated speech and polished style of 
groups and individuals which have, generally speaking, lost contact with the 
emotive and non-intellectual ‘primitiveness’ (which is, however, always apt to 
come to the surface), they play an important part in daily and natural parlance 
of small communities, which springs from impulses implanted in all men, be itin 
Indonesia or in other parts of the world. 


By far the most outstanding type of word-formation ie, in IN. languages, 
derivation: by means of affixes. Among these afüxes (which, according as to 
whether they are found at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end of the word, 
are prefixes, infixes, or suilixes, of which the second group is less frequent) several 
are common Indonesian, e.g. -am, which among other things serves to form nouns 
denoting a place: Mal. labuh-an ‘anchorage’ : labuh ‘casting anchor; -2, which is 
instrumental in forming & class of transitive verbs, denoting actions in relation 
toa place: Jav. madai-2 ‘to shed light on something’. Substantives occur more 
frequently without such deriving elements than verbs. Thus in the Malay 
sentence: sētēlah permaisuri mē-lihat akan istēri Raden S.P. ké-dua-nya bér-kasih? - 
an, maka di-bawa-nya duduk dēkat pérmaisuri kē-tiga itu di-atas balai kéncana ēmas, 
di-hadap oleh stgala dayan?, the words mé-lihat, bàr-kasih2-an, di-bawa-nya, di- 
hada are derivatives of bases by means of affixes, having a verbal character; kë- 
dua-nya and kē-tiga, expressing numeral concepts, are derivatives of a decidedly 
non-verbal character; duduk is a 'base-word' (non-derivative) of a verbal, balai 
(and other words) a 'base-word' of a nominal character. So we can easily observe 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


6 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


LLL — — — Digitized-by-Arya-Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


£ D 
: : 3 : 3 EET 
that word-bases may either do duty in a sentence just as they are (‘base-words’) 


or else they may be extended by aflixes. à " 
Whereas most Sanskrit affixes are instrumental in forming words and 


stems, the endings serving as means by which relations to phe other words of the 
sentence, the ideas of person, plurality ete. are expressed, in IN. languages which 
do not possess elements like the Sanskrit verbal or nominal endings—flection 
being, generally speaking, unknown in these tongues—affixes may also convey such 
ideas as in Sanskrit are expressed by ending:. In Javanese, the prefix pa- not only 
serves to form nouns denoting an instrument: pa-tuku ‘purchase-money’ (tuku ‘to 
buy’); OldJav. pa-turu must be translated as an imperative: ‘sleep’, Skt. svapi-hi, 
svapi-la «xfafz, «afqa. 

- A difficult chapter of the grammar of any IN. idiom will be formed by the 
discussion of the coinpounds. In how far it is possible fo determine for each 
language the difference betwean phrases (syntactic constructions involving two or 
more ‘free forms 1? and compounds has not yet baen decided. Yet, one criterium 
can often be applied, although the feasura of compounds on which itis founded, viz. 
their indivisibility, is not always easy to ascertain: in Malay the group hari bēsar 
‘festival’ ( hari ‘day’, bésar ‘great’) is an indivisible unit with a meaning of its 
own; the group rumah bisar (rumah 'bouse') means ‘a big house’, and rumah 
térlalu bésar ‘a very big house’. Tho first group (hari bésar) can only be consi- 
dered for discussion in the chapter dealing with compounds. In the course of the 
last decennia the Behasa Indonésia has, in the first place under foreign influence, 
acquired a large number of new compounds. The contrast with Sanskrit which, 


especially in the later period and in an elaborate style, very often, and by prefo. 
rence, admits of long agg 


regates of stems analysable in the most varying ways, is 
however, enormous. 


^ In describing an IN. language the classification of words is a very difficult 
point. Ag, in contradistinction to Sanskrit, formal criteria for distinguishing 
nouns from verbs, substantives from adjectives, are few, we have to rely mainly 


upon syntactic valence and order of words. Many words ara by themselves neither 


noun nor verb, but when used in a definite context, when followed or preceded 


Y definite other words, can be considered as beloríging to one class or another.11 
A P in Malay saya sakit means ‘I (saya) am il’, but sakit saya ‘my ache’. Ina 
Similar way words containing definite ‘bound’ forms aro either nominal or verbal: 


rumah-ku ‘my (-ku) house’, but ku-buka ‘I iku-) (have) opened) it’. But, although 


it may be convenient to denote the: ‘parts of speech’ by the traditional torms, 


donesian peculiarities: 7 : ; 
counterpart are by no means alike, 3 šājā aoe ite Sanskrit 


The IN. noun has, i 
ries are practically lacking. 
cology: in contradistinction to i X ion' $ 
UU: mare aiva AA, both ani i i Ce 
kuda, to which, if necessary, 7 
aunt’ Javanese hag bibi, for ‘ 
used poe masculine mūtulgy, "ge: the best 
press oneself is, to state that the IN is indi MUT. ee 
iia ae ; : .' noun is indifferent to this cate, b i 
n oe omah “house’) by itself denotes neither singleness ane a n: 

+18 neither ono) house’ nor ‘hou how p 
! ever, some ways of 


n general, neither 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Anja gemaif;oungatienfehegna ignd eGangotri 7 


indicating that one or more than one object is meant. Plurality can, for in- 
stance, be expressed by adding a word meaning or originally meaning "all, many, 
more than one’ to the noun. In XX century Behasa Indonésia the use of dupli- 
cated nouns has been greatly extended and these forms have often assumed a 
purely plural meaning. 

An insight into the history, real nature and functions of the IN. morpho- 
logical categories soon leads us to the conclusion that they often baffle any 
attempt to describe thoae languages on the lines traditional in Indoeuropean gram- 
mar. But it ig, in some cases, also possible to show that an IN. formation has 
a strong resemblance to a definite formation in an old stage of Indoeuropean. We 
now know that the IE. formation represented by Skt. -yas- in ojzyas- atāta: alpi- 
yas AZIA: originally was no comparative proper: ojiyas- means ‘who (what) is 
pre-eminently distinguished by the possession of ojas-, alpiyasa kalena ‘after a 
rather shors time’. Similar formations, with the same or similar functions, 
developing into comparatives (or, rather, into words which can be tran slated 
into Sanskrit or English by comparatives) exist in the idioms of the 
Archipelago. 

In 2 comparable way a widespread category, represented in Malay by the 
words formed with the prefix tēr-, can conveniently be compared to the IE. adjec- 
tives with sho saffix -to- (Ski. -£a- T) in their oldest function. These adjectives 
with tho suffix -to- which were, as is well known» derived from a root or from a 


* verbal or nominal stem, originally did not belong to any tense stem or strictly to any 


voice: akta- 3I*& ‘able, capable’; supta- Ga ‘fallen asleep’; smita- Kas smiling. Thus, 
Mal. tër tidur (tidur ‘sleep’) is in Sanskrit supta- Yas tér-sényum is smita- fata, and 
with Skt. rathita- Iera ‘furnished with a chariot’ we may compare such forms as, in 
Minangkabau (wet of Sumatra, nearly related to Malay) ta-kabau "come into the 
possession of a buffalo’ ikabau; ta- — Mal. tēr-). 

Concerning other formations, we may say that such forms as OJav. kelt 
(< ka- and ili stream, to strean’). ka-timpal (timpal 'to eut off) are widespread. 
The prefix ka: is instrumental in forming ‘adjectival words’ denoting, in general, 
that a person or an object has (through no fault of his own and whether it is an- 
other person's doing or not) been affected by a process, como into a situation, that 
the idea exprossed by the word-base has been realized or accomplished with re- 
gard to him: keli, added to a noun indicates that (there is somebody or something) 
having fallén a victim to the process or undergoing the process of being swept 
away by the stream; ka-timpal (some person, etc. has been) affected by the process 
of cutting off, hence: ‘cut off’. Other affixes in Malay di-, in OldJav. -in- or in- 
appear to form a mainly narrative category, often an historical past, stating that 
there is a process, a patiens (person or object attained by or undergoing the pro- 
cess), and as a rule also an agens (author, originator, etc.); the patiens is far from 
being always in the foreground, the agens often indefinite. A definite agens can 
often be indicated by a prefixed pronominal element: Mal. pintu ku-buka ‘I open, 
have opened the door’ (b. ‘to open’, p. ‘door’), or by adding a noun, etc. expressing 
it to the verbal form. 

We shall close the discussion of these elements by mentioning that an 
‘instrumental’ and ‘comitative’ idea is conveyed by the suffix Mal. -kan, Jav. 
-ake or -akén, which likewise appears in many languages: whereas OJav. iayakēn, 
t-um-ayakén, eto. (from taya ‘to be not’) expresses the general idea of ‘nullifying’ 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


8 SANSKRIP IN INDONESIA 


— Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
and ‘annihilating’ and corrosponds with a Sanskrit oan F 
nyuduk-aké kēris means ‘to stab (suduk) with a keris (‘the Javanese and Malayan 
dagger’), co that, in this group of words, the caseless IN. noun must be translated 
by a Sanskrit instrumental. 

Modal and temporal concepts are, further, very often indicated by so-called 
auxiliary words. Many IN. languages pos:0ss & series of modal, temporal, aspeo- 
tual’ and other indices; thus Malay akan expresses the future as woll as final 
modality, Javanese bisa such ideas as ean be rendered in English by ‘can’ 


and may’. 

Of course, many other interesting phenomena would be worthy of mention 
in a book or paper exclusively devoted to a description of this too much neglected 
family of languages, To co:ne of them we shall return, as far as necessary and 
possible, in the following chapters when cur argument gives oecasion to some 
elucidating remarks of this description. Let us here confine ourselves to drawing 
the attention to an aspect of the Indonesian vocabulary. Wo already know that 
it is, generally epeaking, rich in variants expressing tho same or similar ideas, 
though the dictionaries often kecp us in tho dark as to the important question 
whether a set of variants is used in the same community or not. The very exis- 
tence of a great variety of synonyms and variants has been conducive to tho spread 
of the phenomenon of the so-called special vocabularies, of which the ‘ceremonious 
vocabularies’ have come under the notice of a large cirele of students of linguis- 
ties: when rpeaking to a person belonging to a higher class, to older or oxalted 
people, to persons whom they do not know, or to whom they wich to bohavo poli- 
celies ae in their language this phenomenon has reached the fullest 

evelopment—avoid the common col i 1 bibutīns it vor 
ging to the ‘vocabulary of courtesy’. pes LE Py am efc 
Indonesians call themselves and their properties by humble terms. The view ibat 
this phenomenon is nothing but a more or less abnormal curiosity is as incorr t 
as the opinion that Javaneso is an aggregate of two or three diffore t 1 x "i 
The phenomenon itself and the devices used in these Indonesian 8 sin l N 
ries are only hypertrophical developments of normal speech. 1 2 PST acc 
Rei MM ls tici We may do wellto remind ourselves that the 

y e Austronesian group of languages, which consist Imos 0 
vely of islanda in the Iadian and Pacific Oceans, ext ds wc i PEL 
Madagascar to Easter Island, west of Chile, and fro pu 4 Sio pu P el 
New Zealand in the south, including, coste d Mer in tho north to 
and, perhaps, other regions on tho continent a OR o toe Malacca Peninsula 

Asia, bub excluding Australia, 


Tasmania, New Guinea (exce j 
I pt along the coast 
in the Pacific and in the eastern cd t eee pac! suelos islands 
FE laa org tte M M | Proper where so-called Papuan 


tically accurate.13 Taken 


vi l gos belonging to th ; i 
a strikingly large number of peculiarities in common; A ein RUE 
; possess a fairly homo- 


geneous syntax and morphology and 
] often al IR 
stantially regular Phonetic correspondences Ey et vita POR pig sub- 


The Indonesian ‘family’ i 
Y' compri 
west: Madagascar, where the Ma] p Me largo Geographical areas: in tho far 


> further» Sumatra 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


sative verb, mod. Jav. 


—s 


Digitized by Arya S. j i i i 
ized by a Serpl Fri tene and eGangon 9 


and adjacent islands, whore Achehnese and Gayo are spoken in the north, the 
Batak idioms (of which Toba and Karo Batak are the most important ), and 
Minangkabau in the central parts, the latter along the west coast, the conglome- 
rate of the socalled Middle-Malay dialects and the Lampong idioms in the south, 
Nias and other languages (e.g. Mentaway ) on the islands to the west of 
Sumatra, Malay dialects in the east coast of this main island, on the Malay 
Peninsular and neighbouring islands; the Java-Madura-Bali area comprises 
Javanese, Sandanese (in the west of Java ), Madurese (on Madura and, by coloni- 
zation, in the eastern regions of Java), Balinese on the isle of Bali: Borneo, where 
many Dayak or Dyak idioms are spoken ( of which Ngadju and Busang are worth 
mentioning ); the island of Celebes and a number of small islands in its 
immediate neighbourhood ( Buton, Banggai, etc.), being the territory of some 
decades of idioms} Bugi or Buginese and Macassar in the south-west, the 
Toraja idioms (Barés etc.) in the centres Tombulu, Tontemboan, etc. in the north); 
the Philippine-Formosa area: comprising Formosan in Formosa Island, Tagalog, 
Visayan or Bisaya, Bicol, Bontok, Ibanag and a score of other languages in 
the Philippines and, besides, the idioms spoken on such small islands as Sangi 
or Sangir, Talaud and Chamoro, which geographieally forms par& of the Marian 
Islands; the idioms of the Moluccas: Buru on the island of thas name, the 
dialects of Garam etc., with the exception, however, of the languages of the north 
of Halmahera which are not Indonesian, whereas the so-called Moluccan Malay 
has largoly intruded itself upon the territory of these East-Indonesian idioms; 
and, finally, the islands to the eas of Bali: Lombok, Sambawa, Sumba: Flores, 
Timor ete., on many of which several different dialects or languages are spoken. 4 
Of all these some 250 languages only Javanese can boast of an old literature, 


. dating from about the IX century. This literature was, as we shall explain at 


some length in a following chapter, inspired by Sanskrit models and filled with 
Sanskrit words. It is only due to a pərsistent misapprehension that the terms 
Old-Javanese and Kavi (<Skt. kavi ata 'poev) are regarded as synonymous.!? 
Kavi, ‘the poets’ language’ is, in correct usage, a term for the traditional literary 
idiom in goneral, be it written in Old-Javanese or in & more recent stage of the 
Javanese language. Besides Javanese some other languages (Malay, Balinese) 
have the advantage of being used for ancient inscriptions, some of which with- 
stood the ravages of time, and of an extensive literature dating from several 
centurtes back. The oldest written Malay texts we possess were committed to 
paper about 1600, Javanese, Malay, Achehnese, Batak, Minangkabau, Buginese 
and some other languages possess a large literature ou a variety of subjects, many 
parts of which have unfortunately not yet been edited or investigated.'* The 
numbers of persons speaking these Indonesian languages vary greatly. In the 
east of the Archipelago languages used by some hundreds of people are not rare 
nor are dialects kept within the limits of a single village or spoken by some scores 
of inhabitants of an isolated island or region either. Javanese, which largely 
consists of an aggregate of dialects, is the mother-tonguo of over 30 millions of 
people, Sundanese is nowadays spoken by about 10 millions, Madurese by some 
D millions. The speakers of Javanese at present by far outnumber the total 
number of them who use Malay, even if all the Malay dialects and regional varie- 
ties spoken in Sumatra, the Peninsula, Borneo, Celebes and the Moluccas are 
added to the growing number of people who nowadays use the Behasa Indonésia 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


10 SANSKRIT IN 


INDONESIA 


which is the moda A Kiras S NATE eet Pa CÓBTERIPndbeténastes, schools, official 
publications, in a large part of the journals and periodicals, etc., and intended 
to be the official, cultura! and general language of the whole of Indonesia. Far 
from being sufficiently known, described and studied most Indonesian languages 


are in urgent need. of ssientifie investigation. 


We do not even possess a Malay, 


Javanese, Achehnese or Sundanese grammar, a Balinese dictionary, a survey of 
: a . . s us 
Javanese literature, a concise handbook of comparative Indonesian linguistics up 


to modern scientific standards. 


NOTES 


1 Fora more detailed survey of the 
subject see my two papers Indonesian 
linguistics and general linguistics’ I and 
II, in Lingua, International review of 
general linguistics, (Haarlem, The 
Netherlands) Vol. II (1950); III (1951). | 
In these papers I have tried briefly to | 
sketch some of the most salient features | 
in IN. languages from the point of view | 
of general linguistics, and to emphasize | 
methodical and other problems discus- | 
sed in recent literature. 

2 There are some interesting particu 
lars which seem to convradict the gene- 
ral rule; for such Old-Javanexe pairs as 
iku ‘that’ (demonstrative): ikū ‘tail’ see 
my remark in Lingna III. 

3 Sve also E M. Uhlenbeck, De Sīrue- 
tuur van het Javaanse Morpheem, 
(Thesis Leyden, Bandoeng 1949). ch. ĪB ; 
4 I reier to O Dempwo!ff, Verglei- 
chende Lautlehre des austronesischen 


Wortechatzes, (Berlin, 1934-1938) TI. 
p. Tf. 
5 


Only the Javanese materials have 
been investigated, see the book written 
by Uhlenbeck, referred to in note 3, 

6 For IN. word-formation and allied 


problems see also my papers 


‘ 

Some 
remarks on onomatopoeia, sound-aym- 
boliam and word-formation’, in TBG 


LXXX (1940), p. 138.910, ana "Enkele' 
opmerkingen over w ing, i 

BEL C (1941), p, 197-499, ein 
7 Bee especially my paper ‘The compa- 
rative method as applied to Indonesian 
languages’, in Lingua I (1947), p. 86-101 
This paper is a summary of Opmer. 


kingen over de toepassing der compara- 


tieve niet hode op de Indonesische talen’, 
in BKI XCIX (1940), p. 397-466. r 
8 For full details refer to my paper 
in BKI. C. p. 127ff. 

9 Irefer to my paper "The functiona 
of word duplication in IN. languages', 
iu Lingua II (1950), p. 170-197. 

10 A lingui:tie form which is never 
spoken alone (such as the Eng. -ing in 
speak-ing, walk.ing) may be called a 
bound form, all others (as, for instance 
speak!, house) free forms. See L. Bloom- 
field, Language, ‘London 1935) p. 150%. 
11 I have tried to give come "prole- 
gomena’ on this chapter which perhaps 
may in the courre of time lead to a 
*atiRfac!o'y claeeification of the IN. 
parts of rjeech: BKI. CV (1949 ), 
p. 275.331 (n D itch), 

1? Seo my paper, the Javanese voca- 
bnlary of courtesy, in Lingua'I, p. 333ff. 
13 L H.Gray, Foundations of Lin- 
guage (New York 1939), p. 395. 

14 The reader might be referred to 
the linguistic map of Indonesia, made 
hy S. J Exer, in Atlan van Tropisch 
Nederland (Batavia 1938 ) Another 
useful map (by J Ensink) may be found 
in Winkler-Prins, Algemene Eneyolo- 
paedie, Amsterdam, s.v. Indonesische 
Talen. 

"5 Thus, eg, Gray, Le; and W. L. 
ba Language and Languages, (New 
Fork. London, 1932) p 423. 

1 condensed bibliography may be 
found in Letterkunde van de Indische 
Archipel, compiled and furnished wish 
an introduction eto, hy J. G mda, (Ams- 
terdam-Brussels, 1947), p. 45ff. ; 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a * 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri n 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA al 


SECTION 2 
ON LOAN WORDS IN THE INDONESIAN LANGUAGES IN GENERAL 


Although many authors of dictionaries and other works in the domain of 
Indone-ian linguistics have made a host of incidental remarks on the Indian 
origin of usual words in Malay, Javanese and other languager, on the 
literary influence exercised by texts written in Sanskrit on the literature of 
the Archipelago, on borrowing: of various kinds, a comprehensive work on 
the subject and, apart from & few exceptions, special collections of facte, are, 
up to now, wanting.’ Although a rather extensive literature has grown up 
in French and Dutch, and in the last quarters of a century by the endeavour 
of Indian scholars also in English, on the cultural and political history of 
Greater India, no book has up till now been written on India's linguistic 
expansion in the Archipelago, which is, nevertheless, of outstanding interest, 
This lacuna is, for the greater part, due to the state of affairs in this particular 
field of linguistic and philological studies in general In time to come an ety- 
mological dictionary of the main IN. tongues must be written, and its author 
will have to aim at completeness with regard to the foreign material borrowed 
by them. s 

The etymological remarks to be found in the existing grammars and 
dictionaries are not always reliable. Some of them (eg.  Hazeu's Gayo 
Dictionary, Joustra’s Karo-Batak Dictionary2) only occasionally characterize 
a word as ‘Sanskrit’ or 'Per-ian', leaving other borrowed terms unnoticed.® 
Other books mistake Sanskrit words for Arabic or vice-versa, attribute an 
Indian origin to terms which are, or may be, Indonesian, or consistently fail to 
distinguish between Hindi, Tamil and Sanskrit elements. Most of the authors 
writing on Indonesian languages being unfortunately ignorant of Sanskrit, ancient 
etymological notes and glossaries made by competent scholars some 70 or 90 
years ago have repeatedly been copied together with the inaceuracies they 
contain from the present-day standpoint of science.s As several other authors 
on Indonesian subjects had no first-hand information about things Indian, they 
too had to rely upon the work of their predecessors in the field, and so not a 
few errors of an older generation with respect to Sanskrit words and their 
meaning have had a long life. Thus, Skt. tapas A9: is translated by "penitential 
exercise’, yojana- MIA by "field of vision” (Klinkert), yoga- Mta by ‘reflection’, 
etc., etc. And the few good etymological lists which were composed in & 
former period (Kern’s treatises on Sanskrit words in Tagalog and Bisaya) have 
not-been checked and supplemented by the younger generation. 

Putting loan-words aside, we should, further, remember that comments 
on the influence of Sanskrit on the spiritual and intellectual life of the people 
of Indonesia are scattered in various books and periodicals dealing with historical, 
archaeological, philological and other topics. It is true that particular questions 
have often been broached by authors who took an interest in them, but they were 
seldom dealt with in an exhaustive way. In other cases an ample discussion has 
lead to no final settlement. 

To do justice to the authors who devoted themselves to the etudy of 
the difficult and intricate problems connected with all the. aspects of Indian 
influence on the culture of the Archipelago, it must, however, be remarked 
that there were, and are, enormous gaps in our knowledge, that the material 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


K, ESIA : 
12 Digitized by Arya SNE hd No ROKA and eGangotri 


available often defies any attempt to arrive at an acij solution, - that: à 
many links in the numerous chains which in former centuries connected India 
and Indonesia are lost for ever. It must be borne in mind that everyone 
who writes on cultural and linguistic borrowings in ancient times, and especially 
when dealing with South-East Asia stands a good chance of making many mis. 
takes. It must be plainly stated thas even now, in 1951, we are far from 
being in a position to give a reasonably satisfactory account of the movements, 
wanderings and trade routes which created the conditions favourable for the 
introduction of Sanskrit words in the Archipelago, or to describe the mechanism 
of borrowing in full detail. Instead of an exhaustive inquiry into a long series 
of successive events a hypothesis with: regard to the missing links of the ends 
of a cbain will be the only thing possible. 

There are algo other preliminary remarks to be made. From prehistoric 
times onwards the mainland and the innumerable islands between the Indus and 
Australia have been the scene of migrations, invasions and commercial travellings. 
The Indonesians themselves aro no autochthones, but according to Kern and 
Kuhn? whose sexagenarian hypothesis has never been refuted or even seriously 
disputed, they once occupied a territory in the coastal regions of the Asiatic 
mainland. The vexing problems of the movements of the Melanesians and the so- 
called Papuans need not worry us in this book"; the confused way in which there 
peoples are, in modern times, distributed on the islands of the Archipelago, tho 
r h their idioms and the IN. tongues are interrelated, 
affirm what we can also understand from other facts: the sea has not only sepa- 


rated these islands from each other and from the mainland, it has often constituted 
& means of communication betweon them. 


Putting on one side the extraordinary difficult 


uestions E By 
(vanished before the. historic Mind ar the speooh 


period) of some pre-Indonesian people or reoplas 
IN. languages known to us, and putting off a 


3, the Arabic, Persian, Chinese, Portuguese, Dutch 


ed numerous elements to Malay 


For it has mainly been 
conditioned the procesa 
of foreign languages hag 
buted to two factors, viz, the merouri and lasting must especially b iri 
i . rourial ch 3 t y 2e attri: 
OREA ES traditional boat v praler of part of the inhabitants of the 


the purely mercanti ion d Pus sus A tell 

ities S 8, and the inereasi i 
and industrial Products wag soon i ei 

ideas and valueg, Une 


z 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 13 


After the Indian cultural influx which brought Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Sanskrit art and learning and Sanskrit itself to large areas of the Archipelago 
the culture of Islam followed. Showing.itself in. the XIII** century, the Muslim 
influence did not directly derive from Arabia. As an intensive contact *between 
the islands and the cradle of Islam: did not come about before the invention 
of steamships in the XIX century, thé Islam creed aad Muslim culture known 
to Malay, Javanese and other Indonesian peoples was for many centuries as 
good as identical with eertain aspects of the. typically Indian Islam. Gujaratis, 
inhabitants of the Dravidian South and other Indians brought some elements of 
Muslim culture from Hindustān, where Islamic-Persian civilization and native 
Indian elements blended and gave rise‘ to a new form of the prophet's 
religion, which emphasized mysticism and favoured unorthodox tendencies. 
Accordingly, this Muslim influence not only introduced Arabian, but also 
many Persian and several Hindi and Tamil words into Indonesia.8 More- 
over, it brought the Arabian-Persian script into use.” Thus Islam gained 
a footing in Sumatra in the XIM: and XIV? centuries and in Java in the 
XV" century and gradually spread, partly by the exploits of military chief- 
tains, but mainly and more effectively through peaceful penetration by traders 
and colonists, who» like their Hindu predecessors, often married Indonesian 
women. Also individual mystics, who later on also acted as members of 
organized brotherhoods, and often became co-nationals of the .ndonesian 
peoples, laid the foundations upon which in later times influences of orthodox 
law and theology could continue constructing the edifice of Islam. 

Although it is not possible to draw a hard-and-fast line between 


. learned? and ‘popular’ borrowings from Arabic, the words deriving from this 


gource can» in the Islamized regions of the Archipelago, be fairly well divided 
into literary terms and those in use among the common people. The first 
group is practically unlimited, for every author translating Arabic works or 
adapting Muslim literary tradition to the requirements of his community 
acquired a more or less large number of technical and other terms from the 
original. Many words which belong to the ‘popular’ class have become 
completely naturalized. They often betray their secondary Indian origin by 
phonetic peauliarities; words like Mal. Jav. ete.  pérlu ‘obligatory’, which 
derives from the Ar. fard ‘ordering anything to be observed: obligation’, have 
been extended by -w in the Dravidian South of India, where descendants 
of Arabian merchants and their native converts speak Tamil and related 
languages ; this longer form in -w also underlies the Achehnese equivalent 
pórülàà (cf. Mal. palu ‘hammering’: Ach. paleé (hammer. And in ‘such 
expressions as the Malay ahli sunat ‘an observer of the traditional law’ the 
-it is Persian; the same -i occurs in abdi ‘slave’ (Arab. abd). Some Dravidian 
words or terms imported through Dravidian intermediation gained a footing 
in Indonesian communities with a typically Muslim secondary meaning. „Thus 
the word labbai, which, whatever its origin may be,19 is the name of a 
class of Muslim traders in the South Coromandel coast, descended, "according 
to various accounts, from Arab merchants ; it has come to denote, in Sumatra 
and Java, a Muslim religious ‘lawyer’ and spiritual adviser who is expected 
to be a pillar of the mosque and is invited to religious feasts. On account of the 


lively commercia! interrelations between South-India, Malacca and & jacent 
y CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection" djac 1 


K j4 Digitized by Aryan RED de ND ONE ba eGangotri 


regions the number of Tamil (and & few other Dravidiar) words which was 
z : i 1 centuries through the medium of 
already considerably increased tor severa j ee inl peloton 
Muslim trade and religious propaganda, grew larger. a ey y o 
here. Up to the beginning of the XIX contury accountancy 
ihe Ee ne pae S "ts, executed in Tamil, and a certain knowledge 
and book-keeping was, iisoaspor Eb | MENU 5 centres ās 
of that language was wide-apread in Milacca a oe, ‘ane om 
‘oran Kélin’ io. literally ‘the men of Kalinga, origin formed a mek insignificant 
body of foreign business-meu in Indonesia. Often all inhabi'ants of South 
India were called Kélin, and we even find that ‘the speech of the Hindus is 
said to be Kélin, i e. Tamil. 
The many Persian words in Malay, Javanese, Sundane-e, etc. were not 
introduced by the Persians themselves. A not inconsiderable number of ‘learned’ 
. terma was due to the study of literary texts, Persian being the medium of the 
intellectual life of the Islamic empires which were growing up in India. The 
history of several words is, from the point of view of the history of civilization, 
very interesting. The Persian word kanduri, e.g, which originally meant a lea- 
thern cover for a table, a napkin’ and, in Iran or India wan al~o used to denote a 
fea-t held in honour of Fatima, of which only virtuous women can partake, serves, 
in Malay, to denote dinners on various religious occasions, or dinners in comme- 
moration of & marriage or death; the word is, however, often used of funeral 
feasts. Like the Tamil and other foreign words, these Persian terms, as a rule, 
first came to the centres of commerce in the West of Indonesia, where Malay was 
the principal language, and partly -pread over other territories. 
For the Malays the name Hindustan particularly deno.ed the Deccan as the 
part of India best known to them, Northern Irdia, when necessary, being called . 
Béngala. Hindi proper has made its influence felt especially in those Malay- 
speaking regions which later on were called the Straits Settlements, because it 
was used there by numerous Indian merchants. 
Siamese could, to an otherwise very small extent, exert influence upon the 
Malay language, because the Malay states Kēlantan, Trénganu, Kédah, Perak, eto. 
(peninsula of Malacca) were in geographical and cultural contact with the Siamese 
kingdom north of them. Indone-ian words have travelled in the opposite 
direction. - j 
At an early date Chinese merchants and colonists came to the lizelkatoša 
of islands south of their native country which used to claim authority over them. 
In the big sea-ports, settlements and towns these Chinese busine-smen formed 
influential groups up to quite modern times. Apart from a number of terms for 
objects of Chinese origin, and a considerable amount of words in the low colloquial 
speech of the big seaports, where the Chine-e often formed a very important olass 
of shopkeepers and tradesmen, their language, 
from having been as influential as Sanskrit. 
The first Europeans who in bodies came to Indone 
After having secured a foothold in India, their ships steered their o n à 
nearer to the islands where the much-desired spices gre ourse for regions 
i ; : W. Ia 1611 they reached 
Malacca, at which point all traffic between India. Ohina and th 4 
. eastern islands of Indonesia was then TCINE After t SA kads 
i g wo attacks they 


became absolute masters of this emporium and f 

x l! rom that moment cont 
spice trade of the Moluccas which was looked upon as the groat cleat S 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


like their oulture in general, is far 


sia were the Portuguese. 


Digitized by Arya Renal Fountan m gennai and eGangotri 15 


world. Every year they orgapized commercial expeditions from Malacca to the 
Moluccas, and from the eame centre occupied the islands of Ambon and Timor. 
But they could not defend all their long lines of communication; there was 
not a Portuguese fortress on either Java or Sumatra, and the important Sunda 
Straits, where Bantam in particular was the centre of the trading movement to the 
Spice Islands on the one side, and Malacca on the other, were totally undefended. 
Then the Dutch, who in the last years of the XVI: century appeared in Indone- 
sian waters, established their first factories (Bantam and Jacatra) and these 
insensibly became the centre of their trading movement. Their energy saved them 
from being super-eded by the English, who also appeared on the scene, and whose 
chances in the Archipelago proper were in the course of a few years effectually 
ruined. Meanwhile they attacked the Portuguese power : after ousting them from 
the Moluccas, they eventually succeeded in taking Malacca (1641). After the 
Napoleonic wars the Peninsula came under the British flag. During the period of 
the Spanish regime the Indonesian language of the Philippines naturally adopted 
a number of words from the Spaniards (especially those bearing upon religion and 
the Spanish culture and administration). This contact with Spanish even modified 
the Tagalog syntax in some respects. In the last fifty years a number of terms 
have been introduced from America. 

From these historical facts—to which we must only add that the Portuguese 
tried to attack the Muslims and, like the Spaniards in the Philippines, to propa- 
gate the Roman-Catholie Faith wherever they went— it becomes clear 
that the cultural influence in general and linguistic influensé in particular which 
these European nations exerted upon the peoples of the Archipelago for many 
years mainly concerned the commercial (and in addition to that nautical ), 


‘technical, military and administrative spheres. Many naines of western cultural 


achievements and institutions, hitherto unknown in the East, numerous wards 
for western products, imported into the Indonesian territories, titles and words 
denoting Portugue-e or Dutch officials, some terms of law, religion and adminis- 
tration, became wide-spread among the inhabitants of the islands on which the 
Europeans settled. Considering the brief perio1 of their hege:sony the influence 
of the Portuguese on Malay and some other Indonesian vocabulsries has been 
rather great, and many terms borrowed from them have become entirely 
naturalized.!! In modern times, i.e., broadly speaking, during the la:& century, 
Indonesia became gradually acquainted with all inventions, technical achieve- 
ments, economic, political and scientific development, and vither adopted the 
terminology bearing upon it or tried to find words of their own to express these 
modern ideas. But it has almost eatirely been through the medium of Huropean 
languages, first and foremost through the medium of Dutch, that the technical 
and economics achievements of modern civilization which rapidly developed into 
a modernization of world-wide extent, peuetrated into Indonesia.!? Already 
before 1980 Indonesians had taken in numerous Dutch or (as far as Malacca 
is concerned and incidentally elsewhere) English words, to mention only a very 
few: Mal. ékonomi 'esonomios' «Du. economie; rēdaksi ‘editorial staff’ «Du 
redactie; kopérasi co-operative society or stores’ < Da. coöperatie; Mal. maskapai 
"limited company’ < Da. maatschappij; mésin, masia ‘machine’ « Du. machine; 
Mal. (Molucca) motoka <E igl. motor car; talipon, talifun ‘telephone’ < Du. telefoon; 
Mal. radio "wireless broadcast! <Du. radio. Moreover numerous Indonesian 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


16 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Greppi qo, G5858times English) model: 


loan translations have been 
Mal. pénajaran kērajinan 
Mal. surat (‘letter’) kawat (‘wire, 
(gram); Mal. kéténtuan hidup ; 
daganan (in)kan merdika ‘free trade a 


formed after a [ oni ish) ] 
technical education’ (p. ‘instruction , k. diligence"); 
cable’) ‘telegram’ after tbe Engl. 
‘life-insurance’ after Du. 

fter Du. vrijhandel 3 


‘wire, cable 
levensverzekering; Jay. 


NOTES 


1 See however the useful list of Malay 
words borrowed from Sanskrit (to which 
a number of Javanese terms have been 
added) in Raghu Vira, Our Basie Voca- 
bulary (Lahore 1942), p. 185ff. 

2 G. A.J. Hazeu, Gajosch-Nederlandsch 
Woordenboek, (Batavia, Djakatra, 1907); 
M. Joustra, Karo-Bataksch Woordenboek 
(Leyden 1907). 

3 Joustra, o.c , whilst noticing the origin 
(Mal. Skt.) of kérna ‘because, by, for 
the sake of (<Skt. karana- ERU ‘cause, 
motive’) and gurda ‘a mythical bird’ 
(<Skt. garuda- NET), regards other 
Indian loans as Malay (e.g. binasa ‘des- 
troyed’; baisa ‘family, race’) and omits 
mentioning the Indian origin of the vast 
majority of them, even such generally 
known words as tapa ‘solitary life; mula 
‘beginning’, and sakti miraculous power. 
H.C.Klinkert, Nieuw Maleisch.Neder- 
landsch Woordenboek? (Leyden 1916) 
omits noticing the Sanskrit origin of 
Mal. bahu ‘shoulder’, cakrawala ‘vault 
of heaven’; muka ‘face, surface’; binasa 
‘destroyed’; and other words, and derives 
dura ‘far’ irom Persian, dola 'dhooly, 
litter, swing from Arabian, the Malay 
pērahu "undecked native ship’ from Skt. 
Rahu- Z, eic. The Malay-English 
Dictionary by R. J. Wilkinson (Mytilene 


1932) is likewise far from being faultless, 


Gimlette, A Dictionary of Malay Medicine 
incorrectly regards such words as Mal. 
ujar ‘speaking’ as Sanskrit. . 

4 Whereas Coolsma, Soendaneesch. 
Hollandsch Woordenboek, correctly 
paysattention to the Sanskrit origin of 
Sund. adri ‘mountain’; agama ‘religion’; 
aksara ‘letter’ and many other words, he 


is not quite correct in giving badwa, | 


“troop, crowd’ as the origin of Sund, 


wadya ‘military men, army’. 

5 T leave, of course, out of consideration 
the writings of fantasts and dilettantes. 
See, e.g. my. remarks in TBG. LXXX 
(1940), p. 133ff. à propos of the opinions 


l'of C. N. Maxwell, who holds that no 


languege is older than Malay, Sanskrit 
being very young, because it is a literary 
language. Malay has, he sa ye, spread all 
over the world, in support whereof the 
words Mal. kampoù and Engl. court axe 
discussed, which are considered cognate, 
because both havea k, and so Sanskrit 


| elements in Malay do no exist: on the 


contrary, there are many Malay ele- 
ments in Sanskrit. According to him 
Skt. suriya (sie; siurya- qa) ‘the Sun, as 
a watergiver’ (sic) is identical with Mal. 
susu ‘milk, breasts’, and bumi ‘earth’ in 
Malay is Indonesian. 


$ H. Kern, Taalkundige gegevens ter 
bepaling van het stamland der Maleisch- 
Polynesieche volken, Verslagen en Mede- 
delingen Kon. Academie van Weten- 
schappen Amsterdam (Proceedings Ams- 
terdam Academy), Lett. 3, VI, 1889= 
Kern, VG. VI (1917), p.105ff.; and E. 
Kuhn,. Beitrige zur Spraoheņkunde 
Hinterindiene, Sitzungsberi chted. Kén. 
Bayerischen Akademie dor Wissen- 
schaften (Proceedings Munich Acad.) 
1889, T, p.189ff. 

7 The reader might consult A, Capell, 
The Linguistic Position of South Eastern 
Papua (Sydney 1943), 

"A comprehensive collection of Ara- 
bian and Persian words introduced into 
Javanese and Sundanese was published 
by A.W.T. Juynboll, in BKI. Congress- 
volume, Taal- en Letterkunde, ( The 


Hague 1883 ) p.25ff. and BKI. XLIV 
(1894), p.169ff, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 17 


9 Some references will be given in dise 
following sectious. 

10 See e.g. Sir Athelstane Baines, Eth- 
nography (in Encyclopedia of Indo- 
Aryan Research), Strassburg 1912, p.37f. 
11 An account of the Portugueselinguis- 
tic inheritance in the Archipelago is 
wanting. V 
12 Apart from a few papers (e.g. C. 
Spat, in Koloniaal Tijdschrift 
(Groningen 1924), p. 251; H. Koot, De 
invloed der moderne westerse bescha- 
vin£+**, ( Publ. 
G.W.J. Drewes. The Influence of Western 
Civilization on the Language of the Bast 
Indian Archipelago: in B. Schrieke, The 
Effect of Western Civilization, Royal 
Batavia Society of Arts aud Sciences, 
(Batavia-Djakarta, 1929, p.196ff.),a study 
of Dutch and English linguistie influ- 
ence is wanting. 

13 The history of Indonesian 
graphy 
some good productions, largely a tragi- 
comedy of errors. As to the attempts 


lexico- 


' to establish etymological connections 


between Malay and Sanskrit worda see 
e.g. J. Pijnappel, Maieisch-Nederduitsch 
Woordenboek naar het werk van Dr. 
Marsden en andere bronnen, (Haarlem 
and Amsterdam 1863; in 1869 H.C. 
Klinkert published a Supplement to this 
book which was as voluminous as the 
body of thé work itself), Preface, p. 
VIIff. Marsden, whose dictionary was 
brought out in 1812, was given some 
assistance in tracing Sanskrit influence 
by Wilkins. John Crawfurd, who pub- 
lished & ‘Grammar and Dictionary of 


Utrecht Univ. 1929 ); | 


is, with all due deference to | 


| 
| 
| 
| 


XII | 


the Malay Language- (London 1852), 
which was bared upon Marsden's lexi- 
con and other glossarier, called in the 
aid of the well-known Sanskrit scholar 
H. H. Wilson. After 1860 the main 
authorities consulted by the authors of 
dictionaries were H. Neubronner van 
der Tuuk (1824-1894), the well-known 
pioneer in investigating the Batak lang- 
uage—his Bataksch-Nederduitsch Woor- 
| denboek’ (Amsterdam 1861) contained 
many etymological notes—, founder of 
comparative Indonesian linguistics and 
author of a vast collection of lexicogra- 
phical details, collected into the four 
volumes of his Kawi-Balineēsch-Neder- 
landsch Woordenbcek, (Batavia Djak- 
arta, 1897-1919), and H. Kern (1833- 
1917) who in a fruitful way combined a 
profound mastery of Sanskrit with an 
extensive knowledge of Indonesian lang- 
udges. The Sanskrit etymologies in J.F.C. 
Gericke and T. Roorda, Javaansch- 
Nederlandsch  Handwoordenboek, of 
which a second edition (by A. C. Vreede 
and J.G. H. Gunning ) appeared Aws- 
terdam and Leyden 1901» are largely 
due to iniormation given by Kern. The 
most recent Malay and Javanese dic- 
tionaries (Ph. S. van Ronkel, Maleisch 
Woordenboek, Gouda 1917, but not the 
5t? edition Den Haag-Batavia 1946; 
W. J.S. Poerwadarminta and A. Teeuw, 
Indonesisch-Nederlands Woordenboek, 
Groningen and Djakarta 1950; Th. 
Pigeaud, Jav&an--Nederlands Hand- 
woordenboek, Groningen and Batavia 
1938) have omitted all, or almost all, 
etymological notes. 


SECTION 3 
THE ANCIENT CONNECTIONS BETWEEN INDIA AND INDONESIA 


Although it is not within the scope of the present work to TUS 
facts and problems of a merely or predominantly historical character, a brief 
1 review of the connections between India and Indonesia is necessary for a 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


18 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
proper understanding of our subject. : ia 
Vīt is a remarkable fact that the Indian sources of information about the 


ancient Hindu colonization in the Archipelago are rather scanty. Even when 
the information they give is amplified by Chinese authors and by such data ' 
as haya come to us from Ptolemy’s Geography,’ our knowledge of the subject 
remains very insufficient. Although the results of the Hindu influence have by 
now become fairly discernable, its spread and the factora contributing to it oan 
only be estimated by way of hypotheses. From an interesting agreement between 
Prolemy's ascount of the Far Hast and data found in the Pāli text Niddesa (a 
commentaria! work included in the Canon), brought to light by S. Lēvi,2 it appears 
that in the first centuries of our era the Indians had acquired a rather large 
amount of knowledge of these distant countries. Though Prolemy wrote in the 
middle of the II"? century A.D., he has‘probably utilized much older ‘sources,? 
which may in any case have been contemporary with the setting down of the 
Niddesa. So, it seems to be too rash to conclude that the data given by both 
sources date from the I century on the strength of the argument that the 
knowledge of the Far East they posses: ia more extended than the vague reports 
to ba fonnd in the P»riplons an! Pliny’s Nit iralis Historia which were written 
in the IS century AD. Yet other data, which have recently: been enumerated 
and excellently discussed by the-French scholar Coedés,* corroborate the view 
that about 100 A.D. & remarkable growth took place in tho maritime and com- 
te? erect S OK inn a India, and, further, that the II?4 and 
EI pansion of Indian influence in this part of 
; however, possible that a sea-route between India and China was 
f T A -cording to Chinese records 
the kingdom of Fou-nan in Cambodia was established in the Ist century A.D 5;* 
m the III' century A.D, and 
the II"4 century. In the same 
xisted in the Malay Peninsula. 


Sanskrit inscriptions in the Archipelago (Borneo 
vr images of the Buddha have 
Now schol ca must be older than 300 A.D. 

O'ar8 are no doubt right in admitting that seamen, mor- 


a and perhaps al : 
Indiens to travel to the Far East an emigrant 


importing gold, tin, camphor, spices 


in this very 
the adherents of which religion did 


expansion. Tt e ; l 
settled at places mps oO imagined that 


small colonies 


y "developed small Hindu or 
Šā ee customs, Hindu society and 
sod crafts practised, and where 

earning. This spread of Hinduism. 


Hinduized communities, 
religion, were established 


Sanskrit was to become the language 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA ` 19 


was ‘neither sudden nor violent. As far as may be judged from appear- 
ances the colonization was entirely pacific, and India proper did not exert 
political influence in her ‘colonies’. By marrying into leading local families, 
by displaying qualities as magician, practitioner or warrior, by the prestige 
of their higher. civilization some of them impressed or even subjected local 
populations. It is, however, an established fact that indigenous princes by 
embracing Hinduism also promoted the spread of the Indian culture; their 


part in this process has no doubt often been underestimated.!° Priests, 


literate men, artisans and condottieres followed the merchants. The 
priests taught the ritual in Sanskrit, which impressed them. The Hindu 
conception of divine kingship was introduced, dynasties were ritually legiti- 


mated and here and there a little court inaugurated, which came to be 


centres of arts and learning.  Winstedt'? is perfectly right in reminding 
us that more than a thousand years after tho arrival of Indian colonists in 
Malay, there were still Tamils, now Muslim, marrying into the families 
of the sultans and ministers of XV™ century Malacca. The coming of the 
Hindus must, indeed, have been very similar to the later arrival of the 
Muslims from India, brahmins or more generally ksatriyas — or people passing 
themselves off as such —, arrogating the place eventually to be taken by the 
sayids, i.e. the roputed descendants of the prophet. 

However the chronological details may be judged, the Malay Peninsula 
must have had the earliest Fadian settlements and have been India's -tepping- 
stone to Iudonesia. The Peninsula and the adjacent countries of Further 
India must also have intermediated in the further advancemeat of Iadian 
influence towards the Philippine Islands. There may be an element of truth 
in the opinion of those scholars who have connected the inscriptions and other 
archaeological objects discovered in various parts of the Indonesian area with a 
new influx of Indians caused: by the military activity of the great Gupta-king 
Samudragupta (between 320 and 380) who also defeated the Pallava king whose 
dominion was situated on the Coromandel coast!?, Too much importance has 
been attached in thie connection to the -o called Pallava seript,!* the spread of 
which need not be attributed to emigrating nationals of the Coromandel kingdom. 


Any attempt to connect definite facts bearing upon the Indian colonization and. 


the spread of Indian culture in Indonesia with defined military and political 
occurrences in India itself! is, for the time being, an hazardous undertaking. 
Though Ho-ling ( mentioned by the Chinese in the middle of the VII** century ), 
which was in all probability a Javane-e kingdom, may be correctly rega:ded 
as a transcription of the Indian name Kalinga, arguments adduced in favour 
of the supposition that this state was a colony of the Indian Kalinga in the 
strict sense of its geographical and political meaning cannot be considered 
very impressive. Anyhow, after the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien had, already 
in 414, recorded the existence of Hindu settlements in Java, the New History 
of the T’ang '5 informs us ofthe prosperity of this state Ho-ling, which was 
also a centre of Buddhism. In the same period the Malayan kingdom of Sumatra 
is mentioned for the first time: Malaya to the east of the island, which had 
gained importance by the increase of the shipping-traffic between China, India 
and Arabia.'” This state soon developed into the famous empire of Srivijaya 
which for several centuries was to be the predominant power in the Archipelago, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


o C j -^ SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

Ta D eum cuncation iu and $63fitaining. relations with 
holding sway over the western part 0 l ; MU Gn mi 
India and China, where the Mahārējas (mais > LIKA sovereign ) of the 
Sailendra dynasty ex chief lord of mountains, *) which later ruled over | 
this Malay empire, were held in high esteem. -Srīvijaya, the power «and 
wealth of whicb was described. in rapturous terms by Arab merchants, yas an 
important centre of Buddhism» visited by eminent Indian Buddhists and Chinese i 

. pilgrims and scholars. I-Teing’s statement in the last docades of the VII _ Cen. 
tury, that though Hīnayāna was the dominant religion in the Archipelago in hig 
time, a fow adherents of Mabāyāna were found in the Sumatran kingdom, is cor. 
toborated by the inscriptions of the rulers of Srivijaya which contain unmig. 
takable references to Muhāvānism. As far as we know tho Sailendra rulers deri. 
ved their religious inspiration especially from Bengal, which was in those dayg 
the chief -eat of Mahayanism in the mainland. : 

Sailendra kings also ruled over at least the central parts of Java! where, 
during their reign, the famous Buddhist monuments were erected somewhere 
about the second half of the VIII century. In the first half of tho X* century 
the seat of political power was, however, removed to the east of the island where 
a century after Sindok2°, the first ruler of that region we know of, Airlanga, at 
the request of eminent brahmans and other people, assumed the royal authority 
of a small kingdom, was consecrated by the priests of the Buddhist, Saiva and 
Brahmanio faith, made himself master of adjacent districts and finally expanded 
his dominions over large parts of Eastern Java. Under his sway literature, 
especially the kàvya or elaborated court literature, flourished. According to a 
later Javanese tradition he retired from the world iu his old age and became an 
ascetic. His kingdom was divided into two parts : Pafijalu or Kadiri and Jangala. 
The first state became not only politically predominant but also a home of' 
lefrning and poetry. In the third decade of the XIII*^ century both parta were 
re-united, another dynasty founded by Ken Anrok, who, residing in Kutaraja or 
Sinhacāri, assumed the official name Rajasa. After 1200—it is not possible to 
give exact dates—the indigenous element began more and more to assert itself 
and the decay of Hindu intellectual supremacy increased. Towards the end of ` 
the XIII'" century a new dynasty was established once again by a king who 
assumed the name of Vijaya, and whose capital, Majapahit in Javanese, or, in 
nc true rendering, Tiktavilva or Vilvatikta in Sanskrit (‘the bitter bilva’ fam and 
bn Ves d o SPP ee een of Majapahit couquered the surrounding 

1 € century it held eway over nearly the whole 


of the 80, g e 
Archipela, 0. exoludin gome fi rritories ln the north and east, but includir 8 


So g 7 t 
lon ag Hinduism Overseas 88 a ital fo 

was V roe, the Indian emigra 
continued bringing & mixture of variou 


pre 8 elements of Indian culture into their 
TN ni Es influence left ineffaceable impressions on the peoples who 
ae ee i 2 it. Their presence was a veritable fertilizing power in the sphere 
and MEN E E creation, From the seaports, courts, monasteries 
nvres indian civilization spread o R i i 
inai zd ver large parts of the Archipelago . 
n jā. pee Pople succeeded in adopting part of it and where a I 
A al fusion’ took place, D 3 M 
official poets as avatars of Indian 5 ds iid Ex 4 ed aye goran by tho l 
1 i i 2 AER odern times & | A400 
bē rk 1 aas to submit himself to ceremonial rules RI APA 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 91 


on ancient Indian ritual. Political, social and administrative institutions became 
likewise introduced from India proper. The titles of the high functionaries of a 
small Peninsular state in the VII century, handed down to us by a Chinese 
author 2! in his native transliteration, are all Sanskrit: the prime minister was 
called sardhakara AAR ‘collaborator’ or sadhukara APR ‘who acts well’; the 
chief-justice or police-commissioner bore the title of kulapati gogla which also 
occurs in Cambodian inscriptions (where it was, however, given to religious 
superior:): Skt. kulapati- ‘the head of a family’; the heads of the towns or settle- 
ments wore called nūyaka “ra ‘chief, principal’ or pati Ufā ‘lord, ruler’, the 
latter term in all probability still surviving in Java; to other functionaries the 
titles of dhanada JAZ and karmika- afis were given: dhanada- ‘who dispenses 
money or property’ and karmika- ‘acting, agent. And other Chinese sources refer 
to kgatriya kings choosing their ministers from the rank of the brahmans. 
Geographieal names were transplantéd from the mainlaud to the Far East and 
Indonesia. The images and works of architecture show the thorough-going 
influence of Indian art. Various arts and crafts, medicine and astrology, chrono- 
logy &nd the attendant astronomical details, a system of measurement etc. 
likewise form part of the accomplishments the Indonesians owe to the Hindus. 
Indian legende, stories, and folk-tales—not the least of the spiritual treasures 
granted to many peoples—may have spread at an early date. 

Religion, religious institutions, the language and literature of India made 
a conquest of these countries and to a certain extent absorbed the native 
elements. Brahmanical sacrifices and ceremonies were performed, reference made 
to sacred land has been repeatedly handed down to us, the Hindu gods and 
mythology, epic and puranie legends and traditions were widely known. There 
is, moreover, ample evidence that Buddhism and so-called Tantrist beliefs and 
practices had also made their influence intensively felt. Mabayana Buddhism, 
introduced after the predominantly Mūiasarvāstivādin Hinay&na: was to a great 
extent known under its Tantric form as Vajrayana or Mantrayana. Yet, religion 
would not have left such a deep impression, if the scholars among the immigrants 
and the native literates who followed in their tracks had not shared in the 
general Indian propensity to describe their religious beliefs and practices and 
all the aspects of their cultural achievements in voluminous and authoritative 
texts, and deemed it necessary to translate or rewrite at least part of their 
extensive literature on religion, law, morals, social institutions, sacred traditions 
and other subjects, part of which has exerted a deep and large influence till the 
present day, and also used and introduced the vehicle of their ideas and their 
civilization, the Sanskrit language, which during not a few centuries, was known 
and studied by Javanese and other Indonesian intellectuals. Many inscriptions 
are written in good and almost flawless Sanskrit and the numerous technical 
and more or less literary works, written; translated or condensed, show that 
India’s sacred language and literature were highly cultivated. The Mahabha- 
rata, the Rāmāyaņa and other Indian cycles and literary works were most 
popular and have to this day furnished the themes of the shadow-play (wayang) 
and of large part of literary production. . 

So, Sir Richard Winstedt?2 does not exaggerate in saying that “from the 
oradle to the grave the Malay is (and, I add, the Javanese and Balinese are) sur- 
rounded by survivals of Indian culture”. India, indeed, brought the populationg 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


. world, and raised them to a 


X , 
95 < Digitized by Arga 8s KB ANa PONESI and eGangotri d 


t the main islands-of the Archipelago into contact with poo other (parts (elite 
[0] em 


i i their folk-tales int 
i ities i their customs into law, their fol nto 

i bal communities into states, ; i : 
mec In later centuries ib: was India again who introduced Islam, Muslim 


literature and, disguised in Persian and other translatione, her own old Sanskrit: 
; 5 


fables and stories, so that even many of their nursery tales are, like ours in 
Europe, derived from the Paficatantra and other Indian collections. 

Early in the XI'" century Srivijaya was firat attacked by a Cola ruler 
from the Coromandel coast. It is difficult not to connect these Cola wars with 
the ancient Tamil commerce, which has been carried on to this day. Othor such 


‘raids and invasions of the same origin, largely contributed to the weakening of 


the Malay empire which in the XIV™ century was definitively defeated by Maja. 
pahit. Soon after, however, the power of the great Javanese kingdom also 
declined. In the same period traders from Gujerat imported the Muslim religion. 
Already before 1292, when the Italian traveller Marco Polo visited Sumatra, small 
ports on its north coast (Achin) were converted. From one of them, Pasai, the 
important port and then capital of a Malay kingdom Malacca introduced Islam 
(XV™ century). This fact soon reacted on neighbouring territories. Like the 
Indian religions in former centuries, Islam soon spread to Sumatra, Java and other 
islands. The beginning of the XVI™ century saw a Muslim kingdom arise in 
Java. But already in the XIV™ century, before the penetration of Islam, many 
Hinduized Javanese had settled on the island of Bali, which bad been & Hindu 
colony for many hundreds of years» taking with them books and traditions. In 
this island Indonesian Hinduism has continued evén till to-day, unmixed with 
Mu-lim elements. 
NOTES 


1 See L. Renou, La géographie de Pto- 
lémée, l'Inde (VII, 1-4) (Paris 1925); 
A. Berthelot, L'Asie ancienne centrale 
et sud-orientale d'aprēa Ptolémée (Paris 
1930 ); G. E. Gerini, Researches on 


* G. Coedés, Les états hindonieed 
d'Indochine et d’Indoné-ie (Histoire du 
monde publiée sous la direction de E. 
Cavaignac, Paris 1948: ch. IT 

5 For this -ea-route see P. Oh. Bagchi, 


higher plane of civilization. She made them broaden ,'. 


Ptolemy’: Geography of Eastern Asia, 
(London 1909). 

2 8. Lévi, Ptolómée, Le Niddesa et la 
Brhatkatha, in Etudes A-iatiqhes (ed. by 
the Ecole Francaise d'Extréme-Orient, 
1925) TI, p.l ff, and especially p.50 ; 8ee 
also R. Braddell, Study of Ancient Times 
in the Malay Peninsula, Journal of the 
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society XIV (1936), p. 18, and XY 
(1937), p. 1081 , and B R, Chatterjee 
Indian Culture in Java and Sumatra, 
Greater India Society Bulletin IIT (Oal. 
cutta, 1927) p.22f. 

3 Trefer to N.J. Krom, Hindoe-Java. 
ansche Geschiedenis? (The Hague 1931) 


India and China, Greater India Soviety 

Bulletin II, (Calcutta 1927) p. L5ff. 

S I refer to Coeddx, 0.0, p. 38 and 

68ff. 

" 'See also R.C. Majumdar, Ancient; 

Indian Colonies in the Far East,’ II 

Suvarnadvipa, I, (Dacca 1937) p.70. 

i These inscriptions will be discusred 

ip ch. II, s. 7. Seo also Ovedés, 0.0., p 88. 
See also R. G. Majumdar Ancient In- 

dian Colonies in the Far East, I Champa, 

(Lahore 1927), p.XIff. 

'0 See the interesting, but in partiou- 

lara often wild and untenable, criticism 


by J C. van Leur, Henige beschouwingen 


betreffende den ouden Aziatisohen 


‘handel (Thesis Leyden 1994), ch. TIT. 


- CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by ARERR USOR Eennai and eGangotri 


23 


11 See e.g. G. Ferrand, Journal Asia- 
tique 1919, p. 254f.; Krom, 0. e., p.129 
and n. l. 

12 R O Winstedt, Indian Influence in 
the Malay World, in JRAS. 1944, p. 187. 
Compare also G. Ferrand’s ‘description’ 
of the process of hinduization, based on 
his own experience with regard to the 
apread of Islam: Le K'ouen-louen, Jour- 


o.c., ch. IT, $ 4. 
13 I refer to V. A. S nith, Tha Early 
History of India*, 'Oxford 1924) p. 301; 
Tu. de la Vallée P»issin, Dypasties et 
Histoire de l'Iade depuis Kanishka... 
(Paris 1935), p. 40. 

14 Chapter II, section 2. 

15 See Krom, flindoe-Javaansche 
Geschiedenis?,p. 104. W. Stutterheim, 
Rāma-Legenden und Rāma-Reliefs in 
Indonesien, (München 1925), I, p. 2:3 


Malay Archipelago, VPG XXXIX (1880) 
p. 13; Krom, o.c., p-105tf. 

17 I refer to Coedés, o-c., p. 138f. 

18 In India the compound Supaga is 
: especially applied to the Himalaya. 

has been supposed (J. Przyluski, an 


| Sumatra. 


, | 2° His official names were, 


Sailendravaméa, in Journal of the 
Greater India Society II (1985), p.30) 
that the term, being synonymous with 
Giriga, was a name of Siva and that this 
god was considered the vamsakara, the 
founder, of this royal family. The Indo- 
nesians, then, preferred this name to 
one of the usual designations of the god 


| because they believed their great gods 
nal Asiatique 1919, II, p.lēf., and Coedés | 


to reside on high mountains. 

19 Ag far as we know at present they 
ruled there at an earlier date than in 
See the sober discussion of 
facts by Coedés, o.c., ch. VIS 4. 
however, 
Sanskrit: Sri Iganawikrama and Sri 
Tginadharma. Cf. also Majumdar, o.c., I, 
p.259 


| 2! Ma Twan-lin, Mériodionaux, trans- 
| lated by d'Hervey de Saint-Denys, p. 
| 467ff., quoted by Coedés, o. c., p.135. 

16 Gee W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the | 22 


| 
| 
| 
| 


Winstedt, o.c., p.195. 7 

23 There exists a history of the Archi- 
pelago in English: B.H M. Vlekke, 
Nusantara (Harvard Univ. Press, 1942) 
which is a poor compilation. (See also 


Winstedt, JRAS. 1944, p.203ff.). 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


D Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


CHAPTER U i 
THE SPREAD OF SANSKRIT OVER INDONESIA . 
SEOTION 1 — 


HOW DID SANSERIT REACH INDONESIA? 


Whence came the Indian merchants and colonists to whom the impaot 
of India’s great civilization on the Indonesian world and the spread of 
Sanskrit inthe Far Hast were due? That is to say: from where did Indo. 
nesia receive the first cultural enrichment and, especially, which parts of 
India maintained relations with these islands in the course of history? 
This question has been much discussed; both by authors who tried to 
elicit the truth from too inadequate a collection of reliable data as well 
as by scholars who were not entirely free from prejudice. Coedés, who has 
recently given an excellent survey of progress in the study of this problem,’ is 
perfectly right in stating that apart from a few inscriptions in an Indian 
language other than Sanskrit our sources of information are the Indian, 
Chinese and Western books dealing witb, or referring to, overseas trade, 
voyages and colonization in this part of the world, the works of art, the 
alphabets, the customs and traditions and, finally, 


the toponomy of the 
Archipelago and the neighbouring countries: as is 


well known, place- 
names often give valuable testimony of former linguistio conditions. How- 
ever, he overlooked one important means of deriving knowledge, to wit the 
Indian loan-words in the Indonesian languages. Before discussing the amount ` 
of information they give the other sources and the state of affairs in general 
deserve a passing notice. 


The Periplous, Ptolemy, the Chinese texts and recent 


| archaeological 
discoveries teach us 


h SA à tat the great ports situated near the mouth of 
the Kaveri river ( Kāviripattina» Sopatma, etc.), Tamralipti (or Tamluk ) 


at the southernmost outlet of the Gange j 
on the Narmada, € ges as well as Bharukaccha (Broach) 


(Ora RE Surparaka (Sopara) near the modern Bombay, Muchiri 
ern Cranganore) on the west coast &nd other sea-ports had mani- 


istory Coedés has 
act that the founder of Fou-nan as well 
at state were brab- 
i Originating in North India, 
PIE) that the frequent references pun Padi tuner Sa 
Tamil civilization, in the Archipela 5o Agastya, the patron sage Of | 

| Eo point to the Pāņdyas having had | 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. i 


mans of the Kaundinya clan 
has been very 
intimated® 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 25 


a share in the extreme south in the overseas colonization. And it has been argued 
that the cult of Saivism in which Siva played the róle of the guardian of the state, 
and also the reverence for his chief devotee, the seer Agastya both occurring in 
South India as well as in Campa and Cambodia, were known in Indonesia too. 

Many arguments based on geographical names" raise almost as many 
problems as they seem to solve. Most conclusive aro those names which 
occur iu inscriptions and other authentic documents. In an inscription 
dating from the Old-Javanese period’ a series of names of peoples occurr, 
in which, beside Cēmpa and other peoples and states belonging to Further 
India, the Cwalika  Malayalü (sic), and Karunake (sic), are also con- 
secubively included, that is to say Colika (wa being written instead of o 
which often aro:e from wa), people of Cola or Coromandel origin, 
Malayalam, and, in all probability, Karņāta, the modern Karnatic. The 
interpretation of other names is more or less questionable: Gola has been 
considered indentical with the Prakrit Gola, Skt. ` Gauda Ñz, tbe central 
part of Bengal, and Siùhū may refer to the Singhalese of Ceylon.? Very 
.curioug evidence can be adduced of interrelations between the  Bataks 
who inhabit the mountainous regions of Central Sumatra and the 
Dravidians of the southern parts of India. Among the names of sub-tribes 
of the Karo-Batak tribe of the Simbiring, which in many respects is different 
from the other tribex, are Coliya, Pandiya, Méliyala, and Pēlawi, which 
have long since!? been explained as Tamil Soliyan, i.e. Skt. Cola ste, Pandya 
qiveq, Malayalam (Malabar) and, perhaps, Pallava (?) respectively. Other 
sub-tribes are called Bérahmana: Skt. brahmana sam, —in this connection 
these brahmans must have been of southern origin—; and Tekan, which has, at 
& guess, been supposed identical with the Tamil Tekkaņam ‘Deccan’. That 
there has been an intensive intercourse between the Tamil South and 
Sumatra also appears from an XI" century Tamil inscription found in 
the camphor district of Baros (Barus) in the Batak region and from other 
evidence.!! It is, however, far from certain that these folk-names together 
with some of the ancestors of the persons who bear them now, have not 
been introduced comparatively recently. ; 

Amoug the names appearing in the above-mentioned inscription is also 
that of Kélin, Klin, which has repeatelly been held & keystone to support the 
view that the cradle of Indian influence on the Archipelago must be sought 
in Kalinga, the coastal region between tho Mahānadī and the Godavari, which 
was indeed, through its port Palura, intimately coanected with the oversea 
countries. There is certainly an element of truth in this view, which may be 
corroborated by the argument that from the days of Ho-lin (which is generally 
admitted to be a transcription of Kalinga, Kalin 2) down to this day the Kalingas 
or Kélin were over and over again mentioned in Indonesian literatures and 
popular tales. I would consider that these facts furnish grounds for believing 
that the Kalingas took a leading part in establishing the Hindu culture in 
at least part of Java, and especially that they belonged to the first Indian peoples 
who did so. If we aro right in conoluding that the Javanese kingdom of Ho-lin 
was named after the well-known coastal region of India, we may be easily led to 
the inference that colonists from that quarter, at least in the beginning, dominated 
that part of Java,!3 We may, however, not overlook the well-known fact that 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


z Digitized by Arya Semel Foundatign CRSSO8 BSE &Gangotri 


; ing the subjects or nationals of other county; 
peoples have often (lg S ideas “cals E atea tha inhabi E 
or regions by & name whic n > with which they maintained the first connec. 

that particular xe COS eil denoted the Greek Ionians (Gr. * Tawone. 
tions: the Indian Yavana- JAA at first denote A j thei m 8 
from which it must have been derived), who by their trading eee se orming 
part of the Persian empire were most known to the peoples of the East, thon the 
Greeks in general, and in later times even Europeans and Musiime,, or foreigners 
in general. In Greek the name Medoi came to be used for the nationals of the 
Persian empire. The Netherlands are still often called Holland, because the 
inhabitants of the province of Holland in former days had by far the largest part 
in the navigation and maritime commerce of this country. In Malay the name 
Kélin is used rather of Tamils. The Malay author Abdullah (11854), for instance, 
tells that his great-grandfather, an Arab from Yemen, settled down in Nagore (near 
Negapatam) in Kēlin'*, a well-known centre of Islam in the Tamil South. And the 
Kēlin languags’ is, according to tho Malays, not only Telugu, but also Tamil, 
In Javanese and Malay the name came to denote the inhabitants of South India in 
genera! and it can even express a still wider renso.'? Go, the frequent reference to 
"Kēlin people’ in Indonesian legends and folk-tales'* does not necessarily point to 
a continuous and unremittingly dominant share of the coastal region between the 

Mahanadi and the Godavari in establishing Hindu influence in the Archipelago.'7 
It has now been recognized that the rather frequent occurrence of famous 
Indian geographical names such as Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Dvārāvatī 18 in the over- 
sea colonies does not furnish conclusive evidence in this connection, for they 
must rather be attributed to the popularity of the epies and other Indian tradi- 
tions. In other cases to be diseussed in another chapter,19 a geographical name, 
thongh leoking Sanskrit, may be a ‘sanskritized’ form of an IN. word. Thus, the 
name Taruma, mentioned by Coedès 20 and borne by a state in the west of Java, 
may derive its origin from IN. tarum ‘indigo’ rather than from a place in the 
dā of Cape Comorin. Yet arguments for the opposite view are not 


; à the monuments, plastic arta and the art of writ- 


South i ina i 

and the Ds ci of the north-enstern regions did not before 
9 southera influences in that parti i 

uo alt f len particular domain. 
Lo E eee a these and similar arguments scholarg22 have repeatedly 
=| aa a a the sea ports with which the eastern coast of India was 
extent than E P ‘One ezpsneion, but the southernmost to a greatere 
Ls 1 3OWeVer, preferred to i CN i 

ns contribute express himself in this 


d, in a great à a "es 
he front rānka.. et or less degree, to it, the 


that tho beginning, the lines of deve 26 55:3 ES AQUAM im, 
borne commerce on the o 
other, need not be y 


i + Brahm i ili 

age ; olr ans, artisans, military 
lans nop Primarily concerned with ne may have 

those from which they put to gea. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 97 


It is, further, important to remember that Muslims from Gujarat, which in 1297 
passed into the hands of the Sultan of Delhi, have contributed most to the intro- 
duction of Islam in the Archipelago. There is ample evidence that this part of 
India owed its wealth particularly to active commerce through the ports ot 
Cambay, Surat and Broach: Bharukaccha which, as we have seon, was already 
visited by western merchants ih, and doubtless also before, the first century of 
our era, and where an ancient land-route from Mathura and Ujjain reached the 
sea. As trade routes tend to remain the same during long periods, we may safely 
admit that already before the XIJI™ century intercourse between the Gujarat 
ports and Indonesia was maintained. It would have been strange if the Muslims 
had inaugurated communications with the Far East, and the success of their 
propaganda must, in my opinion, partly be ascribed to the intensity of the rela- 
tions between Gujarat and the Malay world.2% Moreover, it stands to reason 
that there was always a familiar intercourse between the seaports of the west 
coast and those to the east of India, and we, further, know that one could take 
ship from Bharukaccha for Suvarnabhumi.? + 

Now, the relations between Gujarat and the Archipelago2® have left their 
traces in Indonesian literature and popular traditions. Let us first expatiate on 
the Javanese legend of Aji Saka. According to some accounts the religion and 
culture of India were first introduced into Java by a brahman of tho name of 
Tritrēsta, who with numerous: followers landed on tha island, and established a 
new era. In con-equence of this achievement Tritrésta was considered equal to 
the prominent legendary figure Aji Saka. Aji Saka, whose name literally means 
‘Prince Saka-ora’ (Skt. Saka 2%), is deseribed as the prime minister of a Pàndava 
king ruling at Astina i.e. the Indian Hastinapura gleasigz.26 Having landed on 
"Java which was then peopled by Rasasa (the Indian raksasas tia), he gave it 
its name, civilized if, introduced the Indian alphabet (that means also Indian 
culture) and started a new era: the Saka era.27 According to another, and in 
all probability younger, version of this legend the descendants of the epic princes 
and Aji Saka himself were natives of Gujarat.2§ 

To attempt anything like stating the region of India from which 
definite literary works came to Indonesia would not only be difficult, but 
might easily involve us in premature statements. It can be considered 
as tolerably certain that the Malay version of the Rama cyclus, which 
being widely divergent from the  Old.Javaneso kakawin, represents a post- 
epic and popular form of the Indian Rama legends, came by way of oral 
tradition, probably during the years 1200-1600, partly from the west and 
partly from the east of India to the Archipelago where it underwent 
various alterations.2? Vague as this statement may be, we would be glad 
if we had alroady gained similar results with regard. to the ancient 
Javanese works which either directly or originally sprang from Indian 
sources. In many a case, and especially when we have only the evidence 
of a kakawin, i.e. a poem in the kavya style, we grope almost entirely 
in the dark." Fifty years ago the Dutch scholar Hazeu! was of the 
opinion that the OJav. Adiparwa, which dates from about 1000 A.D., shows 
various traces of being,. comparatively speaking, closely related to Kse- 
mendra’s Bharatamafjari, one of the works of the well-known polymath 
who lived in Kashmir in the XI™ century. But when he wrote his paper 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


28 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri _ 


text had not yet been edited, nor was an edition of Ksomendra 
ao Ojat: ex ither. The rashness of his conclusions Was accordingly 
ae Mas cur 32 who without completely denying the impor. 
INC MM ds Nor for the ancient’ Indonesian Mahabharata version 
anas ces cine by side with points ‘of resemblance between the 
sn and the Old.Javanese Ādi- and IER CMT d rr 
passages, forms of names etc. can be found, Ja a considerable part of which 
either Ksemendra and the other Indian versions 4o together, et the latter 
and the Old-Javaneso texts. As to the pesmographic section! of the 
Bhismaparwa, which I myself subjected to a close exerinstion, i is not 
an Ciber of a Sanskrit text identical or nearly identical with the 
printed editions, neither with the Calcutta edition, nor with that of Bombay, 
nor with that based on South Indian manuscripts. It differa from those 
texts much more than these texts differ from each other, though it ig 
obvious that it, in the main, belongs to tho recension of the wide-spread 


subject-matter which is represented in the Mababharata-texts and in the. 


Padma-Purāņa.? In this treatise and in other portions of the sama parwa, 
as well as in the other parwas and the Brahmāņdapurāņa Is» moreover, 
found, that some of the points of difference they show from that Sanskrit 
text which we use to compare in the first instance, the Javanese text, 
appears to tally with other Indian texts, and among them sometimes also 
with Kgemendra 34 Whereas the OJav. Bhagavadgītā at places agrees with 
the Kashmir recension of the Gītā, the results Of a comparison of the 
former with the quotations found in Alberuni's India were very poor.95 In 
the light of these facts it would be wise not to Over-estimate the impor- 
tance of some remarks made, and combinations ventured by such a rather 
emotional scholar as Stutterheim sometimes proved to be: the indications he 


mentions of the west Indian origin of Indonesian epie themes are interesting, 
but in themselves not conclusive. 36 


Turning now to a discussion of lin 
problem we should first be aware that 
facts as the universal character 
and in the form of 


guistic evidence bearing upon this 


matters are complicated by such 
of Sanskrit, which 


Zi zu. could by litorary ways 
tashnical terms—in a 


larga sənsə of the word—reach 
mutual similarity of hosts of New VOR ae toeni, Sa E M 
, 1 ` x 
ee tia mand Gloria t different periods and to different 
x 11 N 4 there ig our ignorance of chronological factors: 
words in Malay hag been Medi rater a ZE 
the Mal&ys who for cent ae Be (ere HE M 
ct commercial relations with the 

century their acoountanoy was still 
introducod many South Indian 
406 is the presence of a few 
Old-Javanese compositions.37 
a Prākrit loan: cf. Skt. carmayasti- 


words is no wonder 
Tamil and Persian w 
Thus the Tamil sammatti 
mate ‘loather-stick, whip’) is alrea 
raton : camēļi "whip's - i 

Ramayana which ig rogar. text< Tam A "s 
i . pūnai 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


s 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA $9 


jar, Kannada pūnč ‘an earthen or metal jar’;39 
qualify & special kind of horses, also well-known in Malay romance: ‘a 
winged and fiery (steed), but originally no doubt ‘(a horse) of a reddish 
or sandy colour'« Tam. cem and puraņi.40 

Side by side with the Tamil words poin 
come across a small number of Old-Javanes 
derived from a Hindi source, or at least from an Indo-Aryan tongue which can be 
put on a par with ancient Hindi. Thus OJav. joli ‘litter’, which in modern Javanese 
(juli) denoted’ decorated wedding sedan-chair for a bride, the bridegroom riding 
a horse, and as juli, duli ‘portable cot, litter for sick or wounded’ recurs in Malay, 
is of course the same word as the Hindi dol; stēt ‘a litter, a amall portable cot, a 
sedan (for women)’ (algo in ot her NIA. languages: Guj. doli, Mahr. doli ete. < Pkt. 
doliā < Skt. dola, dolika ater, tfe. tbe OJav. mahari '& covered baldachin, a 
stately "grand etand', a small building for audiences ete? (and, with variation of 
the word-ending in the Javanese manner, mahantén ‘id.’) is the Hindi mahari mahari 
Ager ‘a stately dwelling, an upper room or story’. The OJav. kala ‘noose’ may be 
Hindi kala 1 in the sense of ‘contrivance, trick, juggling’. The well-known word 
pasar which, in Malay, means ‘bazaar, market, fair’ in the proper sense, nof so 
much the site of the market as ‘the stalls, booths and shops making it up’ already 
occurs in later Old-Javanece texts: it ia commonly considored as the Persian bazar 
“a market, market day, bargain, ete.’ which reached Indonesia by way of Hindi 
bazar ‘market, market-place, etc.’ Another term of reputedly Persian origin, paik ‘a 
messenger, (running) footman, guard or watchman’ (> Hindi id.), is ag peka “foot- 
soldier, servant, soldier’ already found in the OJav. Arjuna-wiwaha which was 
composed in the fourth decade of the XI™ century. 

There are also some traces of Singhalese influence. The Malay word bélanja 
‘outlay, exvenditure’ and in polite speech ‘salary’ ( regarded as a reimbfirse- 
ment and not as a waga ), also euphemistically for ‘a gift", in modern Indonesia 
besides‘ housekesping money’ also '( public ) expenditure’ has long been regarded 
as the only unaltered Pali word: valanja which not only means “trace,” or 
design’, but alro ‘that which is spent 


further, sambarani, used to 


ting to a South Indian origin we 
e terms which aro in all probability 


‘use, 
or secreted’ i.e. ‘outflow, excrement? 
( in sariravalanja ‘faeces’). The verb valaūjeti, at the root of which Rhys . 
Davids and Sterle *' have supposed a Singhalese word, can also express the idea 

of ‘spending’. This word which in Iudonesia no doubt always belonged to the 

‘economical’ rphere seems to have been a commercial loan rather than a 

direct borrowing from Pali texts, the more so as it seems to be wanting in Old- 

Javanese (in Balinese where it is also used a3 a root for ' going Shopping" 

it may be considered as a Javanese or Malay loan) *2, 

Asis well-known the Chinese gave a gcneral name to all languages of. 
Indonesia, Cambodia, Burma, Malay, Madagascar, eto: Kw'un-lun. This term 
applied to various idioms of Indonesian, or at least Austrie, stock characterized 
by à considerable admixture of Sanskrit ( and other Indian ) elements. 43 T; ig, 
indeed, no wonder that the Chinese merchants and scholars should have become 
aware of these obvious and important facts: the influence of Sanskrit and the 
regsmblance between the native languages which adopted it were too apparent 
and too omnipresent to be overlooked. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


30 


Digitized by Arya S&&iN REOR Edladah ENDAN EM AGangotri 


NOTES 


1 Œ. Coedés, Las états hindouisés d'Indo- 
chine et d'Indonésie, (Paris 1948), p. 
52ff.; see esp. p.56. 4 
2 T refer to C. A. F. Rhys Davids, in 
Cambridge History of India I ( Cam- 
bridge 1922), p.212f.; S. Levi, Notes 
sur la géographie ancienne de l'Inde, 
Journal asiatique COVI (1925), p.46ff.; 
Coedés, o.c., p. 56f. 

3 Ptolemy 7, 1, 16. 

^ Asurvey of these commercial rela- 
tions is given by R. C. Majumdar, H. C. 
Raychaudhuri and Kalikinkar Datta, An 
Advanced History of India, ( London 
1948), p. 211ff. 

5 See B. R. Chatterjee, Recent Advances 
in Kambuja Studies, Journal of the 
Greater India Society VI (1939), p. 139; 
for other references see Coedés, o.c., p. 
58 and 69. 

$ See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Agastya, in 
TBG. LXXVI (1936), p.503f. See also 
Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den Archipel, 
(Thesis Leyden 1926), p.91. Some of 
Nilakenta’s conclusions, however, are 
erroneous; see W. F. Stutterheim, Note 
on Cultural Relations between South 
India and Java TBG. LXXIX (1939), 
p. 73ff. 


7 I refer to the telative section of this 
volume. 

5 A.B. Cohen Stuart, Kawi Oorkonden 
in facsimile, (Leyden 1875) n? IT, discus. 
sed by Kern, VG. TII, p. 71f. 

? I refer to Krom, o.c. p. 264f. 
Majumdar, 0.0. p.271 and Kern, o.c. p. 72 
., M-Jonstra,in BKI. XLV (1902), p 
B41ff. and especially Kern, VQ. III, Ji 


698; Krom, Hindoe.J, avaansche Geschie. 
denis?, p, 85t. 


11 See Krom o.c. 


12 See chapter I. 3; Coeds 
DM B, 0. 
186f.; & different E 


pūt forward by Schlegel ( T'oung Pao 
1,9, p. 2131.) who located Ho-lis in the 


j 


Malay Peninsula. 

13 Compare Majumdar's slightly diffe. 
rent view: Suvarnadvipa I, p.119. 

14 Hikajat Abdoellah. ed. H. C. Klin. 
kert, (Leyden 1882), p. 6. 

15 The most recent Malay (‘Indonesian’) 
dictionary (W. J. S. Poerwadarminta 
and A. Teeuw, Indonesisch-Nederlands 
Woordenboek, Groningen-Djakarta 1950, 
p. 184) gives Kélin? ‘Indian, an Tüdian 
merchant’. The word has often got 
dubious associations and came under 
certain circumstances to bo regarded 


rather as a term of abuse ('mannerless, 


unreliable’). 

16 Of. e.g. Majumdar, o.c., p. 95f. 

'" There has been much discussion on 
the geographical name Kuijara-kufija- 


dega, occurring in the charter of Tjang- . 


gal Java; 782 A.D.) in which the native 
country of the Javanese dynasty seemed 
to be mentioned: according to Kern (VG. 


VII, p. 125) it was Kufijarakufija, some- : 


where between Travancore and Tinne- 
velly in South-India (see also Krom, 
o.c., p. 124f.) However, Dr. Ghhabra's 
revised reading (B. Ch. Chhabra, Kuījara- 
kufijadeša. of the Changal Inscription, 
Journalof the Greater India Society, 
IIL; p.1701f.) led to other attempts to 
complete some missing letters (see Stut- 
terheim, TBG. LXXIX (1939), p.78ft.) 
80 that it is now possible to suppose 
that Kufijarakufīja is tbo name of a 
Javanese place. ` 

18 See the relarive section. 

'? Chapter III, section 11. 

2° Ooedčs, 0.0., p. 5f. 

?! Stutterheim, TBG. LXIX, p. 83 poin- 
ted out that the Javanese river Tarum 
Bprings from a mountain oalled Malabar. 
22 lrefer to the literature mentioned 
by Ooedós, o.o., and by L. de la Vallée 
Poussin, Dynasties et Histoire de 1” 
Inde depuis Kanishka... (Oavaignao's 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


« 


Mene. 


` Javanese he 


Digitized b E a Sama 
i Y ANSENT 


Saree 
T IN IND 


senna and eGangotri 31 


Histoire du Monde VI, 2, Paris 1935), p 
291ff. 

23 Qf. also Krom, o-c., p. 140; C. Snouck 
Hurgronje, Arabié en Oost-.ndi&, (Ley- 
den 1907) p. 15ff. 

24 Gee also the Susrondī-Jātaka (Jātaka 
n9 360; III, p. 187ff.) which speaks ofa 
trade-route from  Broach along the | 
western coast to the Eastern Peninsula. | 
25 An ancient Gujarātī adage mentions 
the Javanese: Hobson-Jobson, | 
p. 456. 

26 In this kingdom the princes Pula 
Sara, his son Abiāsa, and his grandson 
Pāņdu Deva Nātha ruled in succession : 
Skt. Parüsara WXIW3, Vyasa AVA and 
Pāņdu dig. After Pāņdu Deva Natha 
Jaya Baya, by whom this legend is sup- 
posed to have been recorded, succeeded 
to the throne; he removed the seat of 
government to Kediri. This king Jaya | 
Baya is the legendary sbadowgraph of j 
the Javanese king during whose reign | 

the famous kakawin Bhārata- Yoddhs | 

was accomplished. According to the 


Fee 


elso promulgated a col- | 
lection of prophecies. 

27 Tho beginning of which corresponds, 
in Java as well as in India, to 78-79 
A.D. 

28 See e.g. Th. S. Raffles, The History 
of Java2, (London 1830), p. 87#.; Krom, 
0.C., p. 92f. 

29 See A. Zieseniss, Die Rāma-Sage bei 
de Malaien, ihre Herkunft und Gestal- 
tung, Hamburg 1928, eap. p.114. 

30 Compare, for instance, A. Teeuw, 
Het Bhomakawya, (Thesis Utrecht 1946) 
chapter 2, esp. p.19f. It must be con- 
fessed that in some cases the inquiries 
made could have led to a more satis- 
factory result if all Indian manuscripts 
and printed texts were more easily ac- 


ceesible to Western scholars. 

31 G., A. J. Hazeu, Het Oud-Javaansche 
Adiparwa en zijn Sanskrt—origineel, 
TBG. XLIV (1901), p. 289ff. 

32 K. Wulff, Deu Oldjavanske Wirata- 
parwa og dens Sanskrit-original, (Thesis 
Copenhague 1916), p. 9f. 

33 J. Gonda, Aanteekeningen bij het 
Oud-Javaansche Bhismaparwa, (Bandung 


| 1937), chapter 2. 


34 T refer to my paper on the Javanese 


version of the Bhagavadgītā, TBG. 
1935, p.47f. 
35 J. Gonda, Javanese---Bhagavadgita, 


p. 48 ff. 

36 W. Stutterheim, Rāma-legenden und 
Rāma-Reliefs in Indonesien ( Mūnchen 
1925 ), e.g. p.110f.; the same, Indian 
Influences in the Lands of the Pacific 
( Weltevreden, Java ). 

37 See already H. N. van der Tuuk, Jour- 
nal of the Royal Asiatic Society XIII 
(1881), p. 56. 

38 The word occurs also in 
(céméti, cémbéti) etc. 

39 Curiously enough this word does not 
occur in Malay: is may have existed 
there at a former period “see also Van 
Ronkel, TBG. 46, p.545) 

10 See Van Ronkel, BKI. LVIII, p.488ff.; 
Van der Tuuk, KBW. III, p.357; P. J. 
van Leeuwen, De Maleische Alexander- 
roman (Thesis Utrecht 1937), p.45 and 
274; Gonda, BKI, 6. p.163f. 

41 T, W. Rhys Davids and W. Stede, The 
Pali Text Society's Pali-English Die- 
tionary, (Chipstead 1921ff.), s.v. 

42 Of. Van der Tuuk, KBW. IV,999 

13 G. Ferrand, Le K'ouen-louen et les 
anciennes navigations interocéaniques 
dans les mera du sud, Journal asiatique 
XI-18 and 14 (1919); Krom, o.c. p.109f. 


Malay 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


39 Digitized by ASA SSRA KS PAN ELA a eGangotri 


SECTION 2 
. INDIAN ALPHABETS IN INDONESIA 


nt here to say a few words about the alphabets introduced 


into the Archipelago. The ancient Indonesian inscriptions are engraved on stone 
written in Sanskrit and undated. Till 760 A.D. they are all in the so-called 
Pallava script, which was widely spread over the whole of South-East A-ia. It ig 
uncertain whether this alphabet, which is distinguished by charactoristic features, 
owes its origin to the Pallavas or whether it already existed before their ascen. 
dency. It may have been exported from its original territory by poople who had 
little or nothing to do with the Pallava rulers.t The Javane:o Dinaja insorip- 
tion? is the oldest document which, though likewise written in Sanskrit, shows 
another alphabet, the so-called Kawi or Old-Javano-e script. This alphabet has 
xighüly been considered a developed form of the Pallava reript. Not long after the 
first dooument, known to ue, was drafted in Old-Javanese, the Old-Javanese then 
came into general use and gradually developed. It was given the native appella- 
tion of aksara buda, i.e. aksara Buddha ( AB ‘writing’ n i 
writing, which practically means pre-Musli i asas, C 
i eee NOD pue zz kj the im buda being applied 
appearance of Pre-Nāgarī script in the jp - ER i Siam " 
and, at a later date, in Cambodia—probably d:o b the j ee, ne p. 
and Nàla&ndà— was of a temporary nature and of af s Kos vb eda 
modern Javanese gcript is the continvation of ae ae P kr 
Being also used to write Madurese aud Su ae A A aI Euwi.slnhabet d 
Ten asan DETTA aa n ss lt 15 very nearly related to the 
VIG thought out to symbolize the TM e nies dudo additions) discritigy 
ancient letters (ch, kh, ph, $ etc.) which mam paa loanword. Thess 
became, on the other hand, used as capite persons to, Javanese sounds 
of persons or towns, in titles and is eee onesies initials) inmames 
the erat (Skt. vraka mat qi words of particular or individual character: 
big, great’). Thus the word prabhu 5 yeaa) chief ) or aksara géde ‘capitals’ (Jav. géde 
the geographical names Surakart Einybich is of Sanskrit origin, is written AUS 
Tuban : Thuban. The cM E Sürakharla, the Indonesian goographical M 
from the Kawi seript. Although eae writing is not considerably different 
Indian origin is not yet suffi : ae history of the other Indonesian alphabets of 
has rightly been re py Boom ns the Batak writing (Centr | en ; 
garded as a variant of the Ind : 8 (Central Sumatra) 
ndonesian Pallava, The simpli- 


babili iti 
ati ak EO the writing-materials used, to 
: on kā it, hut showing a greater resem- 
MS ire mai in the south of Sumatra, 
- Kern the ancient alph 

Malay or Sum were deri TARARE 

m y ved fro i i i 
ran script of the game family. The NU Mure 
SiS 8 in use among the 
ppines on the Spaniards invaded these 
closely allied to the Sumatran 


It is convenie 


Seript. They were mucl 
characters. These anci 
the Arabic soript, intr, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Vt D OE 


Digitized by Arya Sam Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SARIT IN INDONESIA 


SAN 33 


characters used by the Spaniards. 


NOTES 


1 [refer to J. Ph. Vogel, The Yūpa- ; Majumdar, " Suvarnadvipa, I, (Dacca 
inscriptions of King Mūlawarman from.| 1937) p.248f. 

Koetei (East Borneo), BKI. LXXIV | ? J.G. Février, Histoire de l'écriture, 
(1918), p.167ff.; R. Gopalan, History of | (Paris 1948), p.368 was obviously unac- 
the Pallavas of Kanchi, (Madras 1998); | quainted with this meaning of Jav. buda. 
N. J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschie- | * See GSI, o.c p.5; Kern, VG. VII, 
denis?, p.4f.; 69f.; L. de la Vallée | p. 67ff. 

Poussin, Dynasties et Histoire de l'Inde | 5 The Arab script has in the meantime 
depuis Kanishka...(Paris 1935), p. 258ff. | lost much ground to the Latin alphabet. 
2 I refer to Krom, o.c., p.146ff. and 


SECTION 3 
INDIAN ELEMENTS IN THE MINOR LANGUAGES OF INDONESIA 


The Role of Malay and Javanese 

Speaking quite generally we can say that Sanskrit has exerted direct in- 
fluence on the language in Malacca, the Palembang district and adjacent regions 
of Sumatra, several important coastal and other districts of Java, Bali, a presum- 
ably small part of Borneo, perhaps one or more coastal regions of Celebes and other 
regions. Particulars in connection with this direct linguistic influence sre dealt 
with in the other chapters of this volume.' There was, however, also indirect 
borrowing, with which we shall in the main concern ourselves in this section, be- 
cause it is convenient to survey the whole scene of Sanskrit influence before dwel- 
ling on special problems. 

Some Indonesian languages, and especially Malay and Javanese have, to 
begin with, essentially affected each other. Unfortunately many details bearing 
upon this interrelation will be unknown forever because of the serious gaps in our 
historical knowledge and the lack of reliable linguistic information dating from 
former centuries. For an appreciation of yarious important phenomena—such as, 


.for instance, the occurrence of a considerable number of doublets in Javanese, two 


and two looking like an inherited Javanese and a Malay form reapectively—we for 
the present depend almost entirely on mere conjectures: as to whether Malay in- 
fluence has played & part in it or whether we have to take full account of Java- 
nese dialect variants. Anyhow, commercial relations will have brought Malay ele- 


ments to Javanese seaports from very ancient times, the Malay inhabitants of the 


coasts of Malacca and East-Sumatra having always been traders.and navigators. 


- The empire of Sri-Vijaya has, in all probability: likewise furthered the spread of 
"Malay over adjacent countries which felt its influence. Islam, coming from the 
‘Malayan to the Javanese sea-porta, demonstrably was to a considerable. extent - 


instrumental in the diffusing of Malay terms over Java. In modern times, and 


_ especially in the last decades, Malay has rapidly gained importance, Malay-writ- 


ing authors bave taken the lead iv fournalisa; fiction, political and other litera. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
NESIA 


T SANSERIT IN INDO 


: d administration have, moreover, been very influential in 
suredocs tion an ver Javaneae.? It goes without saying that the Sang. 
ld, under favourable cireumstances, make the same 
ted part of the words concerned in the process ot 
borrowing. To this category belong such neologisms 8a EE C pes: nation, 
al, nationality eto.’ (<bansa nation, race etc. < Bkt: vamsa. IN ineage, race’) 
which were for the first time used by Malay-writing modern politicians, men of 
letters and other learned people. As we shall return to this class of words in 
another section, we can pass them over here. A 

Javanese influence on Malay has, apart from the linguistic diffusion due to 
the settlements of Javanese in South-East Sumatra, for the most part flowed 
through literary channels. After their introduction into Java the Indian epics 
apparently soon excited the interest of rapidly multiplying circles, and in a Java- 
nized form combined with native traditions and religious beliefs. The cycles 
resulting from this union took, in the shape of the so-called wayang or ‘shadow- 
plays’ and the body of literature connected with it, a very deep root in the 
soul of the population. Part of these wayang tales found their way also to 
adjacent islands and even to the Peninsular continent. Another cycle likewise 
traversed the sea: that of Prince Panji of Koripan, whose almost endless love- 
adventures and military exploits provided material for numerous variations on 
the fame theme. Besides, the high standard of culture of the Javanese politi- 
cal centres did not fail to appeal to the minds of neighbouring princelings and 
their court-authors. In this way Javanized Sanskrit words reached Malaysia. 
The first group of these comprises such Javanese titles ax pēteran aria ‘son of a 
eusuhunan or king by a royal wife’ (Jav. paneran ‘prince’); péneran adipati aria 


ture; bo 
giving it many advantages O 
krit elements in Malay cou 
journey to Java as the inheri 


[nn H H 
title of the minor independent Javanese princes’ <Skt. . arya- «Ti ‘honourable’ ' 


whish already occurs in the earliest Old-Javanese compositions, and Skt. adhi- 
pati. afaqfa ‘king, regent’ > OJav. idem,in later Javanese the title of a regent 
of the highest class (in lit. Javanese and in Malay we also find a short form of 
au word: dipati), further, the title given to panerans by birth paneran sēntana ‘a 
Prince of the blood’: Skt. santana- dara ‘offspring, son’> OJay. idem; jaksa ‘title 
of a Javanese judge’< OJav. adhyaksa ‘id "s 
adhyaksa- ATA ‘inspector, eto’ : 
the population has been consider 
a ‘headman’, or ‘divisional chief’, 
‘idem’ does not occur in Malay, 
words have a bearing on Javan 
general public is admitted whe 


„who exercizes supervision’: Skt. 
In Palembang Malay, «poken in & district where 
ably mixed with Javanese element», a pésirah is 
As Sks. siras. frī: ‘head’ > OJuv., Jav. kr. sirah 
the word looks like a Javanese loan. O:;her such 
6:6 royalty: péseban "gallery, a place to which the 
* Jav. seba ‘to make one's a eee ee sovereign holds court’ i.e. pa-seba an 
Bar ‘visit, attendance sPpearance, to attend (especially at court)’ <Skt. sevd 
Raisa y». x: Bervico; siti-iñgil, sitiñgil ‘royal terrace overlooking the 
8 Le. Jav. siti ‘earth, territory’ <Skt., Ogav. ksiti- fafa ‘the earth, 


soil’, and Jav. ingil ‘high’ 
o sh’. Some mythologi ae 
nese dress: gēni ‘fire’ <Skt., OJ. ost E terms came to Malaysia in a J ava- 
Like the las lond $ i 
from soinantio or posti won irs Tods havo more or less apparently sprung 
; T : r 1 e dpi: 
(also gandi) ‘the Javanase bow? ZS SERO oy firu- TS; gandewa, gandiwa 
Arjuna’s bow, & bow in general’: sšlira ; : gandewa bow <Skt. gandiva- méta 
<Jav. sļē)lira" < OJūv. tarira P f. a poetio equivalent of native terms for ‘body’ 
^ . - MN: Dēranta! bzrl;/7 * Xy 
arira- SQ bérasia, béranti "passionate love’ 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


na cos eR et 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation ghennai and eGangotri 
~- SANSKRIT INDONE 


35 


(a literary and courtly term<OJay. and lit. Jav. branta, branta, braūti, branti 
‘pangs of love’ <Skt. bhrānta- WI*d ‘perplexed’, bhranti. Hifa “perplexity, con- 
fusion.’ N 
Other terms, however, crept in by way of colloquial or Jakarta Malay which 
contains many Javaaese elements, e.g. bisa ‘to be able to do, ‘can’ (instead of 
Mal. boleh) which is almost generally regarded as a Sanskrit loan <visa- fag ‘any- 
thing active, poison’.® 
Some words belonging to this portion of the Malay vocabulary show the 
way by which they have travelled in their outward appearance: joyen 'trium- 
phant’, lit. ‘victorious over’, occurring in a few expressions: jayen sētēru ‘victorious 
over one's foes’ etc. i.e. Jav. jayen<jaya *vietory < Skt., OJav. jaya- SA and the 
Jav. preposition in ‘over, in, at, eto.'; the first element also occurs in Malay, but 
mostly in such titles and hononrs as have been borrowed by the same route: jaya 
asmara ‘conqueror in love’<lit. Jav. asmara<Skt., OJav. smara- tat ‘love’; jaya 
kēsoma ‘id.’ < Skt., OJav., lit. Jav. kusuma- G47 ‘flower’ (in Malay this word is only 
found in very poetic style); cf. also the Jav. expression kusuma nin rat ‘flower of 
the world or land''(Jav. words), which is a complimentary description of a hero 
of old romance; hence the word kusuma, which in Jav. literary works also means 
‘nobleman, nobility’, can be found in Malay poems in the sense of ‘noble, hand- 
some’ (of noble birth etc.). The word sémérdanta ‘very white’ ( of the teeth ) or 
its more original variant sumridanta is a Jav. -um- form meaning ‘being like the 
sridanta flower’: OJav. srīdanta<Skt. srt %T ‘glory’ and an honorific prefix + 
danta- 373 'ivory'.* Further, duwe ‘to possess’ « Jav. idem <OJav. drwya etc. ‘id.’ 
< Skt. dravya- 393 ‘property’; sato ‘animal’ < Jav. idem<Skt., OJav. sativa- ux. 5 
An interesting word is sētu ‘metamorphosis, esp. when caused by a spell, a physical 
change due to & curse, spell or blessing laid upon a person by a Hindu ascetic 
endowed with supernormal powers; rendering invulnerable by such a process 
eto.; there are derivatives of this word in the Malay way, e.g. di-sétu-i "one lays. 
such a spell etc. upon & person’, but also in the Javanese way, that is, taken 
direct from that language: sēto-ni <sētu-an-i 9; as the being so metamorphored is 
called a pē-tzēstu or pensétu, it is clear that the origin of this group is Jav. ésiw ‘to 
come off, to happen actually, to be realized’ <Skt., OJav. astu g ‘be it go. A 
Malay variant is, moreover, rēstu 'id.', but nowadays especially ‘spell’, and ‘bless- 
ing’, and its derivatives rēsto-ni, mé-résto-ni ‘id.’; this form is in my opinion, due to 
metanslysis : the frequent Sanskrit formula siddhir astu fafgsg ‘there be success’ 
was interpreted aa siddhi réstu, siddhi being the only Old Javanese form of the 
word.7.Another variant is Mal. mē-nyanto ni which leads us to suppose a base 
— -saniu? which in all probability owes its origin to the plural form besides astu: Skt. 
santu W7d, though this is» as far as I know, not dommon in Old Javanese. There. 
are two words in Malay for *rest-house put up for the accommodation of strangers 
and travellers’, the Mal. pér-singah-an (from the base sizgah ‘stopping at a baiting- 
place’ and the Jav. loan pa-sangraha-(a)n, from OJav. sangraha ( with various 
derivatives) ‘reception, preparing! <Skt. sazgraha- dag ‘receptacle, reception’. 
The second member of astagina ‘perfume-box (a manik astagina isa miraculous 
jewel protecting from drowning and being burnt) is a Jav. variant of guna « Skt. ' 
.. guna- 3" ‘quality’: of. OJav. astaguņa and astagiņa ‘eightfold’, also of jewels and a 
kind of magic box < Sku. astaguna- AZ" ‘eightfold’. Here the word sari may also 
be disoussed, which in Malay romance often ocours as the second member of girls’ ni. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai epancori 


aH ‘moon’, Puspa-sari < Skt. puspa- 353 ‘flower’ 
cosses:.and beautiful things (sutéra sari 


‘fine silk’). The word is usually explained as “lower’ (a taman sari is, indeed, a 
*flower-gatden’ : Mal. taman 'garden') but also denotes ‘the finest of anything, the 
The came meanings, and ‘pollen’ are also Javanese, and 
„already occur in early OJav. texts. I hold the word to be a variant in -2, formed 
from OJav. sara- ‘pith, core, solid interior, quintessence eto. <Skt. süra- «T ‘id’, 
In Sanskrit, puspasüra- JIMT: means ‘the nectar or honey of flowers’, and 
-Oandrasüra- AZAR is & man’s name.” 

Some loan-words show the way by which they have reached Malaysia by 
their special Javanese semantic development : suka <Skt. sukha- GA ‘happy’ in 
.the sense of “beatowing’ beside suka ‘pleasure’; cémpala or capala ‘to wrangle’ 
<0Jav. capala which has, in addition to the meanings of Skt. capala- AWS, viz, 
' ‘unsteady, fickle, inconsiderate’, also such as ‘threatening, chastising, being wrath- 
ful’ ; it may even denote ‘misdemeanour in goneral, cf. the Skt. sense ‘ill-man. 
‘nered’, and, hence, in Lampong the ‘penalty’ fur misdemeanour. Whereas Malay 
has welcomed Skt. 'šatru- 3g ‘enemy, rival’ to denote a ‘personal enemy’ only, 
Javanese used the loan-word for ‘any enemy’: in the latter meaning it must be 
considered a trace of Javanese influence in Malay. Wilkinson’? holds that Malay 
culika ‘a cock’s comb’ (< Skt. culika afer id.) can also mean ‘scoundrelly, trea- 
oherous, sneak-thief’; but the latter meauing no doubt belongs to the Jav. culika 
‘sneak-thief, cheat’» which seems to have semantic, and perhaps also etymological, 
connection with Jav. culik ‘a kind of evil being or magician preying on children 
-to kill or blind them’, though there exist Indian words which may have lain at 
the root: Skt. caurikā AREI, Pkt. corika ete. ‘thieving’; and especially Skt. ksul- 
laka- Sg small, vile, wicked, malicious’, cf. Pkt. chulla- and cognate terms 
“for ‘deceiving eto. in NIA. languages. 

Turning now to the role played by Malay in the other parts of the Archipe- 
lago we must first say a few words about the commercial and colonial expansion 
of the inhabitants of the coasts on either side of the Straits of “Malacca and of 
the small islands in the neighbourhood. We are ignorant of the beginnings of this 
aes ats the east covered coastal regions (at the mouths of the 
ae eee lebes and numerous islands of the Moluccas and of the East 
Ši pelago in general; but when, in the first decades of the XVIt? century 

„the Portuguese made their appearance in these regions, th 

2 Ue ien ; the spread of Malay be- 
yond its original territories on the coasts of th Srrai t 
plished fact. Its role as a means of Me nar Fini uy bara 
tries was so little disputed, that the Moluogan audi AE d KB NA. 
EAMA that Gi Xavier. 1 1 : e to the king of Por-. 
EISE that language n pees to the Indonesian peoples 
Teoh took ayer this practice. ~ . e and, a century afterwards, tho 

A most interesti : 

Alpaca ae? eee MM in 1621 by Antonio Pigafetta, an 
over 425 ‘Malay’ words in use in the eed round the world, and including 
corroborates the above statements, but also sh eae, ue Moluccas not only 
had already been instrumental in the 5 read ; A a this means of intercourse 
I draw attention to some terms for kivi 1 ad of Indian elements to the Moluccas." 
“Mal. rasa, raksg <Skt. yasa- TH, that at of merohandiso?? : raga ‘quicksilver’ 

nas 18 60 cay the word rasa which being found 


^86 


-names : Oéndéra-sari < Skt. candra- 
„and in other expressions referring to: prin 


» pith or quintessence . 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Sarid FEBREROMCheMeheRspeangotri ái 


in various Indian languages is rasa m D a. 
TES cf. Pkt. tamba- ‘copper’ eto. (the vod 7 e 
tambaga-13); further biniaga: Mal. béniaga, bērniaga: cf in by Kern from Pkt. 
P M e m ete.; sandara which ig probably M - Vānta , Skt. vānija- 
L : 1 brother, born 
equ Skt. bhasa ata: oe ki po bahasa: Mal. béhasa, basa 
skitiem MOM speak: Mal. kata ‘id.’: Skt, katha ap ‘talk 
conversation ; pulti queen’: Mal. putri ‘princess’: Skt. puirī wit + , po 
necs REC, puirt St 'daughter'!*: cuta 
kotta: Mal. kota fortifieation, fortified Village ete.’ : cf, Skt. kota- att ‘at hold”: 
samma: Mal. sama "same: Skt. sama. Sm īrs s ta R Rcs ; 
kapüla- BVS ‘skull’; utara "the north-east wind’: Mal. Nu tiek a Hm 
uttara- SW. In addition to these Pigafetta mentions in other parts of bis ook i 
few Indian words which he probably heard in Indonesia: garuda Ses = Lb 3 
Skt. garuda- NEZ; chinga ‘an animal stronger than a lion": Skt. simha fae "lio? 
and Cinghapola ‘Singapore’. 2 à ; 
There is, however, a still older glossary which contains 489 Malacca Malay. 
words and phon and was collected by Chinese authore, in all probability in the 
course of the XV'^ century.!5 Among the Malay words contained in this list we 
find about 16 Sanskrit loans, to wit:!9 bumi earth; ground, world’; kota ‘city, city 
wall’; utara ‘north’; naga ‘dragon’; gajah ‘elephant’; aùsa ‘goose’; sita ‘lion’: raja in 
anak (Mal. ‘child’) raja 'heir-apparent; mēntēri ‘headman, chief’; astana in naik 
astana (‘to ascend’ viz. the stairs of the king’s residence) ‘go along Imperial high- 
way’; anugérah (‘princely bounty’); laksa ‘ten thousand’; maisi ‘ink’? <Skt. masi- 
Alā; muka ‘face’; gémpita ‘mist, fog, vapour’ (the word means ‘uproar, uproarious’ : 
4 Skt. kampita- fida, but TBat. golap-gampita means ‘pitch-dark’}; besides Some 
| „words of Indian provenience part of which are discussed in other sections of this 
work : (Hindi) kartūl “gamboge’; cula ‘rhinoceros horn’; gēta ‘stool, bench’ (Mal. 
‘divan, the prince's sleeping-platform’) « Pkt. khatia ‘bed etc”; pélana ‘saddle’; 
sila ‘congratulate? <Skt. sila- IS in the cense of amiability; kuca ‘glass’; mutiara 
‘pearl’; rasamala ‘rose maloes or liquid storax’; këpala. ‘head’. Also cēndana ‘candel- 
wood’; rusa ‘deer’. 

Asa result of the above expansion various forms of Malay could be distin- 
guished, to wit the colloquial Malay serving as their mother-tongue to a limited 
number of people in Malaysia proper, the classical written Malay language based 
on the Riau dialect and surviving in a stareotyped form up to the first decades of 
the XX" century '7, the so-called Batavia Malay, a colloquial idiom serving also 
as a lingua franca for people of any nationality meeting in this important capital 
and soa-port, and borrowing from almost anywhere, a mixed Malay-Chinese idiom, 

77 the much Christianized Malay of the Moluccas and the Minahasa (in the northern 
Peninsula of Colebes), which, in the former region, had largely superseded the 


original IN. idioms of the native population. ; : 

That the Malay idiom of the Moluccas harbours many Portuguese and a 
Words is only what might be expected, but a few Indian loans, or Indian oat ā 
used in a special sense, have also found admittance'?: bomen (in Menado, situate 
in N. Celebes, and Ambon) ‘a ohest-proteotor wora by mea Glass a ii 
ing-dross as worn by the Indian merchants’ <Hindi banyan, oe jos Hie 
Vest, jersey’ (however, in Peninsular Malay 8 baju (e aši hiltre’ hares 
atmlet”) bunian is a ‘banyan-shirt’; guna in the specific Meija the pens of his 
in the sense of “she ‘bride price’ paid by the future hueban 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


38 Digitized by Arya SANS ERITI ININ BONE SHA eGangotri 


wife” (cf. in Minangkabau law such terms as harta dapatan (dapatan: Ķ MEC “ia 
for ‘acquisition’ ) ‘property brought by the wife into marriage and re urno otn 
on divorce’ < Skt. artha- 8 ‘property’; the term Hindu especially denotes an adhe- 
rent of any other religion than Christianity’ (in Penang on the Peninsula E: standg 
for a Tamil Hindu, elsewhere it has its usual meaning); tempa (Mal. place’) bicar 
(deliberation’ < Skt. vicara- ÑT ) is a euphemism for lavatory, privy’: of. Skt. 
uccüra Salt ‘faeces’. Some loanwords occur in a form different from the standard 
Malay: karya instead of kérja ‘work etc ' <Skt. karya- S laska instead of laksa 
‘10,000’ « Skt. laksa- ST ‘100,000’; pērcaja instead of pércaya trust i Skt. pratyaya- 
MAA; singakala ‘evenfall’ instead of sēnjakala < Skt. samdhyakala- ener. 

"Apart from these forms of Malay there exists also a iloating and unstable 
bazaar jargon, a mixture of broken Malay and other elements, used by ignorant 
Europeans to Indonesians of the lower classes. Part of the Indian loans found 
their way even into that. Together with many inherited Malay words a restricted 
number of Sanskrit words have been diffused by the seafaring Malays over many 
islands of the Archipelago from the north of Acheh to New Guinea. A large part 
of these Sanskrit elements can be found here as well as anywhere. Even among 
the N fors (spoken by Papuans on the north coasts of New Guinea) such words 
as raja "village-head, ‘king’ " <Skt. rajan xis and arta ‘possessions, goods’ < Skt. 
artha- AX can be heard. These worde, the number of which varies from one or 
two to several scores, show that the Malays, enriched by the influx of Indian cul- 
tural borrowings have passed on part cf their acquired terminology to other 
peoples, which, in contradistinction to the Aubonese remained in possession of 
their own Indone-ian tongue. 

The Languages of Celebes 


opious list of the Indian 
n, some remarks bearing 
anguages to which they have, 


terms in Buginese, adding, in passing, to avoid repetitio 
upon the occurrence of wide-spread words in other 1 
certainly or probably, come from Malay.20 


; o deg considerable part of the terms under discussion belongs to the 
WE T Šā xus commodities or Processes as are usually introduced by 
8 Ol higher civilization to other communities: X, 1 K 

4 i [ : kaca glass’ (also in Mac ] 
a Nu A a oad D kāca, Pkt. kacca “glass, orystal’: konci O 

; i ungi; gandi ‘sn earthen ifcher’ < indi: Hindi 7 
Ere, Oriya kuņdi, Skt. kundi SA; gerege dē (he ee ke peg 
cf. Skt. krakacu. BET; garaganta ‘bell’ iu 
Jav. genta): Skt , Pkt., Hindi ote, 


P p « 3 
18 seemingly due to sound symbolism’); gala ‘a mixture o 


1 PE ) " 
or caulking boats’ (Mac. idem)< Mal, gala-gala or gégala: of. Skt. et la. ae 
: of. „ete. gala. 


‘ od, l ‘ , : 
gi g ( . idem)< M ul 1 < . uda 
resin O! la iu ar (Mac al. 

guia (also In other lang: ages) Pkt g "1 


did l uda-, gula. E ( i j. gö 
bell-metal (Mac, idem) « Mal. gansa; Skt., Pkt, kas A, y 3 e f 
j ms eto.; 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Sa A OGRIStGmCITSmDeken dyoGangotri 


39 
pēdati ‘a solid-wheeled cart’ (Mac. idem) « 


Mal., which i 
pancaloga a kind of gem MIR E ; is probabl 


ems it Y à Javanese loan; 
| & multicoloured or i à 

K : l composite metal;or 
stono’; palakka a kind of couch’: cf. the less original Malay f 


kin, pélanken ‘a kind of box carriage Skt. paryanka; palana Pm As re 
ness (of an elephant) <Mal. pēlana ‘saddle’: Skt. palyana- € 
‘expenses, spending-money’ (also Mac., Bat. etc.)< Mal. bēlanja Goalies n a 
diture etc.’: see above; baéduri ‘cat’s-eye’ <Mal. baiduri 'beryl NUT "m 
vaidurya. d$; mutiya, mutiyara ‘pearl f Pu 


' (Mac. idem, eto.) « Mal mulia, muli 
; : 2 p i b , muti- 
ara: cf Pkt. muttia afta etc; mani ‘bead’ (Mac. idem, etc.) <Mal. idem: 


Skt. etc. mani- afa ‘gem’; manikan <Mal. manikam ‘precious stone’ <Tamil idem, 
Skt. manikya; tampaga (Mac. tambaga) <Mal. tēmbaga ‘brass, copper’: cf. Pkt. tamba- 
ata "copper'?'; dadi ‘milk’ (Mac. idem): Mal. dadi, dadeh ‘sour thick milk, olott- 
ed milk’, in Min. dadizh ‘milk’ (also in Batak ‘milk of animals’) <Skt. dadhi- qf 
‘curds’ (in M. and NIA. thedh has changed to kor zero); dewanga ‘a kind of 
tapestry of figured cloth’ (Mac. idem) <Mal. idem: Skt. Devanga- Suh 'name 
of the inventor of weaving; naraca ‘balance, scales’ «Mal. néraca ‘id: 
Skt. naràci “a goldsmith’s scales’; catoro’ ‘chess or a chess-like game’ (Mac. idem)22 
< Mal. catur (also in Jav. Sund.) ‘id’: cf. Skt. ete. caturaiga- GK ‘the game of 
chess’; candana, cēnrana 'sandal-wood' (Mac. idem) «Mal. céndana, ‘id. used for in- 
cenae and perfumery’: Pkt. candana- ‘sandal-wood’, Skt. etc. candana- aga; curiga 
‘a kind of weapon consisting of a piece of iron with rings’ ( Mac. id.) « Mal. 
cériga, curiga ‘a broad-bladed short curved sword’: Pali churika gia ‘dagger’; 
cēlana in Old-Bug. ‘trousers’ < Mal.'id., spec. ‘a Javanese type of trousers, loose 
| above but tightening towards the ankles, worn by courtiers, bridegrooms etc.’ in 
Jav. clana :cf. Hindi carnā tal trousers reaching to the knees; faga ‘to be 


waking, wakeful, to watch, to feast" (Mac. idem) « Mal. 'being awake or vigilant: 
ef. MIA. jagga , Beng, Hindi jaga 3t" ‘wakeful’; jala "net, fishing-net’ (Mac., Dayak, 
Bat. idem) < Mal. jala 'casting-net: Pkb., Skt. jala- SIS etc. (and the iterated jala- 
jala ‘a basket the ropes of which are like a net’, cf. Mal. jala-jala ‘trellis-work’, 
Hindi jūl 'id.; the reduplicated Bug. and Mac. Jalaja means "basket-work'); nyila 
‘indigo’ (Mac. idem) «Mal. (Jav. etc.) nila ‘indigo dye’ <Skt., Pkt. nila- "its, 
Beng. nila-, Hindi nil tē ete.; raji ‘colour, colour-pattern, design" <Mal. īdem 
(also in Bat.): we should, in all probability, compare Skt. ragin- wag coloured, 
having a particular colour, dyeing eto. cf. also Hindi rag; (which means dyed + 
well as ‘painter’); rupiya Dutch guilder, rupiya (Mac. and otber languages idem): 
cf. Mal. idem <Skt. eic. rüpya- 74 ‘silver coin, rupee, Hindi rupaya rupee; 
roli ‘bread? (Mac. idem): cf. Mal. (Sund., Jav. eto.) idem: af: Beng. roti, ruti, Oriya 
~ roti, Bihari, Hindi rof; eto. ‘a pancake, bread’; ranaca balance (see above); rasa 
‘quicksilver’ (Mao. idem) <Mal. idem (also in Dayak, Sund. bee prs 
‘idem’; rasamalai (Mac. idem) cf. Mal. kayu raksamala xs F i palus 
‘a fragrant wood used for burning’, according td Wilkinson pu Su ek 
in Javane+e and Sundanese?* rasamala is the name of pue , uis “the 
term for its fragrant gum?*; I would compate No EU daub over' (Mac. 
refuse of juices (of the body), impure exoretions ; Rae word is used as a base) 
idem) < Mal. lepa 'daubing, plastering’ (in Bug. oto: t', Skt. lepa- ŠU ‘plastering’; 
< Oriya lepa ‘ointment’, Hindi lep ‘plastering, WENT” i Ibha. SUT; sakkala 
laba "profit, gain’ (Mac. idem) : of. Mal. idem: os i P fag sañikala, 
hackles, heavy wooden fetters (to shao 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


3 d ohm 


klo Iunatios 


40 Digitized by Arya SERRI Nden S bermaránd eGangotri 


A ct, srùkhala- WAS a 

sēikēla ‘id.’ < Pkt. saūkhalā, sinkhala, sajikala- un of b cH e 
Hindi samkal ates ete. ‘chain’; sina lion cup I MEN. f Mal. scpana ‘stairs’ 
‘a step before the house of a man of note (Mao. idem) "Ci: b. ` 5 

€ RE agi ‘a kind of perfume or incense 
<Skt. etc. sopāna- ATTA ‘steps, stairs”; satangi 2 » Aue sept , 
<Mal. sétangi (Min. sitangi), also istangz : cf. Skt. astanga- n re Wa S 
eight parts or eight articles’; sutarra ‘silk’ (Mac. idem) < Mel. sutéra silk, si en 
silk-thread' (sutēra Kélin is ‘Indian silk’; also in Jav., Sund. etc.; Bat. suntora): 
of. Skt. sūtra- QA ‘thread’, if this form is not a literary loan in IN. languages we 
might compare Gujarati sutar ‘thread, fibre etc.’; there is also à Minangkabau 
‘variant’ which may, however, be connected with such forms as Oriya sutē, Hindi 
sūt Ya ‘id. etc; sunrawa ‘saltpetre’ <Mal. séndawa ‘id.’ : Pkt. sendhava-, Skt. 
saindhava- FHA ‘rocksalt from the Indus, etc; suji ‘embroider’ (as a base) : cf. 
Mal. suji ‘embroidery’ (cf. OJav. suci ‘embroidery’ and ‘thorn, quill’) <Hindi siz 
sit ‘needle’, Skt. suc; QA ‘id.’; suruga ‘heaven’ ( Mac. idem ) < Mal. sorga 
<Skt. svarga- waa, Pkt. sarago quit cf. Hindi surag BU, a etc; sewa "taxes 
etc.’ (Mac. and other languages idem) <Mal. sewa ‘hire, to rent, to engage for 
payment’ <Skt. etc. seva Hal ‘employment’; suwasa ‘pinchbeck’ (Mac. etc. idem) 
«Mal. sudsa ‘pinchbeck, gold with a large admixture of special alloy’, which, 
anyhow, must be considered as Indian?5; aika ‘cypher’ (Mac. etc. idem) <Mal. 
idem <Skt. anka- am. 

It may be regarded as almost certain that the exact derivation of a large 
part of the above words—which are enumerated in the order of the Buginese alpha- 
bet—-, though their Indian origin cannot be in dispute, is open to discussion; it 
cannot be said from which of the later Middle or ancient New Indo-Aryan lan- 
guages this form or the other has been borrowed, because the same form of the words 
often belonged to the older as well as to the more modern stages of Indo-Aryan. 
It-has often been, more or less tacitly, assumed that all forms which are found 
in Sanskrit have sprung ( directly) from that language, 
would, at least as far as words of the above deseri 
controversy. 


but such a statement 
ption are concerned, be open to 


itiags through the medium of another 
to: guruda, kuruda ‘a mythological bird’: 


avidian: Tamil puja] ‘snake-gourd’ (the: 
Malay word ), Malayalam 
t rrowed the Sanskrit form, 
Sometimes one of the) sonses’: Mal. 


ultal, pittal otc., these IN. languages, 


Hindi having parwar 28; however, have bo 


pancindara’ ‘the five ( 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDO 
j j Chenna ad angot 


41 
panca-indéra, Jay. pancadriya ‘the five seriseg < Skt. 
suri: Mal. pérmaisuri queen consort’ (used of the 
tales of Javanese origin, but also of Queen Viotori 
Perak), Jav. (lit.) prameswari ‘queen consort’ < 
' Jady'; pērētiwi ‘the nether world’ (also in the ab 
Puwam-pērčtiwi ‘Lord of the nw., Mac. lik 
Earth-goddess', Jav. (lit.) pratiwi ‘the earth’ 
TBat. portibi ‘the world’ etc., usually in tales 
= ‘ , 

prihivi ufrāt ‘the earth’; paradana-manatari "pri 
(in romantic tales) ‘prime minister’ (though th 
this title; the words occur also in Gayo in lite 
< Skt. pradhanamantrin. TIRAT; -` pahala ‘reward, merit’ (also in Mac.) <Mal. 
idem <Skt. phala- BB; bidadari ‘a celestial nymph’: Mal. bidadari bidiadari ‘ia.’ 
(in romance), Jav. QUIS did. «Skt. vidyadhari Farad ‘a member of a class of 
female genii i bandahara treasurer (an important office in the state)’ <Mal. 
béndahara id. (also & up aud office in an old Peninsular state??) <Skt. bhanda- 
gara- RSR Nove biduwan ‘a male or female singer, musician or dancer’ 
<Mal. biduan id. (in literature this word is used of singers generally), it has 
also come from Malaysia to Acheh: Ach. biduën ‘prostitute’ <Skt. vidvan fay 
‘learned, skilled’; in Old-Bug. baramma ‘fire’ has in all probability been borrowed. 
from Javanese: brama fire’ (also in Balinese); makola (also in Mae; Ach. mūkuia; 
Sund. makuta etc.) ‘crown’: Mal. makota, mahkota ‘id.’ (strictly speaking Malay sultans 
had no crowns, but a headdress not unlike a tiara?" <Skt. makuta-, mukuta- azz, 
WF ‘crest, diadem’ < Tam. Malay mukatu ‘top, highest part, head’; mega ‘cloud’: 
Mal. mega ‘cloud’ (as a courtly term), Jav. (lit.) idem, Bal. idem (a courtly term) 
< Skt. megha- a; naga ‘dragon, serpent (a fabulous animal)’ (Mac. idem) < Mal. naga 
"dragon, i.e. a huge snake with a horn and on its brow a luminous bezoar, with 
which it lights its way at night’?! «Skt. etc. naga- «HT ‘snake with supernormal 
powers; OBug. samuda ‘sea’: Mal. samudra ‘ocean’, lit. Jav. samudra, samodra id.’ 
<Skt. samudra- 89%; OBug. sinapati “a royal mother: in Malay and Jav. this 
word means, as might be expected, general» chief of an army; is is now obsolete, 
but is still included in the titles of Malay and Javanese princes <Skt. senāpātt- 
aagfa ‘general’; in OBug. sajūti ocours in two meanings: man, people’ and ‘empty, 
unoccupied’ (Matthes, e.g. of a sea without fishes or ships, of an unoccupied house) 
or, rather ‘in its natural state’: cf. OJav. sajāti ‘in accordance with nature or cha- 
racter' (Mod. Jav. séjati ‘truly, essentially’; Mal. sējati ‘real’); Mal. sējaši ‘the 
tight man, the (person) proper, the rightful claimant’ (in Sund. sajati means real; 
easential, true, sincere, genuine, noble') < sa and Skt. jati- mi ‘nature’; antaka- 
soma ‘a coat made of coloured textile: Mal. amtakésoma a many-coloured coat of 
romance which enabled its wearer to fly: probably Skt. ananta- ues endisse and 
Skt. kusuma. ‘flower’; orosasa (also in Mao.) ‘a particular giant or evil demon : d 
Jav. raksasa, rēksasa ‘ogre or goblin of Hinds mythology (often mentione in 
traditional literature) < Skt. raksasa- UNG an evil demon. : 

A considerable number of Indian words passed on by d to Bre 
belong to the sphere of religion, law, customs, administration an socia ife : 

p ae d) < Mal. idem (also 

guru ‘teacher’ (out of which many derivatives have develope : ne: 
in many other IN. idioms) < Skt. eto. gurt- gs ce Moers tales) was a 
in-ohief, captain (of a sbip)' < Mal. peigawa, pungawa, W ich (in ol i 


pancendriya. vafa; paràmae- 
chief wives of ancient kings in 
a and a class of royal consorts in 
Skt. paramesvar; qii ‘supreme 
breviated form reti in Puwam-reti= 
ewise pérétiwi: Mal. Pértewi ‘the 
(cf. also KBat, pērtibi ‘this world’, 
and in the religious sphere) < Skt. 
me minister’ < Mal. pērdana méntéri 
ə Pasai premier was addressed with 
tature borrowed from the Malays) 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


NESIA m 
42 Digitized by Arya EANSEERIT IN INDONE and eGangotri 


title of rather indefinite charactor, but Ko OM MENU RE PU : 
lay world as a title of a 'commissioner' or gs : n N : 
SES riaa meant ‘court-dignitary’, in living ķi: pru ; 
<Skt. pum-gava S3 ‘a chief, an eminent person; pat : or d us pe a 
high) official eto. < Skt. pati- TÑ ‘lord’, Malay having : e wor Ka Mors 
form pateh, patih ‘vizier, minister’ and in compounds: pun e mit g 
praise, to be keen on, to like’ (also in non-religious senses) (Mao. i em E 
Mal. (Jav. Bat. etc.) puji ‘praise’: cf. Skt. puja WI worship, adoration’: 
parakara ‘affair, concern, business’ ( Mac. idem ) < Mal. idem < Skt. Do 
prakāra- XFN ‘manner, method, scheme, means oto, ; paressa enquiry, investigation 
(Mao. idem) < Mal. péreksa, paresa (in Min. parisa) id. (also in other IN. lan- 
guages) < Skt. eto. parīksā THAI ‘examination: test, trial ; puwasa fant’ (Mao. idem); 
Mal. puasa, Jav. puwasa, pasa ‘id.’ < Skt. upavüsa- STATA fast : bota giant, demon’: 
Mal., Jav. oto. buta, bota ‘ogre, goblin’ < Skt. eto. bhiita- % "evil spirit; devil’; batara 
‘a title of gods and kings’ (Mac. idem): Jav., Mal. batara, bétara “deity, divine ruler’ 
(a title given to major Hindu divinities, the rulers of Majapahit etc.) Skt. etc. 
bhaftara- WEW ‘lord (applied to gods, and to great and learned men )’; in OBug. 
the feminine form batari is used for ‘mother’, whereas the Malay and Javanese 
-meaning is ‘a female Hindu divinity, mythological queen eto.'; barata ‘mourning’, 
and the ‘absolute rest and idleness’ at certain perioda of the year: OJàv. and lit. 
Jav. brata ‘religious observance, duty, vow ete.’ < Skt. eto. vrata- sra 'id,'; baratapa 
‘to practise ascetism, i.e. to seclude oneself from society in a mountainous region 


tapa, which is also Mac.) < Mal. bērtapa (in which bēr is a Mal. prefix indicating 
‘the being engaged in doing--*') ‘austerities, spec. those practised by Hindu recluses . 
in anoient Java' (but also loosely used of Muslim devotion; self-mortifieation eto., 
often to be found in Malay romances) < Skt, tapas AQ: ; barahala *divinity (of the 
Hindu period), idol' (Mac. idem) < Mal. bérhula ‘graven image, idol, joss (of Aindu 
Chinese idols or other false gods)’, Jav. brahala ‘idol, false god' « Pkt. bharala- Ue; 
bansa ‘race, origin, nation, people’: Mal., Jav. basa ‘race, descent eto,’ : Hindi 
bans, Skt. vamia sia mantari ‘minister’: Mal. mēntēri ‘minister, a high civil servant, a 
functionary etc.’< Skt. maniri; maradeka ‘tree (of freedom in contradistincti to 
servitude; alsoin Mac.) < Mal. mérdeka "id": Skt. maharddhika- "ef EMS, 


Prosperous or powerful’; dupa ‘incense’ (in Mac. i 
ac. idem) « .i : 
properly a compound of varioug materials; MM dem PUE 


8 to her’ ( Mac. idem ): at. Mal, Jav. duta 


(also used to translate Arab phrases bearin ] eid EUR 
| 25 í 8 upon provisions of th sli 
falls de dērhaka. disobedience to lawful authority’ Grae m 
neuage)< Skt. drohaka- ātas ‘doing wrong’ ( not in MW. ). kaltās 
peeve , Jay. idem< Skt. deva. a; p i i ; e ARS 
O? queens and other n ; iaui 
to fairies and other vot ms (i P den e 
< Skt. dev; zd "goddess, queen’; , 
mythological Bodhead' < Skt, dft devata tam ' 


| av, Mal. ‘a minor or 
Bug. derivatives also mean (to) fin 


Bedhead’; dosa ‘sin’ (Mao, ; 
id : 2 CG. idem; 
9): Mal., Jay. idem< Skt, dosa- 34 fault, harm, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


prince; sankakala ‘the trumpet blown by t 


- siksa ‘id.’ <Skt. siksa fan "instruction, ohastisement'; 
^ «Mal. agama, iguma ‘id.’ <Skt. agama. saa ‘traditi 


SANSER 
FRIT IN TERONESIda eGangotri . 43 


sin; ranaka ‘hell’ (Mac. naraka 'jd”): Mal. 
< Skt. naraka- AT; raja ‘prince, princess’: 


eschatology)’ < Mal. idem< Skt. ete, Sankh 
and kāla- TS ‘time’; sapatta (from Macassar?) ‘oath 
Jav. sapata (now supata) ‘id? < Skt. Sapatha- "g 
due to.a tendency to redoubling (algo in Mac.) 
torture < Skt. etc. samsüra ‘the misery of mun 
punish, torment’: Mal. seksa, siksa ‘punishme 


onal or religious doctrine”. 


would not give us- an adequate 
idea of the cultural expansion from the western parts of Indonesia to Celebes, if a 


last group of words,of too general a character to be included in one of the other lists, 
should be omitted: kapala ‘technical name of a part of a saron or Indonesian kilt or 
skirt’s seldom, in imitation of the Malay usage ‘head of the Local government': Mal. 
képala head (in the literal and in a transferred sense) < Skt. kapala- 891% 'skull” 
cf. also Oriya kapāļa, Hindi kapal, Mar. kapal; kota ‘a fortified place, castle, capital, 
(Mac. idem, also in Dayak etc.) «Mal. kota ‘stronghold’ which is an Indian word; 
in OBug. we also find kuta in the weaning ‘house’, which is alien to Jav. and Mal., 
but admits of being connected with the Indian word kuta- Jz "house, hut' ( £o be 
found in Skt., where it is, however, rare) which has been derived from Dravidian? 2, 
though it is improbable that a Dravidian form has directly come to South-Celebes, 
the Tamil (and Ski.) form being kuti ‘hut, house’, and Tulu alone having a word 
ending in a: kotta; kutti hundred thousand’ (Mao. idem) < Mal. kii ‘id.’, Jav. 


This enumeration, however long it may be, 


kati ‘id.’ < Skt. kofi- atfē ‘ten million’; kotika ‘time, i.e. the particular moment" 


which on the ground of divination is auspicious or inauspicious with regard to am 
enterprise’, and also ‘all writings, figures, tables etc. which may help in calcula- 
ting such moments'33 (also in Day.) <Mal. kētika ‘time (with special reference to 
divination)’ < Skt, ghatika afzat ‘a period of 24 minutes’, also ‘the Indian clock (a 
waterclock consisting of a jar with a hole in it which fills and sinks in 94 minutes)’; 
kécapi ‘a kind of four-stringed lute’ < Mal. idem (often mentioned in chronicles 
and romantic tales, but not in modern use in Malay 3%), regional Jav. idem, Day. 
kasapi ‘a three- or four-stringed indigenous lute, played on with a small piece 
of soft Wood’, Bat. husapi ‘kind of a two-stringed violin or mandolin’ «Bk: kacchaps 
84t ‘a kind of lute’; karana ‘because of, cause’ (Mac. idem) < Mal. karēna, kérana, 
karna ‘id. (the phrase karéna Allah ‘for God's sake, in forma pauperis’ has also 
„been brought to South Celebes): Skt. Karana- iR" ‘cause, motive , Pkt. idem: Oriya 
id., Hindi karan, Guj., Mar. karan, Singh. karaņa eto.; Kallin Kling, ie. the 
Coromandel coast and Southern India in general; the inhabitants of thase regions 
< Mal. Kéli idem, also in other IN. languages (Jav. Sund. idem; Ach. ur ones 
entitled a "(resident) foreigner (daga) pure and simple’) < Skt. ete. Ka aa E 
Which especially stands for a district on the Coromandel lā vāks, : E ue 
other TN. languages the same) ‘elephant < Mal. J av. gajah eto. Gala i krās: 
bination lidah gajah 'elephant-tongue': Mal. lidah tongue , RE. r3 šā 
-Jaja 'jd”: Bug. lila ‘tongue’, both words indicating a plane a re ae i 
Paniyaga ‘to trade’ (Mac. baniyaga ‘id.’): Mal. böniaga, bërniaga — 6, Ach peer 
merchant’, (also in other languages: TBat. boniyaga, Gayo mēnt0g à + 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ESIA 
Digitized by- Arya SRAN ERAN DONTI eGan 


„ D - E D Beng. ba yo, Ori & ba Wy, Bih 
"id to be & shop keeper < Pkt vana ama myt y 7 

Hi di baniy’ ; Gu D s etc. merchant 3 an interes Ing usiness term 18 Bu 
in » à, b b b 


whi i ted j 
iti it” of which various methods are enumerated in 
laba ‘partition of the profits o l RE à 
M inu NUES: Mal. bihagi (bagi) -laba, Jav. bage laba id ‘of à t bhagi 
wd ‘sharing in’, and Skt. labha- WIA ‘profit’ ; binasa perished, dēcaye i ruined 
< val binasa Pii destruction (whether physical, moral or financial) (ng far 

1k og not in modern Javanese, the Sund. binasa 18 regarded a8 & loan from 
Male ; also Ach. binasa 'ruin(ed), perish(ed), decay(ed) eto”, Fue bēnasa 

: J Ga. , n 3 

'd Rd ed, corrupted’ snd a polite term for died’) < Skt. vināsa- AAN; baca 

EAR lso ina variety of phrases (Mao idem) < Mal. 


; ead, to recite ( prayers yy a : 
Mm cas read out, recite’ ( commonly of repeating prayers, often in the 


hybrid phrase mé-mbaca doa, in Mal. : ‘prayer for some definite BUSD959, either 
addressed to God or a3 a charm or imprecation' ), (also TBat. basa vo read (in & 
singsong)’, Gayo baca in the same meanings, Ach. böët (<baca) ‘to recite in a sing- 
gong and rhythmic way (sacred texts and litanies of Islam, but also Acohehnese * 
poems eto.), to study such texts’ (in many phrases: to preach, to read a letter, to 
be a teacher etc. cf. also Jav. Sund. waca ‘to road aloud or in a rhythmic way’) 
< Skt, vacas 44: ‘word, speech’, cf. also vaca AIH ‘sacred text, holy words’; bicara 
‘talk, conversation, advice, lawsuit, to speak, roason, argue, plead, to pass 
sentence etc. (Mac. idem; also in phrases partly translating such terms as 'coun- 
cillor’, ‘justice’, governor’) < Mal. bicara ‘discussion, legal proceeding, concern, 
opinion’ (also in Gayo and Achehnese) < Skt. vicara- fat ‘considerations ponder- 
ing, discussion’; bincana ‘calumny, vilification’ (Mac bincana ‘calumny, offence): 
Mal. béncana ‘trouble (esp. when due to the spreading of malicious reports), (ef. 
also lit. Jav. béncana ‘trial, affliction, disaster’ shadss of meaning not alien to 
Malay) < Skt. vaitcana- AHA ‘cheating, fraud, deception’; biyasa ‘to be accustomed 
` to’ (Mac. idem) < Mal. biasa ‘id.’ < Skt. abhyāsa- ATIA ‘study, exercise, familia- 
rity’; birita ‘news, tidings’ (in derivatives also? ‘to reveal’ and (‘give notice 
of) > ‘to invite’; Mac. idem) <Mal. bērita ‘news, report’ (also warta» warita, rēta: 
the word occurs also in Bat. : barita) < Skt. vrita. JA ‘what happened’, vartta 
ami ‘news’ the Pkt. form being vatta AWI and the NIA. forms būt etc.; basa 
‘speech, language’ (also in phrases and derivativos, Mac. idem) < Mal. bahasa, 
basa ‘id.’ (also in Gayo, Ach., Jav. Sund. etc.)< Skt. bhasa WT ‘id.’, Pkt. basa Was 
Singh. basa, and in the Skt. form in Hindi Beng. Guj. Mar., and Telugu; bisa to 
be able or capable’ : Mal. bisa ‘id’, Jav. bisa ‘to be able, possible etc.’ < Skt. 
via. faq anything actively pernicious, poison; manusiya ‘man, human being’! 
Mal. (now lit.) Jav. manusia ‘human’ (cf. Gayo manusió and Ach. manusia "man, 
human being as opposed to animals or spirits) < Skt. manusya- RJA; mula 
beginning, to begin’ (also in phrases and derivatives) : Mal. Jav. mula ‘origin, be-” 
ginnings (also in Bat. Ach. Gayo, where it occurs in a variety of phrases) < Skt. 
eto. mila- 3% root, origin, beginning; ci i P " 
f A RS P; cita, being a-base for wordg with suoh 
meanings as nursing (an idea), entertaining (a desire), taki 5 MAT ets 
' which expresses such ideas as "thought-concentrati à MD oare ole ICH Es 
languages) < Skt., Pkt, dO tmi few cues re io eaire, ete. (also in other IN. 
dour’ (Mac. idem): Mal. cahaya, caya ‘ia,’ r » desire, inind i caya glow, splen- 
‘horn of & rhinoceros’ < Mal. cula shorn t < Skt. chaya IN ‘shade, lustre’; cula 
Jav. texte eto.) < Skt., Pkt. cida us ‘an 4 eingle-horned animal’ (also in anoient 
the fop of the head’s cf. ny crest, tuft, or similar. protuberance on 


Beng. cula ‘lock of hair: eto,’ „and similar forms in other 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection." 


IKS 


SANSKRIT IN 1 S 
——— — Digitized by Arya Samaj-Feundation Cher DON BS angotri 45 


NIA. languagos; cilaka ‘misfortune’ (Mac, i 

av. cilaka id.', also elsewhere) whi : 
g Sum 'delusive'; rupa "arii may perhaps be "T with Skt. cha- 
derivatives: rupa-i "to discern, recognize’ etc.; in the samo way Gas : I Pa 
donaesmbiguam beauty, sort ete’, Jay, rupa in similar meatings GARM "Tat. 
rupa colour, appearance, to appear in the shape of, appareils ka n hi 
KBat. rupa form, colour, appearance’, and the derivative mtē-TUDG-i DP b Ee we 
read a person's heart”; Gayo rupo 'appeara o bs able to 


y nce, form, exterior looks; apparentl 
indeod, often as an expletive, (mž-)rupö-ön ‘to give a Speo chau Ep 
anco, to produce, to elicit' similar meanings in Achehnece S Skt. rüpa- eq 


‘outward tie eto. Bug. rasa "to suffer, to experience’ (of unpleasant 
sensations; Mac. idem; Day. rasa feeling, opinion") < Mal. rasa ‘taste, feeling, 
sensation” ( Nico La other IN. languages) < Skt. Pkt, Oriya etc. rasa YU 
‘taste, feeling eto.'; rahasiya ‘secret? «Mal, rahasia, rahsia ‘id.’ (Gayo résié, rusió 
rasia, rusia id”) <Skt. rahasya- ZIA ‘eccret’: lassa ‘ten thousand’ (Mac., Day. 
idem) < Mal. idem (Sund. idem; Jav. lëksa ‘id’; TBat. loksa ‘id’; Gayo laksa id? 
< Skt. laksa. SA ‘one hundred thousand’; wija ‘race, blood-relative, family in 
general’ (Mac. idem): cf. OJav. wīja ‘seed, child’, Jav. wiji ‘seed’, (lit.) ‘offspring’, 
Mal. bija (Min.) or usually biji ‘seed, grain’ <Skt. bija- dta ‘eed, origin’; sama 
‘the same, equal; together’ (Mac. idem): Mal. sama ‘same, sameness; equal etc.’ 
(Mal. bérsama "doing, being along with, together); Jav. reg. kr. sama ‘the same, 
equally’ (also in Achehnese) < Skt. etc. sama GH ‘same, equal, like’; sumpuruna 
‘complete, perfect’: Mal. sémpurna, samporona ‘id? (of various applications: of a 
man’s knowledge being thorough, of perfection of work, of a favourable time etc.): 
Jav. sampurna ‘id.’ (the Malay word has also come to the Gayo people: sémpérnó 

1 'complete(ly), excellent!ly)' (used of a state or activity which is in a blessed and 
perfect condition, and to the Achehnese: samporüna (in similar meanings) < Skt. + 
etc. sampūrņa- BIN ‘complete, perfect’: sada ‘sound, voice’ Mae. sara ‘id.’) < Mal. 
suara ‘voice, utterance (as a rule of human speech)’, cf. also Jav. swara ‘sound’ 
(Sund. sowara ‘voice, sound’: Gayo suara (from Malay) ‘sound (in the abstract)’: 
Ach. suara ‘voice, speech, sound’ < Skt. svara- «x ‘sound, voice’; sudara ‘brother, 
sister’ < Mal. saudara, sudara ‘id.’ (aleo in other languages) < Skt. sodara- ute 
‘born from the same womb’; sino ‘lonely, quiet, deserted’ (Mac. idem) : Matthes36 
may be right in connecting it with lit. Jav. sunyo ‘void’, Mal. sunyi ‘lonely, desolate’ 
(of. Ach. sunydé ‘desolate, quiet, secret’): Skt. Sünga- WFT empty ec." sesa leavings, 
remainder, rest’ (Mac. idem) < Mal. sisa (obsolete Jav. sisa) ‘leavings etc. < Skt. 
Sesa- 3Iq ‘romaining, rest etc, Pkt. sesa. 

In addition to the words enumorated in these lists, there are the names of 
the Hindu months and a number of etymologically difficu.u botanical terms; some 
words, moreover, are altogether doubtful ot dealt with in other chapters because 
of their etymological peculiarity. R 

Having dus Pss m Indian elements in the South Celebes languages, 
We shall discuss the smaller number of them which were passed on to in une 
Celebes idiom of Barče. Barče has, especially in the ione "EE 
rather many Buginese terms, mainly because of the commercia pe who imita- 
We mentioned already, but also uader the infidenes e ee Ne S 8. variety of 

: ted the Buginese court. In the main centre of this E 3 n: a Buktisiā. LAS 
nations is represented: apart from people of Celebes o 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i 


igitized by Ax SEMIFINA ena 


LEN a, Matay taro, roldiers ani 
Malay traders, soldiers and 


i - tc.» Chinese, 
Minahassa Gorontalo-men e | 
R 2 E ot Indonesian blood and tongue meet and speak, each in 


of Malay and Barée. They have not failed to exercise 


the usage of the Barée. people themselves.°7 Accord- 
à his particular field, the following 
Buginese intermediation:38 


seamen of all 
his own manner, & variety 
a noticeable influence upon | aie 
ing to Adriani, who was & great authority in $ 
ht into the Barče community through : : 
contact with, 9 spirit by spending the 
night, alone and unarmed, at the grave of & recently do au tat, ; 
‘sacred tree "; bidadari ‘a kind of legendary women in tales (in 9 i SN 
spoken in the island of Taliabo, this word, which is the GEE. veces a 
‘nymph eto., even came to denote the nymphs as & group and the worid o the 
divine beings above the earth’); bisa ‘to be able or capable, to possess 8 mysteri- 
ous power’; bisara ‘conversation, topic’ ( <Bug. bicara); jala a casting-net and 
jalaja ‘fence or entrenchment with trellis’; dosa fault, sin’ (entirely naturalized 
and the base of several derivatives, such as ka-dosa which serves as a substitute 
for the IN. ka-pali ‘under taboo’, mo-dosa ‘to impose & fine’); guruda ‘a mythologi- 
cal bird in tales’; gola ‘palm-sugar’ (also in phrases and derivatives, gola-gola 'con- 
fectionery is regarded as a direct loan from Malay: gula-gula» gégula ‘sweets’ 
(in a general sense), cf. Hindi gul-gula; kara-kara, which is used instead of 
parakara Bug. <pérkara) ‘lawsuit etc.; kotika ‘tables used in practising astro- 
logy’; manusia man, human being’ (as opposed to animals; the word is seldom 
used, but generally understood); mula (in pa-mula ‘beginning’, mula-mula-nya 
‘in the beginning (from Bug. by the way of Parigi, which is spoken on the wes- 
tern coast of the Bay of Tomini); poasa, puasa ‘the Muslim fast’; rupa ‘outward 
appearance, sort (ma-rupa ‘nice’ ); rupiya 'guilder, rupiya’; sa'upana ‘stairs ; 
waniaga ‘merchant, foreigner’. Other words may have been borrowed from Bugi- 
nege, or directly from Malay: basa ‘language’ (naturalized, also used as & word- 
base); basa ‘to read, recite’ (entirely naturalized Y guru ‘teacher’ ( naturalized, 
serves as a base) and some other terms. A few. loan-words apparently came from 
Macassar: bija ‘offspring’; or from other Celebes languag-s: bagi ‘divide’; the above 
mentioned word bēlanja; naraka ‘hell’ from Parigi; nyila ‘prepared indigo” from 
the Ampana dialect, which has it from the Buginese. As far as we are able to 866; 
poe SURE paya reached these regions directly from a Malayan source: agama 
religion (mo-agama ‘to attend a course of Christian catechism’), dénda ‘fine, 
penalty (from o Moluccas); kapala ‘village-head’; karajan ‘to carry out & corvóe 
TNR kérja business, work, to carry out’: cf. Skt. kārya- SU ‘work, business% 
ota n AN. face, perhaps morgaw ‘title of one of the chiefs or of a funo- 
; d KS. «Mal. cara ‘id.’ <Skt. acara- AIT ‘conduct, beha- 
viour'; tambaga copper.*9 Curious words are Bar. parumbasa ' mbi h 
i.e. words liable to b : : a ‘ambiguous specc4s 
e e understood in more than one way, to say something in 
overt terms, adage which, though it i s DD S 
Mien eas ad identical’ with Tas 8 conneoted with basa ‘speech, langus£e; 
‘id? «gkt. paribhasa WRT ea e et adage, proverb', Mal. pērbēhasā 
tion’, its other meaning ‘censure vas ace Anatory rule, maxim, general defni- 
, reproof' is found in Old-Jayanese. 


Names of plants will be di ; m À 
The Islands East of Bali e discussed in the relative section. 


words were broug i 
baratapa “to try to meet, OT to come into 


The Sa kri : > 
Maigarai SCR ie other Indian) elements found in Bimanese, Rotinese 
her languages spoken on the islands east of Lombok are 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


CEA UA 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
S Digitized by Arya j i ennai and eGangotri 47 


1 e languages ie, com arati i 
gmall, including mainly such almost omnipr i : beer 


guna, mula, jaga (“to watch, guard, to be o 

Particular sound-laws have, 
appearance of these loans. Thus Bi 
of Mal. raksasa (Skt. raksasa- Uta): sahi side by side with 
sūksī aft); ala "(cast-)net' beside jala< Mal. ide 


-words which are, from the 
tion only a few, Kupang 


a and : he verb sal ‘to fish with a 
casting-net’), being phonetically irregular by the side of Rotinese dala ‘id’, loan- 


words from Malay or from another language which hag the word from Malay jala 
(Skt. sT&) 241 An instance of a problem of another character is Roti bana, banda 
‘animal’, Sawu bada ‘id.’, Sumbawa banda (dial. 'animal"), against Endeh (Flores) 
bada 'rich'; Sumbawa banda ‘possessions, riches’; Jonker42 regards these words ag 
loans from Javanese (bunda ‘riches’ (lit.), ‘working-capital’); without precluding the 
possibility of this route of the borrowing I should like to point to the Mal. benda 
'article of value, property, treasure’, and also ‘a thing, object’, or "stuff, matter". 
The origin of the word is, of course, Skt. bhanda- arts. e 
In part of the islands to the east of Bali we have interesting evidence of 
Javanese influence in addition to the influx of Malay elements: by both channels 
Indian words flowed further. In Sasak, the language of Lombok, loan-words are 
far from rare: not a few Arabic words were introduced in connection with reli- 
gious concepts; Dutch terms applying to political institutione, material culture and 
modern life in general and literary Javanese and Balinese expressions came in side 
"by side with Malay terms. Indian elements reaching Lombok by way of Javanese 


(or Balinese) are e.g. the wayang, or otherwise literary, terms: anantaboga (or coll. ` 


antaboga) the name of a mythological serpent : Skt. ananta- and bhoga- amean 
‘of endless coils’ 43; aria 'noble(man): Skt. arya- WRG baya ‘danger’: Skt. bhaya» 
WA; bakti *reSpectfully'&£4; batara in names of tissues and sacred places: Skt. bha- 
ttāra- AER ‘lord, (god)'; buta ‘monster’: Skt. bhita- Aa ‘evil spirit’; dial. jaya 'con- 
quering’, in general lit. use as an element cf many proper names: Skt. jaya- Wa 
‘victory’; mina ‘fish’: Skt. mina- HtA; gada ‘club’ (as a mythological weapon): Skt. 


* gadā El; géndewa ‘Arjuna’s bow’ (in antiquated speech also ‘a tambour’): Skt. 


gindiva. MISA; gili ‘mountain’: Skt. giri fif; idadari ‘nymph’: Skt. vidyādharā 
faerat; Indra, the name of the god, also an element in UC of books: Skt. Tnára- 
XFA; mantri in the literary senso of ‘councillor (of a king), the modern meaning 


« m SM S. 
overseer, official’ coming from Malay (or Javanese): Skt. manir Wet ‘councillor’; 


mérta (often in combination with the word for water) "holy water': Skt. amrai 
"HEN, pustaka ‘a book written on palm-leaves (lontar)': Skt. pustaka- Tet; raja 


* ™ina ‘the name ofa fish-oharaoter in the wayang: Skt. raja USI and mina. ata; 


« LPA EH de 
*aksasa ‘a monster (wayang-character)’: Skt. raksasa~ URE demons Sa. lions EE 


simha. fe; suria ‘the gun, the god Sun’: Skt. sūrya- 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


qii; péraba ‘lustre, shine, glow, 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


48 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati 


= ^ 
: Skt. senūpati- QIME. 


E 3 apati | enora l’ tt 
e': Skt. prabha THs senapati: & loss dignified character: istri "wife, 


-words have a more or ified t 
ēru aneze sense of ‘child’: Skt. yoga- ata ‘yoga’; 


^* Sk ; «t; in the Jav 
m um RUE Me laa qu. kērna ‘ea’: Skt. karna- 2 margi Be 
me m the idea of ‘going’: Skt. mārgā- ARTI way’ (the a D is kaiti = 
and, especially, Balinese: margi way, street; pérana in ihe sense o PE ne o y 
—in Balinese the word means ‘heart, mind, inner life’ and in general a at is 


connected with life» the vital breath’: Skt. prana- TIN ‘id’, Pine ves female 
privy parts’; the latter Balinese sense has also spread in Batavian ABA d where 
many Balinisms, due to Balinese elements of the population, Hero HR perona 
‘pudendum’ (in general)— ; roma in the Jav. and Bal. senso of hair of the head”: 
Skt. roma Wa ‘the bair on the body’. 

Among the words which becauso of their form must have come from Bali 
are gumi the earth; a greater island such as Java’: Skt. bhivmz alt earth’, Jav. 
bumi ‘id.’; lurgra and even lurga "permission, leave'» occurring beside nurga, < Bal. 
lugra or lugraha (there are also derivatives: ka-lugra ‘with leave of publie authori- 
ties’) beside nugra, nugraha which, however, mean ‘favour (towards inferiors ), 
prosperity, blessing’ (but pi-nugraha-(a)n is ‘leave-passport’): lit. Jav. nugraha 
‘favour’ < Skt. anugraha- AJAZ ‘kindness, benefis, favour’; (dial.) darta ‘meaning’ 
< Bal. (‘court-vocabulary’), daría ‘clear, understood, explaining’, Skt. padartha- 
Ugr4 ‘che meaning of a word or thing.*5 A typically Javaneso form is upata 
“oath, curse’: Skt. sapatha- ATA. 

A considerable number of Sanskrit words have been naturalized to such a 
degree as to become a base for derivatives: bagi ‘to divide, distribute’ (e.g. bagi-an, 
the native suffix indicating the result of a process: ‘part, portion, share heritage’): 
Skt. bhūgi etc. atrīt; baca ‘reciting’: Skt. vacas etc. 4Y:; dupa ‘incense’ (pē-ndupa-yan 
(Conse ): Bkt. dhüpa- WT incense’; guna which in this language completely means 
magic (bé-guna to enchant');+ 6 lepa which is the Skt. lepa- 7 ‘plastering, plaster, - 
anything smeared on, or, rather, the same word borrowed by way of Hindi lep(a) 
VY id., mortar, whitewash etc. > Mal. lepa ‘plastering, daubing’, Jav. di-lepa 
(i. BO UNO prefix) rough-cast etc.’, Bal. lepa ‘plaster, etc.: in Sasak ‘cement, to 
cement’; manah i intention, desire’ (manah-an ‘to have in view, mean, think of; 
in Balinese a Polite word for ‘heart, will, thought, opinion’): Skt. manas HA: ‘mind, 
OIM d calumny (verbs for ‘calumniating’): Skt. pisuna- IXIA; saksi ‘witness’ 
agas die qr toe? rasa ta à a or ‘ning fr (Bd. a 
"taste, meaning, feeling ote’) < Skt PAR pO iteel, consider, take thought'; OJav. rasa 

: ;T058- TA taste, sentiment, feeling’; ka-sansara- 


€ . , 
an misfortune’: Skt. samsara- dary * i 
é ; Ā i mundane life’; sédia’an ‘ j ēdi 
ready : Skt. sajja- ASH; sēri-an "better than” froms a SR 
bliss, glory’; bé-sisa ‘to leav 


aureol 


; ‘remnants of food’: 

er; nyorga to have a heaven on earth’ from 
R „Jaga etc. ' ^. b C 

Beng. jaga for ‘being vigilarit eto” Yer: of. Pkt. jaggati seat, 


came already from Bali: masan (suffix -an) 
sa time, Period’: Skt. mūsa- ata ‘month- 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya SAASEEREBaiNn INbona:and eGangotri 49 


the interest)’; 2é-raksa ‘to rule, govern’ from raksa, in Bal 
care; ka-sakti.an ‘supranormal power’ from sakti i 
powerful’: Skt. sakti- afte, 

Some Sanskrit loans in the langua 


i "protection, watch(ing), 
(magically or supranormally) 


ge of Lombok are interesting for their mean- 
ing: the word eka (Skt. eka- qa) ‘one’, no doubt elliptically, serves asa basa for ‘to 


concentrate upon another man’s death’, loba ‘very (much), badly ete.’ (Bal. ‘greedy, 
covetous, Mal. ‘greod’): Skt. lobha- ata greed’; dina (Skt. dina- fra ‘day’, likewise 
in Jav. and Bal.) refers to the ‘day of the main ceremony in honour of a dead person’; 
diwasa moment, hour (of the day)’, in Balinese a poetical word for ‘day’: Skt 
divasa- fzaa ‘day’; maya-maya ‘to be able to appear and vanish at w i ; 
faculty)’ the single word, which has been introduced by the literar 
‘shadow’, whereas the Malay meaning of this word is ‘phantom, elusi 
tial’, the doubled form meaning ‘clear, transparent’; the OJav. texts use it in various 
shades of meaning such as ‘illusion, delusion, phantom, deceptive’, here maya maya 
stands for ‘metamorphosis’; in modern Javanese the geminated form alone seemg 
to have survived, expressing such a sense as just glimmering or shining through, 
shimmering (esp. of green objects being at a distance)’: Skt. maya «141 "supra- 
normal power, illusion etc; nila (Skt. nila. Ne ‘dark-blue, black; indigo (colour)’) 
‘dark blue’ can, as a verb, mean ‘to dye’; Skt. papa- 1I ‘bad, evil, wicked’ which in 
Malay means ‘destitute’ and ‘miserable (in general)’ and in lit. Javanese ‘misery’, is 


in Sagak often used for ‘struck by a curse; roga is not only, asin Sanskrit 3HT and 
lit. Javanese, ‘disease’, but also ‘all that is dangerous’; cahya means ‘ray of light’ and 
‘any light radiated’: Skt. chaya Z1 ‘shadow, reflection, light’. A very interesting 
word is gunja, which serves as a technical term for various ancient ‘levies (also 
on gambling and cock fights) and rent-charges ete., now especially used for ‘an 


ill (as a magia 
y Way, means 
ve, unsubstan- 


“indemnification (consisting in a portion of the harvest) paid by those who reclaim 


land to the village-head'; in Bali the same word denotes a weight or measuret7, 
in NW. Sumatra an area measure; it is identical with Ach. gunja ‘an artificial rice 
measure (‘bushel’): Skt. and other Indian languages guzja "si ‘an artificial 
weight (4 grains of rice) called after definite berries, (Hindi) ‘the smallest of a 
jeweller's weights'. i 

But the remarkable meaning is not seldom due to foreign influence: in 
Sasak mitra (:Skt. mitra- fa ‘friend’) means "woman friend, i.e. concubine, cf. 
the Bal. mitra which serves as a root for having sexual intercourse with a coneu- 
bine or prostitute',-in Javanese mitra means a "male friend” as well as a woman 
friend’. Already in Old-Javanese the Skt. naraka- Aši hell' > Jav. idem could 
convey such connotations as misery; hellish; bad’, bence Bal naraka mintortane, 
disaster» illness’ and ma-naraka "having met with disasters , and Sas. tero as 
a base for ‘to treat (a person) infernally, to ill-treat’; anās (from mansa: Skt. 
mümsa- Ata ‘flesh, meat’) ‘to go in search of prey (anima : MM CU ka 

( i i n as, in Balinese and Sasak, Y. 

CMT MEUS d waya means "time, hour of the day; age; the 
exact time or moment’, in Balinese ‘age; aged, ripe, mature; a a n 
-mother', in Javanese time, hour of the day' and aged: ae perte aca 
vayas YU: ‘youthful strength, youth, age. Io Oa, E e Ra 
slaying, killing, death, destruction’ also meant epide i 


, Là k we find mērana 
, in lit. Balinese: ‘death, deadly, lethal, venomous , in Pana 


eropsg 4 + 
» - mē n 
MĀLA ‘getting worse (of wounds). Sas. pérbawa means omen, portent, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


350 Digitized by A SANSKRIT Dy DNDONDSL 
< Bal. prabawa ‘id.’ and "presertiment, foreboding eto.'; a lit, Jav, 
ower’: Skt. OJav. prabhava- ATA id., might eto. Bal. and 
(hand) writing’ (Bal. mé-sastra to write, to read ) tit, 
Jav. sastra "writing; literature <Skt. OJav. sasira- ara a (ra Ne canonical 
text etc.’ In Old-Javanese satmaka (Skt. aka) with the gou cou 1 also expresg 
the idea of ‘alone’, in Balinese and Sasak satmaka means exactly like (Skt. saksat 
alee) just asas it were’. In Balinese & s(é)kaha, or sēka iua: society, associa. 
tion; fellowship, organized community for various purposes H s(ē)kaha 4(é). 
runa ( « Skt. taruna- T&T ‘young man’) is a ‘young men’s (bachelor’s) association’, 
beside which there are ‘young women’s associations’, the s(é)kaha toya (<Skt, 
toya- ata water) is a ‘group of farmers united (for the furtherance of their in. 
terests) in connection with irrigation’; besides, there are other skahas of farmers 
and other persons;*” in Lombok the word denotes ‘a musical or dramatic club’: 
the prototype must be Skt. sakha Wal ‘companion’. In Balinese and Sasak tala not 
only means ‘floor, story’, but also ‘layer (in a beehive), honey-comb’; the latter 
sense, which is now the only one attached to the Jav. word tala, was, according to 
Van der Tuuk,5" extended tothe shelves of a cupboard or the room between 
them : the word is the Skt. tala- 4S ‘surface, flat roof, bottom’, In Sasak wada 
means ‘talk scandal, to slander’, and the derivative pér-wada { pér- is a native 
prefix) ‘calumniator’ and ‘a distorting mirror’, in Balinese the same word expresses 
among other ideas: ‘fault, (physical) defect? and forms derivatives for ‘to call a 
person deformed, to abuse or call a person names; in Javanese wada is a base 
for words meaning ‘scoffing’; in Old-Jav. wada is not only ‘speaking’ (Skt. vada- 
aTZ ‘speaking, speech’), but also ‘quarrelling’. 
MS Sometimes such 8 special meaning found in several languages entails an 
Ue in Sasak a sundari is either ‘a kind of whistle, fastened to the. 
pee r-pigeon oh as in Balinese, an Aeolian barp attached to a kite and 
] umming sound’; Jav. séndaren (< sēndari+.an) has the same meaning 
and in Sundanese sondari is 'an Aeolian harp which stands upright’ as well as t 
romana fee rti omi jn Tatar ann e cold 
rd for worm") sondari. Perbaps these words were 


derived from the name of a se j " 
M ED. rpent-demon called sundarī (Skt. gañ) ‘handsome, 


d. Other words of Indian origin occurrin 
considered as borrowed from Mal ēlanji 
ay : bel 9 i i 
ones purchases’; the form igama (tā at "OE MN SOS aa mgs 


which also occurs in Mala ‘ 
y; orna colour’ H : : E 
<Bkt. varya- 47; pēlēkara wh Which exists in Malay beside warna 


H 3 H D 
the wide-spread meaning: à ve (i.e. common) Bal. pērkarā, has 
Malay influe ; 8nd has no doubt 
"manner see Word and meaning are also Javanese: ae Se eae 
Malay pelihara ‘looking ae Also Skt, prakaran uA A 
ay pélihara ‘looki a- NU "question, matter’. The 


ng after, fostering, keeping animals) Was borrow ed: pe 
ara id., tending . ef. 8 D 0 e R i 
p possesg n, househ 
A kt aT. raha qa [0] 10 old, marrying, wif ) 


occupation, concern’; further: w 
i H : the word; i w. 
which we deal el ; së (Gentē. uen E: 
Dy no leone sérta ‘along CIR xs of Village-hoad’ ith 
mpany, of. sūrhena ada ‘in th any of’ al. id.” <Bkt. sartha- 
of. Moreover, some words 


may haye come from M 

e al 

Mal. céndérawaseh "ira of iso of a mysterious bird” : of. 
Ssussed elsewhere in this work: 


presage 

prabawa ‘supranormal p 
= G 

Gas. sasira means letter, 


ay: candrawasa ‘the na 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


| 
| 


Digitized by Arya SAVA BU d ANDR RTAnd eGangotri 51 


arti meaning, significance, and as a base ērti, 
‘comprehension, insight’, 

Not a few loans are often or common] 
words. Such phrases are: adat (:Arab. ’adat ‘cust 
‘customs and usages’; purnama ‘the full moon 
native word: ‘moon’) purnama; géruda muitkur 
at the back of the head-dress of nautch-girls’: Skt, garuda- A&S ‘Visnu’s bird’ and 
the native muAkur ‘being at the back”; naga (Skt. nüga- ARI espe D E 
member of names of dragons, plants or tissues; bala ‘army’ (Skt. bala. aw boxes 
forces') in various expressions for & “troop, band, crowd of demons soldiansspirated 
etc. ; baisa (: Skt. vamsa- Fz ‘race ete.’) in baisa Sasak ‘the Sasak S a Sasak’ 
in bansa panjak ‘the serving classes’; dana in dana-darma ‘munificent, charitable’ 


(and in derivatives): Skt. dāna- a4 ‘granting, gift? and dharma- wd which is 
discussed in another section.5 2 


in Arti ‘to understand’, pē-nērti-an 


y used in combination with other 
tom ) cara (:Skt. acara- ATR. "usage') 
(Skt. pūrņamūs quiam) in bulan (a 
the technical name of an ornament 


Dorneo 

As far as the dictionary of that language? can be relied on, the vocabulary 
of Busang, a language spoken in Central Borneo, includes the following Indian 
words, &ll of them usual in Malay: arēti ‘sense or meaning of a word etc. < Mal. 
ērti, cf. Skt. artha- AÑ; asa apparently from Malay: rasa ‘feeling, taste’: Skt. rasa- 
Ta; basa < Mal. baca ‘to read’: Skt. vacas, vaca 4Y:» ATA etc.; dēnda ‘punishment: 
penalty’ < Mal.: Skt. danda- 473%; jaga ‘being awake or vigilant' « Mal. idem: 
MIA. jagga-, Beng. jaga SIM ‘wakeful’; jala ‘net, enare’ < Mal. idem: Skt., Pkt. 
jala- ATS ete.; gula ‘sugar’ < Mal. idem: MIA. guda-, gula- JS, JS ‘molasses’ ete.; 
guna ‘profit, use’ < Mal. idem: Skt. guna- I; guru ‘teacher’ <Mal. idem: Skt. 
guru- We; lēpiah <Mal. rupiah ‘a Dutch guilder or rupiya’: Skt. rüpya- SA ‘silver’: 
pērsaya ‘to believe, trust’ « Mal. pércaya ‘id.’: Skt. pratyaya- SAA; priksa ‘to inves- 
tigate, to question’ < Mal. périksa ‘id’: Skt. pariksa THR raja, laja ‘chief, king’ 
< Mal. idem: Skt. raja ts; saksi ‘witness’ < Mal. idem: Skt. saks: Tt; sētēra 
‘silk’ < Mal. idem: Skt. sūtra- QA ‘thread’; compare also kēlēkaji saw < Mal. 
gérégaji ‘id.’: cf. Skt. krakaca- WEA. The semantic classes to which these words 
belong are typical. 

It may be noticed in passing that the other Dayak tongues, as far as we 
know them, have also welcomed a number of similar words. In the southern 
districts of Borneo (Kalimantan) and in the regions near the river-mouths Java- 
nese influence has made itself felt. During the flourishing period of the empire of 
Majapahit (XIV century A.D.) and in later centuries Javanese terms could also 
reach the voasts of the great island north of Java. In the Malay chronicles 


* written in those coastal districts where the Malays had introduced their idiom, we 


come across unmistakable Javanisms, and among them some Sanskrit words have 


o 

come in: prayogo (the o vowels point to the Javanese G pronunciation of the origi- 
nal, and still West-Javanese, a) ‘deliberation, prudence, tact: Skt. prayoga- 

“enterprise, device, performance’; wayah, wajah ‘age’? Skt. povas TE youth; M 
lg; kusuma ‘flower’: "kt. kusuma- Sai paduraksa fore-court which we . shall 
refer to again elsewhere; the name of a style of kris-hilt boma-wijaya: Skt. Bhauma- 
Wa ‘name of a demonihercuandriauae fasa ‘victory’. The ways by-which other 
Sanskrit words reached these regions are, however, doubtful, benanees, ies aa 


found in Malay as well. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


, 52 Digitized by Arya Samaj Fo! i 


Philippine Languages i 
Before directing our attentio 
dwell for a moment on the linguistic con 


‘hich have a bearing on our subject. 
PvE. Itisa well-known fact that India and her languages have exerted an 


enormous influence upon the peoples of Siam, Annam» Cambodia and the adjacent 
regions of the South-East Asian continent. Confining ourselvos to the inhabitantg 
of the ancient Campa, because of the unmistakable relations their language, Cam, 
has with the Indonesian languages which are the subject of this book, we can say 
that the eastern part of the Indo-Chinese peninsula has played a very important 
role in the process of Indian cultural expansion. Though it is very difficult to 
find out precisely the time when the Indian influence was established in these 
regions, it is clear that the commercial and political penetration was rapidly 
followed by a complete cultural conquest. The local population soon assimilated 
the new civilization and adopted the laws and administrative systems, art and 
religion, alphabet and literature of the Indians playing, in all probability, an 
essential part in interpreting these elements of civilization to China. We know, 
for instance, that after the Campa king Sambhuvarman was defeated by a Chinese 
general (605 A.D.), the Chinese returned with a rich booty amongst which were 
also 1350 Buddhist books, all written in the Cam alphabet (which is of Indian 
origin), and a Chinese priest was entrusted with the work of translating these 
texts into his mother-tongue. The inscriptions of this region cover a period of 
over 1200 years, the early ones being written in Sanskrit and the later ones in the 
indigenous language. After the Hindu or Hinduized dynasties had ruled for nearly 
1300 years over the kingdom of Campa, which in its most prosperous days was 
contiguous to the great Chinese empire, it was overrun by savago tribes from the 
north, and the Hindu civilization was destroyed, though some vestiges, apart from 
the remains of the architectural monuments, are left over to this day. ‘The sto- 


ries of Mahabharata and Ramayana still form the themes of literary works and 
dramatic performances.5 + 


n to the Philippines it might be convenient to 
ditions of those regions of Further India 


nt many elements to Cam, but th 
e i e number of 
au» Rd foremost, very much contributed to the enriching 
ea (3 e i N 
ed ditying its lexicographic character. At rough estimate 
about 9350 words. We might, i 
eultivation of Sanskrit 
Indian influence, conditions wore 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Saj BRinidatign GhevOR reed eGangotri 53 


poets, at least, describe them as versed in astrol 


the schools of philosophy; We farther know, likewise on the strength of epigraphic 
records, that the two epics were quite familiar in Campa, that the smrti lit 
especially Manu, as well as Purenic and Šaiva and Vaisnava religtena ceo 
well-known. The authors of the inscripti y EN Ur 
various styles of writing and metres. pona tir ienanc great fami Hat yas 

The Indian words in Cam are on the whole also found in those languages 
of Indonesia which have borrowed a larger number of loan-words. As a rule they 
can easily be recognized. Not all are current; the 'mystical vocabulary' (as 
Aymonier and Cabaton call it) has adopted such special terms as bramórah which 
represents Skt. brahmacūrin- FAINT unmarried student”. Other words have special 
application in literary texts: thus kamūr, kumar <Skt. kumara- FAR means 
‘child’ in literary style and ‘unborn child’ in definite religious contexts. 

It is an intoresting fact that the number of Sanskrit words in the main 
languages of the Philippine islands, to which we have already referred in our first 
chapter, contrasts strikingly with their scarcity in the idioms of North Celebes 
which, in other respects are closely connected with the Philippine tongues.- We 
shall for instance, not be totally out in our reckoning when we assume the amo- 
unt of Indian Joans in Tagalog to amount to about 250. The only explanation 
we are able to give for this must be sought in the preference given by the ancient 
navigators of Cambodian and Peninsular origin to the Philippine route. As the 
customary way followed in travelling between the Straits and the Moluceas ran 
via the sea-ports of the northern coast of Java and South Celebes, the northern 
part of this island had for a long period no share worth mentioning in the inter- 
national traffic. 

Many of the Sanskrit words in Tagalog and Bisaya,>® of course, refer to 
commerce or to commodities and products of material civilization. As we håva 
already observed a considerable part of them was also adopted by other IN. lan- 
guages. Suffice it to give a selection : Tag. banyaga ‘merchant’, Bis. baligya to trade’ 
(ma-baligya-on (with native affixes) 'business-man') which belong to Skt. vünijya 
wif 'trade';57 Tag. halagá ‘value, price’, Bis. kalāga ‘id.’ < Skt. argha- 9rd; Bis. 
lába, Tag. pa-laba (pa- is a native prefix) ‘profits, usury’ < Skt. lābha- WIA ‘gain’ ; 
Bis. palada 'gold-foil, gilding’: Jav. prada ‘id.’ (esp. when applied to leather or 
tissue ), Mal. pērada ‘gold foil, tinsel59 < Skt. pūrada- T3 quicksilver’ ; Tag. 
saklā ‘wheel, ring’, Bis. sákla ‘a ring-shaped object’: Jav. (lit.) cakra disan (as a 
mythological weapon, the diso of the sun’) < Skt. cakra- a wheel etc.; Tag. 
sandáta 'weapon(s) : Mal. ete. sēnjata, to which we shall revert; Tag. tags arti- 
ficial pond’ < Skt. tadāgā- ASIT ‘tank, pond;5% Tag. Bis. talikala chain’ < Skt. 
órhkhala-, Srakhala se,» kati ‘ton millions’: Skt. kofi- tf; Pampanga kasa 
‘artificial pearls eto.’ and Tag. kasa "bracelet of coloured stones are the Skt. kaca: 
"TW ‘glass’, plur. ‘glass-pearls’; Tag. eto. kopya, kupya iron helmet’ < Skt. kupya- 
$4 ‘any metal but silver and gold’. LISA g 

ane terms ue point to a Prākrit prototype: Tag. suka, Bis. ok 
‘vinegar’: Mal. cuka ‘id., i.e, palm-wine whioh bas goneisagx inp pub e pe j ds k 
< Pkt. cukka Ga ‘sorrel’ of. Hindi cūk Ļā ‘acid, sorrel’, cūkā <T sorrel’, oe 
SE ‘vinegar, sorrel’ eto. Tag. sitha *multicoloured pieces of cloth’, thoug admit- 
č à ; =n 'variegated, multicoloured; figures, image 
ting of being connected with OJav. citra variegated, A them tena iod Ten 
< Skt. citra. faa ‘bright, manifold, variegated’, the Tag. A, then being 


ogy» dharma, Panini’s grammar and 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 4 ss 


54 Digitized by Mod SERIE IN INDONESIA 

i m that Sanskrit word 99 and must, 
irrational orthography, ur citah, cita ‘a sort of flowered cotton 
in my opinion, like the e) 'jd'61 be brought into connection with the 
U a Vata. Deng: chip (ot. Hindi chim, ohit dfe ‘chinte’s a, 
RTA maiHe Mars sb Gnd» Ot ns chitt- ‘to scatter, splasb, besprinkl 
these words are derived from an Indo-Aryan ; ; K! 
eto. and this MIA. form, or, perhaps the Port. chita Which vi) borrowed from it, 
probably accounts for the Tag. form sitha. Tag. daga. to walk : of. pēta Jaggar be 
wakeful’, Beng. jūgā ete. Farther: Tag. lakha in the sense of lac’: Pkt. lakkha 
qal; Tag. liha ‘stroke, line, Pampanga lia in à specialized sense the line 
dividing the slices of a fruit’: Pkt. leha al ‘line’, in MIA. languagos liha eto. 
A g instead of a k in the corresponding Sanskrit forms may be due to Prākrit in. 
fluence: thus Tag. dalaga "young women’, if it may be connected with Skt. darika 
gRs ‘girl’; .of. also the word for ‘copper’: Tag. Bis. tumbaga, which is elucidated 
on another page. In other cases the change k> g seems to be a Philippine pheno- 
menon: golobhi: Skt. krodha- $t% (see further on). 

Not a few words have suffered a change of form. We shall have to return 
to such ‘prothetic vowels’ as appear in Tag. aksaya ‘destruction’ in another chap- 
ter: this word represents the Skt. ksaya- NU ‘loss, decay, destruction’. Instead of an 
$ before a nasal a ¢ is e.g. found in tadhana ‘agreeing with a person on...’ < Skt. 
samdhāna- att ‘joining together, uniting, union’; an original 7 repeatedly became d 
in Tagalog: daga (see above); dala < Skt. etc. jala- ae "fishing-net'. Au 1 arose 
from an r in Tag. antala ‘intervene, occupy’: Skt. antara- &edx ‘being in the inte- 
rior, interval’; dala ‘loads burden’, and as a verbal root ‘carrying, lifting up’ <Skt. 
dhara- AX ‘bearing’ or dhara- alt ‘holding, bearing’, and dalita ‘suffering’ <Skt. 
dhrta- Za ‘borne’; golodhi and golobhi ‘fly out, lose patience’ < Skt. krodha- «ta 
anger, wrath’; halata ‘presume, suspect <Skt. artha- ay in the sense of ‘sense, ' 
notion’; labhasa ‘destruction, destroying’: Skt. r 
sity’; ladya ‘a title’ < Skt. raja ual ‘king’; lasa ‘taste, relish’ < Skt. rasa- TU; 
palamara ‘ungrateful, nonchalant’ < Skt. pramada- sale ‘negligence, carelessness’; 


come across curioug transformations. Th - TH. We repeatedly 
D us Tag, ali G p 
gelf of” represents Skt, pariprsia- qu [erue i do qu: or 
sylla 


regarded as a native Prefix a 

: f nd hence dr 
Prodigal, Equandering’: Skt, paribhogu- EE » 
Payment, wages, interest: 


Pampanga opa “day's Wages’ is of o 
marivara tedious, 


ble, hardship’, T ze? firesome' may be the Skt. panpa 
s : a + zaribadha 
banging down’, Mi 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by arya ERE Fuka RDORURREA and eGangotri 55 


There are, further, remarkable instances 
The Skt. vitāna- AN v pene meaning "extension, great extent, development, 
canopy, ik e kr , 5 aiso occurring in such compounds as latavitana- salaat 
je oanopy mace One acc by the ancient Javanese to denote 

oovered summerhouses , Seats FE tribunes » festive halls or tents etc.’, in Tag., 
however, bitana is a sort of nom in Bis. ‘a fishing-net'; Skt, duhkha- Sa *un- 
pleasant, sorro W; i rouble, pan on Tag. dukhā ‘poor’ (but compare already in 
Sanskrit duhkhajivin- gaitaa living in distress or poverty’), whereas the Mal. 
duka moans grief’; Tag. sutla silk, silken’, Bis. sukla ‘id.’, like Jav. sutra, Mal. 
sutēra, Min. suto, TBat. sutlora, sinlorā, surta, Gayo sétéra etc. not in the Sanskrit 
sense < Skt. sutra- YA thread. A similar common IN. deviation from the Skt. 
meaning can be observed in Tag. laksa, Bis. laksa ‘ten thousand’: Mal. Jav. etc. 
laksa, lēksa id.’ < Skt. luksa- SY ‘one hundred thousand’. Kern®® was douktlens 
right in observing that these cases point to common vicissitudes of the words 
concerned in the different parts of the Archipelago, that is to say that either a 
parallel semantic development, or, what seems more probable, a common starting- 
point of the travellings over the islands must be assumed. Yet, it is worth noticing 
that the Cam laksa (< Skt. laksa- wq) has kept the original meaning of a 
hundred thousand’. An interesting history can be written of the Skt. ubhaya- SRA 
‘both, of both kinds’: in OJav. it came to mean ‘agreement (mutual understanding 
eto.), promise, permission’, in modern Jav. (obsolete) ‘appointment’; in Balinese 
it is a courteous synonym of sémaya ‘appointment, agreement etc. (Skt. samaya- 
WWW ‘agreement, compact, contract’; in Tagalog which may have borrowed the 
word from Javanese the meaning delay’ has become prominent. . 

A special semantic development appears in Tag. duluhaka ‘to-put falsa 
colours upon, to interpret in a false way’: Mal. durhaka ‘insubordination’ < Skt. 
drohaka- ZY&* ‘injuring, laying violent hands upon’ the existence of which ag a. 
second member of a compound (cf. lopaka- Ut etc.) was assumed by Kern; . the 
word has now been found in two ancient Malay inscriptions. Tag. dúsa means 
‘penalty, penance’: Mal. dosa ‘sin, offence against divine law’, Jav. dosa sin, crime’ 
<Skt. dosa- SIN ‘fault, sin’; in Cam dus, dusa ete. mean not only sin, fault’ but 
also ‘pardon, remission’! An interesting change of meaning is: Skt. gandha- tā 
‘smell, odour’ > Tag. gandā ‘to adorn’, ma-ganda ‘nice, pleasant, in Mal. Jav. etc. 
the Indian meaning has been preserved; a similar semantic development 15,8000 
in Jav. arum ‘fragrant, odorous’ > ‘sweet, nice; Skt. karunya- tēva pity came 
to express the idea of ‘feeling affection for, loving: Tag. kalunya lover, mistress : 
Whereas Cam karun means ‘present, favour (like the Malay kurnia, kanina 
‘bounty, favour of a superior’) and also ‘only (son); Skt. rekha and (or) p 
Vat, Saal ‘stroak, lino, drawing’ were the prototype of Tag. likha idol,in EX 

do © d'. Another Tag. word for idol is 
reka could express the same idea: image of a £0 PUE ialkoltheumage 
liza, no doubt< Skt. linga- fea ‘emblem (esp. that of Siva)’, De au AE 

A ‘ : (o a high degree, very; 8 more original 
of a god’. Tag.lubha means excessively, to a Mg TOC satin 
meaning still appears in such phrases as ma-lubha sa P erii d Te in eating” 
forming a sort of adjeotives) "eating immoderately, excessive d pen eae 
< Skt. lobha- Bx ‘greed’, cf. Mal. loba “covetousness eto. Skt. rūks i 


S 63? $ b 

rough, not greasy, hard, harsh, not soft eto. 207 serie E x ES 
: in à 2 

OT of an uncared-for appearance (of persons krata sense of ‘mourning-attire’.® 8 


6.84), while Tag. luksa has completely assume 


of a special semantic development. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


) DONESIA 

Digitized by Arya sf SRI INC INDG and eG 
urning',- pa-malaia ‘be in mourning’: Tag. balata o 
A A A 

aa ‘religious practice» vow eto.’ > OJav. brata 4a! 


. € 
Tag. man-di-digma (man- a native prefix expressing such ideas nm pag ag 
regular occupation’, di- reduplication emphasizing the meaning OF tno Dase, expres. 
een Ķ « ror:69 the base digma possessing oneself of’ h 
sing intensiveness eto.) conquerors aimee war of qu ag 
been derived”? fram the Skt. jikma- fre ala, Ka was (Oh Talkan 
Rietsdfā ‘bend down’. In the Philippines Skt. mantra- AFA sacred text or 
formula, charm eto.’ has the specialized meaning spell, incantation : Tag. mantala 
(of. also Cam manirak ‘magic formula, incantation ) though Bis. mantala 
aleo means ‘advice’. In a similar way Skt. siddhi- fate complete attainment in 
general, the acquisition of supranormal powers by magical means etc,’ (see above) 
became a Tag. base (sirhi) to express such ideas as very wise, esp. being a clever 
fortune-teller’. As texts containing many foreign words were unintelligible to the 
great mass of the people Skt. kavi- alà ‘sage, poet’, and, hence, in OJav. ‘literary 
language and style’, came to mean ‘unintelligible speech'. Tag. muksa means 
‘dead’; it has given rise to a group of secondary forms with which we shall con. 
cern ourselves in another chapter.71 Like the Jav. muksa, muksa (lit.) ‘to dis» 
appear, sink away, to be carried away by feelings etc.’ the Tag. word has completely 
given up the sense of ‘emancipation’ which characterizes Skt. moksa- MT. The Skt. 
sampratyaya- SIAI ‘agreement, perfect trust or faith’ having become sanpalataya 
‘trust, faith’ in Tagalog (cf. Jav. pitaya ‘id.’ <Skt. pratyaya-), has given rise to the 
noun pa-sanpalataya ‘who tries to inspire confidence’ i.e. ‘a hypocrite’ (pa- isa Tag. 
prefix). Tag. opasalaan ‘traitors flatterer’ may be considered a derivative of * wpasala 
< Skt. upacāra- STAT ‘polite or obliging behaviour , etc.’ in its sense of ‘bribe, 
solicitation’.72 Bis. budhi and Tag. burhi ‘plotted treason’ (cf. also Mal. budi in 
the sense of ‘design’ and the Jav. sense of ‘contriving’) may safely be regarded as 
‘the Skt. buddhi- gfē ‘the intellectual faculty; design’. Tag. haraya ‘imagination, 
opinion’ probably represents the Skt. hrdaya- €q4*t ‘mind’. Tag. salanta ‘poor, desti- 
tute’ « Skt. srūnta- Alea ‘tired, exhausted’: salisalita ‘to talk, chat’ is a reduplica- 
tive form of the base salita ‘narrative, story’ <Skt. carita- afta ‘deeds, adventures, 
cf, Mal. cērita story etc; Bis. samuha ‘friend, mate’, Tag. salamiha ‘to unite 
<Skt. samüha- WA assemblage, association! >Mal. sēmua ‘all, 
whole’ (ka-samua-nya ‘all of them, the whole lot’). Tag 
is no doubt Skt. mandala- ATES ‘circle, 


€ 
In Bisaya balata means MO 
continence eto. < Skt. vrata- 


every one of, the. 
. mandala ‘a pilo of rice-eate 
; aes a collection’; Tag. simi-sigla ‘to hurry (a 
person), (-mi- is the infix -um- with assimilated vowel, it helps to form verbs) 
<Bkt. sighra- ate quick > Mal. sēgēra 'speedily eto.'; Tag. bahagya 'sonrcely, 
Early. of, D bhagyena WT ‘Luckily’; Bis. yigi 'vorbous, talkative’ is in all 
probability Skt. yogi Mt ‘possessed of supranormal powers, a contemplative saitā 
a follower of the yoga system’; we may suppose an intermediate henni ‘philo! 


sopher. In Tagalog and Pam isa ‘fi 
AM ‘a serpent: demon’, ee n gagas a figure-head': it is the Skt. naga- 


lasa ‘pleasure, delight, lust” < Skt, y 


"face! < Skt. mukha- ma 


38 ‘desiro, »n kha 
JA, in Malay Se Ire, pleasure eto”; Tag. mt i 


£ , 0. 
face’, in the sense of 'oountenanc?! 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


~ test’ <Skt. pariksa Tite 'examination! >Mal. pir 


Digitized by Arya SdhAàySEurdetien PREC 14 eGangotri 


57 
‘facial. expression, front otc; Tag, 


mula ‘starting-point? < 
beginning' > Mal. etc. mula ‘origin, ee 


Skt. mila. 5 
beginnings’; T 


Tag. paliksa ‘to try, put to the 
. € . ~ 
iksa ‘to examine, peruse, inquire 


into’ (kurai p. literally ‘(I am) wanting (Mal. kurai ‘falling short’) in examina- 


tion’ i.e. Iam not quite sure, I don't know’), also ‘(to punish) inconsiderately’; 
sida to destroy’ <Skt. cheda- 97 ‘cutting, dividing, disturbance’, cf. in the Malay 
dialect of Sélangor (Peninsula) tér-cida ‘dislooateg’ (tér- is a Malay prefix indica- 


ting thata person or object is affected by the idea expressed by th d- 
Jav. (lit.) ceda “defect, to be defective’, meer cage eee 


It has been supposed that definite Indian | 
Islanda by way of Malay or J avanese. Thus Tag. bandi ‘leased land, landed pro- 
perty aad Pampanga bandi (landed) property’ without h has been derived? 3 from 
the Jav. banda (lit.) riches, capital’ (cf. also Sund. banda "possession(s), property’ 
and Mal. bénda a thing of value, article’): Skt. bhanda- WS ‘goods, wares’. The 
seme sound is, however, also lost in words for which such travellings were not 
assumed: Tag. barga ‘attacking, fighting’: Skt. bhanga- xm ‘breaking, overthrow, 
refutation’ which is found in Old-Javanese to express such ideas aa "refractory, 
rebellious, conceited’, mod. Jav. also ‘resist (the police etc.) and regionally, 'refrac- 
tory, difficult (to be executed)’. In other words the has been preserved: Tag. 
katha (in derivatives) 'composiug (writings), making verses’ < Skt. katha «Ul 
‘tale, story’. Tag. dulubasa or dalabasa ‘interpreter’, which contains the Skt. bhasa 
WITI ‘speech, language’, may be the Mal. juru bahasa or Jav. juru basa ‘id. 
According to Kern”+ Tag. gahasa ‘precipitate, rash, unmanageable’ may be ex- 
plained from Jav. sahasa ‘rash(ness) etc.’ (< Skt. sahasa- AZE id”) the first syllable 
of which was considered as the prefix sa-, the Tag. equivalent of which is ka- 
Which, Kern holds, became ga-; though possibly this supposition cannot be con- 
firmed by reliable arguments.”'* 

Languages of Sumatra: Gayo and Achehnese 

Turning now to the influence exercised by Malay upon the neighbouring 
tongues of Sumatra, Gayo, Achehnese and Batak, we first draw attention to those 
terms which we have already met in Celebes or in islands east of it, mentioning in 
passing such changes of meaning and other peculiarities as seem worthy of notice. 
In Gayo we find: agama, igama, ugama ‘religion’; basa ‘language’ (in Ach. also 
‘good manners’, as in Mal.); baca ‘to read, recite’ (Ach. boēt id”); bénasa ‘destroyed 
(see above) (Ach., KBat. binasa) ; bēr6lē ‘idol, esp. spirits of trees and swamps, but 
in general all beings or objects revered contrary to the prescriptions of Islam’ (the 
Karo-Batake, too, believe the bérhalas to be a olass of spirits) < Mal. bérhala; 
bécara etc. ‘deliberation’ (Ach. bicara); blónjó ‘outlay’ (Ach. dūlanja, KBat. bélanja 


oans reached the Philippine 


meaning in Malay, reminding the Indian E 
‘head (in a figurative sense, as a title eto. : : 
aa in KBat. the meaning ‘(first ) quality, the best e pem SAS 
honey, tobacco-leaves ) eto. no doubt under the ate EDU number 
Phrases as kšpala susu ‘oream of the milk’ eio; kērjo s ae ce TURIS 
of phrases) ‘common activity, indicating the proper pe : wedding, marriage’ 
tant family-feast'75, ‘feast’, but usually wedding-party, i Bee 


(Ach. képala ‘headman, chief’), 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


58 Digitized by Arga SEA ID UNA RON Ana eGangotri 


give in marriage" and several other derivatives; da Ach. kórója 
dding ), KBat. kērja ‘fostivity’ < Mal- kérja occupation’ ; 
because of, for’ (Ach. küróna); kētik6 ^ moment! (algo 
sy; (Ach. kutika ‘moment, tables E. divination’); 
g ” (KBat. idem, TBat. loksa id”); manusió human being’: 
S te" on binaga ‘retail trade’) E Mal. bKr)niaga; (lit.) mëntëri 
'a high functionary’, in the same Way Ach. mūntroč (in KBat. mēntēri is ‘the 
queen (in ohess)); mērdēka ‘free’ (Ach. madeka or anaes free (from slavery), 
freedman, free (from duties, obligations)’); nērdka ‘hell’ (Ach. noraka, néraka); 
niraca 'asmall balance’; nēgē ‘dragon’ (in mythology aud divination); pasa ‘fast’. 
p (r)Mana (see above); pēlr)kara ‘question, cause eto.” (also KBat.: ‘cause, 
lawsuit); (lit.) pētēri ‘princess’ (Ach. putroé ‘id.’); pujà "worship, adore’, algo ‘to 
fondle (a child)’; priksó ‘to examine into’; rasa ‘taste eto.’ and ‘quicksilver’; r pid 
'guilder (KBat. rupiyah, rumpiyah ‘id.’); r sid ‘secret’; röjö ‘raja, i.e. an hereditary 
and patriarchal chieftain of a family or of a group of families descended froma 
common ancestor, and at the same time political head of a village or of 8. part ofa 
village; he upholds the customary law of his community, leads the management of 
its common interests and public affairs and pronounces judicial decisions’ (in KBat., 
however, a raja is ‘2 person of royal descent’ and ‘the king (in chess)’); rupó ‘outward 
appearance? (KBat. rupa ‘id., form, colour’); saksi witness (saksen< *saksi-an ‘take 
a person to witness’); saudóró ‘brother’ in a sense which impressos us as transferred: 
brethren’ are all men who, being considered united to another by membership of the 
same clan’ or family, are under the same röjö (sce above); hence they are not al- 
lowed mutually to marry their female relatives (Ach. seédara, ceédara ‘brothers and 
sisters’); sēmpērnē ‘complete’ (seeabove); sit ra ‘silk’ (usually imported from Acheh: 
Ach. sutra id., and often worn by men, seldom by women, KBat. sutēra sotera 
silk’); svara ‘sound’; tapa ‘asceticism’ (in the Gayo way: on a mountain, ata place 
m to be baunted by ghosts or spirits, & the confluence of two rivers aia the adept 
es si trial, e.g. the coming of & tiger, high water etc. such a trial 
: Judi ch is also used as a base for ‘test, allay (gold etc.), put to the 
test’, and is the Skt. suddhi- giz ‘purity, purificat i kos NT 
(> Mal. sudi tro E ME ;purifieatory rite, holiness , Pkt. suddhi- gs 
$ i , 5, not to be conneoted 7 6 th Mal. uji ‘testin 
trying with a touohstone), in a similar way KB P. P enu m 
(ara e copper’) Ach, pe m ay at. and Ach. tapa™7; témbogo brass 
A 3 MRS 7 y copper, red ellow' or ‘white’ i 
, Zine, tinred iron’) being, if need be, added; cēlak RT O) (for tin, 
wretoh' (often as a term of abuse; di Ane Im S ope fortuna cuu 


88 an exclamation: ‘miserable, awful i i 
mere term of abuse): Mal. PEN een d Rete oaa 


above). One or two excepted, the a 


(also kērj6-i *&o 
'aotivity, feast, We 
kērna, kéréna, kana “cause, 
in connection with divinatio 


royal residence’ < Skt. asthdna- 
atdwa...atawa ‘either (whether)... 
rts of sentences in such a way that 
atawa which still ocours in Kēdab 


hen $i 
oe, in all probability, KBat. atat 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ATENTA ‘audience or assemb 
, fa : 1 
or’ (in Ach, atawa connec neni 
only one of them Can ex 
and Djakarta (also uawa 


atawa ‘or’, 

ts two sentences or pa 
press reality) < Ma]. 
Or, usually, atau; 


Digitized by Ary&/SRRISRE GU md Pt pag go nd eGangotri _ 


59 
CNET ty» 

‘or’) «kt. atha va (maa) ‘or’, when repeated ‘either...or’, Skt. uta vd (Sa an) ‘or 
(else); atra» ata, rēta "for, because eto (causal conj 


conjunction, in a similar way Ach, 
[i Li . 
atra aia: Mal. harta, arta "property" < Skt. artha- 44 "object, property, matter, 


profit’ (borrowed in younger TA, languages); beda ‘distinction, difference! (Ach. 
bida) : Mal. idem -«Skt. bheda. WA id’; begis, bakgi6 ‘good fortune’ (Ach. bagia, 
bahgia ‘id.’): Mal. bahagia ‘good fortune (sent by God) ete., fortunste(ly) < Skt, 
bhagya- ATA ‘lot, fortune’; biöyö ‘a presentation ceremoniously offered to a guru, 
through whom a sick person has been restored, a wish granted,a child has finished 
learning the Koran otc.’ ( Ach. biaya expense, outlay, charges, Presentation, 
esp. a gift offered by the newly married man to his wife DE Mal. biaya expendi- 
ture' (in Indonesia now lit.; in the Peninsula working expenses’ e.g. of the cost 
of running a poultry-farm, of money spent on building a mosque eto.) <Skt. vyaya- 
saa ‘expense’; Disi ‘poison’ esp. ‘venom’ (Ach., KBat. idem): Mal. bisa blood-poison, 
venomous' (of bites of tigers and erocodiles as well 88 of the stings of scorpions, 
centipedes etc., also of wounds fram krisses ) XSkt. visa- faq poison, genome 
Pkt. visa- faa, Oriya bisa, Hindi bis ete.; budi usually in the combination budi- 
pēkērti or budi-pēnērti "correct bearing’ ( Ach. budi or budiman to behavo well, 
wise’) < Mal. budi (pékérti) ‘character, natural ability, disposition , budi qualities 
of mind and heart’ <Skt. buddhi- gfe ‘mind ete. bumi the ue S & E 
body’ (likewise Ach. bumòë ), "surface of the earth (also in TBat. »u Sonet e 
whole) earth, world’, sometimes also ‘soil’ <Skt. bhumi- kd jn ; ae ca eie 
"communication, account, story (with the exception of fairy: mane in xa jā : 
Mal. cēritēra ‘story, narrative’ (in Kédah cēlēra) <Skt. cis Šajā 4 z e 
tures’; cálikó ‘a dagger of foreign manufacture : of. Marg dd. se x : x 
short curved sword or dagger'; cérka spinning-wheel (ie. ic = re 
water-c. is a ‘paddle-wheel’), Ach. jérdka ‘wheel (in A Ke pes 
sorka ‘spinning-wheel’< in all probability & form RI ae ofa feline 
(Pers. carkha 'spinning-wheel'); cind ‘a charaeber sore a is; ho TaN EROS 
which has once fought and won, and by which the erre soe — 
future, (also) the tender spot on the body of RE RÉEL Mess 
already been injared’s (of men) {ie a they are 
which hurt a person’s We seklingacolšidāiji C ENTRE EN 
ashamed’, Min. cenó ‘mark on the OR PRE hiccinos aviso etd 
hurt and healed, mark indicative of its E NR pes Le 
hurting a person's sensibilities (see d o "masc: B oihana FERAE 
ing-cooks which are not past fighting)’, ame inh ‘mark, spot, scar, sign ete.'; cintd 
characteristic’, Pkt. cinha- Fang, Hindi cinh, ci 


inió want, desire, inclination’ and 
* “desire, covet’ (a rather dignified word)» also sinto. want, ; 


3 
: ce to parents or by parental love 
aa inspired by loving reverence aul d DE 
NS n i Gayo us D, cu mi, ns a of al 
M E ‘devoting much thought, care, loxe: Re. little serpent believed 
= des Pes iety, concern’; Ach. ciniramany a 
ral thought, care, anxiety, 


: i | dary small yellow 
to be fed by birds and to bring luok': Mal. cintamant a legendary 


Serpent t] , B e 
Ww i i lo ve: of. Skt. cuiu Ream E. 
e finding of hich brings luok, esp. IN : ^ s 
4 


thought-gem, i.e. a fabulous gem supposed to AUS (TBat. dorbia ‘a domesti- 


Ln k. 
Gayo durubi6 (a dignified term for) inne pape o 
cated quadruped, esp. a buffalo): of. abya, drwy 
€, 


arbe (obs. reg.) ‘id.’ < Skt. dravya- gu 
Dossession, to possess; mod. Jav. dēr i 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
60 Digitized by Ar j i i eGangotri 
Ach. doséta ‘a lie, lying’ < Mal. dusta "id. (also justa) 
< Skt. dusta- ZE ‘corrupted, wicked, falso ; Gayo j éma om being ( 88 Opposed 
to angels, ghosts, animals), people; other people, also rendering an indefinite 
subject (TBat. jolma *id.', but also wife’; in KBat. the derivative per-jēlma.kšn is 
a low term for- ‘having sexual intercourse with COTO GIO, wife’? 9): Mal, jēlma 
assumption of human form’ (me-njélma ‘to become incarnate (of a god), to be 
reincarnated, to undergo & transformation’, also, in a transferred sense, ‘become a 
mystic or changing in character in another manner’) < Skt. janma- SH, (but oon. 
fer the Hindi by-form jalam ISA with 1) ‘birth, (state of) existence’; gémpa ‘earth. 
quake' (Ach. gómpa): Mal. gémpa, also of the great convulsions which will precede 
the end of the world, bér-gémpa ‘shake’: they represent Skt. kampa- Hq ‘trembling, 
esp. earthquake’; gēnta or (reduplicated) gégenta "a cast-bronze bell’ (usually of 
cattle-bells), Aoh. gönta like KBat. génta (which is also metaphorically used for a 
definite flower in bud), TBat. gosta ‘small bells suspended from a chain belong- 
ing toa side-arm’, and Mal. genta, ginta is used of various bells < Pkt. ghanta. quz 
bell’, cf. Skt. Oriya, Hindi ghanta qzi 'id.; glana ‘fidgety, to move restlossly’: 
Mal. gulana, gelana ‘dejected’ (cf. OJav. glāna, gēlāna in Skt. sense) < Skt. glana- 
Tem exhaustion, depression’; gun ‘use’ (also in derivatives: gund-i ‘to utilize’, 
eto.), KBat. guna use (made of), Ach. guna ‘use, interest, destination’: Mal. guna 
use, usefulness and magical potency’ < Skt., Pkt. etc. guna IM ‘(good) quality’; 
guö ‘cavern, cave (in a mountain)’ (Ach. guha also denotes the ‘opening in the floor- 
piu eee mlj is thrown away’): Mal. goa, gua, guha ‘cavernous hollow’ 
a ns EA Aet duc DUM quine (ot gun or moon)’ < Mal. gerhana 
or death of a mighty man’) < Skt. Des S eeoompsnzind the fal. 
price (Ach. haróga, aróga and TBat. arga ‘id.’): n RO eg il, 
« a_y eh < k ga id.’): Mal. harga ‘id. (also as a base for 
to appraise’): Skt. argha- AÑ; haréta, rēta * : SE S ^ 
us , goode, possessione, one’s all’ (Ach. (h)ardta 
and TBat. arta id.; see above): Mal. karta eto.: ma rokā 4 a. 
nified epeech, also in derivatives: kata-i ‘to IET) js m , speech (often in dig- 
ing, but in TBat. we also find the meanings of 'g] ? x ^ x ata is a base for speakl 
speech, to say’ (a common word); in RAT andering and lawsuit’): Mal. kata 
‘sayings (upon which the local sa E i ig used in the specific meaning of the 
etc.; klati ‘an areca-nut cutter’ ( aw 18 based): Skt. katha FAI ‘word, speech 
s r \used by women): M ASN DES 
Skt. karkaļi EEA a female crab’ (in Toba-B E al. kšlēkati, kēlati ‘id’: ot 
karakata, which is explained as 'frog']. m. tho form with tho r vowel ocours: 
esp. the persons connected with him iby i 799 a the relatives of a person, 
Mal. kēluarga ‘circle of relatives”, col], also I (Ach, kóluarga ‘relatives’): 
gam) k. ‘kith and kin’ (there i curga, often in the phrase kaum.(Arab. 
entana family and depende 3 
"race, family’ and varga- asi Vie house’ (from Jav.) < Skt. kula- FS 
compound in Sanskrit literature); Sas d (I cannot give references for the 
TBat. mara ‘the risk (one incurs), immi st dae imminent danger’ (Ach. idem; 
behaya (usually mérbaya or mérbahia; Skt, b EE) : Mal. mara ‘peril’, mara- 
t Staya- WT) “dangor of all kinds’ < Skt. 


Pkt, mara. WW ‘slaughter, hi 
; hindranoe, i : 
ciple of Destruction’, Guj, Hindi dee " FEM texts ‘the Evil one, the Prin- 


SR idem: Tad ‘when?’ (Ach. toh ‘whioh MES time; moment’, mostly ‘when’ 
young (c.)’, the origi d » Masa cut gata ʻi ; ; 
masa (t. ‘to A) “to ee ene however, still e nu e Hime you V) 
. discharge the menses): Mal māsa ine be phrase. ier 

E ©, season, epoco 


*property, (worthy) object’ ; 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a 


n kula-wansa ‘noble family’ and - 


— N 


oe 


J 


< Skt. māsa ATA ‘month’; milio "respectfull 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA : & 


y treated, valuable, appreciated’ (the 
distinction’, Ach, mélia ‘id’, and ‘pro- 
TBat. muliya ‘honour or credit gained by a 


On account of hospitality or g ity’): 
le deed; ; r enerosity'): Mal. 
mulia ‘distinguished, illustrious, exalted, noble otc." (often used as a title, esp. in ad- 


dressing letters) SIE mulo: afa, Skt. mūlya- AFA ‘value, price; to be bought for 
a sum of money’ ; nahmas sometimes nama ‘title, rank, dignity’ (Ach. “a2 and 
‘name’) : Mal. nama versousl name, reputation, fame’ (bér-nama ‘named’: cime 
of kora nane, famous ) E Skt. nana ATH ‘name’; nēgēri, nigri ‘realm, territory’ 
(nēgčri Acheh Acheh ; n. Pétawi J akarta’, Ach. nargroé or naùgri ʻid.’, but udēb 
(Ach. ‘to live’) dua (Ach. two) nañgròë ‘amphibians’ (lit. ‘(animals) living in both 
regions, on land as well as in water’): Mal. nēgēri “city-state < Skt. nagari 
aait ‘town’; nyata (also TBat.) ‘obvious, manifest; Ach. (lit.) nyindra ‘to 
sleep": cf. Mal. (lit) nidēra ‘sound (of sleep), sleep’ <Skt. nigra RRI ‘sleep’; 82 
pēkērti (or pēnērti which may be due to the influence of a base ērti in mérti, 
mēnērti ‘to know the conventionalities, well-educated’, though these words might 
have arisen from pēnērii, which, on the other hand, is only found in part of the 
Gayo district; if such should be the case * érti might be connected with the Mal. 
ērti, rēti 'meaning which is, in all probability by way of Javanese, a variant of 
the loan-word artha ‘meaning’: Skt. artha- at) in budi-pēkērti (see above) < Mal. 
pēkčrti ‘intentions, disposition’ <Skt. prakrti- Tela “character, disposition’; pērala, 
pérahla ‘to attend to, take care of’ (Ach. pélara ‘id.’): Mal. pēlikara ‘id.’: of. Skt. 
parigraha- RAZ ‘receiving, reception, possession, household, dominion’ (and 
influence of Skt. parihara- URE; ‘handing over, immunity?); pérnahma, pérnama 
“full (of the moon)’ (Ach. pónama, Mal. pérnama ‘id’, TBat. purnama ‘id.’, KBat. 
‘the 14** of a month’: Mal. bulan p. ‘full moon’ (Mal. b. ‘moon’)) <Skt. pūrņamā?. 
URI; pērtama ‘firstly, for the first time’ (Ach. pētama id; Mal. pértama ‘first, 
firstly’) < Skt. prathama- SAR; rasi as a base for ‘to give (a child) a name’ (Ach. 
rasi ‘id.’ and ‘fortunate, lucky’): Mal. raksi, rasi ‘a person's star < Skt. rasi- Ufa 
Pkt. rasi- wa etc. ‘a sign of the zodiac’; rau ‘tho name of the demon supposed 
to swallow the sun and the moon and thus to cause eclipses’ (also KBat. 'TBat.) : 
Mal. rahu < Skt. rühu- TIE; sakti ‘magic or supranormal power’ (TBat. soi, 
KBat. sakti ‘id.’, Ach. sa’ti id.): Mal. sakti ‘id.’ (esp. in the Hindu sense of the 
word): Skt. šakti- wf ‘power, energy or active power of a divine being etc’; saka 
‘to be of the opinion that..., to imagine, suppose, suspect” (Ach. idem): Mal. satika 
*to misdoubt, suspeob; idea, opinion, supposition, prognosis < Skt. sanka AB 
Pkt. sanka WEI ‘doubt, suspicion etc. ; sēgēra, sēgēro quick’ (Ach. sigra speedily, 
hasty, quick’): Mal. sēgēra ‘id.’ < Skt. sīghra- aita quick’; sēndi Jom (doh. sands 
‘joint, hinge’, TBat. sandii ‘limbs’, KBat. sindi & lath or plank which joins the 
piles or pillars of a house together’): Mal. sēndi joint, sinew (of the Hines of the 
body, but also of the mountings of a framework) < Skt. Pkt. t "a is 
eio. sēraya a base for ‘calling in a person's aid’ (Soh. sóraya dd „an volun ary 

i : ys 3 ‘appealing for help, assistant: of. Skt. 
and collective assistance’): Mal. sēraya &ppes? srana, stana LS onal 
Araya. WIAA ‘help, assistance eto.; sērapa curse (Ach. sonan Ue srap, Pkt Ps 
Sérapa, sérapah ‘impreoation ot evil, oursing' : of. Hindi sarap, $ ( bo talah 

, : ā "On hrases and derivatives (serbo 

curse’ (Skt. sapa- wTq id); serbó ‘all’ in some paras thing’ (Mal. eto. salah 
‘found fault with in all case, finding no pleasure in ARS S. 


mi ; lv; in a similar way Ach. 
ami ). aušrbē * ething completely 
eae fault ); nyërhö pi; gadīga Vrat Shastri Collection. 


derivative mēli6-i ‘to honour, to treat with 
minent, honourable, dignified etc, 
noble deed; a good name or reputation 


j Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
'62 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


a RE , rA Lan 
A 1 va- GA all; sérégo, sēr bruni 
mera 'all, all kinds of' < Skt. sarva- d 3 eg 90, sērugi 


sif radise': Mal. surga (or with a prennon rapie P UNES shurga ) 
aes at the Muslim Heaven of Bliss’: cf. Hindi sarg, sarag, surag eto., Pkt, 
eaven, 


iY, Skt. svarga- at ‘Heaven’; sēta ‘oll’ (from the elbow till the tip of the 
sarago WN, žsta ‘id2, TBat. hasta id: Mal. hasta, sēta ‘cubit’ < Skt. hasta. 
nē RI M Mal. istiri (a courtly word for) ‘wife Skt. strī. a: 
MM Rs (esp. of such arimals as the Mun ae 
pig): Mal. sētēru ‘personal enemy’ < Skt. satru- ag rival, enemy tē ii E. el.) 
«Mal. tatkala ‘the time’ < Skt. tatkala- als (happening at that timo , Hindi 
latkulía) TEIS (at) that time’ etc.; tëlögö draw-well, small pond, pit 1n a tree or 
a stone in which some water is found” (also in geographical names: tho t. of the 
tree’ etc.): Mal. tēlaga (in Kedah) ‘a well’, (in Java) ‘a small lake’, in Malay 
(in Malaysia and in Indonesia proper) ‘lake’, (in East- Indonesia also) ‘pool, sheet 
of water, pond’, ( coll. also ) ‘bore-hole or derrick (on an oil-field}, Min. talago 
‘morass, pool of stagnant water’: Skt. tadāga- A811 ‘an artificial tank or lake’ (with 
which word we deal elsewhere); iérka (a base for) ‘guessing, inferring, supposing’: 
Mal. idem <Skt. tarka- as id”; Gayo upama umpama 'parable, example; for 
instance’ (Ach. upama ‘id.’) < Mal. umpama 'id”, of. also KBat. umpama ‘figurative 
language’ and TBat. ‘a stanza mostly consisting of four lines, the second half of 
which expresses a truth or maxim’ <Skt. upama STAT ‘comparison’; usaha 'endea- 
your, pains, labour’ (Ach. wsóha ‘endeavour, industry’): Mal. usaha ‘id.’: Skt. 
utsūha- Sag ‘energy, continuous exertion’; utara (the) north’ (Ach., Mal., KBat. 
` idem, TBat. otara id”) < Skt. uttara- S. Other words will be discussed in con- 
neotion with interesting changes of meaning, puzzling etymologies and so on. 
Languages of Sumatra: Batak ^ 
o Apart from the many Toba and Karo words enumerated in the above list 
there are rather numerous others worth mentioning. As far as I know there are 


à : ; Whose influence spread to 
various regions of Sumatra. Especially in the XIIrt» 


in NA With the Javanese whose political. influence then was at its 
porod of greatest extension. Although the Batak People were, in all probability, 


any Hinduized or Javanized power, commeroial and 


n to the neig 


and other elements of Indian cultu PT communities (Gayo eto.), - 


re. 


nology, mythology eto, Thus Toba 
_ting of an egg, some husked rige 
= ^ Iknow, nof known to the i 
identical with the 1; 3 i, 88 i 
Lohan E UES sé-santi (reduplication) ‘prayers’ and repre- 
5 il, any expiatory or 
Which was used by ancient 
SBing' The Indian mystio and 
Serving as the first word of an 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


and XIV" centuries they. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 63 


z The well-known Indian eclipse-demon Rāhu q 
bles) in Toba. TBat. siñùhora ‘tho first Frid 
as the Skt. sukra- Bm ‘the planet Venus’ 


g is called Law (two sylla- 
ay of a month’ has been explained 83 


j l ) » of. Sukravara. JEN ‘Friday’ Hindi et 
sukra ‘Friday’, cf. lit. Jav. sukra ‘id. and especially KBat. cukera LT e 


atzA ‘sun’ serves to denote the first day of a month (aditiya); soma ‘the first 
Monday of a month’ is of course identical with Skt. soma- ata ‘the moon’ also = 
€ H $ 
somavāra- QATT Monday’, of. lit. Jav. soma 'id”; Skt. angara- HAN ‘the planet 
Mars’ and then also Tuesday’ became in Toba (añgara) a term for ‘the third day of 


a month’, the Karo form is ñgura; Skt. budha- 31 ‘the planet Mercury’ >TBat. 


muda and KBat. budaha ‘the first Wednesday94 Skt. brhaspati- ggxaía ‘the pla- 


net Jupiter’ >TBat. boraspati ‘the frat Thureday, the fifth day of the month.’ 
Indian names of constellations or signs of the zodiac have also found access to tha 
Batak vocabulary: Skt. mithuna- faga ‘the Gemini? became TBat. nitunas which 
was, however, re-interpreted as ‘earth-worm’, because of tuna or giya tuna 'earth- 
worm, mud-snake'. In a similar way the Cancer, Skt. karkata- €%z (also ‘crab’) is 
explained as ‘frog’: TBat. harahata, cf. OJav. karkata (see above). The ‘Virgo’, Skt. 
kanya $771 ‘girl’ is called in Toba haniya (the word is interpreted as ‘marsh-har- 
rier, Falco pondicerianus’). A hatiha is in Toba (katika in Karo) a ‘moment fixed 
by astrologers (and supposed to be either favourable or inauspicious); Skt gkatika 
TÈSI ‘a period of time (94 minutes)’, also in other IN. languages, but kutika, kētika 
in Malay, as against ghatika (also ghatita) in Old-Javanese. In Batak divination six 
moments are especially distinguished, the calculation of which is essential in most 
provinces of astrology. These moments are called pangorda (prefix pa-). This word 
has been derived from gorda, the name of one of these moments: Skt. grdhra- JA 
‘vulture’, but in Toba explained aa ‘rhinoceros hornbill’. The Toba por-hala-(q)n 
may be regarded as a derivative of the Skt. kāla- 61% ‘fixed time, moment;95 it 
denotes a kind of diviner's table, consisting of twelve horizontal and thirty vertical 
lines. For ‘calculating an auspicious day’ eto. the Bataks can use the verb ma-niti, 
derived from titi, which occurs also in OJav. ( tithi ‘the day of the month’) and 
Balinese (indicating, at the end of letters and writings the month): it is the Skt. 
tithi- fafa ‘lunar day’ (of astrology eto.); in Batak the meaning of the word was 
extended: ‘to calculate or figure out a debt’ and even ‘to enumerate (grievances 
eto.). To the cultural legacy of India in these regions also belongs the lute’ or 
‘mandolin’: Skt. kacohapi 94t OJav. and reg. mod. Jav. kacapi, Sund. idem, Mal. 
kécapi (in chronicles and romantic tales) ‘four-stringed lute’; Day. kasapi; TBat. 
hasapi, husapi ‘two-stringed mandolin’; KBat. kucapi or kulcapi. A sanha is a kind 
of ‘German flute’ < Skt. ankha- xi« 'conch-shell TBat. hamisara or hamisaran 
‘the graphic sign for à', in OJav. called anuswara (hence lit. Jav. nuñswara) is the 
Skt. anusvara- SJEAN ‘the nasal sound marked by a dot aboye the line. 

It is interesting to notice that some Indian loans in the Batak dialects are 
not found in other Indonesian languages. Skt. kudala- F419 or kuādāla- Sue E n 
Of spade or hoe' (given by lexicographers according M MS Rī o K 
dul (dal F id, and Kaan get 2 ee a ROSE. i supposed to 
1s Skt. kuā(d)ola--+ suf. iki). Besides, a Ske ith three teeth used for 
have existed.26 Anyhow, Toba hudali ‘a kind of rake wi ; ee vous 
breaking up the soil’ is the identical word. Toba saudara (4 syllables) gloss, 


i ntenance of a healthy man’, also 
sp. the natural lustre or brightness of = FEDORA. ga 


ithe Majesty’ of the deoeli Skt. gudra. g Collection. 


Digitized by Arya sam eld TP INO RRRAIAC Cangotr 


64 
tidings was not inconsiderately connected by Van 
ATT ‘informed, made known It seems to me that 
a. Hi, to wit CH DE e.g. T booty’ 
^ BAS Jav. Bal.) the same word has espe. 
appears in the Karo gerat aija VEN i these Sanskrit loans are, of "s 
oially preserved its meaning sek ral more or less technioal, or only kiowa 
not commonly used. ue cara ‘serpent’: Skt. sarpa- Wd: mintora ‘magi. 
todivinore SBE ars aira. Hea ‘magico-religious formula’; humba "water-jar' 
EE. ue "jar ;89 tola ‘balance’, but often explained as ‘tree’, because 
ee cci with tēla which in Nias has that meaning; pastima (KBat, 
of an zd varter of the sky where the sun sets (= TBat. hasundutan), the west’: 
e a WR ‘west, westerly (the word also occurs in Old and lit, Jav, : 
wr A very interesting loan is Toba wisara, i.e. Skt. vicūra- fanz ‘prove. 
dure, pondering’, denoting, in diviners’ usage, either a sopo, i.o. an open hall in 
war-time, where the diviner performs his funotions and manifold activity is taboo, 
or a guerilla or similar conflict. 

The close relation existing between part of the Batak Sanskrit loans and 
those occurring in Javanese is already clear from some of the above instances. 
Other loans, too, are Javanese and Batak, but not found in Malay: Jav. wada 'to 
ory down’, TBat. wada ‘to quarrel’ <Skt. vada. arz ‘discourse, quarrel’. It 
would, moreover, be convenient to add some words which in their very outward 
form bear evidence of the role played by Javanese in their transmission: mortiha, 
explained as ‘star’ is no doubt the lit. Jav. mércika ‘scorpion, the Scorpion’ < Skt. 
vrscika- JAS; maisi ‘ink’: Jav. idem < Skt. masi af etc. Some words have ano 
vowel in Toba which corresponds to a Malay or Javanese č; as the original Sans- 
krit has a, one of the other IN. idioms must have been an „intermedium: TBat. 
borna, KBat. bērno "Yellow (of ripe fruit, of rice) «Mal. Jav. wērna ‘colour eto. 
= Skt. varna- 376. KBat. jélma "Homo sapiens’, TBat, Jolma ‘id., wife’ < Mal. jélma 
id. ete. < Skt. janma SFH ‘(state of) existence’, 89 In other words we have evi- 
e es eon D stikabau influence: TBat. karna ‘cause, motive’ < Mal. 

) se (of)’ <Skt. karana- nu ‘cause otc; TBat. paranmayo ‘a 


magical formula recited to cause a person's death’ < Min. pēranmayo, pérmayo ‘id. 
<Bkt. pramaya. TAA or pramaya HAM ‘death, killing, á 


i For semantic reasons are "interesting: 
during a certain period, e.g. of a day’ (also as a 
of revered or feared persons or obj : sri i 

i jects) : Skt. sro st 'g lendour' rifio 
prefix. In Malay this word (séri) ig prefixed to tit] i oris 
ges, and people of non-royal but very high rank, to 


. Toba jamita ‘report, rumour, 
der Tuuk 37 with Skt. jūāptta- 
one of the meanings of Skt. grah 


Toba sori ‘the auspicious moment 
prefixed element before the names 


names of certain plants and 
8 for other 'illustrous' objects. 
t passing through the senso of 
an astrological term the word 


reasoning, speculation; 
conjeoturing, reasoning’. Of. 
base térka ‘suspecting’. TBat. 
8 and even inheri an the Batal Women were bought by 


m & Le by their own gong this word was in 
(0) n 
CC-0. Prof. Satya vet Sal dic dust (under the foot of royal 


98 or names of royal persona- * 


Digitized by Arya SAN E RIP KDENESTAd eGangotri 85 


beings) and, hence, a form of addressing Princes, 
qf Yet ‘dust’. For the form of the word we 
(3 syllables), KBat. dahupa ‘incense’: Skt. dhüpa- 
which in OJav. texts means ‘army, men’ (as a military term) and ‘people’, and in 
Malay ‘soldiery ( with special reference to the rank and file)’ is NEM bala 
*warrior', which; besides, helps to forin the phrase anak bala ‘the subjects’ (anak 
is a native word for ‘child, inhabitant’, elsewhere for "man, people’); in Toba bala 
even came to mean companion, ally’; put before names of districts it denotes a 
native of that district.9! In Toba a bajora is ‘a kind of ghost which causes a panic 
on battle-fields’; as the phrase bajora manganu denotes’ a big mallet’, its prototype 
must be Skt. vajra- 3A ‘thunderbolt’, from which also came OJav. ‘(flash of) 
lightning’, and lit. Jay. bajra ‘lightening, flashing’. Skt. dharma- WW ‘customary 
observance, religious merit’, which became the Mal. dérma ‘charitable gifts, bane- 
volence' and the Jav. ‘gifta going to cbarity, contribution to humanitarian institu- 
tions’ etc., became the Toba dorma, which denotes ‘means of winning a person’s 


which is the Skt. dhūli, dhils 
should compare TBat. daupa 
W. The Skt. bala- qS ‘army’, 


affection’ and ‘enchanted of a person's heart go as to wish another man well’. In 


Toba sokti expresses the idea of "whose pronouncements or predictions are borne 
out by the facts or verified (of a magician)’ < Jav. sēkti ‘supernormal power <Skt. 
sakti- 34% ‘creating power of divinities etc.’ Skt. deša- Za ‘place, region’ came to 
mean in Batak (desa) ‘the cardinal points of the compass’ and even ‘the compass’ 
itself. Toba akasa ‘the world’, and also ‘a district’ or ‘country’ is the Skt. akasa- 
HIST ‘free space, atmosphere. The Skt samudra- AGF ‘ocean’ has been preserved 
in the TBat. phrase ‘the navel of the ocean’ (pusat samudora) which is the name of a 
mythological whirlpool. The Skt. prihivi- würd ‘the earth’, aleo as a goddess, 
has been borrowed by the Malays in the latter sense: Dewi Pértiwi ‘the Earth- 
Goddess’, and in such phrases as sita (Skt. simha- fag 'lion') périiwi ‘an imaginary 
lion of romance’; in Macassar pérétiwi refers to she nether world’; in Karo Batak 
tales pértibi is a word for ‘the sublunary world’; in Toba portib: means 
‘region, quarter. The names of the eight cardinal points are only known to 
the experts; they do not form part of the general vocabulary but only of that of 
the pustahas (Toba pustaha ‘a diviner's book on tres-bark’ < Skt. pustaka- Sum 
‘manuscript book’. Thus, we find: purba ‘east’ < Skt. pūrva- TA 9%; agoni SE.” 
« Skt. agni. «fi ‘Agni, the god who presides over the south-east’; mariti 'S[W." 
Skt. nairrtī A&A;  manabiya (Karo manabiya) ‘N.W.’ must be connected with the 
Skt. vāyavya- ataca; irisanna N.E.: ef. lit. Jav. irsanya <Skt. aisāna- SUE In 
Malay and Javanese séraya (< Skt. asraya- MIAA ‘having recourse to, help’) means 
'asking for assistance’; whereas Toba has preserved this meaning, Karo has specia- 
lized it: “to call up one’s subordinates for gardening or for other work’. Karo 
sogéra means ‘not controlled, licentious (of a persons speech)’, ef. Mal. p 
‘speedily’: Skt. Sghra- IS ‘quick’. In the same dialect a sudara is à Ang of ‘tute- 
lary spirit", sometimes identified vius pgs vital power, personality» essence 
or spiritual double’: Skt. sodara- Atat brother +- UD " 
The Skt. cinta farat ‘thought, reflection, sorrow’, iade PV he 
muoh thougbt to', has come to express suoh ideas as being inc E E p n 
hanker after’ in Toba: cinta. A tali pasa is ‘a cord with a Horn A f iod M 
tie up men and wound around the head when visiting a gamb NN DOSE Karol 
tali means ‘rope’, and pasa is the Skt. pasa- TRI cord, Me ^" Skt. Len 
kansa and Toba haisa ‘brass’ oan also stand for tinned Iron 7 ; 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONE SJA ` 
66 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati T 


ae indi tel) and denotes ‘refuse oil”, Ag; 
Skt. taila- TS oil o m ka ES (< Skt. putri- ga ‘daughter’) 
as a title for princesses and other high-placed gone 0 En Mee "s 
the form putori and, besides, putora prince . In part of the Batak 
ANUS tia ‘ara is ‘a device for catching animals consisting in a cage the door of 
SE dus by means of a spring; the same device is called pinjaro by the 
Minangkabaus, pēnjara by the Malays who use the term also for a prison in 
general: Skt, panjara- YER cago. The word biyaya is used as & synonym of balanja 
‘expenses, charges, Viatioum’: of. Mal. biaya disbursement, working expenses and 
Jav. beya (reg. and obsolete) ‘expenses’ and (in common use) toll-money, duties, 
customs’ < Skt. vyaya- “TA ‘spending, disbursement’. Skt. mukha- gu face, head; 
chief, principal” >OJav. muka ‘face, chief, leader’ came to denote an originator’: 
TBat. munha (pr. mukha) etc.; Skt. mula. YS root, origin’ serves as a root for 
"beginning (with) and ‘starting from’. The Skt. rüpa- SY ‘form, shape’ forms a 
base for ‘having the outward appearance of..." (cf. Mal. mē-nyē-rūpa ‘to assume the 
form of..."); moreover, it means ‘apparently’. Finally, the title s? (which is an IN. 
"personal article’) Siżha (< Skt. simha- fag ‘lion’) Maharaja (< Skt. maharaja- AZRA 
'sovereign was given to their priestly royal chief who was subjected to some 
taboos and to whose blessings much importance was attached. 
A remarkable word is Toba siseyana ‘pupil’, which looks like a blend of the 
Skt. sisya- fate ‘id.’ and the native sise ‘to ask, interrogate’. In the phrase sita- 
sila ni roha ‘what occurs to a person without any special cause’ sita must be the Skt. 
citta- faut ‘thought, idea’, so that the literal meaning is ‘the thought(s) of (a per- 
son's) mind’. When compared with OJav. Bal. timbrah, Mad. tembra, Mac. tumbera, 
Bug. tumara ‘lead’ and in combination with a qualifying word ‘tin’, the Toba 
simbora ‘an ear-ornament made of tin’, which may be considered the identical 
‘word, looks like an Indian loan: of. Skt. tīvra- dta ‘tin, steel”,?3 the development 
of which into the above OJav. form is not difficult to understand.9?4 Toba dandan 
ae the sum paid by the loger to the party gaining the lawsuit’ is in all proba- 
ility the Mal. dénda (or Jav. dénda) ‘fine’ <Skt. danda- ZYS ‘punishment’. 

M VR is CM deciding whether Van der Tuuk was correct in 
do WC 8n of Toba gabe, which, expressing such ideas as 'being 
"Of people who have many children), promising well (of the 


erops), being fayoura ici P i [ 
ype fayon ble, auspicious (of omens) ; and serving as an element in phra- 
seg meaning wishing a person well’ 


eto., strongly remind f th i 
co. ed , 8 us O e meanings 
EE. Me Eee bhagya- WA good fortune, welfare’, As the form bage, which 
e a ped as identical with OJav. bage (< Skt. bhagya- ra) ‘fortunate’ 
the Skt. oiha. X pe gord MAY, indeed, be an instance of metathesis. In Old-Jav. . 
en Cutie minute: (from ‘to chew, grind (with the teeth)’) not only 
ing, destroying Aslon E powder’), but was also used as a base for crusb- 
Karo curna 'slandering irc pa beyond the bounds of possibility that the 

, n 

fal whether the Bat. mar £ YN be the pare word. It is, further, doubt: 

ay be considered identical with Skt. varga- aù 


ga ‘olan’ 95 
initial m is algo found in muda < Skt. budha- 34 


‘brass’; i 
Malay romance putēri, Batak tale 


company, party, grou "5 th 
(see above), — + ES ir 
Nias 

Turning now to th 


e lan ; 
Serve 83 an exam PRMe of Nias, 


may i 
ple of linguistic cond 


fo the west of Sumatra, whioh 
itions in these remote regions, 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya SANS ERIM Kbenais1ad eGangotri 67 
. we must first Berens that the number of Malay and Minangkabau elements 
welcomed by the inhabitants of that small island is considerable. A large part wf 
these must be due to the settlement of Malays on its territory.96 But, ihe Batak 
ares on the opposite Sumatran coast being near, Batak influence on the Nias 
language is not wanting. It may be taken for granted that most of the Indo- 
Aryan words in Nias, which amount to over 60, came ‘there by way of Malay or 
Minangkabau, some of them, however, by way of Batak. These borrowings are 
no doubt young.? 7 Many of them are by now well-known to us: agama ‘religion’; 
razo ‘king, chief Š Min. rajo, cf. Mal. raja; guru; gaza, guaza ‘elephant’ < Mal. 
gaja; sasi witness’ < Min. sasi, cf. Mal. saksi; raso ‘taste’ < Min. raso, cf. Mal. rasa; 
sino ‘lion’; kata ‘speak’; (sa)namo ‘(of the same) name’; otoro ‘north’; narako ‘hell’; 
(tula) baharo ‘ballast’: cf. Mal. tolak bahara or bara ‘id.’: bahara <Skt. bhara- WR 
‘load’; aso ‘goose’ < Min. aùsõ, ansó; Mal. ansa, haisa; maniaga ‘to trade’ < Mal. 
birniaga, méniaga; garagazi ‘saw’; guna‘use’; gulo ‘sugar’ < Min. guló; beo ‘toll, 
customs’, cf. TBat. biyaya etc. (see above). Part of these words are found all over 
Indonesia, some of them were also imported into the neighbouring islands (Mēnta- 
way, Simalur etc.) Nias baso, Sim. baco etc. ‘reciting’ «Min. bacó ‘id.’, cf. Mal. 
baca 'id.99 The word for ‘rent’, which goes back to the Skt. seva Wal ‘service’ 
(hence Mal. sewa ‘renting, hire’), has the Malay form, sewa, in Nias, the Minang- 
kabau form, sewo, in Simalur. 
Attention may be drawn to some particular cases showing either a consider- 
able change in connection with the outward form resultant on the operation of 
Nias phonetic rules (e.g. faso (to) fast’ < Min. puasó: Mal. quasa)99 or such gene- 
ral tendencies as ‘abbreviation’ (e.g. suto, ruto beside siruža, sotora ‘a kind of tex- 
tile fabric < Min. suto and Mal. sutēra, Nias having borrowed the word by two 
"ways; rudo ‘a mythological bird’ < Min. garudo) or interesting semantic diver- 
gencies, e.g. muko (karate) ‘batik-work’ < Min. muko "face, front; surface; kalo 
as a member of a phrase denoting a portion of the marriage gift < Min. kulē 
‘family’. In Nias a sarano is a ‘sireh-set or stand’ < Min. carano, cf. Mal. cérana, 
both denoting ‘a rather deep metal pedestal-bowl in which aro placed the articles 
reguired for betel-chewing < Skt. carana- AIM "foot, support. : 
In this connection another instance of a loan-word regionally spread in & 
modified meaning deserves to be mentioned: Skt. mra- AT, has kept its sense of 
‘water’ in literary Javanese, but came to denote fresh palm-sap (ii by 
outting the palm-blossom and used for making toddy and palm-sugar) in 
Malay, Minangkabau, Nias and Aohehnese.1%1 
Pr. can only make some incidental remarks on the Indian element in that 
remote Indonesian language, Malagasy. Though Indonesian, the geographical 
distance and the independent historical development of the island a Madagascar 
put its language in a class by itself. Moreover, the complicated n Ke s 
upon the diffusion of the Sanskrit element to the African island which is situate 
; i h connected with particulars regar- 
at a great distance from Indonesia» are 80 mue thes Bart E JS 
ding the spread of Indian languages towards the West an Tek dieros RI 
thorough discussion would not be within our province. e P lems are 
as the point of view of the historian who 
of outstandiog interest, not only from the Do MEI. IM 
A ` : ; esi 
studies the anoient migrations of the Indonesian peoples Dus Ae P 


logist who is interested in the diffusion of Indian culture. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

„68 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and-eGaa ; e 
s E "ds in Malagasy has sometimes been exaggors, 
K a ao Farrand who has repeatedly reverted to this sub. 
ted.192 pyon kie regard as Sanskrit, words which, to my mind, ean not poggj. 
MM. E to be of Indian origin. However, other scholars, who tried to 
bly be auru of Sanskrit elements in the language of Madagascar are in the 
deny SOC a be 8 mere coincidence that at least six of the names of the 
mo in Mii bear a striking resemblance to the corresponding Sanskrit 
words. The very correspondence between a relative large number of names do: 
ideas belonging to the game class has a greater conclusive force than a similar 


— 


pem. .104 gf : 
number of single instances. We find, indeed: these names: asara Or asara for, 


two months (the minor and the major asara): Skt. asadha- Viu 'the month 
Asadha’ (which corresponds to part of June and July); vatravatra: Skt. bhadrapada, 
NIZTT (a month which corresponds to part of August and September); SUITES asutri, 
asutri: Skt. caitra- NJ; hatsiha: Skt. karttika- afia; sira, sira (in vula sira): Skt, 
siras it: in marga-siras MANU, or -Sira- FAT in mūrgašira; fawia, fusa, fora: Skt, 
pausa- ÑT; maka: Skt. magha- Ala; tsihia or hiahia: Skt. Jyaistha- SAB; fišaka, Sisaka: 
Skt. vaisakha- Aare; varatsa, varatra in faha-varatsa: Skt. varsah «qt: ‘the rains’; 
asåra-manta: Skt, hemanta- ZAA ‘winter’. Considered as a whole this listis a convin- 
cing proof of the existence of Sanskrit elements in this language. Other undeniable 
loans are sisa ‘remainder, rest: Skt. sesa- 19 “id.’; hatsa ‘glass’ eto. : ‘Skt. kaca- 
ara ‘crystal, glass’; tantāra ‘story, tale, legend’: Skt. tantra- dra “scientific work, 
doctrine, theory’, cf. also the well-known title Paīīcatantra, the fame and contents 
of which spread far and wide; sandri "joint, junction’: Skt. samdhi- att; darum 
. young, fresh, tender’: Skt. taruna- WX" ‘tender eto.'; hetsi which like Mal. kéti 
means ‘a hundred thousand” may be the Skt. koļi- «tfž ‘ton millions’. 
So the problem with which we are confron 
whether there is an Indian element in Malagasy 


but the difficulty how to account 
for the ways by which it found entrance, 


; ; Pane, looking-glass, lens’ occura in the idioms of 
the island of Java, but it is algo found in Cam (kaca ‘elect orystal’), in the Philip- 


also been adopted by many NIA, 
8180 found its way into Persian 
tal eto., stands for ‘a varni 


ding with th the 
ans.108 pp ;, Imm ® peoples about 

Indian crystal men- 
© some doubts may arise as to 
8 Indian name reached Mada- 


AY Was in reality Ohi 
the reliability of the CAM D 
Basoar from Java, 3 


discussed by Ferrang??° 


in & way to which I 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ted does not concern the question’ 


Digitized by Ary8 eR HTOUnSetipg CORR) and eGangotri sô 
Dano 

must, to my regret, object, concerns the Mad. Zana-hari the name of th 
whose cult has anciontly spread over the island. The Merina'" Ee. Ee 
corresponds to Zana-hari in the other dialects of Madagascar and ki) z ic 
OMad. Yana-hari,is, Ferrand holds, a loan from a postulated Malay * Vaislas 
in which hari, harči ie, according to him, the Skt. hari- «ft ‘the sun’. Now, it is 
true that this Skt. word among many other meanings also conveys that M Rois 
one, &nd there are more instances of Indian words which have spread abroad in 
one of their less frequent functions. But, first, the Malay hari properly means 
‘day’, often, it is true, of the daylight hours only, but usually of the twenty-four 
hour day; it occurs in the latter sense in many phrases, such as the names of the 
days of the week, in dates indicating the day of the month etc. The same word 
(ari) occurs in Toba-Batak ‘day, natural day’. In Gayo, where it appears beside 
the indigenous lo, it is a Malay loan-word. But the OJav. wai (mod. Jav. we) ‘day, 
gun’ can, in accordance with well-founded Indonesian phonetic rules, etymologi- 
cally correspond to the Malay word, an original IN. r, appearing as r in Malay, as 
h> zero in Javanese, as y in Gayo: Mal. darah ‘blood’: OJav. rah< *raah; Gayo 
rayoh, hence OJav. wai and Mal. hari< IN. var zi ‘day’ .''2 So, there can be no 
doubt that the word under discussion is Indonesian. Moreover, the phrase yar 
hari or hya& nari (the first element is an IN. term for ‘divinity’) being foreign to 
Malay, is well-known in Cam: yañ haréi ‘the Sun (as a godhead)’, and in this lan- 
guage we aleo find parallel phrases: yan adit (<Skt. aditya- MZA ‘sun’) ‘Sun’; 
yan can (< Skt. candra- €73 ‘moon’) ‘Moon’; yai bulan (the native and IN. word for 
‘moon’). Though it remains uncertain whether the Cam harči is a Sanskrit loan— 


y I feel inclined to answer tke question in the negative, admitting, however, the 
probability of the Sanskrit word being grafted upon the native term, for the 


coincidence was no doubt striking—Ferrand should, to my mind, have limited his 
comparisons to Cam. ''? A 

That the Malag. sakavīru (or sakarīvu in the modern language, which form 
is a product of metathesis) ‘ginger is related to Indian words for the same stuff 
such as tho Pkt. stzgabera is almost a matter of course, but this does not involve 
that the Skt. form srzgavera- SUR, which looks like an adaptation by way of 
‘popular etymology’ (sriga- am ‘horn’, because of the horn-like shape of the gin- 
ger-root), should be the ultimate origin.''* 

On the strength of these and some other instances the opinion expressed by 
Krom seems, when modified as follows, to contain a considerable element of truth: 
it is improbable that all Sanskrit present in the language of Madagascar was intro- 
duced by fully Hinduized Indonesians on their first arrival as colonists because of 
the very great difference between the large amount of Sanskrit in Javanese eto. 
and the few Indian vocables in Madagascar. The other supposition would lead to 
the strange conclusion that the Indonesians at home used a far larger. number 
of Indian words than abroad.'* So, it seems probable that Madagascar was colo- 
nized by Indonesians who had only a scanty knowledge of Indian loan-words and 
ample room must be left for the possibility that individual Indian vocables found 
their way into Malagasy by other intermediums.''* 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


» 


; ESIA ! 
tü Digitized by Ary S83 kn dA QONEE and eGangotri 


NOTES 


1 The reader may be referred to the 
historical introduction in chapter I. 
> A history of the Malay language does 
not exist. The reader may, for tbe bine 
being, find information in my article p 
Winkler Prins’ Algemene Encyclopaedie, 
6" edition (Amsterdam) under ‘Malei- 
sche taal’. 
2 We have to return to this word fur- 
ther on. 
4 Trefer to my remark on ‘sanskriti- 
zed’ forms in another part of this volume 
(chapter VI). 
5 Ina comparable way Mal. sela (anti- 
quated) ‘stone’ is, in all probability, 
borrowed from Javanese: Jay. idem< 
Oday. silā i.e. Skt. silā ISI ‘stone, rock’. 
€ Other instances of a Jav. verb-form: 
nikara, nyikara ‘to do wrong delibera- 
tely’ from Jav. sikara ‘evil-doing’ « OJav. 
swikāra- ‘to force, constrain’<Skt. svi- 
kāra- TVR ‘claiming’, cf. also svikara- 
quaha- ERAT ‘forcible seizure’; misani 
‘to poison’ (from Skt. visa. fq poison’) 
in the name of a pattern of a kéris (IN. 
dagger), kala-misami (from kala in the 
sense of ‘scorpion’), 
ZHANG: Klinkert, Nieuw Maleisch- 
Nederlandsch Woordenboek?) Leyden 
1916) p.493 incorrectly derives rēstu (< 
Jav. estu) from the Skt. vasty atg. 
* Derived by Klinkert, 0.0., p.604, from 
syanti (sic) a Skt. word for ‘bless for- 
tune’, that is santi- sna, 4 
? Other such Javanisms are supata 
oath, curse’ <OJav. šapatha ‘id?’ < Skt. 
dapatha- WI ‘id’; (deva) kamanusan 
(divinity) incarnate’ < Bkt, OJay. 
manusa- AJF "human being’ a Er 

Mal. manusia ‘human’ paren nt 
m ģ man Skt, “manusya. 

RJA. 

18 ilkinson, MEB. I, p.940. 

" Pigafetta's record hag repeatedly been 

edited, see e.g. Magellan’s y 

und the World by Ant Oyaga aro. 

onio Pigafetta... 


. 


with English translation, nofes...by J. 
A. Robertson (Cleveland USA. 1906), 
and J. Denucé, Pigafotta, Relation eto, 


(Antwerp-Paris 1923). The Malay VOOR.. 


bulary has been subjected to a detailed 
examination in & paper written by thg 
present author and published in BKI, 
XCVII, p.101ff. 

'2 Etymological details may be found 
in other chapters of this volume. 

1 Kern, VG. X, p.151 (written in 1869). 
Van Ronkel, TBG. XVL (1909), p.105 
was of the opinion that Tamil may have 
played a role in the transmission of the 
word. 


14 This is not the only instance of lin- 
stead of r in, Malay words given by 
Pigafetta. In part of the cases the lis, 
iu my opinion, due to the influence of 
Philippine languages (see BKI. XOVIJ, 
p.108); the word under discussion is 
pūtli "an unmarried noble lady’ in 
Bisayan. 

'5 This list is one of the manusoript 
vocabularies bound up in & volume let- 
tered Kó Kwó Yi Yü which forms part of 
the collection of Chinese books made by 
the well-known missionary, Morrison 
(1782-1834), and has been deposited in 
the Library of the London School of 
Oriental Studies. It has been edited by 
E.D. Edwards and G.O. Blagden in 
BSOS VI (1930-32), p.716tf. As the earli- 
est historical date of interrelations be- 
tween Ohina and Malacca is 1408, when 
a mission was sent from China to 
visit that town, and as, on’ the other 
hand, no European loan-words at all 
are entered in this list, we may safely 
assume that it was compiled before 1611 
when the Portuguese conquered this 
Malay seaport. From internal evidence 


it appears that several independent. 


collectors had been at work before 8 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat cRomniler agnsoliduted their various lista 


UT. 


Digitized by Arya S K BUR Sid Ne RAR Asad eGangotri 71 


jnto one collection. 
16 The translations given are those 
found in Edwards’ and Blagden’s tfans- 
lation of the Chinese vocabulary. 

17 With this form of Malay and the 
modern language we shall be concerned 
in another chapter. 

18 For the spread of Malay see M. G. 
Emeis, Vorm en functie in klassiek en 
modern Maleisch, (Thesis Utrecht 1945), 
ch.V.; the same, Bijdrage tot de vergelij- 
king van het moderne Melaja-Maleis en 
de Bahasa Indonesia, in Bingkisan Budi 
(A volume presented to Prof. Dr. Ph. S. 
van Ronkel, Leyden 1950), p.l17ff; G. 
W. J. Drewes, Van Maleis naar Basa 
Indonesia, (Leyden 1948), p.13ft. 

19 Incomplete vocabularies are: F.S.A. 
de Clereq, Het Maleisch der Molukken 
(Batavia 1876), and G. W. W. C. van 
Hoévell, 
woorden...in het 
(Dordrecht 1876). 
20 Agarule these wide-spread words 
occur also in Javanese and Sundanese. 


Vocabularium vau vreemde 
Ambonsch-Maleisch 


"1 B. F. Matthes, Boegineesch-Holland- 


sch Woordenboek (The Hague 1874) p. 
314, is wrong in referring to Skt. udum- 
bara- Sg733 which can also stand for 
‘copper’. 

22 The final o’ is due to a phonetic rule 
in these languages. 

23 Wilkinson, MED. II., p.303. 

34 $.Goolsma, Soendaneesch-Holland- 
sch Woordenboek, p.508 says that this 
big tree gives beautiful timber and, from 
its bark, a olear resin which when cold 
is grey and opaque. 

?5 According to Matthes 0.0., p.524 and 
Juynboll, OJ W., p.463 OJav. rasamalā 
denotes the liquid amber altingiana Bl. 
Van der Tuuk, KBW. I p.749 mentions 
a Javanese variant rasmahon. In pre- 
Muslim days this gum was used to em- 
balm corpses. 

26 Good suasa is considered 88 impro- 
ved gold and may be more valuable than 
that metal. It is a rather mysterious 


word the origin of which is not clear 
to me. Van Ronkel XVL (1902), p.109 
thought it to be the Tamil sogusa ‘pinch- 
beck’, but its outward appearance rather 
points to an Indo-Aryan prototype: 
Skt. suvāsas- JATA: ‘well-dressed, decked 
out’ (of a woman, but also of a cow, a 
town), cf. suvarna- ati ‘gold’ etc.; if this 
could denote pinchbeck it may however, 
have been an adapted form. 

2 T. Burrow, Dravidian Studies VII, 
BSOAS XII (1948), p.383. 

78 Other Indo-Aryan forms are enumera- 
ted by R. L. Turner, À comparative and 
‘etymological Dictionary of the Nepali 
Language, (London 1931), p.368. 

29 For particulars see Wilkinson, MED. 
I., p.116. 

3° The reader might be referred to Wil- 
kinson, MED. II, p.89. 

31 There are, however, many varieties of 
nagas, 0.g. the antaboga< Skt. anantabhoga- 
amanti ‘of endless coils’ (not in MW.); 
naga géntala ‘a huge and motionless dra- 
gon, sucking in its prey with its breath’, 
but also ‘a processional wheeled dragon 
so represented’ (a géniala is ‘a magigal 
wheeled car of romances moving when 
willed to move but not winged nor yet 
drawn by animals’, which may be the 
Skt. jajala- SZI% ‘vested (by flames)’, of: 
OJav. and hence (beside Jēntayu) also Mal. 
Gēntayu < Skt. Jatayu(s)- Sey or stt: 
‘the king of vultures’); moreover, in old 
romantic tales such less definite dragons 
as naga sokma (s. ‘soul in the Hindu 
sense’: Skt. suksma- QSA minute, intangi- 
ble’); naga gaiga (< Skt. Ganga stu ‘the 
river Ganges’) are mentioned. 

32 I refer to T. Burrow, Transactions 
of. the  Philological Society 1946, 
p.95. 

32 The interested reader might be 
referred to B. F. Matthes, De Makas- 
saarscbe en Boegineesche kotika's, TBG. 
XVII. 1869, p. lif. 

34 According to Wilkinson, MED. I, p 


522. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


72 
———— — — ———pigitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai an e ngotri s : 
35 Matthes, Boeg. Holl. Wdb., p.167. malignity (a) aniaya to do Wrong’, the 


25 Matthes, Boeg. Holl. Wdb., p.712; 
the same, Makassaarsch-Hollandsch 
Woordenboek?, (The Hague 1885), p.757. 
37 T refer to A.C. Kruyt and N.Adriani, 
De Barée-sprekende — Toradja's van 
Midden-Celebes (Batavia 1912-1914), IIT, 
p-29f; 72ff.; Adriani, Spraakkunst der 
Barée-taal, Bandung 1981, p.8f. 

38 For the Buginese and Indian words 
see above. 

39 Ses also the section on ‘popular 
etymology’. 


*? This list is not complete; a few words | 


are, for obvious reasons» discussed in» 
other chapter. — 

<! I refer to J. O. G, Jonker, Rottinee- 
sche Spraakkunst, (Leyden 1915), p.60. 
** Jonker, o.c., p.66, 

^* Another snake-nameis Bésukih: Skt. 
Vasuki- ag ‘the name of a serpent- 
king’. : 

^* According to R. Goris, Beknopt 
Sasaksch-Nederlandsch Woordenboek, 
(Singaradja, Bali, 1938), p.35 this word 
was introduced by way of Balinese, 

*5 See also KBW. II, p.410. 

‘£ Other meanings are dealt with in 
another section of thig book. 

“7” Cf. KBW. IV, p.786. ` 

48 (n. ” 

^* The reader might be referred to V. p. 
Korn, De- dorpsrepubliek Tnganan 


Pagringsingan (Santpoort 1933 h 9 
3 ) p.3 ff. 


*° KBW. II, p.687. 
», Bee Wilkinson, MED. I, p.509 


aksara ‘letter’: 
aika ‘a numeric 
ansa goose’: Skt, 


Bwan, goose eto”; ani i 
> miya. Wickednege, 


Malay meaning is ‘wrong inflicted by th 

strong on the weak’): Skt. anyūya. "— 
‘injustice, unlawful action’; arta* Wealth 

property’: Skt. artha- ay; arti ‘meaning’ 
cf. Skt. artha- AY; asta ‘forearm, ell’: 
Skt. hasta- Ga ‘hand’; atawa ‘oy’. Skt, 
athava- IHAT; bagia “good, welfare, hail. 
rich’: Skt. bhagya- ura ‘fortunate; luck’: 
basa ‘speech; (the) words of (spoken by) 
a prominent person’: Skt. bhasa wmm 
‘speech, language’; bisa 'poisonoug, 
venomous’: Skt. visa. faq ‘venom’; buda 
‘irreligious person’ (< ‘adherent of 
another religion’), cf. Bal. buda ‘a Bug. 
dhist’, lit. Jav. buda ‘Buddhist’ (adj.): 
Skt. buddha- Sg “(with the Buddhists) & 
fully enlightened man, (a) Buddha’: danta 
‘ivory’: Skt. danta a; dasa ‘decade’: 
Skt. dasa- FX ‘ton’; desa ‘village’, esp. 
a mother-village’: Skt. desa. Za (this 
word is discussed in another section) 
Place, region, country’; jala ‘fishing. 
net : Skt. jala- MS; gajah' elephant": 
Skt. gaja- Tit; gaisa ‘a musical instru- 
ment consisting of five horizontal cop-: 
Der keys touched with a small wooden 
hammer’ (cf. Jav. gaisa ‘bell-metal’ and 
a Javanese orchestra’): Skt. kamsa- $a 
brass, bell-metal”; génta ‘bell’: Skt. gha- 
nļā sna gua ‘cavo, grotto’: Skt. guha Ia; 
gula sugar’: Pkt. guda, gula JE JS ‘mola- 
8868 ; guru ‘teacher’: Skt. guru- TR, imba 
instanoe, example, specimen! whioh al- 
ready in Old-Jav. Occurs as another 
INM (meaning form, shape; to 
A 5 phu: fava mirror, image 
PEU afoetida” (used as a medi- 
cine eto): Skt, hingu. Èg ‘a fuid or 


myriad"; kala 'time'. Skt. kala ; 
Lar] ^ 4 c S we; 
r kika musk’: Skt, kastūri siet; kērama 
s D, usage’ (o. kérama desa ‘the 
ms of the village’; of. Bal. krama 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN 
‘a Samaj Foundation 


*d.") : Skt. krama- IH ‘manner, custom’: 
kēti a very large number, 10000 or 
100000: Skt. koti- tf ‘10 millions, 
highest number’; kewala '( nothing) 
but’ : Skt. kevala- FAS ‘alone, mere 
etc.” ; kuta, kotu ‘fortified ‘town’; 
gate’: Skt. kota- atz ‘stronghold’ ; laksa 
*10000’: Skt. laksa- s&xt ‘100000’; mansi 
‘ink, lamp-black': Skt. masi- ete. wfa; 
manusia ‘man’: Skt. manusya- HJA; mën- 
i(é)ra ‘spells incantation’: Skt. mantra- 
ara; mērga ‘because’: Skt. märga RI 
‘way’ (OJav. also ‘causes occasion, mo- 
tive’); muka ‘face’: Skt. mukha- JE; mula 
‘beginning, origin’: Skt. mula. X; mule 
and mulia ‘costly, expensive; noble': 
Skt. mülya- FRA ‘price’; nēgara (lit.) 
‘realm, country’: Skt. nagara- AN ‘town’; 
nyata "clear, apparent’: Skt. niyata faga 
‘eatablighed, fixed’, cf. also Pali nata- 
‘known, experienced’; the MIA. and NIA. 
word onta ‘camel’: cf. Pkt. ulta- SE: 
Hindi unt $Z 'camel'etc.; pahala ‘the 
fruit or result of good deeds’: Skt. phala- 
WS; patri ‘solder, to solder’: cf. Hindi 


-patri, patra Ti, Yzēt, ‘a narrow slip of 


metal’ (in Gericke and Roorda's Java- 
nese Dictionary (1901), II, p.968 this 
word is explained as consisting of the 
prefix pa- and the word tri ‘three’ (Skt. 
tri- G1); because solder consists of three 


constituent parts); pžnjara jail’: pangara- 


USI ‘cage, aviary’ (in Old-Javanese the 
word could already serve as a base for 
‘lock in, confine; commit to prison’); 
puasa ‘(to) fast’ : of. Kern, VG. X, p.285 
who draws attention to the fact that 
the initial u- of Skt. upavāsa. Sala 
‘fasting’, which is the origin of this loan- 
word, had already dropped before it had 
reached the Archipelago, none of the 
IN. idioms having it; of. also Pkt. posa- 
tha beside Skt. upavasatha- STAY ‘a 
fast-day’; purna-jiwa ‘a definite tree, 
theleaves of which serve asa kind of 


toa’: Skt. pürna- YÀ ‘full’ and jiva- Sita 


dit; purusa "male: Skt. purusa- JST 


man’;  putri(lit.) ‘princess; Skt. pučrē | 


CAPRA BSA Gangotri 73 


git daughter; raja 'king, prince' : Skt. 
TUR NW; rupia ‘guilder, rupiyah’ : Skt. 
Tupya- €F silver’; rufi ‘bread’: Hindi 


- ES Gra a 
rotā WEN; sésato being; animal; character’ 


from sato (Bal. sato ‘animal or animals 


(in general), wild animals’; Jav. sato 
animal’): Ski. satfwa- «x3 which has 
the meanings given to the word in 
Sasak; séda ‘sound, voice’ (Jav. (anti- 
quated) sébda ‘word, utterance’): Skt. 
sabda- WEF ‘sound, speech’: seda ‘dead 
which is probably the Skt. siddha- 
faz in the gense of “perfected, beati- 
fied’ (this word is discussed in another 
chapter); sédiah ‘intentionally’ (sédiah-an 
‘to make something a necessity, cf. 
Bal. sadiya, sédiya ‘intentior’ and» as 
a ‘high’ or courteous term ‘fortune, pros- 
perity; fortunate’ (its ‘low’ or common 
equivalent being bagiya < Skt. bhagya- 
HEY fortunate'), OJav. sadhya ‘inten- 
tion, design; aim', and as a base strive 
after’j: Skt. sadhya- SV ‘to be accom- 
plished, attainable; ségara ‘sea’: Skt. 
sügara- WWW the ocean; sélana 'bree- 
ches, trousers’: Hindi colna sites ‘short 
breeches’; sžmaya ‘promise’: Skt. Samaya- 
&HA ‘agreement, condition’; sēmēntara 
"during: as long as (a similar sense in 
Malay; OJav. samāntara ‘meanwhile, 
immediately after’): Skt. samanantara- 
Wei ‘immediately following’; sénde- 
kala ‘avening-twilight’ : Skt. samdhya- 
ai ‘relating to the evening-twiligbt, 
veeper-time’ and kala- FIS ‘time’; sétata 
‘sontinuoua, always (OJav. idem): Skt. 
satata(m) WWWW, 'continual(ly); suara 
‘Voice, sound": Skt. svara- MG subaya 'pro- 
mise: cf. Skt. ubhaya- SWA ‘both’ which 
in OJav. also denotes promise’ (we have 
to return to this word); sutra ‘silk’: Skt, 
sütra- QA ‘thread, cord’; tapa ‘to Practise 
asceticism': Skt. tapas- 4: asceticism; 
tatkala (at) the time that’ (also in 
OJav. Mal. ete.): Skt. tatkala- ITS 


‘happening at that same timo’; tēlaga 


‘pond’: Skt. tadaga- ISI; témbaga and 
tēmaga ‘copper’ with which we deal in 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA . 


"n igitt Tya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


4 
„another rection; téraka as a base for E. 
treat" from néraka (the initial nasal be- 
ing re-interpreted 88 native verbal gs 
ment) ‘hell, misery Skt. naraka- 7 

‘hell’; cērita ‘story’: Skt. carita. alā 
; warga ‘family’: Skt. varga- 
from waca: 


‘adventures 
art ‘group, class’; wewacan ( 
discussed elsewhere) ‘the speech, worded 
in OJav. pronounced by the proxy of a 
nobleman to the parents of his future 
wife’. : 
53 J. P. J Barth, Boesangsch-Neder- 
laudsch Woordenboek, (Batavia 1910). 
54 A fullaccount of the Indian influence 
in Campa is given by R. C. Majumdar, 
Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far Hast, 
I Champa (Lahore 1927). 
55 F. Aymonier et A. Cabaton, Diction- 
naire cam-francais, (Paris 1906). This 
book is not free from etymological 
mistakes. 
56 See H. Kern, VG. X, p.251ff. (in Taga- 
log; p279(f. (in Bisaya or Visayan); 
T. H. Pardo de Tavera, El sansorito en 
la lengua tagalog (Paris 1887); F, R. 
Blake. Sanskrit Loan-words in Tagalog, 
Jobn Hopkins University Circulars, n? 
163, p.63íf.  - : 
*7 The word is discussed elsewhere. 
** Wilkinson, MED. II, p.948 incorrect. 
lyregards this Malay word as a Portu- 
Euese loan. i 
a cM on Dravidian influence 
*° As has been supposed by Kern, o.c. 
p.276. i i ki 
.*' Tt ig not completely certain w| 
Wilkinson, MED. I, p.230 is Pila (a 
deriving this Malay word from Port 
chita which comes from à 
Bee also Yule-Burnell, 
p.201. 
9 Asis well-known th i 
has the same origin: P M Ys 
tho Dutch sits probably from ( 
„or Marathi, ; 
'** The Pampan 
88 the Tag. w 


Mar. 5 eto, 
Hobson-Jobson, 


of. algo 
Gujarati 


ga samanta (same senge 
Ord) has lost a syllable 


more. Ae 
64 Tt seems questionable whether Tag 
kataluna ‘priestess of the ancient reli. 
gion of the Tagalog people’ may be deri. 


ved from Skt. taruna- ASN ‘young, ju 


nile, youth” (as to the prefix ka. of, 
kamukha ‘resembling in face’ 
mukha ‘face’: Skt. Fa). 

65 To this word a circumstantial. but 
now partly antiquated explanation wag 
dedicated by Kern, VG.X, p.256. 

66 Kern, VG.X, p.268. 

67 Kern's remarks (VG.-X, p.268) on the 
Tagalog accentuation in connection 
with the position of the ancient Indian 
(Vedic) accent are beside the mark since 
this had no longer a practical value, 
See e.g. J. Bloch L’Indo-aryen du Veda 
aux tomps modernes (Paris 1934), p.48, 
and-the same, La formation de ls lan. 
gue marathe (Paris 1914), p.50ff. More. 
over, the accent of identical loan-words 
sometimes varies in the Philippine lan. 
guages. 

58 See alzo Pardo de Tavera, o.c., p.36. 

5? See Kern, o.c., p.269. We may com- 
pare Lat. conquirére ‘to seek, to search 
out with care’, Late Lat. ‘to conquer, 
Fr.conquérir, Engl. conquer ‘to overcome 
by force, subdue etc.’ 

7? Kern, VG.X, p.987; this etymology 
is, however, not certain. 

" From muksa a secondary base puksa 
arose. 

™ Kern, VG.X, p.277 points out that 
the’ meaning of the derivative maf 
upasala ‘to complain of (a person)’ is not 


from 


"in harmony with this; he therefore con- , 
nects the verb with Skt. apacūra- ATA 


‘improper conduct’, the initial sound 
having developed: a >ë >u. 

?* By Pardo de Tavera, o.c., p.21. 

™ Kern, VG.X, p.264. 

"4* Other Sanskrit words.in Philippine 
languages are: Tag. alositha a base for 
convincing oneself of': Skt. alocita- MS- 
ta considered’; asa ‘hope’ (of. Mal. asā 
hope, trust’): Skt. aia BIRT; asia a base 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i 
i 
i 
[| 


—(R MI 


for ‘considering’: Skt. astha AIVI ‘consi- 
deration, regard, care; Tag., Bis., Pam. 
panga bagyai ‘storm, hurricane’, in Bis. 
also ‘lightning’: Skt. vayu- ag ‘wind’ 
(Kern, VG. X, p.258 thotght it possible 
to suppose a blend of vayu- and OJav. 
wagyut ‘tempest’, ‘which was, not with. 
out reason, considered by Van der Tuuk, 
as having arisen from Skt. vidyut- faq. 
"lightning; Tag. baka ‘current, overflow 
of a water course: Skt. vaha qat ‘stream, 
river’; Tag., Bis., Pampanga bala ‘to threa- 
ten, to be impending’: Skt. bala- au 
‘force’; Tag., Bis. balita ‘news, tidings’: 
Skt. vrita- JA ‘happened, event, adven- 
tures’ (see Kern, VG. X, p.258); Tag. 
bansi ‘flute’: Skt. vamšī dst ‘id’; Tag. 
bani ‘to persuade with deceptive argu- 
ments’ may be Skt. vāni atvīt ‘eloquent 
speech’; banig ‘mat’ was (not without 
hesitation) connected with Skt. vāni, 
vant aia, aw ‘weaving’ (lexicogra- 
phers; Kern, VG. X, p 259); basa ‘reci- 
ting’: cf. Mal. baca ete.; bata ‘boy, girl’: 
Kern’s supposition (idem, p.260) : Skt. 
bhata- Wz ‘soldier, cervant, slave’ is pre- 
ferable to Tavera’s (p.23) vatsa- aa ‘child’ 
because the group stop and s is preserved 
in other Tagalog loans from Sanskrit; 
bidya 'key (of a guitar); which may be 
the Skt. vedhya- aq ‘a kind of musical 
instrument’; biyaya ‘gift, presentation’: 
Skt. vyaya- STW ‘expense’; Tag. ma-biti 
‘beautiful, dressed up: Skt. bhüti- ate 
‘ornament’; dati ‘nature, natural abi- 
lity’: Skt. jati- aÑ ‘character eto.'; 
diwa ‘vital spirit’: Skt. jiva- sita ‘princi- 
ple of life’; dupa-an ‘conser’: Skt. dhüpa- 
"NI ‘incense’ and Tag. suffix -an forming 
nouns for ‘places, vessels ete.'; gadya 
‘elephant’: Skt. gaja- šī; ganan ‘portion 
is a derivative of Skt. gana- UM 'multi- 
tude, body’; gansa ‘goose eto.': Skt. 
"hamsa- K; hambo, hambua base for bath- 
"ng (see Kern, VG. X, p.266) may bo 
identioal with Skt. ambu sw "water; 
Bis. lala. venom! is perhaps the Skt. lala 
TSI ‘saliva’; Tag.. likita ‘left, omitted’: 


A R VSK, INS PONēdēbd and eGangotri 


"46 
Skt. rikta- Re ‘left (behind) eto? 


€ as à egra 
cloud’ is Skt. megha- 3H; Bis. mamsa ‘a 
kind of fish’: Skt, mümsa- ata ‘flesh, 


meat’ (in IN. languages ‘meat’ and ‘fish’ 
is repeatedly expressed by the same 
word); Tag. masa ‘time, period’: Skt. 
mäsa- 818 ‘month’ (cf. the Mal. meaning 
Season, time, epoch’); ma-sigla ‘diligent, 
industrious’ probably contains Skt. 
Sighra- *itH “quick, speedy’; mothala, 
muthala ‘albugo, a white spot on the 
eye (abnormality): patala- qzw 'an en- 
closing membrane of the eyes’; Tag. paa 
‘foot’ may be Skt, pada- Nq ‘foot’; Bis. 
pana ‘drinking a person's health’: Skt. 
pana- TA ‘drinking, drink’; Bis. puasa 
‘fasting’: Skt. wpavasa- STATS ‘fast’, cf. 
also Pkt. pavasatha- waaay etc.; sakla 
‘wheel, ring’: Skt. cakra- 355 wheel’: saksi 
‘witness’: Skt. saksi maf; sagana ‘rich’: 
Kern ( VG. X, p.274 ) left it undecided 
whether Skt. sagana- A in the sense of 
‘having a multitude’ or Skt. sadhana- 
WWW ‘rich’ (which might have suffered a 
change through "popular etymology’) ig 
at the root of this word; Tag. sadya ‘to 
prepare; intentionally’ : Skt. sajja- ate 
‘ready, prepared’; sama as a base for ‘ac- 

| companying, being partners: Skt. sama 
a ‘along, together, ete.'; samaya ‘being 
a partner: Skt. samaya- GHA ‘meeting, 
agreement; sinta love’: Skt. cinta feat 
‘care, sorrow for; sola ‘impaling’: Skt. 
Sila WSI ‘a stake for impaling criminals’; 
ma-susi ‘clean’: Skt. suci- BF ‘pure, 
clean’; Bis. sudaya ‘to admonish’ may be 
connected with the Skt. codya- ta to be 
incited or criticized’; Tag. walna multi- 
coloured tissue’ may*be Skt. varna- an 
‘colour’; wastu ‘shape, form, order, sys- 
tem’ was hesitatingly identified by Korn 
(VG.X,p.277) with Skt. vüsu ATT the 
site or foundation of a house’, the sup- 
posed semantical links being ground 
plan; plan; sketoh : Dubious or impro 
bable etymological suggestions are og. 
Tag. awa ‘piety, pity’: Skt. stem ava (atati 

| «rafā) ‘promoting, favouring’ (Pardo dé 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


- SANSKRIT IN. INDONESIA 


16 den 
j i i and eG tri 
itized by Arya Samaj aa ajag eon pore ri 


Tavera); aya ‘satisfaction’: Skt. mi ; 
‘going, good luck» fortune (id.); Tag. ya 
‘to have patience: Skt. root vafh-, po 
ag, Tg to be able or powerful' ka 
‘sound of water running out of & bottle 
eto: Skt. kala- U ‘soft (of sounds) 
(Tavera); daga ‘idol’: Skt. daka- gtē 
‘sacrificer’; dolo ‘extreme point’: Skt. 
dūra- QX ‘far’ (Tavera); bisti in the sense 
of ‘donning, dressing’ is the Spanish 
vestir rather than the Skt. vist- in 
somvista- af4E ‘dressed’ (as Kern held: 
VG.X,p.262); hari ‘king, queen’: Skt, 
huri: gf in the sense of ‘sun’ (Tavera); 
Tag. lathala ‘a device (cord eto.) to cross 
a river’: Skt. ratha- X4 ‘waggon, chariot’ 
(id.); ogak ‘noise of a torrent, of the sea 
etc.: Skt. ogha- AIA ‘rapid flow of water’ 
(id.); pakin ‘a species of bird (Lozia 
philippina)’: Skt. paksin- Way ‘bird’ (id.); 
saya & base for ‘being like, imitating’: 
Skt. chaya 9171 ‘shadow’; dani ‘to sleep 
together’: the Skt. root jan- IF ‘to be- 
get, to be born’. Some etymologies 
proposed by Pardo de Tavera are in all 
Tespects untenable: thus his suggestion 
o(p.50)that the wellknown Tag. (and IN.) 
personal article st (e.g. si Pedro "Pedro') 
ig the Skt. honorific sri- 2ft; the above 
lathala: ratha- and others, 
™ As opposed to the kërjö’s of the living, 
i.e. marriages etc., we find kërjö matė ‘the 
disposal of the dead’ (G. mate ‘dead’); 
the phrase stērj6.(6)n člēmu means ‘to try 
to obtain fecret power or influence 
A ilmu) by ascetism, retirement 
ete, 
ie m Wilkinson, MED.II, p.492, — 
. Snouck Hurgronje, The Achehnese, 
translated by A.W.8.0'8ullivan (Leyden 
1906), I, p.181f. relates how a leader 
i. ata is data himself. in 
tapa » LAA ME dE ism ae 
ing isolated for ae Pee a retain. 
DY succe 
& cave at the source of the 
8 place which was from a; 
chosen for sugh devotions 


River Daroy, 
neient times 
(of. also IT, p. 


88lve days in. 


ns sometimes caused 
considerable commotion, giving them. 
selves out to be mythological figures (e 
g. Malem Diwa, the immortal patron of 
invulnerability), and receiving followerg 


and converts to whom they proinigeg . 


invulnerebility and victory over the 
unbelievers.- The Malays of the Penin. 
sula, though admiring and respecting 
tapa in the sense of absolute seclusion, 
very seldom practise it; tapa for short 
periods is, however, popular. 

7? The Dutoh word for "human being’ 
mens, came to denote ‘woman’ (ing 
disdainful or low-collequial way) and 
‘husband’ (in certain dialects). 

This is the first word (at p. 396) 
which has been marked as Sanskrit in 
Hazeu’s Dictionary. 

*? In Malay nama is often used loosely 
of a title; in Minangkabau, where titles 
are abundant and in frequent use as 
appellations, nama sometimes applies to 
the names or titles of the lower ranks, 


| the native term gélar being reserved for 
the higher classes. Malays have as a: 


rule several namer, but the term nama 
only refers to their ‘baptismal names’ 
and to the familiar names used by their 
own family. 

* This word is discussed elsewhere. 

*? Reference may be made to somé IA. 
forms in which likewise an internal 
nasal has developed: Lahnda nindr, 
Kashmiri néndr, of. Hindi, Guj. nind. 
"* H.N. Van der Tuuk, Bataksob- 
Nederduitseh Woordenboek, (Amsterdam 
1961), p.171. A k in the same word when 
found in other languages corresponds 60 
a TBat. h. 

** Usually considered as a fatal day- 

** Bee, however, also Van der Tuuk, Bati- 
Nederā. Woordenb., p.76. i 
** Of. Bkt. ghafi «£t *waterjar' beside 
għata- Wz ‘pitcher’, šastrī wat ‘daggers 


knife’: sastra. a ‘sword’, etc, See also 


R.L. Turner, comp. and etym, Dict. e 
"the Nepali Language, p.107. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


v 


SANSKR 
LLL — — — — —Uügitized by Arya aina Poor ENRON Sand eGangotri 


TT: 


s7 Van der Tuuk, Bat.-Ned. Woorden- 
boek, p.201. 


the prefix mor- may be explained from 
analogical factors, referred to by Van 
der Tuuk, Bat..Ned.Wdb. p.547. 


89 interesting word of thi: is | : 
An in g ais bype is | * Of. also Simalur rajo; 


Skt. sakti- af ‘divine power! > Jav. 
sēkti ‘sapernormal power, which has 


! 
j 
I 
t 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


been borrowedin TBatak a3 sokti ‘whose | 


pronouncements are verified’, written 
soùti, which was the pronounced form 
when othor Batak idioms in which now 
sonti is current, adopted them from Toba 
(cf.also Van der Tuuk, Tobasche Spraak- 
kunst, p.49). Cf. also TBat. porcaya 


‘confidence, trust < pércaya which occurs | 


in Mal. and Jav. < Skt. pratyaya- ĦA. 
?" Van der Tuuk, o.c., p.250. 

5! Sae also Van der Tuuk, o.c., p.376. 
22 In common life and ordinary speech 


; founded, See cis 
| n.l. 
** This word kumba occurs in mor-humba; | 


the same book, p.56, 


QNIN complete list of the Sanskrit ele- 
ments in Niag hag been compiled by A. 
Lafeber, Vergelijkende klankleer van het 
Niasisch, I (Thesis Leyden 1922), p.gare. 
gaca ‘elephant’; 


saksi; utara; (tulak) baro; guno; gulo etc. ; 


see also Lafeber, o.c. 

** Of. also fandrito or falito ‘missionary’ 
X Min. panditó 'clergyman': Skt. pandita- 
qfve ‘scholar’, A curious form is hati 
(translated by ‘castle’) which is identified 
by Lafeber, 0.0, p.86 with Skt. kuti, 
kuti R, Sat ‘but, ball’, d 
"°° This meaning also is from India, 
Gujarati, Marathi, etc. nra ARI ‘fresh 


; palmjuice' —Raghu Vira. 


only the eastern and the western region | 


are distinguished by native words 
meaning ‘the place where the sun rises 
and sets’ respectively. 

?3 Matthes, Makassaarech-Hollandsch 
Woordenboek?, p.401, is in my opinion 
wrong in comparing alzo the Mal. and 
Jav. timah ‘tin ete.’ 


°4 The word Kas also spread over other | 


parts of the Indonesian world: in Sangi- 
rese we come across timbëha which is no 


doubt identical. It is doubtful whether | 


Van der Tuuk, KBW. II, p.779 is right 
in connecting also timga in Philippine 
languages, which has, in & more convin- 
cing way, been regarded as identical with 
Skt. fanka. 2% ‘borax, solder’ (in lexicons, 
see MW.) (Don T. H. Pardo de Tavera, 
El sanscrito en la lengua Tagalog (Paris 
1887), p.54). One is tempted to connect 
with fanka- also the Mal. tinkal ‘borax, 
solder’, 


. " Ot. Van der Tuuk, Bat.-Ned. Wdb. 
v.420f. 
76. E, Schréder, Nias I, p.203 says that 
: no less than 60 Malay ‘villages’ inhabi- 


| 


l 


by:more than 10000 persons, were | 


'"! Other Toba words borrowed from 
Sanskrit are ayuga ‘yoke (of a plough)’ 
(KBat. iyoga ‘id.’); cf. Skt. üyoga- Arta 
'a yoke or team of draft animals’ (and 
yuga- X yoke?); husa ‘a small copper 
chain’: Skt. kuta- Gat ‘a rope made of 
kufa.grass, a bridle’; gaja ‘elephant’: 
Skt. gaja- Ts; saputa ‘curse’ (e.g. of a per- 
son who is killed by the person cursed}: 


| Skt. šāpatha- ATA ‘oath, curse’; sattiya 
| in a phrase meaning to confirm on oath’ 


is the Skt. satya- G&A ‘true, truth, ‘oath, 
promise’; sarira in its original meaning: 
Skt. Sarira- WT ‘body’; swara voice, 
sound’, but also ‘report, crack (of a gun 
eic.) : Skt. svara- TA ‘voice’; sindura 
‘ed lead, minium’: Skt. sindūra- faeqs; 
daksina (written dansina) ‘south’: Skt. 
daksina- 4m; nariti ‘south-west’ : Skt. 
nairrtā- ARA; dosa ‘crime, sin, guilt’: 
Skt. dosa- dis; TBat. durrasa (elsewhere, 
like in Jav. and Mal. naraca (néraca) ) 
‘a sinall balance’: Skt. ndrdca- ARTA a 
goldsmith's scales’; Skt. naga: WT ser- 
pent-demon’ mainly occurs in the pro- 
per names of mythological serpents and 
also in place-names: T. and KBat. naga; 
the curse papa may be the Skt. papa- 


qiq ‘evil’ (tbe word is also ourrent in 


| Malay eto); warst: Mal. bassi 'riee-pipe, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


78 


y Arya Samaj Found 


LU Gud ` 

fageolet’ : Skt. vam- ast p B 
barita ‘tidings, report’: of. Mal. berta 
< Sst. vrita- WW "bappened, ovont : 
manusiya or the more usual VEST 
"Homo sapi ns’ (as opposed to animals, 
ghosts etc): Skt. manusya- HIST, rasa 
*ta-te, feeling :Skt. idem; raja (Skt raja 
TII ‘king’) applies to a person of prince- 

birth. 

= In addition to these words the Karo- 
Bataksch Woordenboek by M. Joustra 
(Leyden 1907) gives: ata, a colloquial 
by-form, cf. kata ‘word, to speak’: Skt. 
kathā 591 ‘talk’; kansa ‘gonso and similar 
birds’ (cf. Mal. gansa eto. id.’): Skt. hamsa- 
€"; kalesa ‘calamity, misfortune’ (mé- 
kalesa ‘to auffer all kinds of calamity, to 
be su-ceptible to suffering’) : Skt. klesa- 
ST ‘affliction’; kaca ‘bottle, spectacles, 
lonking-glass, glass’: Skt. Küca- ru 
‘glass’; képala in the sense of ‘first-rate, 
firat-class’ (of tobacco-leaves, honey): cf. 
the Mal. kēpala susu ‘cream of the milk 
(Mal susu) otc.’ : Skt. kapala. Kurs ‘skull’; 
kandi-kandi ‘a bamboo jar in which 
palm-wingis broūght home’; this word is 
doubtless identical with kēndi, which 
represents a loan (or a more recent 
loan) from Malay, 'a hollow gourd, 
Berving as a water-jar: Skt. kundi Bret 
e etc., Which, like kapāla and the 
wing word is discussed in another 


section; kunci ‘key, lock shutting’ : 
Skt. kuncika gfrag1 ' 2 c A 


ation Chennai, and eGangotri (T 4 
the first place used of a spinning-wheep. 


Skt. yantra- 3*3 ‘engine, machine’(foy the 
specialization of the meaning cf Karo Sërka 
*spinning-wheel” and ‘sewing-machine'. 
Skt. cakra- N ‘wheel’ and the Portuguese 
roda ‘wheel’ which in Sasak came to 
denote a 'sewing-machine' ; rajawali (in 
tales) ‘falcon’: Mal. idem (especially for 
the falcon): of. Skt. rajjuvāla. tyas 
etc. ‘a kind of wild fowl’; rasa ‘quick. 
silver’: Skt. idem; rubiya, like the Toba 
durbiya which is a more original form, 
means ‘animal’ (as opposed to ‘man’ 
manusiya) : Skt. dravya- SA “object of 
possession’; maniéri ( :Skt. mantrī wet 
‘a minister or high official’) is used for 
the ‘queen (in chess)’; mula ‘beginning’: 
Skt. müla- RS ‘origin otic.’ ; muliya ‘glo. 
rious, prominent’ : Skt. mülya. AA 
‘price, wages, gain’ ; tapi "but, however’, 
cf. Mal. tētapi and in common speech 
also tapi : Skt. tathapi- amity ‘neverthe- 
less’ ; sérta ‘complete, accomplished, 
shipshape : Skt. sartha- @ which 
among other ideas also expresses that 
of ‘useful, serviceable, important eto.' 
(the Malay meaning which we disouss 
elsewhere is 'along with'); sora which 
is also regional Malay for suara ‘voice’s 
used in the sense of ‘voice’ and ‘(the 
specific) sound (of an object)’ is the Skt. 
svara- FX; laba ‘profits, gain, interest: 
Skt. labha- eqq ‘gain’: ceda ‘damaged, 
broken ; fallen into abeyance, distres- 
sed’ (cf. dial. Mal. tēr.cida ‘dielocated’): 
Skt. cheda- %z ‘cutting off, separation, 
Interruption; piece’, 
E Mr. O.Chr. Dah] draws my attention 
to Razafintralama, Le bouddhisme mal- 
Bache, (Tananari vo about 1985), accor- 
ding to whom the number of Sanskrit 
ees in Malagasy amounts to 450. 
mī pees Histoire physi 
(TNI rs" 
by E &nd Tēti. See the critici 
Mirada. and, L'origine africaine des 
(1908) A97 Journal Asiatique, xX 
; P. + and N.J.Krom, Hindoe- 


, CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


` 


— Digitized by Ary SKS ua LSPONĀZSBA and eGangotri 


Javaansche Geschiedenis*, (The Hague 
1931), p.41f. 

194 Gee also G. Ferrand, Le calendrier 
malgache et le Fandruana, in Revue des 
études ethnograpbigues et sociologiques, 
(1908), II, p.93f. and III, p.4ff. 

155 G. Ferrand, Le K'ouen:louen et los 
anciennes navigations  interocéaniqes 
dans les mera du sud, Journal Asiatique, 
XI:14 (1919), p.66 and especially the 
game, Essai de phonétique comparée du 
malais et des dialectes malgaches, (Paris 
1909), p. 301f. — , 

106 A synopsis of the theories in connec- 
tion with the influx of Indonesian and 
Indian elements into the African island 
was given by Krom, o.c.,p.41ff. Mr. Dahl, 
whose name has already been menti- 
oned, is preparing a book on the rela- 
tions between Indonesia and Madagas- 
car which will appear as a thesis of the 
Oxlo university. : 
'7 Mary L. Trowbridge, Philological 
studies in ancient glass, University of 
Illinois Studies in Language and Litera- 
ture, XIII (Urbana III. 1930). 

08 Trowbridge, p.137. 

'*? Plinius, Naturalis Historia XXXVI, 
192; see also Trowbridge p.98f. 

no Ferrand, Journal asiatique XI: 14, p. 
66; the same L'origine africaine des mal- 
gachea, Journal asiatique X: 11 (1908) p. 
961 and elsewhere. 

"' Merina : the main dialect of Mada- 
Bascar. 

"2 Compare also R Brandstetter, Mata- 
Hari, (Luzern 1908), p.4f. 


."* Compare also his (partly doubtful) 
 ebymological combinations with regard 


to Malay anahari which is a synonymous 
name of the divinity: Essai de phone- 
tique comparée... , p.810. 

"* According to E. Hultzseh, Ginger, 
JRAS. 1919, p.475f. the word is of Dravi- 
dian origin. ` i 
"* Oompare already A. Marre, Apergu 


, Philologique sur les affinités de la langue 


malgache ayer le javanais, le malais 


LN 
et les autres idiom 
in Actes du 6° G 
Orientalistes (Le 
nésienne, p.60 a 
Beziehungen de 
ischen; Malaio-p 
II (1893), p.141. 
"* Among the Malagasy wordg regarded 
88 Sanskrit by Ferrand (seo especially 
his Essai de phonétique comparée... p. 
29611.) a considerable part is in my opi- 
nion highly dubious or even decidedly 
non-Indian. Thus Malag. vūla translated 
by 'entourage, enclos, clóture' and re- 


es de Varchipel indien, 
ongrés international des 
yden 1883) section poly- 
nd R. Brendstetter, Die 
s Malagasy zum Malai- 
olynesische Forschungen 


| garded as related to Mal. balai *public 


building, i.e. an unwalled or low-walled 
building where people met, public busi- 
ness was transacted, and strangers spent 
the night’ (varieties of balai are the royal 
audience-hall, a covered dais, a summer- 
house, a house on raft etc.), TBat. bale Os 
simple building erected above a royal 
grave, and similar meanings in the 
cognate languages, has nothing to do 
with the Skt. valaya- Taq ‘bracelet, ring; 
circumference, round enclosure’, the lat- 
ter meaning occurring in such compounds’ 
as bhūvalaya- MASU ‘the circumference 
of the earth’ and comparable words. O. 
Dempwolff, Vergleichende Lautlehre 
des austronesischen Wortschatzes, IIT, 
(Berlin-Hamburg 1938) p.21 is no doubt 
right in considering balay to be an IN. 
word for ‘an anwalled house’. It is 
worth mentioning that E. Aymonier et 
A. Cabaton, Dictionnaire cam-francais 
(Paris 1906), p.331 likewise derived Cam 
baléi ‘cell of a Buddhiet monk’ which is 
of course the identical word, from Skt. 
valaya- (cf. Hindi bara enclosure etc). 
Malaģ. rambu "what hangs down, fringe, 
tail (of an animal)’, Mal. rambu bes 
decorative fringe' ( Min. ambu-ambu 
cannot be connected with the Skt. jos 
lamb- $3, ‘to hang down on aooQuns E 
the final u; Malag. tamana tamed m 
Mah. tamah ‘affable have nothing to 3 
with the Skt. root dam- %% be om make 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


| 


family', algo yen 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
80 > 
i i and eGangotri 
tame, S iie and tho meanings do | bliehing the rule that Skt. l becomes tin 
t tally J The correspondence Skt. | Malsgasy (Ferrand, Essai, p.296, n.1), 
not ta : : 


lāigala- SITS ‘plough’ : Mal. téngala id. 


SEOTION 4 
GENERAL REVIEW OF A NUMBER OF WIDE-SPREAD WORDS 


It is extremely interesting to see how a number of Sanskrit words have 
spread over many parts of Indonesia in such a way that more or lesg considerable 
differences in meaning exist in the various languages which have borrowed one 
and the same word. These differences are no doubt partly due to cultural condi. 
tions, to the co-existence of so-called synonyms or of words apt to exert influence 
upon the loan-word» and to other semantic tendencies existing in each language 
to develop along different lines. They were accentuated by time and distance, 
until in this or that instance meanings have come to be widely divergent. . As this 
semantic change is of outstanding interest from the point of view of both the lin-' 
guist and the historian of human culture, we shall devote a whole chapter to it, 
confining ourselves here to a bird’s-eye view of some wide-spread loan-worda. 

The Sanskrit vamsa- d*t “genealogy, lineage, race, family, esp. of noble races; 
offspring’, which bas been borrowed by theanciont Javanese to express the same 
ideas; for instance, means 'family, relatives! in regional Javanese, whereas the 
doublet baisa now, in Javanese in general, means ‘race, people, nation’; Sund. and 
Bug. bansa expresses the same ideas and, in addition, "kind, sort”; in Balinese and 


‘ancient Malay, the meaning ‘caste’ existed beside ‘race, blood-relationship’, whereas 
lit. Malay has given it the sense of "family, 


quality; in modern IN. Ma 
(Malacea), however, "family" 


to racial and family distinctions: bassa Cina ‘the Chinese’; the doublet wansa is 


; but can algo appear as an honorific : 'noble'.' From Malay 
sense of ‘descended from eto. : inan 
TMB tee MSS i ori : : ade in, fashionable in Batavia. 
ce ad ae race, family, nationality, eto." Ach. baisa ‘race, family, 
terms big iela Nē » also in combination with more or leas synonymous 
‘bird’). 7 ail sorts of birds, all animals that are birds (Ach. cicóm 

Sometimes the ge | 
interesting because o though at first sight insignificant, 8I 
aptation of the borrowed elements t0 


community’ has been borrowed by thé 


9 umber of sef ph j "sg ‘noble 
Pronounced Lzlua;.. E Phrases : kula-wansa n 
loan?; and Kide-warga? or ar Be kula-sintang which apparently is a Javanese i 
tives’, The Tor D monly, kéluarga^ ‘one’s family, the oirole of rola- 


d was im into 
or mate’, or eyen ‘what ga into Borneo (Kalimantan): Dyak kula ‘a relative 
l S'ongs to a person or 8 thing’: a ‘fellow or companion’ 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


, Eood fortune to”, mé-rasi ‘to be out to make & PTO 


Shed with tufts of hair camara could also denote suc 


Digitized by AryaSdeisis Roundationseagnegnd eGangotri 


81 
(e.g. in tilling the soil) can as well be called a k 
nion piece’, e.g. the second ear-ring of a set: 
Toba Batak the redoubled form hula-hula (h<k) denotes ‘the whole of the famil 
a female member of which one has married, the relatives of one’s wife’, in the. 
South-Sumatran Malay dialects kulé stands for ‘patriarchal marriage’, i L 
it came to denote the ‘marriage portion’. ee 5 i> E 
Sanskrit desa- Šā ‘point, region, 


€ 
ula as a ‘counterpart’ or *compa- 
|. $ ‘ : 
a ka-kula is a ‘remote kinsman'. In 


| province, country has, in Iadonesia, 
assumed a variety of meanings In Malay it is used rather loosely to denote 'a 


territorial unit of any size (desa Hindi may be used for ‘the Indian land’ or - 
India’) or the ‘country (as opposed to the towns) (pérgi ké-desa ‘to migrate to the 
country’); moreover, the Jav., Bal. and Sund. meaning ‘village, 
a country hamlet’ (=Malay kanpoit) has penetrated the Malay 
the word came to express the idea of ‘dependency, a territory governed by a 
sultan, a resident etc.’, the verb ma-ndesa even means “‘to subject, to ‘pacify’. In 
the Toba-Batak area it has developed the spacial meaning of ‘cardinal point of the 
compass, in Karo-Batak even that of the "compass-card” in general, the eight 
points being regarded as mythological or legendary countries. Sasak ( Lombok ) 
has borrowed the Bal. meaning ‘village’ (wkich is under Javanese or other influ- 
ence also Mac. and Bug.), but uses the word also in the special sense of ‘mother- 
village" (as opposed to dependent daughter-villages); it has, further, preserved a 
special shade of meaning which may be old: pētēi desa ‘night sets in’ (lit: ‘the 
region becomes dark’: Sasak pētēt 'dark ). 

The Skt. camara- AAT or cümara- ATA ‘the bughy tail of the yak (Bos grun- 
niens), used as a chowrie or long bru<h for ‘whisking off flies and other insects, 
and, hence, one of the insignia of royalty (camara is also used for ‘a kind of plume 
on the heads of horses etc."), admits of metaphorical use in Nepali dhan-camar ‘the 
male flower of maize'. In Malay the word came into use to denote nob only the 
'yak-tail' or ‘switch’, and ‘an ornamental pendant of horse-hair or other similar 
material”, but also 'a plait of false hair to enlarge the coiffure; the hairy tuft in 
maize; foliage suggesting hair’ in general, the kayu (‘tree’) being the casuarina. 
The Gayo cémara is œ ‘chignon’, frequently worn by women, but seldom by men, . 
consisting of man's hair and made by men; cf. also Ach. ceumara ‘chignon’. With 
the Tebida Dyaks camara denotes the "hair-pin. In the Sundanese and Jayanese 
territory, however, a cémara— the word belongs to thekasar, le. ngoko vocabulary— 
is ''a plait of false bair’ worn by women and consisting of their own hair after it 
has fallen out. Sasak cámara means "a. plait of false bair s Besides, Javanese has 
Preserved the word as an animal's name: reg. cëmëra dog , ef. Ovex. ae oS 
jackal’, beside camara ‘yak’; the Bal. caméra is a poetical word for dog. In ate 
nese and Maoassar, however, camara is used with reference to black buffglos, the 


skull and forehead of which are white (also Bar. samara), and likewise, for ae 
As the hilt of ewordlike weapons were often furhi- 
b a tuft (NgDy. Tettum, in the 
umala, Nutor samara ‘id.’ 


village community, 
territory. In Dyak 


8 similar outward appearance. 


island of Timor, samara), and even ‘sword’: Tontemboan s 
eto. ` (ep . 
7 lebes languages, such as Barče (rasi) 


mo.rasi ‘be in luok, to have the 
fit’. Ia the Bada language (Cen- — 
h* like the Mac. raseù ‘luck’ may be the 


st PE Another widespread word is rast. In Ce à 
it-means ‘prosperity, fortune’ and henco ‘booty : 


tral.Oelebes) we find rahi ‘(too) much’, whic 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ko 


* ‘horoscope’ , the 


magicians who maint 


P themselves; ma- 
Nation’, In Karo 


.  SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
82 Digitized by Arya Samaj i i 
S d. The Barée term must certainly be ponnesied with KBat, 
identical word. base for ‘casting a person's nativity’; the derivative tasin m 
Mr the bal derivate ñë-rasi ‘to consult astrological tables's, 
ee pecific ‘power of Luck’ in p 


fasi 
? meg 
in Toba. 
a hala which is a 8 OBBO sei on 
tak rasi is a synonym of sa d. TA : 
ae fortunate people come into the world’; further rasi refers to g Special 
ume of divination and prognostication. Another word which no doubt belong 
m 


S SY o ' (an is a native suffix) , dreams being re 3 
to this group is Min. rasi-an dream (a Y. 


ded as visions of the future; besides, it may be suggested to connect with it also 


rasi in such phrases as tingi (Mia. *high') rasi which can be translated into Malay : 


by bariuah’, i.e. ‘luck-bearer, luck-bringing’ (et. the Toba-Batak meaning) and is 
especially used with reference to persons (animals etc.) which impress other peo: 
ple, strike them with respectful dread etc; rasi may be described as a charaoter 
which inspires other people with awe or respsct’. Tho Mal. rasi or, usually, raksi 
is “a person's ‘star’ ”, i.e. the astrological force in tha ascondant at the time of his 
birth and affecting his fortunes throughout his lifo'." Hence also sé-rasi? ‘borm 
under similar stars and likely therefore to live together in perfect harmony, to be 
well-matched’; ‘operate, be effective’ (medicine) and nowadays also ‘feel at home’, 
Oday. rasi means ‘a sign of the zodiac’. It is, of course, Skt. rasi- Ufa ‘id.’ 

As to Skt. devatā $481 'godhead, divinity’, the Malays and Sundanese use it 
especially with reference to the ancient Hindu gods; in Malay romances the dewata 
mulið ‘distinguished’ < Skt. mūlya- HZA ‘having worth’) raya (Mal. ‘great, mighty’) 
are the god or gods of the non-Muslim: heroes. In Sundaneso a dewata is a divinity; 


a dewa (Skt. deva: XA ‘god’) a godhead of lower rank than a batara, and the redup- 
licated form de-dewan denotes spirits, ghosts, 


divinities. The forms rewata in Maeassar and 
nese are especially applied to a kind of 
accredited with the power to send 
Macassar regalia (very sacrosanct 


gnomes, etc. passing oft themselves as 
, in the same manner, dewata in Bugi- 
guardian angel or tutelary spirit, who is 
fortune and misfortune, to delude people etc.; the 

objects) are called ka-rewata-(a)n, and the name 
Rewata has been given to a highly dangerous rock,'° According to an ancient Dutch 
record " the inhabitants of Madagascar called the Devil Taiwaddei, i.e. Tayvadéy, 
which name was identified by Ferrand? witht he Cam debatā ‘god, divinity, 
heavenly spirit’, 


In Malay the Skt dita. ga ‘ i ilā 
; ; = mess : ta. Or 
meaning (side by side wi 4 ocho et e i naa M 


th the IN. word t ; d Acheb- 
nese have not borrowed it at all. 8 usan and suruhan). Gayo an 


itn ay ; T imited 
to literary texts. "With the Maca n Javanese and Balinese its use has been lim 


88&r8 and Bugi Sout uta je 

‘OY woman of well-known fluency, delegated E itn oe 

"aei with the parents of his beloved 
th - i , 

V the non-Muslim Batak area the title guru is given to the datu's ie» E 


sin relations, with Wi: 
ghosts a r ws 
the Villages; guru aes 


nguru means ‘to learn’ 


n', esp. ‘to appl t of divi 
-Batak a aa apply oneself to tho ar , 
and further ds divi guru is & £t 


tant functionaries in 


the derivative kini-guru- 


a gurti 
eague of the J Gayos and Achehnese 

as the gurn; attenti 1 *Vanese dukun (the tradit hysician) as V? 
the former f on must be drawn to ‘the Dcum v. Achebues 


interesting fact that iu 
arl 4 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Ven quete teacher however, with ! 


Ya young man to plead his being 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 83 


naturalized form of the same word: gurče. 
expert in all kinds of practices the performance 
supranormal knowledge, leader of a community 
on; the person who conducts an orchestra, 
men, the man who is able to dive for obj 

gunpowder, the instructor of archers or hee goad Madre 
does not rain, or military men are invulnerable, 
possessed by a spirit, who speaks by his mout 
utters oracles —all these persons are called gurus, the special quality being indica- 
ted by another term. In Acheh the guržē ia in the 
pupil has practised the Arabic characters, he ig given a portion of the Ko 
recites this under the guidance of the gurèë; 
invulnerability is also called a gurčē. The g 
spiribs, or to prognosticate success in military enterprises; he prosecutes the 
medical profession, and gets through Supranormal means, a hold over tigers and 
erocodiles. In Malay the title guru can now bo given to any teacher : a guru sékolah 
(< Dutch school (school) is a "vernaeular-school teacher’, a guru bēsar a ‘pro- 
fessor’ (lit. a great guru after tuan bēsar "great lord’, a title formerly given to the 
Governor-General and other prominent Europeans), a guru mé-naji is a ‘catechist’, 
In old literature the title was, however, reserved for religious teachers, esp. in 
esoteric learning. These meanings of the word have algo spread over other parts 
. of Indonesia. In Barée, e.g., guru is a ‘(elementary school) teacher’; ma-guru is 
‘instructed, clever, trained, ete.’, even of a horse: ‘broken’, 

The Skt. pandita- {tea ‘learned, wise, skilful, clever" survives in literary 
Jav. as ‘a wise man or teacher’, but in colloquial speech it denotes ‘a protestant 
missionary’, in Min. and elsewhere it means ‘clergyman’; these meanings also occur 
in Malay, the old literature of which used it to denote a non-royal ascetic; more- 
overs a rabbi can be called a péndita Yahudi (‘a Jewish p.’), and Muslim theologians 
were also pénditas; in the so-called Middle-Malay dialects of South-Sumatra the 
word refers to an indigenous physician or ‘medicine-man’, whereas the Mac. and 
Bug. form panrita means an ‘architect’, including naval architects and eloquent 
men when qualifying words are added. 

As to the words sprang from the Skt. vicara- faam ‘deliberation, discussion’: 

Mal. bicara stands for ‘deliberation, discussion, discourse’, in the Straits Settle- 
ments also for ‘legal proceeding’ or court-case; similar meanings. are found in 
Macassar and Buginese; in Kélantan Malay it can denote concern, business (in 
general)”; moreover, the Malay phrase budi (<Skt. buddhi- gfe ‘intellect, judg- 
ment’) bicara means ‘common sense; in Gayo bécara, bicara picara mean delibe- 
rating, considering’, and also ‘looking after, caring for’ and even looking out for, 
trying’; the Achehnese meanings are ‘advice, deliberation, opinion M Sundanese 
We only find gédoz (‘a big house’) bicara ‘council house, town, hall; in J De 
the sense of the word shifted from ‘deliberating, discussing’ to reasoning’, Ls 
ing’, ‘talking’, 

We already mentioned Jav. bisa ‘to be pos a 
thing’ (with Jav. ora ‘not’: ora bisa ‘to be impossible, to ho una " “aes 
to acquire a manner, to fall into a habit, to acquire skill. Sim ar meanings e 

i E d means 'to be able eto., (to 
found in Balinese : bisa. In Sundanese the same wor 


ta-bisa is ‘skill, ability, capacity 
6) cle 2 ed’, pa-ma-bisa ig skill, a 1 
P5 capable, EE TEE Vrat Shastri Collection. 


A s . aie oie 
Gayo guru is diviner, exorcist, 

of which Iequires secret means or 

during ceremonies, teacher, and go 


gsible; can, be able to do some- 


or files the teeth of his fellow-country- 1 


?), but also 


84 ' Digitized by AryS ENSE RU nid RONĒSTA, eGangotri 


3 e able’ has spread in Malay, and in Nias (a-bisa), wh 
ST Ds ci ae Si 
"Aiša and also ‘to be ready for the battle (in playing chess)’, The etymo. 
logy of the word which also.oceurs in the Philippines: Tag. bisa power, effioga 
(of medicines)’, was amply discussed by Kern 1 who pointed out that the Taga: 
log word also means ‘venom’, ma-bis being venomous (of serpents)’ and ‘offion. 
cious’. Besides, OJav. bisa ‘poison, venom’, but aleo powerful, superior (of enemies)’ 
is to be found beside wisa ‘venom, poison’ which survives in the modern wisa al 
Like Mal. Ach. bisa ‘blood-poison ete.’ (see above), etc. these word», as far ag they 
express the idea of venom’ are Skt. visa- faq id, and ‘anything actively pernici. 
ous. Though the etymology proposed for Java bisa by Gericke and Roorda," 
viz. < Skt, visa (431 ‘intellect’ was not inconsiderate, Kern was no doubt right in 
considering the Tag. and Jav. words expressing ‘being able’ and those for ‘venom’ 
etymologically identical, pointing to Jav. ampuh which not only stands for 'power- 
ful, formidable’ (word, gambler, magician), but also for ‘powerful, efficacious’ (bee- 
sting, poisonous dart), and admitting the possibility that Skt. visa- and visa have 
united.'* Yet, there is an element of truth in the etymology suggested by Kiliaan, 
for ‘to acquire a manner’, one of the Javanese meaning», reminds us of Skt. 
abhyasa- ATIN which also expresses such ideas of ‘familiarity’. This word, which 
became biasa, biyasa ‘habitual, accustomed to’ in Malay, Javanese etc., is pro- 
K. besa in Malay dialects and may sometimes have been mistaken for the 
other. 

i Tag. anyaya ‘being idle or negligent and at the-same time hurting, doing 
ER Hi m aniaya "Wrong inflicted by the strong on the weak’—we shall reour 
R ZI Kāja Ga M been pud as identical : at their root is the Skt, 
E Taa -——— y. Derivatives of the word are also found in 
means ‘(acting) cruelly, t Me. e E RO VIEN ein Jey ari 

ie g) crue y, to do premeditated harm ; Sas. aniaya'is ‘wickedness, 
malignity . Tag. bahagi ‘to divide, distribute’, which may have been imported from 


Malay: béhagi ‘to allot, a i i 
Pportion, mete out, d i i l 
Bpeech of part of the Peninsul : , deal (cards)’, and as bagi in colloquia 


‘portion, to divide eto. ai a aud in Djakarta bagi ‘to give’ ; of. also Sas. bagi 
LJ eetc.; dial. Jav; Bar. etc, idem: Skt. bhagi Wit ‘partaking of; 
owner (having a chare)’. * 


A CHEM - 
E d vi is Mal., Ach., TBat. eto, biaya ‘disbursement eto, Gay? 
n to 8 guru by whose help & wish has beon obtained’. The 


Javanese beya must be i i 
the identical word i i 
AA K Fs € zs Whether it hag developed in that lan 


SIA a cc sbursement’ and, like the Skt. original: 


though ‘charges’ ig fou in b co also T 
nd 1 i l 
$ 2 ^ , o solete and regional usag we Hen p i 
In Tagalog Pamfan a ava, 1 bër- 
ion L g J 1 r lang uag i 
ien 7 ; : ; = , ey Sundanese and othe 
means to sit n the Oriental ma with crossed legs , cf. al 


1 ‘stone, rook (to sit upon) v bub must 
Buddhists assumed the meaning 6. Practice, good disposition’, which with the 
er devel Re conduct’ which is a sort of preliminary 
me = i 

concentration’ wag Di—ÓVOn a roof si in the sense of samādhi- 9%! 


CC-0. Prof. ERE dfēdsmeēnihilestiepparently assumed the 9X 


with the Skt, sila nor With crossed legs. Tho word has 79 . 


pe by AgaXemajtorRdatigpjiogapal and eGangotri 85 
tended meaning of ‘sitting in the posture of meditation’. From the Skt. sense of 
‘good disposition the other Mal. meaning—often considered ag another word— be 
'go good &8 to, please has, in my opinion, been derived. 

Skt, labha- SIA acquisition, gain, profit\has these same meanings in Old 
and lit. Jav., Bug. ete., applies to ‘good returns, much gain' in Malay, to ‘gain, 
interest, profit ( in general ) in Achehnese, to ‘gain’ and ‘special allowance ( from 
the government)’ in Balineze, as pa-laba (pa- being a prefix) to ‘gain’ and ‘usury’ in 
Philippine languages; & Tag. derivative, moreover, means ‘winning, increasing, 
e.g. of the waxing moon.'? 

Skt. kapala- BNE “cup, fragment of brick, skull is the Malay kēpala "head 
(literally and figuratively) has been widely introduced as a term for ‘headman’, 
especially in such phrases as képala desa ‘village-headman’: cf. Sas. Bar. képala 
tid? (in connection with a word for ‘village’); cf. also Bug. kapala ‘chief’ (person or 
persons among a body of man or women). 

The OJav. bhinna has been regarded as a group of homonyms"? : one word 
for ‘otherwise, differently’, one for ‘diminution’, and ono for "tremendous, formi- 
dable, enormous'. The first use has been preserved in lit. and antiquated Mod. 
Jav. : bina ‘otherwise, strange and kēbina-bina "uncommon, extraordinary” (kē- is a 
native prefix ). The latter form is also Sundanese : Kabina bina. exceptionally, 
highly. Isis doubtless the Skt. bhinna- faa ‘distinct, different which is still used 
in Sundanese to denote the idea of ‘difference’; kabinasbinaior maus meant cha- 
racterized by being different’. The OJav. meaning diminution must likewise be 
considered as a special use of ‘broken, destroyed, interrupted, altered whic ate 
meanings belonging to the Skt. bhinna- faa. Bal. bina means other, otherwise ; in 
Sasak it conveys the idea of ‘bad(ly)’ in positive sentences (<'otherwise'), whereas 
it is used for ‘nothing else but, exactly like when it is attended by a megabiye 
Rar the Cam sudya Mal. sédia nowadays means ‘ready’ and also ‘available’ 
(bēr-sēdia ‘hold oneself ready’; sédia-an ‘matter specially prepared fos E: definite 

sedis s oonir.szdiakan ‘place at the disposal of...) In tradi- 
purpose, preparation ; mé-mpér-sédia-kan p e 1 Niere 
tional literature, howevor, we come across such meanings + rom 0 o a Ed 
(what has always been), original; admittedly, indeed etc. (Tuhan yan eee s 
Ancient of Days’ : Mal. Tuhan ‘the Lord’); cf. also the use of the Moa es i 
phrase adat yan sēdia ‘old customs’ (Arab. “adat, angina expression sé ia- alg 
sédikala < Skt. OJav. sadakala- Q451% ‘ab all seasons’) at all times, E , 
always (Skt. kala- FIS ‘time’, and the adverbial sie SEM = o 
adverbs) ‘properly, strictly speaking, really - Thatos tes Es MEL etc. 
Gayo:sadiya ‘ready, prepared’; Sund. idem; Jav. ared’. Ib is no doubt Skt. 
The same word recurs in Cam: sudia finish; ready, prepared. 


4 . 
go T 1 ig sadaya ‘to supply oneself with 
sajja: Ww ‘ready’, Pkt. sajja- ready." Toe to present clothes and other 


what is necessary; to be cheerful and contented; Mage M ec ca: 
objects’ has been regarded?! as identical. The other 


t 
^. : on the same 
looking for another source of sédia "from atas 2 "ad o e in Sanskrit 
day, recently! may be considered its source, of. sady : 


i f the 
‘present time” Moreover, Skt. sada W«l has exerted influence, 80 that part o: 


i ‘blending’. 
expressions mentioned may be considered Erte ODE : saksi "witness, 
The Skt. term for ‘witness’, sks ami, is foun 


: i Min, Nias sasi, Day., Sund. idem; 
Personal testimony’; Gayo, Simalur eto. idem, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
86 


——— — — —Bpigitized by Arya iti Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGa C 
D . 
. sēksi; Tag. etc. idem. : E 
E The UM of the-'young louse’, also denoting ‘a nit or the egg 


» of & louge 
was in its Sanskrit form liksū, liksa- fsa, Cin Ra 7 ; lisa Which ig 
in OJav. (in mod. Jav. ‘nit’); Sas.: lisa’ ‘nit’; guna. lisa (hain 
already found puc isa; Tag. lisa; Bis.losá, etc; the curioug Mao, py 
the colloquial form); Bat. lisa; Tag. a; ! bon tica 
kulisa'and Bug. alisa for the same object can scarcely 28 lon words, 

4 In studying the spreád of words over large areas and in trying to trace their 
semantic evolutions we do well to remind ourselves that not infreguontly they do 
not, from the very beginning, admit of being translated into English Or another 
modern language by one term. The variety of meanings given in our dictionaries 
for many old or foreign words often owe their existence only to the fact that the 
English language is not able to express the concept expressed by these Words by 
one of its own lexicographic elements. In Sanskrit as well as in othor ancient lan- 
guages all that is connected with oneof the many power-concepts—which are often, 
but incorrectly, put on a par with modern abstract ideas—or represents them, can, 
to mention only this, in principle bear the same name, whereas our translationg 
must resort to different ‘equivalents’, Thus a word like Skt. dharma- IÑ is already 
explained in Sanskrit dictionaries by ten or twelve lines of English torms or phra. 
868 : "law, usage, customary observance, duty, morality, religious merit, good works 
ete. etc.’, and many other equivalents may be added if we will do justice to all the 
aspects of the concept and to its unexhaustible wealth. 
"good works', which is already unmistak 
sals- aims ‘charitable. asylum, 
dharmūrth. Tats ‘a charitable gra 
'charitable gifts, favour, 


In Indonosia tho sense of 
ably present in such Skt. terms as dharma- 
hospital’—cf, also Hindi dharmatar untat or 
nt’ ete.—hag become very popular: Mal. dérma 
condescending kindness, alma, bounty' and similar 
‘a shed or Pavilion for the distribution of royal gifts 
or ‘donation’, a pē-ndērma a 
id phrase dérma sédékah (<Arab. sadaqat ‘alms, gifts 
metimes find in Malay, Gayo and Achehnese have the 


ame seng 
Toba, Jay. ; Band., Bal., 


ad. ete, or sētg, in G ; - Min. 

form is ètö (sti i ; E AYO respectively , whereas the 
nese as athe eels Script, with st), whence Nias to, and Acheh- 
; tt KU. SUGrgg. Tay borrowed ag syarga; sērga , sréga 
he Javanese : ‘Heaven, paradise, 


4a, Sóruga in Achin, eto. etc. 3. ega in South-Sumatran Lampong, 88 
means ‘the Belles cls ne 960; in the Sula Islandg (t 


To the Mal. sélésémn € 
$ s ema, ‘a cold į M 
the Min. forms salema, salesma ues (also séma sima) correspond 


ich are Nearer t; A : ; 2 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shan Beigtiginal, viz, the Skt. slesma 


neue: 


mere a 


Digitized by MAA Sarid] HaungstiGhennai and eGangotri 87 


quen, ‘mucus, rheum’, cf. Pāli silesuma- Ega; the Sund. salesma ( which is a 
common and colloquial term) and the Sas, sēlēma mean ‘t 
form, however, is kla)lesma. 


o have a cold’; the Mad. 


It is à well-known fact that some words because of their outward form, 
especially when it is attended with & predisposition towards sound-symbolical 
. suggestions, aro apt to be changed in various ways. Thus Mal. gérgaji ‘saw, to 
paw, also appoaring as gégaji oe gaji-gaji (a common tendency to doubling), Nias 
garagazi, Ach. gogajoe, Jav. graji, Sund; and Bal. ragaji, Busang kēlēkoji, Sangir 
lahaghari, Tag. lagari, Iloko (Phil.) ragadi, Igorot (Phil.) lakaji may all be conei- 
dered as representing the identical word, viz. Skt. krakaca- WRA ‘saw’. A similar 
instance is Mal. kalakati areca-nut slicer’, also (partly dialectical) célékati, cēlēkuti, 
kélankati, cēlekati, cakéti, kélati, to which etymologically correspond Nias kalakati 
*penknife'; Jav. cēkēļi ‘areca-nut slicer’, OSund. kalakatri ‘id.’; Bug. Mac. kalakati 
“id. oto.: Skt. karkaļi FER "a female crab’. 

Passing mention may be made of a number of words of younger Indo-Aryan 
origin’ which found their way into a rather great part of the main Indonesian 
idioms. Into Malay, Lampong, Nias, Javanese, Sundanese, Macassar, Buginese and 
other languages the Hindi rof ÜA ‘bread, cake’ has been introduced in its original 
form which in other idioms suffered only slight changes: Mad. rote; Sas. ruti, in 
languages in the northern Celebes peninsula loti etc. Mal. onta, Min. unió, Ach. 
Jav. Mac. Bug. unta, Sulu ( NE. of Borneo ) onta ‘camel’ etc. find their origin in 
ancient Hindi ūnta «2. 

Kern?? suggested the Tag. asal ‘custom, usage, solemnity to be identical 
with Skt. acàra- AIT ‘conduct, good conduct, custom, traditional usage, prefer- 
ring, however: to assume as the starting-point a younger IA. form in which the 
final a was dropped. The ancient Javanese borrowed the full form; cf. also mod. 
Jav. acura as a base for ‘welcoming ( guests) < ‘to behave in a ceremonious 
way’. Mal. acara means observance, rule of conducts manner of life’. 

A wide distribution was reserved for the Hindi kung: «sit ‘key’ (< Skt. 
kuūcikā afl : in correct Malay kunci means ‘lock, bolt’, though the sense of 
‘key’ occurs; properly ‘key’ is anak kunci, anak ‘child’ exprosaing tho idea of an 
important component part or *the smaller of two objects which belong together’; 
of. also Ach. kunci, gunci ‘key, lock, catch or pawl of a gun’, Nias kusi lock 1 
Mentaway kukcik 'id”, TBat. hinsu or hunsi ‘locked ( now pronounced hitsw ) 
Jav. (dial.) kunci ‘key, lock’, Sangir kunsi, Tont. kusi , Ibanag (Phil.) annusi, Nufor 
(N.Guinea) (be)kudsi eto: ebo. : spread all over € Nee 

A very interesting word from the semantica p ER e 

* bhikkhu ATG ‘religious wendivant’ (Skt. bhiksu- fag). Teassame ER 
in OJav.: ‘ascetic, religious man, monk’ (hence suoh derivatives as Aa-tv0-0" 
à Ten s NE S it. Mod. Jav. wiku ‘holy or religious 
religious life’ or (monastery); of. also lit. 1 A EI 
D. TR ERG ta ‘a learned priest’. In Malay the wor b only 
man’; lit. Bal. wikw=pandita a i The Skt. form bhikgu» fig 
serves to denote the Buddhist monk of old Malaya. E Kā 
; I ‘ , to lie at the root of Mac. and Bug. bissu 
is found'in Orson ME le priests or magicians who pretending 
‘hich ls theiname ofalai AO i ae lack sexual capacity live in the 
to be inspired by a superhuman gpirit an dent BCs Barée biku ‘who does not 
odour of sanctity.?^ Adriani^* assumed iek t of luck’, Bicol (Phil.) biko wrong” 
drink palm-wine’, Pampanga (Phi) bigo PN biste ‘dumb, mote! with the 
with the Pkt. form under discussion, and that o S 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


88 Digitized by Arya j 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


Skt. f Tam, however, not convinced of the correctness of this view, 
. form. ; 


NOTES 


1 In this sense it is apparently an 
abridged form <adiwansa ‘of a primeval, 
principal, family’: Skt adivamsa- afa. 


| numerical values of the letters ang (ii) 


| ‘lucky’ or ‘unlucky’ in any 


sort of enter. 
prise’. 


In tériwansa a Skt. term trivamsa- fadā | ° For së- see another seotion of this book, 


‘the three Aryan classes of course, survi- 


ves : (it is not given in MW). The curi- | 


ous meaning ‘young’ given to Mal. warsa 
is discussed elsewhere. 

* In Javanese we also find kula-gotra 
(Skt. kulagotra- ENA), kula-warga (Skt. 
kulavarga- FEAT) etc., all meaning 'one's 
family. 

* I cannot agree with Wilkinson, MED. 
I, p.545; who derives the Malay word 
from Skt. kaulavarga- TSAN ‘the group 
of those who belong to the family, or cf 
the Kaulas’. 

* In colloquial speech algo kēlurga: 
According to N. Adriani, 
Nederlandsch Woordenboek, 
-1928), p.618. 

* Joustra's supposition that this word 
is a corrupted form of Mal. rahasia 'ge- 
cret’ (Skt. rahasya- 4781) ig no. doubt 
incorrect (M. Joustra, Karo-Bataksch 
Woordenboek, Leyden 1907, p.141). 


5 
Barče- 


(Leyden 


ence that this phrase no 
Way into Malay: (i) ‘to 
(ii) ‘to be possessor of 
mentioned above”, 
* Wilkinson, ME 
‘Popularly the w 
&-kind of divination, 


Wadays found its 
have much luck’, 
the magic Power 


D, added Up and 
the balance left 
mber... Raksi hag 
secondary meahing, : (i) 
m the commingling’ of the 


; d y nine; 
Over is the fateful nu 
thus two 


mixing’ fro, 


| 
| 
i 
| 
ļ 
| 
| 


10° For geographical names see ch, 
8. 11. 

"Tt may be quoted from & French 
source: Collection deg Ouvrages ancieng 
concernant Madagascar I (1903), p.196 
and 198. 

12 G.Ferrand, Essai de phonétique com- 
parée...,p.310. 

'* H. Kern, VG. X, p.961t. : 

'* Gericke and Roorda, Javaansoh-Ned, 
Handwoordenboek, first edition, s.v. bisa, 
The same opinion is expressed by Pardo 
de Tavera, El sanserito en la lengua 
Tagalog, (Paris 1887), p.94. 

'S A. Lafeber, Vergolijkende Klankleer 
van het Niasisch, p.82, is of the opinion 
that OJav. bisa in the sense of ‘being 
able’ was borrowed from Old-Malay--. 
where we, however, only know visa 'poi- 
80n'—and further that the Sanskrit word 
already early acquired the meaning of 
"being able; the second supposition 
seems plausible, 

'"5^ H.N. Kilisan, in De Indische Gide, 
XXVII, I, (Amsterdam 1905), p.227: 
bisa < Skt. abkyūsa. AFITA ‘practice, exer- 
cise, familiarity’ (rejected by Lafeber, 
l.c. ), 

"7 As has been assumed by S.Ooolsme, . 
Soendaneesch.Hollandach Woorden- 
boek?, p.578. 

'* Pardo de Tavera, o.c., p.49 incorrect- 
ly derived the Tagalog pa-laba from 
Skt, pallava- 481 in the sense of ‘growth 
i.e. 'expansion, spreading’, mentioned 
by lexicographers). 1 

” Juynboll, Wdb. p.418. 

* It has been Supposed that the change 
Indian ji>Mal, diy, which is irregular: 


m, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA ; . 4 
LM — — — Deroy arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 8) : 


was due to an attempt to express the | 23 Kern, VG.x p.257. 

double pe Well as possible | ** Seo B. F. Matthes, Over de bissoe’s of 
3 2 t) 8 a 

(Korn, VG. X, p. heidense priesters en priesteressen der 


21 Kern, l.c. Boegineezen, Transacti 

z a : a 3 , sactio: , 
22 The word is sometimes in an hyper- | Academy (meee dms a 
correct manner written syorga, the Arab | 25 N. Adriani, Barée-Ned : 
sy being felt as foreiga and, hence, more | (Leyden 1998), p.67 erlandsch Wdb., 
dignified. 


SECTION 5 
BORROWING BY WAY OF DRAVIDIAN LANGUAGES 


It has already been intimated that part of the Indian words in the Archi- 
pelago languages came there by a roundabout way. Let vs therefore turn to 
those Sanskrit, or at least Indo-Aryan, elements which came, or may have come, 
to Indonesia by way of Tamil. As has already been noticed the speakers of 
Dravidian languages, especially those who, living on the east coast of the Dravidian 
South, expressed themselves in the languages of these regions, to wit Tamil in 
India’s south-eastern corner and Telugu north of it from Madras to Kalingapatam, 
entertained already early commercial and other contacts with the opposite coasts 
of Further Asia. If it can be said that the Dravidian idioms, too, have exercised 
influence beyond the borders of their own territory, this is especially true of 
Tamil. Up to quite recent timea the number of Tamil-speaking people immigrat- 
ing into, or seeking employment in, the Malay Peninsula has been considerable. 
The Dutch East-India Company was, in the XVII*" century, even obliged to con- 
duct part of their correspondence in the Malabar language (ie. Tamil) or Telugt. 
No wonder that contacts between the Tamil Dravidians and Malaysia were far 
from wanting. A limited number of literary texts was translated from the richest : 
of all Dravidian literatures into Malay?, and the number of Tamil words, walsh 
irrespective of their origin: found their way into Malay, amounts to about 105. 
Referring the reader interested in the epread of Dravidian elements ta the articles 
mentioned in the note, we can here concern ourselves exclusively with those 
which have something to do with Sanskrit. . 

A at part of them belong to the commercial aphere, rā he hon 
‘sense of the phrase including various commodities and material com orts: pan z 
€ D IR ans of binding or 
a kind of rosin used as a means of fixing < Tam. pandam AT A der (he RADO 
fastening < Skt. bandha- arā binding etc.'; bënian an CA eh of Guje- 
word as the Engl. banian, banyan’ a Hindu trader, ča ae Finda EE 
rat; sometimes used by early travellers of pu ard ^—the word, which has 
rally; extended to mean a'broker, secretary, OF 2 Es merchants or inhabitants 
already early been adopted by Huropeans to de Sue form. Based onn NIA. 
of Gujerat,* has incorrectly been regarded as EU is Š ‘merchant, shopkeeper'*—; 
form like Guj. eamiyo, Hindi baniya ab VET Y * (likewise applied to tradere, 
thus, while the Indo-Aryan form oāniyo, baniva so trading castes, particularly . 
shopkeepers, moneylenders, and often used for vari 


1. bi(r)niaga ‘to trade”, 
those of Rájputüna and western India) lies at the root of Ma 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


- canai, in batu (Mal. 


IT IN INDONESIA 


90 Digitized by Arya SHA Foundation C 
has come to Malaysia as bénian, 


A baniyā eto. 'grindi 
the Tamil variant built on rd PITT stone. and as a base for pending Glora 
n Meee coasting sharpening steel. blades etc. < Tam, 


hard substances, also O > Pkt. sāņa- SM, cf. Hindi eto. san 


bard ae ‘whetstone, grindstone’, 3 S 4 ‘ ; 
mec 8kt. Pin bridal browband or frontlet < Skt. patta- YE cloth’, 
wm id.; pétar i 


ilk eto. 9; patrem in Mal. keris patrem 'g 
Pkt. patta- VE fine cloth of cotton en ae "ūtēram, pélérawan— the form 
small-bladed kris carried Se CE also ARINE as a word-base exprosmng 
patrém ‘id.’ already occurs in Vav. Ie irēm?— < Tam. paitiram < Skt, 
the idea of using the kris, mod. Jav. also LENS *— mancalogam “multi 
iira- WA ‘the blade of a sword or knife; a knife, dagger 5 1 g i 
PES or ‘composite’ metal or stone” (a name given to veined on pad aes 
marbles, alabaster, and imparted metals or enamels of which the exa nature ig 
unknown"), cf. Gayo pancalcgam or pancarogam (qualifying a fingor-ring) in which 
gold, silver, copper, iron, lead etc., have heen alloyed < Tam. patisalogam S Skt. 
gaiicaloha- 47423 ‘metallic alloy containing five metals (copper, brass, tin, lead, 
iron); logam ‘mineral, metal, stone’ (logam-logam ‘metals’) < Tamil ulēgam < Skt. : 
loha- &Y& ‘red metal, iron’. X 
Other words adopted by way of Dravidian are: Mal. idam ‘morbid craving 
(of a pregnant woman who has a craving for some special food)’ « Tam. idam ‘what 
is pleasant, delight’ < Skt. hita- ft ‘beneficial, favourable, ete. '? and Mal. bisi 
‘a frivolous or shameless girl’, also ‘a prostitute’, and as a term of abuse ‘a dirty 
wretch of a woman’ < Tam. wesi < Skt. vesya 421 ‘a prostitute”.'5 For gurindam 
‘text, saying, any old saying quoted appositely’ Malay is not directly indebted to 
Sanskrit!*: Skt. grantha- HEA ‘a composition, verse (esp. a £loka of 32 syllables), 
text, book in prose or verse’ was borrowed by Temil-speaking people: kirandam ‘a 
Sanskrit stanza of 4 lines; a similar Tamil stanza, a book containing such 
stanzas, Sanskrit, book or knowledge (in general), which, in its turn; may be 
supposed to have been the source of the Malay term. Whereas Skt. gopala- aris, 
educar aleo ot volta ene i alae introduced gel 
lso à b amers, grooms, falconers, camel-drivers 
i ie ae Rene added): the word ig interesting, because it shows 
aviv has travelled by the south Indian D 5 1 Ņ 
The Mal. ségala ‘all, every, the whole Mr Gave Pus a, ems iit 
is the Tamil form sagala of the Skt. sakala- azg ‘complete, entire; all’. » Ngala id, 


^ Van Ronkel'* had hi j il origi 
18 doubts about tho Tamil origin of Mal. kēndi ‘water- 


er, consisting of burned oarthon- 


goglet’ (also Gayo kēndi ‘a 
ware with a n 
arrow n Wilkinson" drew attention to 
12), though a water 


the fact that the Malayāļam kindi, 
vessel, does not correspo 
Now, OJav. authors 


used the word kuņģi “jar 
regarded as an elliptical 


its belly’ : this word kundi may 


, Ay -A : i £ y 
- Water-pot'; : Hindi kundi gA ja aso Skt. kundi gost "bowl, pitoher, 


The modern Malay këndi 


: Y word may b Monuments of the Hindu 
Side by side with Bi el uL loan from the South. 


Malay h ] i D ; 
ay has nilam in batu ( stone’) D blue, indigo dye’, 


combinations: the 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


an unmistakg. 


- al a P. cie 

|? iia. The case of Mal. weda aud wedam is Similar nd semantic differentia. 
"gone - 4 

; Tamils -1 
“formers 


m 
fi. any’ ragam multifarious' lag. of fashions in dreg 
exacting, of 8 changeable disposition’, and farther, 
: <Tam. irāgam '& tune, musical mode’ < Skt. rīga- 
feeling or passion : melody etc. : Mal. raga ‘the hu 
goul) which comes from the Javanese, where its meaning ( 


well-known sense of 


(t ; Apart from the single ragam Malay 
has puspa ragam of flowery or variegated colours’ (of gems, and in names of ladies 


in old romantic tales): Skt. puspa- Jq ‘flower’ which must, however, be regarded 

as Dravidian by origin;?? the compound is the Tamil form (‘topaz’) of the Skt. 

pusparüga- KTI ‘id’, and panca-ragam ‘many-natured, capricious’: Skt. punce- 

qa ‘five’, expressing *multiplicity”;?* to my mind, the combinations arose in 
Malaysia, the first members being Sanskrit.25 ` ģ 

i However, in the case of part of the words we are discussing the assump- 
tion of the Sanskrit origin of a Tamil loan in Indonesia has turned out to be rash 
or entirely in the air. Thus, though Pijnappel, Van Ronkel, Wilkinson and other 
Malay scholars correctly considered Mal. pualam ‘marble, alabaster’ to kaye been 
imported from the Dravidian South, the opinion that Tam. pavaram, pavalam, 
piravalam, Tel. pavadamu etc. are loans from Sanskrit pravāla- Hals or pravada- 
TAS ‘coral’2* ig highly improbable, first because the Tamil word occurs already in 
the earliest Tamil texts (which date from a period when Indo-Aryan influences, 
linguistic and otherwise, were comparatively restricted), and, further, because the 
coasts of South India abound in corals.*” —Mal. malai ‘pendent flower ornament 
for the human head’ 28 or ‘pendant from the head of a standard’, also ‘crest of 
flowers’ is a loan from Dravidian : Tamil malai ‘garland’. It occurs in the earliest 
Tamil literatura, aud the verbal form malai ‘to wear as & io aria 
BN the supposition that Skt. mala or malya- Ml T be ei 
M pe been considered as the ultimate origin We M 
Ddian ; vom Dravidian?^ There is a Malay yanani ake h a host of variants 

Source? —Mal. mēmpēlam ‘mango (Mangifera indica) , with & 


č š ; have 
SOSA ēmpēlam eto.), Jav. Mal. pilam, Min. ampalam e ec H Uu 
fruit’); ipse considered ag containing the Tamil param nos T GC 


18 is however Dravidian, not Sanskrit; for Skt. Bus 
rds rge group of Dravi 
ee etymology and the Tamil form belongs to & er geem to repre- 


y. turišu ‘blue vitriol 


€ onsidered 

Su Of vitriol’; the Skt. tuttha- get ‘blue vin MT e x (Mal: 

" idi cS * (pěti . 

Pinon), Pātwordss* „Wal. gēi ‘box, ease, chest, [BHA TN |), Jave gi 

Chest, ^ Pēti nyanyi ‘musical box, ie. gramophone bility been borrowed . 
OR’, Min, peti 'id”, Gayo pati "id. has in all probabi 


udo- 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a Digitized by Arya Samal ogg design seennot and eGangotri 


from Tamil: pelli ‘box’ which has, indeed, been derived Oe ne tad ad 
Gz, also pitaka- fāzē "basket, box, bag ef BE gee b y dd usually atm. 
eto. pet dz (basket, bag), belly, stomach, inner a DS ve 
; rigi A obs , 
E d^ n oo MA en » RS a word which is regarded ES ori- 
ginally Dravidian : Mal. pitam ‘rush of Apr ee Mae ons aidā 
` zel as a Tamil loan: p?itam bile, s s 
s Rer ru rsen «kt. pitia- RT ‘hile’, which now is consi- 
"ad a Dravidian loan: "pico- ‘green, yellow"? 
ES poco which Edid Dravidian have in common are almost 
mo form and meaning. So it is at first sight not possible to say Theria 
Mal. mani ‘bead’ has been imported from the Aryan or tho Dravidian part of 
Indian. Yet, it seems to be found only in such phrases 88 biramani corel beads’, 
which no doubt represents Tam. vairam, vayiram (known in Malay ag biram, beram 
‘red, a red diamond’; also Sund. bóróm ‘red’ in various applications, phrares and 
derivatives ? ) ‘onyx’. Hence mani, too, will bo of South Indian origin. 
The wide-spread word for ‘stronghold, ( defended ) village, town ete.: 
Mal. kota which is discussed in another section of this volume, can have come from 
Sanskrit, where it is a Dravidian loan,** and from a language of the latter 
family : cf. Malayalam kūtta, Tel. kēta etc. The wide-spread and now almost inter- 
national term ‘coolie’ (unskilled labourer, porter’) which occurs in Mal. (‘coolie’), 
Jav. ‘porter; wage-earner; villager’) etc. and about the origin of which we still 
gropo in the dark (Tam. eto. kuli ‘wages’ and kūlī, a name of a tribe or caste in 
Western India who performed menial offices) may have reached Indonesia from 
Tamil or from Hindi or Bengali : kūli. 
In this case and others the etymological interrelations and the wanderings 
4 of the word concerned are very intricate and difficult to trace. Thus tho above 
Mal kéndi, géndi ‘water-goglet’ (Gayo, KBat., Lamp. ete këndi), though reminding 
us of the Skt. kundi Et ‘a pitcher, water-pot' or the Hindi kundi sé ‘id.’ (cf. 
OJav. kundi ‘id.’), may be a Dravidian loan, whereas the Min. kendi, Simalur gedi 
can certainly be considered as borrowed from the Dravidian forms: cf. Malay. 
kindi, "S gindi, In some languages the vowel of the first syllable is an a: Cam 
kadi théière, bouilloire; aiguière a bec’ (Aymonier et Cabaton) Mac. gandi, KBat, 
kandi-kandi a bamboo vessel to transport palm-wine'.?* 
ies ee te Dos vore e ale aight hone divroet 
come into existence so as to keep us in the dark 


as to which particular languags the Indonesian form owes its origin, because the 
phonetic phenomena in question are found in 


: : most of the languages concerned. 

Thus; ees occurring in Malay to denote the lotus (einer forms are 

A come i Ta ki and pakma) may represent the Middle Indo-Aryan paduma, 

Fed e : mam. padma. (though other Tamil words keep the final m in Malay) 

óf the Aaiun with pearabhaiss. ts Anyhow, Malay has introduced the name 

to express 5 A ARCAM E ue kā the Hindi eto. form padam 447 helps 

of fiery red’ (lit. -red' p , 
_merah (Mal. *red") padam. SE lotis Ted’, as a face blazing with wrath) :- 
À highly interestin BY 
T g group of i 

reaching the Archipelago in itg ice ic d IS Pro oha tamil element 

variants and equivalents in MCN id orm, are Mal. parapati ‘pigeon’ and its 
guages, According to H. Kern 37 Tag. pala- 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


, 


SANSERIT IN 
p Z Digitized by Arya j 
pats ‘pigeon’ owos its onen bo Skt. pūrāpata. qq " 
tymology is no doubt correct, but the Bans Be fem, Pūrūpati qq- 
to do with the adj. pūrāvata- maA e, Nord bas in all probabi- 
under which it is usually given in the dictionaries, It We from a distance’ 
a Drav: word : Tam. puravu purā 'pigeon, dove sio: 2. 8 like an adaptation ot 


That Malay and Tagalog seemingly borrowea the "— We 
ne form, is no wonder 


en used generically : Dutch 


INDONE 
i enne Md eGangotri 


93: 


Wa. ‘turtle-doy, 


history of the OJav. cawéli, canwéli ‘a kind of i 

i i li, stuff or article of dress", whi 
be considered identical with the Mal. caul : kain caul ‘a kind E d ki 
calu ete. The corresponding Dravidian forms are Tam. cawali, castis i 


drapery’; Tel. cawali, cawili ‘cloth’. 


It is clear that this word is identical with 


Phe of the town Choul or Chaul, which formerly was an important sea-port 
9 Concan (West-coast of India), and particularly famous for its fine embroi- 


dered guilts, 2 


NOTES 


T 
a the way in which Sanskrit words 
ere adopted in Tamil see J. Vinson, 


Man 

1908), pace langue tamoule, ( Paris 
à : 

Beo Ph, 

nāt," Ronkel, TBG. XLII (1900), 


2 They have 


ot m PM The Universal Dictionary 
biz, | 18h Language* (London 1946), 
4 
The Gu; 
u ` 
Which w rāti call themselves Vanean, 


ag 
to Baneg corrupted by the Portuguese 


Imperio Magni 9 Laet Commentarius de 


by Bir o Mogolig (1631), translated 
Mo Pug ne Lethbridge, p.119f. See 


8.v. banijan, À 
* Yule and Burnell, l.c. The last part of 
the word is the maso. sing. element of 
Tamil, viz. -an, -dn. 

7 See chapter IV, section 8, under Retro- 
grade derivation. 

® J. Przyluski, Emprunts anaryens en 
indo-aryep, Bull. de la Sco. de Ling. de 
Paris XXV, 71 (translated by P. Ch. 
Bagchi, in Prearyan and Predravidian in 
India, (Calcutta 1929), p.198.) has sug- 
gested an Austroasiatie Origin ot this 
word. ` 3 dx 
s» H. Kern explained Jav. patrēm as a 
loan-word from Sanskrit (patram TRE 
‘the blado of & sword eto.'). Van rā 
(o.o, p.109) was in doubt whether e 
g were directly borrowed from 


B 
Bevel; Hobson pbagns. yd Worms. Collection. 


94 


Sit, or indirectly by way of Tamil. 
10 S;e Wilkinson, MED. II, p.203. 
11 Van Ronkel, BG.. SLVI, p.549 gug- 
gested deriving (Sumatran) Malay black 
sand, black excretion of gold when it 18 
smelted’ from Tam. kalam <Skt. kala- 
SIS ‘black’. : 
12 See Van Ronkel, TBG. XLVI, p.537. 
12 Without reason Wilkinson, MED. I, 


p.146 connects the word with the term ; 


for ‘poison’ Skt. visa- f44, Hindi bis faa 
etc. à 
1 As Wilkinson, I, MED. p.383 holds. 
15 For the m see chapter IV, section 1. 
16 Van Ronkel, TBG. XLV, p.112. 
17 Wilkinson, MED. I, p.557. 
18 See also Hobson-Jobson, p.373. 
1? According to Wilkinson, l.c. 
?? I refer to F.B.J. Kuiper, in BSOS. IX, 
p.991. 
21 In this connection the question as to 
the ultimate origiu of this word can be 
left undiscussed. 
** I follow Wilkinson, MED. II, p.649, 
but Klinkert, Malay-Dutch Dictionary 
gives the word also, R 
7* See J. Bloch, BSOS, V, p.740, and T, 
Burrow, Trans. Phil. Soo, (1946) p.10. 
** Bee the next section. 
*° The word puspa also occurs in other 
such groups : puspa-danta 
etc. 
** Van Ronkel, o.c , p.111. 
27 T refer to T. Bur 
the Philological So 
1947), p.15. 
** As such ornaments are worh 

; 7 b 
Sovereign at his coronation and on dus 


‘ 
carved ivory’ 


row, Transactiong of 
ciety, 1946 (London 


Tamil South, - 
to the followin Sins 
a , alam, 


Digitized by Arya Sana denndation INBOBESEAGangotri 


special occasions, especially by g, bride 
groom at his wedding. phrases "with 
malai are also used as terms of endear. 
ment. 

25 Qf. e.g. Van Ronkel, o.c., p.115; Wil. 
kinson, MED. II, p.95. 

2° Seo Burrow, BSOAS, XII (1948), p.390. 


| ?! Taleo refer to Burrow, Transactions 


Phil. Soc. (1946), p.10. 

i 32 Burrow, BSOAS. XII (1948), p.381. 

| 33 Burrow, BSOAS. XII, p.8841. 

| 34 I refer to Burrow, in BSOAS. XII 

| (1948), p.376. 

| ?5 For this and other instances see also 

_ A. Lafeber, Vergelijkende Klankleer van 

; het Niasisch (1922), p.99ff. 
36 See chapter IV, section 1. 

| H, Kern, VG.X, p.279. 

** See also Burrow, BSOAS. XII» p.384. 

?? Wilkinson, MED. II, p.136, incorrect- 

ly in my opinion, refers to Skt. 

bharyapati aata which means ‘man 

and wife’, 

** See also O.Dempwolff, Vergleichende 

Lautlehre des austronesischen Wort- 

schatzes, III ( Berlin-Hamburg 1938), 

| p.38. 

| “ Burrow, Trans. Phil. Soc. 1945, p.108f. 

| derived it from Tam. tatu ‘to hinder, 

| obstruct’, tajam ‘ridge, dam, causaway, 
Pond; in view of the well-known Indian 
idea of the banks obstructing the river, 
thig Suggestion deserves more notice 
than Kuiper’s supposition (Proto-Munda 
pane in Sanskrit; Amsterdam 1948, p. 


- 


^* See H. Kern, VG. IX, p.3031.; Hobson- 
Jobson s,v. chayl, i 


ln 6. 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat shašiltČ6K6eniebalam (OT, 


- SANSKRIT um 
Digitized by Arya cea PERE By dNDONESIAeGangotri $ 
5 


m strokes on alternate sides of the canoe (also mz 
Kol" ig rigbt in connecting it with Tam. valam "push, 
"regarded as a loan from Beate bala- RS ‘power, stre 
"word is also the Mal. bala soldiery, army’,—however, 

feother instance ig Min. kandai ‘a long and forked pe 
See Gent in general < Tam. kandai ‘a hanging orn 
metal, small bells, lace, fringe? which has bean derived from the gi 

..'a bell’; this word was borrowed in Mal. as génta etc 

1 Malay has borrowed from Sanskrit the word 
"white, unsullied etc.’ to express such ideas ag "being pure or 


, and (in a ritual sense) 
€ 
of chaste, immaculate, 


cik) ` A 4 3 rt or of motive, freedom 
from all malice. Side by side with this form Malay cuci refers to ‘the act of clean- 


ing’, though it can also be used in connection with circumcision : ‘to purify by that 
ritual act. ^ In modern usage we find such combinations as cuci pérut (Mal. "belly; 
stomach’) purgative’; cuci muka ('face! <Skt. mukha- HS) ‘wash-basin’ (also ‘to 
give one's face a wash’); babu (Mal. ‘a female servant’) cuci ‘washer-woman, laun- 
dress’; cuci darah (Mal. 'blood') ‘an abstergent’; as a verb itis especially used in 
those cases where Dutch usage often has ‘reinigen’ and not ‘schoonmaken’ (both 

` being ‘cleaning’ in Eaglish, but the former used in spscial phrases): ‘to clean clothes 
the water-closet etc, Now cuci (c is now a slightly palatalized s but was a c like 
the Skt. c) is the Tamil form (‘mental and corporeal purity, ceremonial purifica- 
tion, cleanliness, whiteness etc. ) of Skt. suci- Of, 

A very interesting word was, at the time, discussed by Kern in a manner 
which must be considered out-of-date The name of the plant “Ocimum basilicum 
or basil’ Mal. sulasi, sélaseh, Jav. sulasih and tulasih, Bal. sulasih, was in his opinion 
a ‘regional pronunciation’ of the Skt. suras; QW, or ‘in the most correct Skt. 
form’, surasā gal ‘well-favoured; the holy basil’ (at the same time the name of 
other plants). The form tulasī was, the came scholar said, a ‘perhaps intentional 
corruption’ of this word. Though well-known in modern Indian languages, tulasi 
does not occur in Sanskrit before such puranic texta as the Vāyu, Padma and 
Bhagavata, Nowadays we may be sure that suras; etc. are adapted. forms and 
that tulas; is more original, because it came from Dravidian : Can. tolaci, Tam. 
furüy "the holy basil’ etc. In Javanese a variety of forms occur : tulassh, triki 
„Sulasih and sélasih; thelatter two were without reason regarded as corrupted. 
Bide by side with the Mac. and Bug. tolasi or tulase we find the Tag. salasi, sulusi; 
of. also Sund. salasih; Mad. salase; Bal. slasih; Ambon Mal. sulasi etc. We i 
Perhaps consider tho forms with s as partly adapted Indo-Aryan ec (su- S 

Owever, other variants exist: Min. kula si, TBat. hulasi, 80 thatthe moku à 


of Austrie origin, t A cere = 
Double borrowings of this description are 8 veidnē Dti eadeni 

non, In Dutch such words as comfort ‘comfort, conveniences T > mieieh tulip 

came into use in their French and in their English propor M Italien turbante 

i S Fr. tulipe, OFr. tulipan etc. from Turkish tulbend) and pia the flower being 
ES antes tulbend ‘head-dress’) are originally the identical wor’ 
Y d: phponed to resemble that Oriental hens das e found when with the 


"Another.kind of double borrowing ! 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samay Seundation ARDON Bid &Gangotri x 
.96 D. = D 
—-- oducs into their vocabulary of civilization EXPres. 


i intr l 
CaA RE C eee of an older stage after the spoken form of the 
sions from the wri g 


‘oualy been subject to the normal changes whieh Occurred in 
same word had i E. many a Latin word appears in Frenoh and other 
the language Cs * in its regularly developed form (the so-called Popular 
Romance ie M Latin or balf-molernized Latin form ( the loarned word ), 
ponen AL "m development are: Lat. fragile ‘fragile’ > Fr, frôle ‘frail, 
Examples of de the English forms being borrowed from French, The 
Dus D HR E Paois is a learned word beside chétif ‘poorish, indi. 
Fr. caplif p rer worde, though of Latin origin reached the Eronoh 
oe B uer of Italian. Comparable instances are found among the Indian 
3, asis some discussion about an OJav. word whicb, occurring in 
various forms, means ‘amith’ as well as ‘scholar, wise or learned man * : pande 
(with or without OJav. wési ‘iron’) ‘smith’, panday in a-panday a-nulis (a- is an’ 
OJav. prefix, tulis a base for ‘writing, drawing); in Mod. Jav. we find the now 
antiquated pande ‘blacksmith’. These forms are generally considered etymologi- 
cally identical with pandya ‘learned, wise’, which has been taken by Juynboll? 
and other authors as Sanskrit, a smith being in many countries at a certain stago 
of cultural development a sort of wiso man, to whom people resorted for magic : 
the art of metallurgy, which seems very mysteri 
often practiced by men who from the point of view 
community were outsiders and who formed a caste, 
the secrets of their craft strictly to themsolyes.® 
ring to Lampong (South Sumatra) panday and Iba 


ous to the non-initiated, was 
of the members of the social 
guild or class apart and kept 
Van der Tuuk?, however, refer- 
nag (Philippines) padday regarded 
de being a root expressing the idea of ‘working, 
tituting a prefixed element indicating the agent. The 


» occurs to denote ‘a scholar (pandita), ascetic 
gious man”. 


names tukañ or utas)'9 

this sense the word 
« . " 
Bug. panre skilled ised’ ag a speaker eto.); 
Peoples of Celebes: Barée (Central Celebos) 
. . 73, Carpenter, silversmith etc; 9 curious 
nea lll ‘disinterested, indulgent, generous’ 
A ‘skilled QUA skilled craftsman, especially smith’; 
905 experienced, Clover, adroit’, also in phrases 


to be able to m 
ful of One'g interesta Sys pot ends meet When one is short of 
13 


artisan ( often a smith )' e Gayo pande stands for ‘skilled, 

savin "and the meanings of the Achebnese 
ration the OJav., Mal. and 
inverse analogy! (borrowed 
Javanese?), is difficult to explain, it 


ri x : 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Via $t4titotepiigman de from Hindi and Beng 


in Minangkabau Pandai me 
expressing the idea of ' 
money, to be Watch 
experienced, &ble; 

pande are nearly the 


M an CAPON ESIAGangoti 97 
ande di: panre aig ‘a learned man, scholar (also teacher)’, 
or caste of brabmens. The (un OJav. Pandya, on the other 
jn OJav- pandyansa a brahman (cf. eg., Skt. devamta. $a 
of a. god’) no doubt ee the Piakrt stage Dandia ‘al 
Indian form, Skt. p e ew learned, wise, educated, clever, shrewd, skilful, a 
learned man, teacher’, which has also been adopted by modern Indo-Aryan tongues 
‘ig, then, represented by the alley frequent Oday. pandita (same meanings), In 
Malay, Javanese, Sundanese ote. pëndita means learned man’, in Indonesia DESEE 
often 'a Christian minister or mu » although it is also used of rabbis 
(péndita Yahudi) and Muslim theologians; in old texts it can apply to ‘non 
ascetics’. The remarkable extension of meaning in Macassar and Buginese (‘le 
>'architect' : panrita + ‘house’ : ‘architect’, + ‘ship’: 
above suggestion in view of the origin of pande.'? 

Beside Mal. dola "dhooly, litter, stretcher’ we find duli ‘litter for sick ot woun- 
ded, dhooly' or the more usual juli ‘dhooly (the Indian form is not in use in Malay)’ 
—jolatu *a large dhooly' is a Javanese variant—, the former being the Skt. dola ste 
‘litter, palanquin, hammock’, and the latter the Hindi doli, Guj. del; ete. ‘litter, 
etc. In a similar way Mal. cakéra "wheel, circle, discus, a war-guoit with a.sharp 
toothed edge (mentioned in old romances)’ represents the Skt. cakra- mH ‘id’—cf. 
also cakérawala ‘wheeling vauli of heaven, circle of the year; also of the heaveas 
generally, of heavenly bodies which seem to move in a circle’ : Skt. cakravala- Seale 
‘circle’; (with the Buddhists) ‘the name of a mythical range of mountains encir- 
cling the orb of the earth and being the limit of light and darkness. In Sundanese 
the form cakra came to denote ‘a cross, small cross or a sort of projectile’. 

The obsolete Jav. gdgnkén, planki 'palanquin' (which came from the Port. 
palanguim, which was borrowed from the East) is closely related to Hindi gall 
West; Beng. palki; Guj. palkhi ‘id.’ (cf. also Oriya palanka etc. bed); likewise: 
the Mal. pélanki, pélankin, pélanken ‘the four-wheeled palanquin-carriage’. The 
OJav. paryanka ‘couch’ is the corresponding Skt. word: paryaika-, palyaika- TIS, 
4714 ‘couch, litter, palanquin’, cf. also AMg. pallanka bedstead etc? 

Side by side with Mal. bahara load; a rather indefinite measure of weight 
(now reckoned at about 460 lb.) we find the shorter form bara and a variant 
bahar. In Achehnese bara denotes & special weight of areca-nute; besides, it is 
& word for "very much’. The word came also to the Philippines where a Mes 
not only stands for a very high number, “10 millions (cf. also Jav. s ifs = 
bara’ i.e. ‘infinitely much’ and the corresponding Mac. ibara & hundred mil ions), 

, i load’ has become a 
but also expresses a ‘metaphorical sense’: that is to say ^ "C Ram. 
trouble, responsibility, a load of care’ (this change of meaning 18 far trom T 

D large quantity, & particular 
other languages). Now, Skt. bhara- Wl a load, a MRS TEE 
Weight’ eto, (of, Hindi bhar) was introduced into the Indian Bom Fh. who oar- 
"and also naturalized by other seafaring peoples (Arab. Horde * metis. 
Tled it to the Far East, where the Portuguese on their ar 


learned it.14 1 ta ah E 
i In the word sutéra ‘silk-thread, silk’ the Skt. -—-— Rip. 
in Malay, OJav., mod. Jav. Bal., Sas. Sund., Ach. s gw thread CDU 
In ali Probability the latter came from MIA. : Pkt. sui In OJav. we find, side 
also Hindi sii WW oto., the former is the locis mukha. 8 "face") : Skt.” 
Y side, šūoi (in šūcimukha ‘name of a battle-array : Skt. 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


also the name of a clan 
I side, which also occurs 
TT ‘a partial incarnation 
earned man’. The oldest 


-royal 
arned' 
ship-builder’) concerns the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
98 


& sharp-pointed instrament’ ‘and suji “prick, sting, 
qst < Skt. sücika Gfart. The latter form ig, 


: cus as TY bau a word for ‘the (poreu- 
Si SN idery; sugi is in Minangka 
as suji, also Es "pend VERUS ior Erosie; basin’ was borrowed by the 
ute a E. ros remark that both the Skt. bhajana- WI receptacle, 
S EĻ ticies NIA. (Hindi bhajan atst id”) are roprosented : Mal, 
vea 1000 e d bowl’ and bajan ‘basin, bowl, plattor’. ` 

bējana, béjanah ‘basin, large bowl an s y 
enobin any case easy to decide whether a pair of doublets 
represents an older and a younger Indo-Aryan foun or a loan-word-and an altered 
form arisen in Indonesia. Thus the OJav. cayanya and the Mal. candakiya: the 
former refers to the well-known Canakya- TNT the minister of Candragupta and 
reputed author of the Arthašāstra etc. the latter means backbiting, or (in 

. . ? 

Minangkabau) "people who are extraordinarily smart or tricky’, and may probably 
be connected with the Hindi chandi gat ‘tricky, deceitful’. 

In OJav. janma < Skt. janma- SFH is a well-known word for birth, exis- 
tence, re-birth’; many verbs and some othor words were derived from it. In Sund. 
the ideas of man, men, people, inhabitants, dependent(s)’ are expressed by jalma 
which must bo the identical word, as Mal. jélma denotes ‘assumption of a human 
form, humanity’ (mén-jélma ‘to become incarnate of Visnu and other gods etc.’); 
cf. TBat. jolma ‘human being’ or "wife. One might be tempted to explain the J 
as a product of dissimilation effected in Indonesia, but it might be remembered 
that Hindi jalam is a by-form of janam or janma ‘birth, existence etc,” : 

When endeavouring to translate a word like Skt. jati- sīlfā into a modern 
Western language we have to make our choice frogf a great variety of terms the 
Cam and marginal meanings of which often overlap each other. jāti- may mean 
,birth', put also the particular form of existence of a being, the position (assigned 
by birth/, and, hence, caste, race, family, rank, class eto.'; it can denote ‘the 
genus or kind (in contradistinction to the specias)' and ‘the species (as opposed to 
the individuals) , the generic properties (as opposed to the specific ones)’, ‘the cha- 
acter of a species, the true state of a being oran object” etc., etc. Many of these 
interpretations of the complex of ideas Indians called up before their minds when 
pronouncing the word jati-, also do when we come across the term in an OJav. text 

"but it would be of no little int 4 S 7 
nterest to have a completo list of all Indonesi 

rences and to compare them with th S all Indonesian occur- 
e use Indians made of the word.' In Old 


Javanese we find such connotations as '(indivi 

y as "(individual i 
all the facts of the case, all the ins and outs of n rbd c CLAN DL 
dition; the original destination of an object’. aie 
die; the true story of a man’s descent i 


(-born) brahman, someone who is reall 


sūci or sūci BF, qui ‘needle, 1 
thorn’, which is the Hindi sùg? 


It is of cours 


J real or original con- 
ds It is the jūti of animated nature to 
8 the Jūt: about it; a brühmana jūti is a ‘true 


SPRK Ya brahman’: th šai i 

itg jūti, > ; e authenticity of a story is 
: jūt. And other shades of meaning associated with tho : city of a d ory 
ppeared too: from ‘the nature of things’ wa, 86 mentioned occasionally 


a3 Wirātaparwa p.19: Sahadeva, deserih; 
Pd Pi , describing his ^ 

Bs nam E that he has been He coon 4 HERUM ure 
in tem Hones n. p dd ee that) i.o. quite naturally We Ls Pere xm 
From 'the facts of the t a chant bo translated by a conjun ti : ‘so that” 
0 E ction : 80 . 
or to make gure of...” * ‘to infor f 
means ‘to give being to? Ts an peaulary of mysticism Balle E 2 5 p" 
Go Hoar sada teni os aS a es to 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


1 Digitized by Arya Samaj ounda i Gangotri - 99 
lent of our conform to the facts, really’; 


uiva 2 the EET. 
he nn means -to inform a person -with truth’, Iw verbal derivative jatèni 
(ie. 


: Sundanese sim; 

other applications are to be found: Allah nu (‘the, who is’) sa-jati ig Wer 
o 

e (si A excellent "ati : 
, 816 ‘sterling, noble, excellent’. Malay Corsa M n 
are 
y pur sang’; a 
a kambii jūti is a ‘native 
uch ideas as ‘answering to 
n’ (food), ‘genuine (piety)’, 
dzat jati is ‘the very soul of 


expec , 
‘properly 50 called' etc. In the language of mysticism 


thinge, the real meaning of life, the Existence that is": dzat which is considered an 
Arabic word gūt escence' is used in Malay to express ‘the very core, true or inheri- 
ted nature of an object; that in which an objects special potency resides etc.” Thece 
meanings are akin to those conveyed by fati, but Wilkinson's opinion that the 
latter is the adjective of dzat is not correct. The meanings of zat ('essence, 
substance, material object, person, individual’) are in Arabian difficult to re- 
concile with those of zū ‘lord, endowed with, possessed of’, of which it is tradi- 
tionally held to be the feminine, and the use made of the same word in Persian 
(‘essence etc.; generation, breed, castes, genus, species, kind”) reminds us so vividly 
of the Indian jāti, which in Hindi is commonly pronounced in the same way (zat), 
that we would ask ourselves whether the Arab word must be considered a loan- 
word, which: through Persia, came from India. If <0, both forms of the same word 
are met with again in Malay.'* 

In addition to the above instances the attention may be drawn to a highly 
uncertain etymology which has been considered a case of double borrowing or 
differentiation. Nias gambala ‘blanket, coverlet’ is no doubt identical with Skt. 
kambala- &3$ ‘a woollen blanket, cloth, or upper garment’ which also came te 
Java (OJav. kambala ‘id.; wool). As in the Malay idiom of Kutai (Borneo) gémbala 
denotes a hanging ornament consisting of hairs or feathers, fixed to a state-lance; 
the lit. Jav. kumbala ‘tassel’ may be regarded as the identical word; and so may 
the Jav. substitute (court-term) kumbala for ‘moustache’ or ‘beard. Apart from the 
puzzling problem of the introduction of the isolated word into Nias, the quos 
arises whether Jav. Mal. Sund. etc. gēbar ‘blanket etc. has had the same origin. To - 
my mind, it has too rashly been answered in the affirmative." 


NOTES . 

1 ( „ andam to be the ori- 

, im ši, TBG. XLVI, p.540. bees i es its meaning, 
D e , 

v onkel, TBG. XLVI, p.553f. IEC does not suit as well as that of 


al. andam ‘trimming (the edge, a | however, 
may the bride’s hair; to arrange, | the Tamil wor 
eer) ig g Tamil loan : Tam. andam ture, symmetry, 
i: beauty, trimness'— see Van Ron- beauty » but, iE conr 
C ti XLVI, p.535— the Skt. anta- | three E ķā arit. ET 
Wout would be twice represented | ** Kern, VG. à ` Jav.-Ned. Handwoor- 
» the Tamil term being consis * Get B p.613. = á 
berg, este loan > ‘end, limit | denboek, 


Borg, De Middeljavaan~ 
arate 7 5 See eg. ^ : 
Wilkinson, MEPL eee Vrat Shastri Collection. 


d : Pers. ‘body, limb, ats 
arrangement, ornamen b 
Hindi only ihe first . 


Digitized by AYR Sena Feunegtinp eh siidai and eGangotri 


m above word. The name of the tree, fati, 

is found in many IN. eu but all 

1927), p.148, n.l. a of them havo undergone influence of 
: S &nese, sd 

6’ An older ay, at p in- | Sanskrit worth T ca HE 

but sometimes an origin A 4 de Clercq-A. Pulle, Nieuw ndig 

version, developed to ay, ai. | Woordenboek voor Nederlandsch Indiëz, 


? Juynboll, Wdb., p.333. oes ( Amsterdam 1997), p.211, n^ 3869. As 

e See e.g. eee Eisen- | is only natural, the EE ek el fee 
È M. 0 , ; 7 : e or 5 

ās Dämonen in Indien, Inter- | nected the two words : no or hig 


D - (jūti) are, in proverbial 
nationales Archiv für Ethnograpbie | Rs the teak the tim. 
apps (evden m ! is of CH is greatly valued. 

3 EuT M II, p.205. 16 The reader might be referred to M. 
M honeg to N. Adriani, Barče- Horten, Materialien zur nie des 
Nederlandsch Woordenboek, (Leyden, Buddhismus S Indische Strómungen in 
1928), p 546 this meaning only occurs in | der islamischen Mystik (1927 and 1928), 
coastal districte. who does, however, not touch upon this : 
12 Another word the meaning of which | point (Horten's views are far from being 
i8 of interest in this connection is Mal. generally accopted), and to L. Massi- 
biduan or bēdwan "male or female singer, | gaon, Etudes sur les Origines du lexique 
musician, dancer’ <Skt. vidvan fāzra, technigue de la mystique musulmane 
‘knowing’; in Achehnese the word even | (Paris 1992). 

came to mean ‘prostitute’ (as strolling | '” Lafeber, o.c , p.147; KBW. II, p.355. 
actresses often are). '* In this connection Lafeber also dis- 
'* See also R. Pischel, Grammatik der | cussed the word OJav, panjut 
Prakrit-Sprachen, § 985; Yule-Burnell, 
Hobson-Jobson, p.659, 


'* Bee also Yule'Barnell, Hobson-Jobson, 
p.47. é 


'* It is open to doubt whether the name 


sche historieche traditie, (Thesis Leyden 


‘torch, 
lamp’, Gayo panyut ‘a small lamp’, Nias 
fandru ‘id.’ and similar words in other 
IN. idioms (o.e., p.147f.), thinking them 
to constitute an IN. prefix pa- and the 
Skt. dyut oq ‘shining, ray of light’, cf. ° 
of the well-known ‘Javanese’ teak (Tec- | the root jyūt Sq ‘to shine’. His views 


tona grandis) and its wood ig, etymolo- aro, however, far from convincing, 
gically speaking, identical with the 


SECTION 7 
THE INFILTRATION OF SANSKRIT THR 


OUGH THR MEDIUM OF 
LEARNING AND WRITTEN TEXTS 


Although it cann our plan to enter i 


t é 
ot be part of Mya nto historical details or to 
86 : i 

sketch the part Played by Sanskrit i eee eer o Mie 


n the literary ang other documents left by the 
been well known, industri- 


owledge ar The oldest Indonesian 
and even during the subsequent D e Composed in India 8 ancient language, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


^. Tbe oldest insatiipkitisiyithemboFeuegelon ehee and UE = 
ie oo (now called Kalimantan).?, Four yüpas (sacrifici 2 the island ot 
Bor?! oin Kutei on the Mahakam river .place us in possession 
a plat ' 'the famous king Kundunga’ and his gon Ašvav a Ry facts cone 
uA a family. Asvavarman had three gong, like Amšumān, 
oun Majosty Mīlavarman, lordi of the kings, who performed g Ra" Was 
; ‘which costs much gold’); on the occasion of that event th ee 
w^ M: 2s e brahmans 
sted one of the yūpas. In the original Sanskrit : i 
ere taa: MAREA FENA nena: 
gaisagat fears: dua TAJAT u 
WR GAT ARAA: GUT FNAT: 
dat aami Tat: quhaezufss: 1 
AFIAT UTR: ABI ARA IRT 
ve VEL Ser gals RIRA: 11 
King Mülavarman who is exuberantly praised in these faultless, but rather trivial 
atanzas, reigaed—this must be our conclusion—in à Hinduized state, where Hindu 
offerings were performed and brahmans made their influence felt, and situated on 
the trade route between India and China. The style and contents of the inscrip- 
tions are Indian; they might have been found in India proper. The author must 
have been a well-informed Hindu, but it is open to doubt whether the viprah 
or dvijendrāļ mentioned were Indian brahmans. The stones bear no date, but 
judging from the script they may have been erected about 400 A.D. That these 
oldest remainders have been found in Borneo and not in Java or Sumatra is, of 
course, only due to the merest chance. In the following centuries the Hindu in- 
fluence in this part of the Archipelago has declined.? 

To the same period belong the oldest epigraphic remainders from the Mala- 
yan peninsula.‘ Two of them? are Buddhistie; an inscription engraved on a pillgr 
` bears the name of ‘the great seaman Buddhagupta, a resident of Raktamrttikāt: mahd- 

nāvika-Buddhaguptasya Raktamrttikavasa... Five Sanskrit inscriptions carved on 
` largo rooks or stones, four on the Sadane river and one at Tugu (east of Djakarta) 
and most probably dating from the V™ century A.D., constitute tads i 
Indian script and language in the island of Java.’ One of them has MEA. 
Under the representation of & pair of feet, and informs us in somewhat ae 
phraseology that these feet belong to H.M. Purgavarman—once again & ke pis 
name ending in -varman—‘who was peerless and illustrious and formerly ae jās 
Tārumā”, a name probably surviving in the river-name Tarum which as an IN. 
mon noun means ‘indigo’. The sragdhara stanza runs like this: 
EC l Aara HT REAN As GU TAAL 
j sat tiahi sgae 
ve TRARRTARATTAAA ARER y 
The rai afad walt gest TT ees in the kavya-style. 
2) tā ss aho composed thastan snina anag fet and mentioning the same 
Sem ive a Inscription likewise written under & pà tters, somewhat older : 
ming 18, as far as appears from the form of the letters $ m 


ness. farara: dta: uei 


Tn the Tu 


y-50000 
Man's ag 


gu inscription dating from the ue ecc ar 


cession to the throne two rivers oF WA 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


: inm epe 
si we ear after King Parnava c 
a e mentioned, bearing. 


ONESIA . M 
Digitized by ArRASSRUT, IN, INDORE and eGangotri 


rabhaga TAMM and Gomatž MAR. As in’ India 
the brahmans are presented with cows and the Indian chronology is adopted: 


prarabhya phalgune mase khaia krsņāstamītithau eto. But the style of the inscription 
is harsh and rather awkward. It is evident that & king who reigned for go long a 
time over a large area and who caused watercourses to be dug was not a Dotentate 


from overseas, but either a successful colonizer or a representative of a Hinduizeg 


102 


well-known Indian names : Cand 


West-Javanese cultural élite. ? : 
These inscriptions wero, of courae, official documents. Although in some 


parts of the Archipalago Hindu influence must have been strong and Indian belief 
and traditions were, here and there, introdaced to such a degree as to become lead. 
ing, the language spoken by tlie common people was Indonesian. But already in 
these centuries the process of percolating must have begun: terms bearing on the 
cultural enrichment brought by the foreigners certainly had by this time reached a 
not inconsiderable part of the subjects of these Hinduized kings. The study of Sang. 
krit proper, of its grammar and texts was, of course, no concern of the crowd, but 
that there were scholars applying themselves to philology and other branches of 
knowledge appears as far as the great kingdom Sriwijaya is concerned from Chinese 
sources. 

This kingdom was founded in the VIII^ century A.D. and comprised when 
at its height, the Malay Peninsula and such important parts of the Archipelago as 
Sumatra, provinces of Java, Borneo etc. Its rulers possessed a powerful navy 
to protect the trade routes and lines of communication, The wealth and power 
of their country was rapturously described by Arab writers. The Sailendra 
dynasty which had diplomatic relations with India and Ghina t b 
to Indian kin d allowed thei j ilgri it 

: es and allowed their subjects to go on pilgrimages 

mportant evidence of this ki Sriwii hos 

nart kās d) NE OMM a given by the Ligor 
bĪ ASI fans (ety NIE aie ic recor 8 the ereotion of a triple 
lendra dynasty which ruled over tiek now B dead Mes | 
m Kajakara-Māranisudana. Vajri nin. Dire. As the edifice was intended to 
and Vajrapāņi, the king, like other rulerg 
rent of Mahāyāna Budāhism, Though the 
Sanskrit abounding in long com 

: nds ; pound 
various stylistic devices ag Well as all the 
are employed, it ig not entirely free fr 


netionarieg, although the village- 


Anot DA $a- (in Java Skt. deta. 3 
nother Makāvānist epigraph (799 isp tas e a 
ie urak, 


^ Anim inscripti 
portant inscription, likewise written in ga k RS, n 
" anskrit verse, dated 789 A.D 
ides commemor ae on the Wukir hill”, the 
ating the existence of a ‘celestial 
ga On fhe hill by a king 
mā and Visnu, provides 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. z 


a 
Y 


"of propor 


l of illustrating thìs statement. 


This * ae a 
gals Sanskrit has degenerated into gibberish! 


: ith useful historical data concerning the dynasty in 
us 


pig son Sañjaya (a well-known Indian name) are r 
an 
and alt 


power, Sauna or sannāhg + | 
hough the very wording of the text in the traditional var je d 
tion (yasmin chasati sūgarormirašanām failastani, medii pus 
jd sway over an important part of Jaya, ba” 
he A very interesting record, found at Ding | 
; sued in 682 Sāka =760 A.D. It makes mentio 
is vasimha, ‘under whose protection the fire of 
"ba guplali paribhali Pitikesvarapavita); 
yana, was an adorer of Agastya, to whom a s 
dedicated. In the year 682 (the date being expressed through tr. 
called sëùkala or chronogram"’) in the month Mārgašīrga etc, the ki 


senge 
doubt 


aoai Java), was 
n of a wise and brilliant king - 


n every side’ 


Style and grammar of the epigraph are not blameless. ? 3 

The oldest inscriptions found in Bali, written in Sanskrit can, on paleo- 
graphical grounds, be assigned to the VIII** century; in 915 and 933 a king 
Ugrašena is reigning.'¢ ` 

Sanskrit inscriptions were composed as late as the XIV'^ century : a 
double votive epigraph (1843 A.D.) engraved on an image of Manjusri which be- 
longed to the sanctuary called Tjandi Djago (Java) supplies us not only with 
information concerning the image itself, but also with data of historical moment. 
But another record, issued in the same century", by king Adityavarman, who 
ruled over the Sumatran kingdom of Malaya, shows that the knowledge of India/s* 
language had seriously deteriorated. The author of the text is a master of 
metrics, but that is all that can be said in his favour. He neither mastered the 
correct forms and functions of case-endings nor knew the rules governing the order 
of words, the idiom and the orthography, so that H. Kern was perfectly right to 
call his ‘poem’ a piece of ‘impossible Sanskrit’. Let us quote two stanzas by way 


Wear gadargattar eaaet sea 
ama Breet au wat 
alee Mittarqubear ae eet T- 
mAAR Refer neuen: 


qe db ara ada «uper aR À 
Wim SHAR fef qur PASAT, 
aite fafta aa send TI e à 
sitiegRa gaita Sui A 


and ` 


šas MAE SRE i 
hich Sanskrit and an Tudo- i 
ther texts compo! inthe 


Nesian 1 et us before discussing those insoriptions inw 
ANBURZe are mixed, first direct our attention to 0 
d ; 


{Neng i 5 
"489 of India, lio many Old-Javanese: 


hat alread the gee $ 
3 y may be expected on T . exerted 
Xt quot nE Sanskrit stanz(P6r Hsbrésamand Shasin ppm 


o4 Digitized by Arya ANKRON NRAN MA eGangotri 
1 


ral development of the K al peona E clear 
: pepe nd in inscriptions : Sanskrit must hay 
from references in oe URBE ee dierabto number of Sanskrit texta, E 
been studied T ERAN imported from India, must have existed there. Chinese 
rd res m a mia relin tn sama ote iu one 
the great Chinese travellers in India and adjacent countries, (kri to Sriwijava ju 
671 and stayed there for six months to study grammar. After nee visited India, 
where he was for ten years at the famous Nalanda colleges, he returned to Su. 
wijaya, and stayed there some seven years (685.695, with an interruption to sail 
for Canton), studying and translating original Buddhist texts, either Sanskrit or 
Pāli. There he wrote his work on Indian Buddhism and his biography of Chinese 
pilgrims.” And in the latter book he relates that some decades before his own 
visit another Chinese scholar, Hwui-nin by name, stayed for three years in Ho-lin 
(Java), where he studied with, a learned native priest of the name of Jiītānabhadra, 
and translated agamas connected with the Buddha’s nirvana. And tothe same I-Tsing 
we owe the information that Agvaghosa’s Buddhacarita was as popular in these is. 
lands as it was in India proper, and that the Buddhism propagated there was prin- 
cipally the Mūlasarvāstivādin school of Hinayana, the main Sanskrit canonical texts 
which I-Tsing himself was to translate after returning home (700-712).'” This very 
fact, that during the "Hīnayāna period’ of Buddhism the Mūlasarvāstivādins with 
their Sanskrit texts were the prevailing school in the Archipelago can provide us 
with an explanation of the remarkable scantiness of Pali remainders in Javanese 
and other IN. languages. 
That the capital of the Sumatran kingdom remained a centre of learning for 
some centuries is evident from another Chinese source, recording that in 1017 
envoys from thence brought bundles of Sanskrit books, folded between boards.?? 
rning is, further, also shown 
prosody and lexicography, part of 
less corruptod form, been handed 
atical work which ancient Javanese 


dian literature on the cultu 


re uged : th i 
ekamatra-.(Skt. TERTA) ‘consisting mos de NC e A Sod 
S ng ones, d oto., 


nsisti ; 
ng of two such instants’, and the diphthongs trima- 


tra (Skt. fara) ‘sounding three i 
such instants’. Ingi j 
F * Indian work i j used 
eigen mate ie Bh Nr 
; - guru- TE) ‘long’ ich i ^5 
(Skt, AS 4 3; Ong, which ig i i 
one e E yi GIU. laghu- Sg 'short'), The pod P Ao Rio 
with the exceptio nau reo divisions : ghosa (Skt ata) which ērā, Ķ all t th 
$ . ch denotes all of them 
ing alo wee on, ie. the so-called occlusives, & 
nasals which is also one of the meanings orci net GE RPL) OP 
Lv,5 5, 5h (si Y this term in India; and the 


eadi mdi They c 
ings of mūrdhanya ‘cerebrale’ (Skt, ae 9n the other hand, under the 
7 tanya- pde ); tālawya ‘palatals 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj F i i l 
iL IN Donna 
A 


(git. larva aesa); „anā dantya ‘dentals’ (Skt, dantya. 
o gutturals and the labials have, at least in th 
To these categories are added the fe 
sipsprüna ‘the aspirates and the unaspirates resp 
qiu and alpaprana ASAIN), Finally, the text distinonin 3 Skt. makūprāņa. "EL 
y stands for udālta, a term the Old-Ja : 
aksaras (Skt. aksara- ANT ‘syllable’) which wh 
possibly goes back to an Indian interpretation of udatta-" 
accented 3 and anudantya (i.e. anudāttg- AFAT) ‘(a e tis 
not pronounced with the udatta accent, i.e, grave’, E id vowel which is) 
blo which sounds low, a fluttering of the tongue';s J ned like this : ‘tho sylla- 
4 conoluding from the use of these technical terms that the Add m0: 
|. + understood them, do not take into account that they vom people'obvionsly 
paraphrases like (mürdhanya) "the akgara which originates a er. ry Wor: 
the author of tko Swarawyanjana understood the terms ss S head’; 37 so, 
to translate or explain them.?® i ought it necessary 
ey Much attention is paid to sandhi phenomena, 
ings nus oin , E: ki sandhi (Skt. sandhi. afta) 
tion of final and initial sounds’ in connecti i 3 
sfr) ‘(rules for) the so-called "€ R = e 
suarasandi (Skt. svarasandhi- nafa ) ‘the junction or mm m. 
wyafijanasandi (Skt. vyaūjanasandhi- sagqaatea) ‘the sandhi concerning the cong: 
nante ,Pisargasandhi (Skt. visargasandhi- ftatafta) ‘the sandhi concerning the 
visarga . ES to special sandhi rules fhe author, for instance, sets forth that ikañ 
ikāra dadi ya i.e. the sound i becomes yu’, adding some illustrations: ai-- am > 
Quam; bai+em> bayēm etc; 'a and i combine toe’, e.g. atidan > edan; a and u 
combine to o', e.g. ganga (Skt. tI) - udaka (Skt, Sq) > gaigodaka Ganges-water*; 
ka + ulah kolah.?? As part of the examples given are Javanese words, it is evident 
| Ey author has tried to explain Sanskrit by pointing to parallels in his own 
nguage and even to interpret the latter as if it were Sanskrit, to apply the Sans- 
krit rules to Javanese. 
There have existed other works of this character: in a collection of small 
pa cip containing cosmogonic and other matter there is also question of 
rs re: Skt. anusvara- S e1lt and the wyaijana; further on, the diseus- 
M e limbs and parts of the body in which the akgaras are Toonsed brings 
us ee bounds of grammar proper. t ; ighi, which 
! M $ P island of Bali an interesting short treatise has come M zm T 
Yet been > as attracted the attention of Sylvain Levi, has woe 
Kürakasay atingal In ths colonia g me e NOE indica- 
ling the diia (Skt. SRBAHE) i.e. ‘a compendium deem r earla begins 
OY stating Aa between a noun snd aitoi ane us MEE D is the 
'objoot* = at the man who knows the connections between EE es 
R ether it stands in the accusative, in the nominative Or, Ih. ME 


evident! 
of which : ‘the 


need sound high’ 
tt» gh 
Sq "highly (acutely) 


which come under the head- 
the so-called euphonic june-: 


Ww un 
1 ae noun or action; in the genitive)— and karir ‘agent a E nc 
«. an expert; addi i Pa apresa tho rti 
the is Pert, adding yat kriam karma tat proktam tho express the recipient to 


relations" (hay by one: ES 
whio akas) are Wi ās et instrumental, dative and genitive 


9 agent oa j 
"e dosigna ere Sausos anything fo he gizen ta eeji! gufiintly oleat, come 
Sltuateq... AT VPE Shade aetti sufficiently : j 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


106 
kas to be found in the well-known Indian 
varman's Kātantra, which is traditionally held to be the 
kārakas. The Balinese trea tise, the Indian original of 
not yet been found, expressly admits having used ag 
Kātantra and a text called Mahatantra. After the 
d the contents of the text, which has been drawn up 
ed in the native idiom. The author of thig 
he term kavīndra- BAR’ ‘prince of poets’ 


very near to the definitions of the kara 


text on grammar, Sarva 
source of the doctrine of 
which has, fo my knowledge, 
a basis this very influential 
rules examples are given, an 
in Slokas, are in the usual way explain 
Indonesian version expressly saya that t 


in the beginning of the text refers to Pāņini.** 
According to Sylvain Lévi this Karakasamgraha seems to refer to a collec- 


tion of small texts serving as exercises in interpreting Sanskrit texts and in trang. 
lating from Sanskrit into Balinese. Fragments of such exercises have, indeed, 
come to us, illustrating the method which was practised while the study of India’s 
language was alive in the Archipelago. To give an idea of the text I quote a por. 
tion of it, leaving out the translations: @: aA. A ungga TAA EZANA UA... SEAT: 
Rawat Raa ahaa Ra: ae: aA. AA. A. ARAT TA.. AA ARRA 
STHRARAT SIS. ARAA- TA uÀ ARA wad fravēt ai dat TARAS TAERA e: 
S REAT A 8: HE TT UA UA agi UA: aqd. Wed IRT wed a aa Ae ARN.. uei 
wm gi. ad red us ad.g aega.. agha «fos set: afer. rd 
si lag ones Ae AGHA... FTAA... TL MAM sg ci ——' Aq- 
NN Ei Gl is an exercise based on the first two slokas of 
WASNT AITĀ auem areal 
am afe Rawal dai a amare i 
Wt Ate gega 
This epitome, o p A oa 
(or Rama-)caritra or Jaünalakavya) b: IA Tona (that is in Skt. Ramayana- 
y name and likewise preserved in the island 


Í Ba ] &8 proba 
>» Wi y compose 
[*) 1 ob bl 0. osed to exemplify the grammatical ruleg of Sanskrit, or 


Exercises of a simi 
a similar character, going 
ser, going by the name of Krtabasa, are also 


pts containing the Swarawyaijana. Here 


0 which an Old-Java 
neso tri ion i 
anco with didactic ranslation is added 


a: JA: ikai ? iya “it Wag struok’,35 m 4 

that it de ros de (that) tree’ nre. by what ? °, sah vrksah 
o i 7 , det s 

causative verba] EE fanfa: tiba va ‘it tell! eae pue sinimbat iya ‘by 

is translation of the 


Pee e), sah gaj 4 
Va it is accomplished or re ts gajah abhihala], bhavati q; arī; aiaa: aaf siddh 
Rd B+ 7 stdana ` 


Boing by this na it language’. Ar 
from destruction, T em 


n ; A 
ames of Ganesa, Varuna and other "id begin 
O 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Viat ERMES ‘animals, An A itty os 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


ug meanings of & number of words, e. 


: - $4 j S 

es io ahacitta i next a new list of M EL W, brata 
of the god of fire, 29 na b the moon), then 59 Words for TAM Ga £ 
‘ird’, 48 for HOEDEE. e De Es t the end Conjugations of Sanskrit & , 98 for 
given : tisthati, tisthataļ, tisthanti ete. In other texts of this description dae 
"other gods, beaven and earth, sun and moon, plants, clothes ete. hos of 
collected." ta 


One of these manuscripts"; the first Portion of which deal 
orthography etc.» bas in the first ceotion of its second Part the u 
Indian Kogas or Lexicons i synonyms are enumerated in Slokas, b 
ending in & recapitulation in Old-Javanese ig added to every ge 
Thus, amara» tridasa, girvana, vibudhas sura, vrndāraka, aditija, 
„haran in daiwata ika kabeh (Skt. daivata- 24a) i. c. "these (wor, 
divinity (god)’. These lists are rather similar to those given in the Amarakosa The 
namo Amaramala AATHI@I which is an Indian title of a dictionary, ig indeed quoted 
in the text.*° In places we come across a term which ig Wanting in Indian lexicons: 
Kern drew attention to sudhūtin. (Skt. sudhatin. TURR ‘goa’, lit “feeding on 
neofar') as against the synonym sudhabhuj. SUITS in Homacandra’s list; sudhapa- 
gum sudhalih- qas, and even sudhāšana- KALTĀ are nowadays in the Sanskrit 
dictionaries! Next the names of Siva (Bhatāra Guru), Uma, Brahma, and other 
gods are enumerated. It is worthy of mention that in the prose version of Brahma’s 
names a list of names for the Fire-god is added, though the author (or a copyist- 
redactor) ends by remarking that all these names refer to Brahma who was, in Jaya, 
often connected with fire.'? The second section of the manuscript consists of a 
Vocabulary, in which names of plants, animals, various categories of men, the months, 
Parts of the bodys such objects as "house, river, smoke ete,’ together with their mean- , 
inga are systematically arranged; moreover, lists containing homonyms or words 
with a plurality of meanings have been added. Thus; pansu, ksoda, TENU, Cürtay 
dhīdi Gig, sita. im, Fi, Yfē= lēbu (OJav. ‘dust’), etc. But a number of polysemous 
Oday. words is also explained and Kern was no doubt right in supposing that this 
very fact discloses the true character of the text: it was not intended to bea manual 
of Sanskrit, but it served as a means of facilitating the reading of OJav. kawi- 
Works, (or rather texts containing Sanskrit terms).** I would only add: and it was 


NUM first and foremost) a means of lessening the difficulty of writing such 
Works, 44 k 


8 with metrics, 
sual form of the 
ut a proge passage, 
Ties of Synonyms. 
nirjara, dānavadvi; 
ds) are all names of 


We now turn to the study of Indian prosody. An important work has come 
S nder the title of Writasaficaya (Skt. vrita- IW ‘a metre containing a fixed 
des of syllables’ and saūcaya- JAA ‘collecti on').*5 In sccordance with its name 
V offorg an exposition of the vrttas alone; the mātrāchandas (metres RR) h 
not tale" Of Prosodical instants) and ganachandas (metres eres nat fa 
sc a Within its scope. In describing his subjeot-maliter ae M, and the 
exam i Method of the Indian handbooks which while giving the tre and further 
Pw Dlo in the Same stanza expressly mention the feet of each metr Ww 
leularg : g e describing the theory in the stanzas 3-8 he adds a large nu 


o ; E ; f 

the gil stanzas, serving as models (9-108). ` In the MRE crn 
8 S o 

Dein ee Of metres from strophes extending from 4X1 fee tioned by name are 


SON "cond part 96 Indie retrēstgavkošrādidbiēdīd i 
led, For example (st. 15): 


to usu 


Digitized by Aryo RA Te RISORSE And eGangotri 


108 | 
ksamakēna ta jrwan | tēkap tra san wruh 
Aunihuni sakweh | kusumitajanma, ` ; 
x e, especially because they are 'people furnished on 


; ts forgive m 2 « , 

ie. "May A Me with the Jav. connotation of kusuma, noblemen (the 
MM S arīma) In addition to this & Kawi-metre, the name of which is Dot 
meuvri 4 e 


ion.+* So, the author's method in a sense remindg 
i eee e e By ataarit, which in describing the sphere 
E ORUM resorts to 64 different metres, the names of gebioh exe likewise men- 
tioned in the stanzas themselves. But whereas Vārāhamibira in the Br place 
deals with astrology, the Javanese author has, it is true, invented en insignificant 
novel as a means of connecting his stanzas, but primarily offers an inatruotion in 
prosody. The title of the novel is interesting because it reminds us of Kálidàsa'g 
immortal poem Meghaduta : "The Story of the Duck-messenger . This title is given 
in the colophon which runs as follows: itt Vritasascaya, Cakravakadütacarita, 
Tanakus" Tha last word is the author's name. Tanakung who is traditionally 
also regarded as the poet of other OJav. works, in all probability wrote this- 
handbook of prosody about the year 1200. ** 

He must have been an advanced scholar in his branch who had a variety 
of sources at his disposal. He himself quotes Rāmašarman (st. 4) and Pingala 
(st. 7; Pingalasāstra st.109). The former is an Indian author on metrics, but the 
Pingalašāstra is, as has been shown by Kern,*” not identical with the well-known 
sūtra attributed to the same authority, the Pingalachandassūtra.*" It is, bow 
ever, far from likely that Tanakung who inserted corrupted Sanskrit forms 
in his work, read the original Indian texts. Yet the publication of the Writta- 
saficaya supplied the Indologists with come important data so far not known from 
Indian sources. It must, farther, be remarked in passing that a work like this 
PE S ijas deines Many rasan mat and 
wiwāha we for instance fad do SEU E CAN ts adata D 

s rieties of dhrti vfi; kyti gift and other metres, and 


in other poems strophes in i = jra BaF 
makbtamayüra AR eto. AC n. ka, aa F344, upendravajrā 3744M, 

Fragments of other textg 
which treats of the vrsabl 
and other metrical forms 


3f dealing with metrics, such as the Wrttāyana*" 
agativilasita gaantāfistāaa; maņiguņanikara afnantaae 


iyeb been edited or studied.52 


; bon 
WU; and kuswalali pue (alo 


mention names of m 
here how far they a; 
calls the metre oft 


£ vamsapatra- 493; swaladara for sragdharü 


ta for asvalalita- 
etres which Munere Sometimes the manuscripts also 
made in Java; we must leave it undecided 


Te.founded on 1 
genuine ol ia 
he second canto of the iru, Ba Thus a Javanese COPY 


iwā BR jeg 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri colicin LWaha, which is.a spec! 


Digitized by. aaa) oundation Chennai and eGangotri 
: a T IN INDONESIA 

ikrti-metrē, wegan sulanjari.*^ 
T * agakusuma, maigalagita, of which I 

rit: ; $ VERTES 
CES song kas." TER m 8 B Y of tho metres used in 
b Nagarakrtagema century)??? such technical terma'ac sarddula < Ski, : 
En ridita- agglaztiss; mandrakrania <Skt. Ek. šūr. 
<Skt. sikhariņi fāraftūtt have been handed down. nae 
|; . E xs ama (i.e, 
Skt. virāma- faim pauter end of, or STINE, within, a Verse, or at the end ofa = 
tence’); the verb ma-wirama means singing in time (to the accompaniment}? 
3 gund. word for ‘measure, time; tuno, melody, ; 

M ear! is wirahma; in Javanese irama means ‘measure’ (in m 


of Y 


dūlavik 


3 
harmony! and even for ‘gratifying 


° T usie; also wirama) 
. and ‘acquired habit . 


Tt is, finally, an interesting fact that the Skt, term sloka- 
particular kind of commoa epic metre consisting of four quart 
each’ has beeu preserved in Sundanese, where stloka, which ia n 
word, denotes ‘apothegms, metaphorical sayings, especially 
esoteric or religious lore’; it ceems, kowever, to apply in a more particular way to 
texts composed in the pantun style i.e. in that kind of literary form which ig neither 
prose nor poetry, but historically *peaking preceding both, consists of shorter or 
longer series of free rhythmic unities from about 7 to about 16 ayllables (in Sunda- 
nese unities of 8 or of about 8 syllables are preferred), and which can be called by 
the Jatin name, carmen style. In a comparable way the Skt. pāda- T3 ‘the fourth 
part of a regular stanza” has been preserved in Javano:e and Sundanese to denote 
a stanza as well as a punctuation mark or stop between two lines of a stanza, bet- 
ween two stanzas or at the end of a phrase or sentence. 

One can easily imagine that short texts and other formulas which were 
regular parts of the ritual were early introduced into the Archipelago. A consi. 
derable number of them have been preserved through the ages in the isle of Bali, 
where they are relies of the time when Iudian civilization held sway over the 
South-East of Asia and the adjacent islands, and where part of them are still 

à muttered by the priests who, though having no knowledge of India, and not being 
able to understand the Sanskrit of the texts they read and write, go on perform- 
ing the ancient rites of Indian origin. Among the stotras (texts of praise ) 2 
stavas (eulogies) extant some are addressed to high divinities, Vigun*^ and E 
and, further, to Sūrya, Sri, Sarasvat!, Vayu, Yama, Vasuki, Uns, ae E 
Ganapati, Agni, Indrani, the Pitaras, Rati, Varuna etc. Some titles of tiesa E i t 
are rather curious, ion instanco the Sri-Yajurveda Buddhastuti, an Ra enc 
the character of the so-called Balinese Hinduism, which has nothite ee 
the Yajurveda... The Paūcadašarasdstuti is & Buddhist Tantric hymn, (to wit 
to the Fifteen Vajra-deities, in which among other data three ot thoma mga t 
Vajradharn ; 4 ; ) of the sixteen Vajradevatas aro me 
Wise 4 c Vajrayaksa, and Vajrakarman litany in honour of the Eartb, 
interg PUN BELLS id ‘a dr C — E ieee to the goddess of the 

Sos MM with soine. Old Javanese) Old t is over, as being the real 
ı Who receives a regular pūjā when the hatves 


| 
z lly been | 
f praigo has acbuall : | 
The text of some of these formulas E the hymn has been 


udia, whereas in other oases the chances are kind of worship to rt 

» rather, adapted in Indonesia, because fee roper. Thus, the Sristava 

à 708 Was, as far as T lacoqv Pmibdtconan siasfr&iledion a (dhānyarājtā : Sh. 
loh the goddess Šrī is exalted as the goddess Ot 1 à 


gt Ba stanza, esp. a 
ers of eight syllables 
0 doubt the identical 
when dealing with 


Digitized by Arya Sameskoundatiqn GhedwESIdeGangotri 
110 ; 


i 75 ‘queen’, the word dhanyarüja. qqa meg, 
dhānya- UPA ‘grain’ and rājūš UAT ‘queen’, ng 


PN ; texts aro known as Buddhaveda ‘the Veda of the Buddha), Con. 
N daily worship of the Buddhist priest they in fact form g set of 
taining t R 


h nta, a few parts of. which can be identified with Indian 
Buddhist Tantric aa Lévi the prayer to Avalokite&vara (i.o. tho Asta, 
KAM kas PIE, astana are very weil-known in Nepal. Another 
pan ee the title Vedaparikramasarasamhitakirana. Already in OJay, texta 
oc M Gori meanings foreign to Skt. parikrama- aq ‘roaming 
about, transition, succession etc.', to wit those of expedient», help, attendance! or 
something like that. In tho Balinese it is another term for tho so-called madhya. 
pūjā, that is the cult practised in the daily worehip. Sylvain Lévi is right in sup- 
posing it to be an alteration of Skt. parikarman- REAT in the special meaning of 
„cult, adoration’. é? 

It may not be out of placa here to mako some remarks on the much-discus. 
sed word weda in Balinese tradition. The priests of the island know the terms weda. 
caturweda, and mé-weda, the last of which denotes the reciting of definito mantras, 
Friederich, who had studied Sanskrit under Lassen’s guidance and was sent to Bali 
to examino its religion and literature, soon carried conviction that the word weda 
really covered thesame meaning as ths Indian veda. 33, and thas that most aacient 
and yenerable body of Indian literature was preserved in this small i-land.‘ He 
Bays that rather large portions of tha "Rog-Veda, Jadjoer-Veda or Jajoer Veda,* 
Sama-Veda, Artawa-Veda’,** composed by Bagawan Bjasa had boon kept from be. 
ing lo-t and contained the preyars for tho domestic service as well as for tho great 
fest Vals, offerings and cromations, and he adds that tho brabmene, who continye 
tho ancisut Indian brahminical Worship, keep them secret from_all other people. 
ition lees Taree i MY ober anor wo oat 

, Tesearch-workarg6? had, already soon after 


ae mes the truth. The 80-oalle1 Balinese Wedas are collections of 
relīgious text3 of ritual and mystic character, Do of Enos collections! notte 


i ti a A 
meer ON EUN of the dead and mantras to be recited when the funeral 
ed; formulas bearing upon deliveranco and purification, myatic 


aphorisms dealing wit a ^ 

As or mud ini Bn Kūst! the universe and leading to final omanci- 
a, : 

E E ho supranormal faculty of fixing the 


: » a dissertation on t 
momen ying: 
RA šas il EO (Skt. svacchandamaraņu- targa ‘dying at 
4 Ue ed the great epos), expatiations on the 
These texts are amply interlard- 
čāyatrī (Rgveda 8 69.10) jr ae ima); sl Goris“? says, the pāda of the 
: be remarked that tho ani šau Wales it should however 
ed in purāņie and other re] are repeatedly quoted or montion- 
edic and Post-epic origin." Yet, 
ali, whero it is known as Sivasiitra, 


3 Tespacti vely; 


stici i 
CC-0. Prof. SM Vat Seka eondsioohe Vedas,72 


SSR RIT IN INDONESIA: eGangotri 
Before leaving this subject we must noti 
Balinese indications or pi accompanying the Sanskrit text 
foregoing pases many porters: words have found a-place, 
parikramasürasambitàkirana «i ma-wastéra (ma- ig & native p 
thos’ : Skt. vasira. Ad; mantérani sarira (mark the plural en 
mantra- AMHA body-mantras’; ñgastiti mantra: Skt. sth 
astéra mantēra : Skt. astramantra- KARA ‘the mantra oo 
syllable phat (which is also called astra-); karasudi catura 
caturangula- VIZES, hr cleansing the hands (in a ritual 
kēroda desa i.e. the region of Death (who is also called krodha- ālu *anger'); 
mantērani sapērēkara : Skt. praküra- WS “class, species; sort’; téripada ‘a three- 
footed (Skt. tripada- faqz) brazier on which the holy-water stoup rests; zaskara 
‘to further the good of..., consecrate, bless ete.’ from Skt. samskara- EZER ‘sacra. 
mental act, purification eto”; péranayama: Skt. prünayama- MAIR ‘breath-contr: V; 
udakanjali : Skt. udakanjali- SISAS ‘a handful of water; padyarga camaniya : 
Skt. padyarghya TIVA ‘water offered for washing the feet’ and ücamaniya- SF- 
adta ‘water ured for sipping from the palm of the hand’, otc. eto. 

Now that we have discussed tho more technical grammatical and ritual 
literature in Sanskrit we can proceed with the anciens Hindu-Javanese religious 
literature in general, a small part of which has come to us in Sanskrit. We have 
important evidence of the existeuce in Java of ‘theoretical’ works concerned with 
Saiva religious learning and written in Sanskrit. The so-called Bhuvanakosa (Skt. 
bhuvana- 349 and kosa- &t3) "collection of (the doctrines concerning) the worlds’, 
Bhuvanasamksepa (Skt. bhuvana- WIA and samksepa- AJT) brief exposition of the 
world(s)’ and Tattva san hyan Mahājīāna "True principles (Skt. tattvu- ara) of the 
divine (Jav. Aya) great knowledge (Skt. mahajnana- ZIJT) being Sanskrit texts 
preserved in Java and Bali, are not only important from the point of view of thè 
history of Indonesian civilization and the spread of Indian culture over the 
Archipolago, but also from the angle of the history of Saivism in -ndia ess 
The Sanskrit šlokas (or pādas) of these texts are followed by OJav. pros rint a- 
tions or explanations. The Bhuvanakoša which is the most voluminous of t 2 
three texts is divided into cleven chapters called patala, each of which is lee 
bY a colophon. The first fiva patalas form the brahnarahasya, the Gth bears the 

i ; ; à rasakalavidhisastram etc. 
title of Jūānasiddhūntašāsiram, the Tsh that of bhasmamantrasa Mea 
esides betraying some other puranic and tantric influences the text as the v 
rā i Bhargava (ie. Parasurama 
nown outward appearance of a dialogue:the muni Bhargava a, and the god an- 
SDproacheg Mahadeva for instruction about the state of ae Mee doe 
UOS by giving an exposition of the truth about Siva, an fates: 1-6). The 
and aPpearances of this divinity who is identical with nirvana i 


i i t can be summarized as: 
Tope of the first and second (6-11) portion, of this text c Mu : 
e 


MES i i in sounds 
vinity and its appearances and manifestations d a à NOR e 
be oooem and microcosm in their interrelations. fo givē am 7 


tae NER Work I append the text of the beginning : 7° 


t: Avighnam astu, 
(S ) n joka kari sira motus, lià nira: n 
~> “uamya Sirase devam vàkyam. munir & T m 
Orar) Ap ma Sañkara. CO0 Rot aja Vat Shad CE. iia ri 
Java, sera mahyun 


111 
ce that in the Old-Javaneso or 
8 discussed in the 
Thus, in the Veda- 
Tefix) “to put on clo- 
ding!) : Skt, sarira- 
ttimantra- faima gts 
neerning the mystica] - 
ngula : Skt. karatuddhi- 
Way), the four fingers’: 


t 


ihah devadeva malūdeva para- 


119 Digitized by Arga SS Kaka (SPOKI na T as cm 
ik: abhipraya nira, manambah ta sira ri bhafara, $irasd, makakūra n2 
man ano Det vi tēlas nira manambah, mojar ta sira; he devadeva, kita dewa 
2a Peu he mahadeva, kita bhaļūra Mahadeva &aranta, he. 
non 1 


n 5 E cu 
kita bhalāra Mahc*wara (sic) naranta, he Sankara, kita ta bhatara ankarg 
a $ t 


naranta, S pe 

The English translation ae liea Dig: 

cb.) re be undisturbedness. 3 DA 
ai his thoughts in a few worde he spoke im : en 
(Skt.) After bowing down his head before the god, the JEERIHOHVCLT Asceslo said the 
words:'O God of gods, great God, highest Lord, beneficent One... "m 
(OJav.) The ascetic Bhārgava wished to ask the God about the Rika of nirvana, 
thus was his purpose; he made a salutation to the God, with the head, this he 
did by means of his head. After his salutation ho said God of gods, thou art the 
God of all gods; Great God, thou who art the god Great god by name,..., thou 
who art the god Great Lord by name, beneficent One, thou who art the god bene. . 
ficent One by name, otc.’ 

In the equally important Bhuwanasamksepa,”* which like the Bhuvana- 
koga, deals with tattva-mysticism and mysticism in connection with the maoro- 
cosm-microcosm, the religious practices of nyasa, speculations about the eseence of 
Siva etc., Uma and Kumara approach Siva for instructions. The author dwellg 
upon the ideas of šūnya and nirvana; when there is neither earth, 
moon, light, wind, nor cound, clouds, fire, day and night, nor heaven, 


Brahma, Siva, when éverything is void, that condition bas been descri 
(emancipation : Skt. atq). 


Water, sun, 
mind, Vignu, 
bed as moksa 


Tanaya,®° which refers to 
scholars were of the opinion th of Javanese Buddhism, Some 


Vāna- REITIT or, at least a syn 


=(0jrayāng = Tantrigm 51 


D 3118 often very free urually exceeds 
etter discussed in th but it also contains 
of the stanza, a pada or two 
8 a rule these Sanskrit elements do 
d entence, som ti they 
in th , etlmes, however, 

9 latter case the endings may on From these 
anskrit ver 


he first pada, 


avo been adopted by the Javanese 
anes i 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shasi! CORERAS may, however, be due 


SANSKRIT IN 


—— — ——Jigiti Samaj Founda tun GAB Sbai and eGangotri in 
p= , = i S a 
to the adapter's attempts to explain the difficult conten 
0 


i : ts of th m 

there aro many metrical and grammatical defects in the Sena eee Although 
o reason to suppore that they have not been Composed in Am a 

A . 


‘oka, selected at random may Serve a3 an example : They lath 
glok8; Xi cd Wes gaz Fel aag ERCI 
F> ats gami Wine: u 
(translation of a —- 2) r 
r (in yourse 16 fai confidence), £ 

iss skatas brought into (this speci We 
(Translation of the OJav. Portion: <) ie. andala Mes 
janaya cādhunā, display your srddha (< Skt, $raddha Z1 ‘faith, confidence’), 
be without fail sagorawa (<Skt. sugaurava. i towards the divine 
mandala (circle), kule jàto'si buddhānā W been born in the 
buddhakula (family of the Budd has), for bhatara (Skt. bhattara. KE ‘the Lord’), the 
divine Buddha will be your name, sarvamantrair adhisthitah, you have 
been brought into (this special) condition by sarwa tathagata (all the tathūgatas), 
formulas have been spoken over you and you have s-i-a&askara (from Skt. sams- 
kara- EFR ‘consecration’) i.e. been consecrated with sarwamantra (all the reti- 
gious texts)’. 


circle and now en. 


The second treatise edited by Kats; the Kamahayanikan proper, is an Old- 
Javanese catechism of tantrist Buddhism. The Sanskrit element which it con- 
tains is not eo important, many pages being without a stanza; and the quality of 
the Sanskrit is in places so bad that at least part of it has been supposed to have 
flowed from the pen of a Javanese author.*5 

Turning now to the Brahmandapurana,®* we should remark at the outset 
that, putting aside minor details, this extensive text, though containing only part, 
of the contents of the Indian Vayu- and Brahmandapuranas, is almost entirely in 
harmony with the corresponding portions of these counterparts, the Sanskrit 
Wording of which, however, was not entirely identical with the Javanese author's 
model.” The Javanese adapter has, generally speaking, followed closely upon the 
text of his Indian model, often giving a free rein to the same cirenmstantislity, 
ut sometimes condensing his text by omitting irrelevant glokes, repetitions, epi- 
theta eto, In the Javanese narrative we come across a very large number of quo- 
tations— Slokas, half-slokas, padas and at places a single word—, almost always 
followed by a more or less precise translation. As the metrical recension of kā 
Purana, the So-called Kakawin Prthuwijaya or Brahmandapurana kakawin, whic 
Probably dates from the XI century, gives, in general, the same ‘text, Ns 
- “nelude that in those days the Old-Javanese portions of the prose text 7 F 
Y the same form as they have now. So the chances are ee RS 
Which Sanskrit stanzas or padas fail (and which here and ki hands of the 
iis Page) are not due to the influence of a redactor, but lett "ET 

Nee adapter himself. : e style and showing a simi- 
lar stru : CUN with other texte) «TIE E or Old-Javanere prose ver- 
Bion Ei 1n the first place with the M Pha Brabuindaporéna may be said 
to kava MN of the Mahābhārata ( + 1000 A.D. hrased Sanekrit and partly ln . 

. wen written partly in explained and parap 


l i it text. In the parwas, 
ja nene, Which elocelydollerers stha vonüRgdo Senn. enl eee 


Are not complete translations of the Mahābhārata, 


i Digitized by Arya SagyeNsYuntatiaiNC Rara Be b Sangotri 
114 á z DIL — — — — 
exact and more or less condensed translations, the M 


Tho author or authors of the Parag 


phrases, partly more or less i 
krit porbions are however less numerous. M nas E 

hile keeping olose to their Indian models, were ondense the 
while ke 


narrative in their own words, so that tho qM m. nos án tonem that the. 

n original written in another language. The manner of toll. 
we ERA uris is consequontly more episodio, the Sanskrit stanzas and 
eee iors which the translator has at lege os vaten from hig 
copy of the Sanskrit text often have tho charactor 9 ingertiong SRS s markg 
which bring the reader into contact with the original, enhance the authority and 
trestwoithiness of the Javanese text, call attention to the special Importanc3 of 
some passage or other, or, perhaps, also emphasize tho sacred character of the 
work. Yet, it is worthy of mention that the more purünic or didactic portions of 
the parwas (eg. the Jambukhaņdavinirmāņa- and Bhagavadgità- sections of the 
Bhīgmaparwa**) contain many more Sanskrit quotations and are as to their struc. 
ture, in harmony with the Brahmāņdepurāņa,*? whereas, on the other hand, those 
portions of the latter which relate legends or other more narrative matter deviate 
from the general struoture of the far more numerous didactic and dogmatic sectiong 
of the work, resembling the manner of telling usually adopteā by the author or 
authors of the parwas. How can this be accounted for? It is true that parely 'reli- 
gious’, dogmatic, mythological or ‘theological’ subject-matter is apt to be couched 
in traditional style, but may we infer from this that all OJav. texts, which have 


of works? Dogmatic and other subjects of the 


which tries to explain the struc- 
being exclusively of chronological 
Proceeded to omit the Sanskrit à Se of time authors of Javanese prose 


tanzas and padas, which t a 
ch the poets of kāvya-works 
1 88 far ag T know, never includeg, 2 i i 


Although i i 
editions, it may UT A agl may easily be found in tho printed 
above exposition, The Bh ki iy passages by way of illustrating the 
P:88-65) begins dud section of the OJav. Bhīgmaparwa (ch.III, 

6 formation of the two armiog (Mbh. 6,20); only Mbh. 


change of views of Yudhisthira and Arjuna, 


next stanza met with is 
AG. 1,28 IT.o9]) Which rung like this : 
i i BLUE Pr 
G s az Fa = 4 
Qu that T goo, Ergņa, my e Pons RU 1 i 
ecome feeble and m n present here, desirous of combat, my limbs 


followg this Bloke ig: ph drieg up’), The 


rd K sevi osu zondering: which immediately 
CC-0. Prol$4ty4Yeattsriasjgj PRU otn beno strangers, I suppose A 


SANSKRIT IN INDO 

j tion Cheitaldnd eGangotri 115 

who will combat with each other— whom I see, all of them belon 
family; thoy aro related to each othor as fathers, granā.fathers, 
prothers, children, grand-children, and alzo as fathers-in-law, friends and friend 
of the family (part of these words render st. 26 and 97 I) Anyhow Dow th As S 
them all» MY limbs are languid, my mouth dries Up and withers ren I x t 
pling all ovor without cause, and lo, my body lets fall the gandewa-bow fr rem- 
hands, for my heart i broken my mind is bewildered (these words corre ate 
st. 29 and 30 without being an exhaustive transletion). Then 31 II and ui M 


quoted in full :) = 

à a x ASJA gA SEEGILE 

4 FIA tad A as Ui gari g |] 

(i.e. I don't see any good in killing kinsmen in this war; Krsna, I desire neither 
victory nor kingship, nor (its) pleasures’). The Oday. paraphrase runs like this: 
‘how would my mind be at ease, how would it delight, when I should haye killed 
my kinsmen and relations in this battle? Therefore, great king Krsna, I do not 
desire victory, nor am I greedy for the power ot kingship. To what purpose does 
one live and enjoy oneself, if one kiils what is alive and destroys one's uio 
family? (a free rendering of 39-II and 33 I). Alas, pity and desire enter my heart ! 
(whence?). Where will there be joy, how will my mind become quiet? (cf. 36 b)... 
etc. etc, 

We must always remember that the Hindu colonists, merchants and adven- 
turers did not speak Sanskrié, bus the vernacular of that particular region of 
India from which they came. In conversiag with the indigenous population they 
might have learned some Malay or Javanese, especially when they married Indo- 
nesian women. The Prākrit element in the IN. languages is, however, rather 
s oanby as compared with the large amount of Sanskrit words. The linguistic result 
of the impact of India on the Hinduized provinces of Indonesia is therefore not a’ 
blend of Indian colloquial and some Indonesian idiom or other, but an Indonesian 
language enriched with a large admixture of Sanskrit and a much smaller number 
of younger Indo-Aryan vocables. The Sanskrit element hasin many cases rela- 
tion to the cultural enrichment the Indians brought to the Archipelago. From 
these facts we may conclude that the learned and literate Indians in the Archipe- 
lago had, by their oral instruction as well as by their writings an extraordinarily 
great influence upon the evolution of the native language. The Dutch scholar 
Brandos’: as early as 1889 remarked that a close study of the orthography of the 
Sanskrit words in the Javanese inscriptions dating from the Old-Javanese mie 
shows that in tho oldest documents Sanskrit words are comparatively few an 
: ratlier badly spelled, whereas at a later time the Sanskrit elements are ans Eo 
Tous and often even superabundant and the orthography M os Tei 
these faots he duly concluded that during the second period ad En 
în à more thorough way and not only ‘written down from he ‘ 


thi ; ; f ; ld have deteriorated both 
bird, and last, period the Sanskrit used in Java M ME Se 


wi i 
. With regarā to grammar and orthography goes xia e 
y of Old-Javanese) about 


Pf Sanskrit texts is also obvious when we see tha 
UE (which is far from a complete dM as againat about 6926 
indi saulē words are entored (compounds Po in addition, 
‘Senous vocables. A large number of these Skt. Malay dictiona- 
. y diction 
d Others, oan also be em ref. Satya Viet nage Gekeision Ta those 


ging to the sama 
uncles, teachers, 


IN INDONESIA 
116 Digitized by Arya oA AN ERIT DS Chennai and eGangotri 


ries which aleo give the many literary loans one comes across Over 760 Skt 


elements. : : 
Turning now toa brief discussion of the way in which Sanskrit elemontg 
infiltrated in ancient Indonesian written language which may fairly well bo Cong} 
dered as a rellection of the technical idiom of scholars and religious authorities 
and of the official jargon ured by the. lawyers and administrators of the kin 
doms, we have ample evidence of the necessity under which thore men Were i 
resorting to Indian terms when speaking of things Indian or introducing ideas or 
customs of Indian origin. In part of the ancient texts which have come to ug 
thia process is easily to be noticed. From the abundance of inetructive “passages 
afforded by inacriptions, religious texts and more or less technical literature, the 
following may deserve passing observation. As we had already occasion to 
remark the Javanese author of the Sang hyang Kamahayanan Mantranaya though 
following his Sanskrit model, was repeatedly compelled to ineert some words not 
found in it (or at least not present in the parts he took from it) by way of eluci 
- H 1 H 1 1 Šā 
datīng his translation. Thus in $ 1 he explains the words mantracaryūnayam vidhim 
the method leading to the due observanco of the Mantrayāna Buddhism’ by th 
‘ , D D . 5 i 
„Javaneso Passage sai hyan Mantranaya sira AMahayana mahamarga naran ira, i 
the divine Mantrānaya that is to sav the gr ayana’, i or 
E ay the great path Mahayana’, in which not only 
2 wo proper nouns’ but also the technical term mārga- RÑ i 
Indian idea of ‘right way or ini un M UU 
denn Sv Way or method of attaining delivorance”, a d, with the B 
dbiste, the way to salvation pointed out by Qu (eee 
Sanskrit technical vocabulary of the Buddhist c 
come acrose, in $ 2 tüsana (Skt. šāsana. maa) ( 
hitasuka (Skt. hitasukha- Baga) ‘welfare and 
al) ‘mundane existence’, mahapralaya (Skt. 


? 
Buddha’ was borrowed from the - 
ommunity. In a similar way we 


um z ormidable army of Māras’), tho 
ral Šrī Sāk i is vari 
Ae use (g 3 4 vamuni (mark this variant 
(ka-marawijaya-(a)n, aa dU BEN of his gaining the victory over the Māras 
impediments of the Māras (m n substantive), of his overcoming all the 
pes z his congu mark the variants of Mārasainyam in the 
Oncélved as one m SAAN), i.e. the afflictions or obstacles 
LE (Skt. skandha- zara ‘the - 
constituto the substratum of a perro- 
utramára (Skt. Zagan), that 
hīwaprab bhyäsa : Skt. abhyāsa- AFNA 
tion’ (Skt. samadhi augu rabh Md hawa lustre, greatness and power’ 
saati BAA), the takii i aea: TAT) of tho divi Idhi ‘medita- 
D mhe, e fal ower’ (kt, 1.17 e divine samadhi medita 
; no co «takti. af) of the divine sañ hyafi 
nd these Sanrkrit rds in & 
necessi : th words 
teas Sind thom. And inn from Other sources, tho adapter 
SEM (Skt. shop. x 2 a for ‘specific, Re AN we find, throughout 
haka ‘adept! (Sut, så thee TAG “intelligence, e ras, sthūla [i 
i Papa 'evi] + + Sent’ (Skt. prajūā. 9T); 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri ee list. Papa- N13); marga- ‘the 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati i and eGangotri 117 

` th pointed out (by the Buddha fcr escape from end 
E ‘ascetism’ (Skt. tapah qq:); wyapar, « existence’ (Skt, ma 
aui); tapa 98 "an, vāpāra “occupation, function, veel 
to: (Skt. vyapar a- STIR) and many other Words of religions on, Performance 
e technical signification. 


» Scientific or more or 
In the first paragraph the author when 


panaye resorts to the long paraphrase ri kadadi Pēda bhūjanas toam 
m ri saù hya dharma mantranaya ‘so that yo 


108 


! : ja u are (will be) worth 
E boine instructed in tho divine doctrine, the manirānaya” 


a Sanskrit word yogya has to explain the likewise Sanskrit fülrabhüig, And 
when trying t9 interpret the meaning of §8 where the Mahayana ig said to b 
gambhira ‘mysterious’ (Skt. gambhira- TEND; atarkya ‘surpas-ing reasoning’ s 
alarkya- A171); anavila ‘pure’ (Skt. anāvila. aag), eto., atarkya is explained xà 
‘what cavnot ba understood with Teaconing’ : t-in-arka, a derivative of Skt. tarka- 
at formed with the Jav. infix -in- and ‘it withdraws from being argued atout’ (or 
a translation like this): in-iha, derived from Skt. ūha- $3 ‘deliberation, Teasoning’: 
anavila is explained as tarpadosa "without fault’ (Skt. dosa- ata). In § 95, to n 
tion only one other example, the Skt. word Samayabhrasta ye janah "people who 
have strayed from the covenant’ is interpreted by the Jav. hana wwan ‘(if there 
are) people (who)' and the Skt. samayabhrastah, 

liko this: wih sampun krtasamaya, manadah upadeša 


Y of, i.e. quali- 
- In this sentence 


which in their turn are explained 


a, apa ‘kuna waiwartika ta ya ` 
wékascn... ‘that is to say who have taken the covenant (Skt. WI) and who have 
received instruction (Skt. $3351), but who eventually turned away (became un-- 
faithful: Skt. @afa% from vivarta- fxad ‘turning away)’. In paragraph 1 the author 
tries to render tha words of the Sanskrit text desayisyami te samyak ‘I shall teach 
you (that) in a correct way’ by writing: sira teki desanakéna mami warahakna mami 
ri kita ‘I shall teach you that, I shall tell you that’, the first verb of this tauto- 
logy being a Jav. derivative of the Skt. dešanā- 22a ‘instruction’ which comes 
from the same root as the verb used in the stanza, and the second being a frequent: 
OJav. term for ‘to impart knowledge to a person, to tell him what he did not 
know before’, 

In a comparable way many Skt. words are used as bases of derivatives in 
the Javanese way : ka-wisaya-(a)n ‘the objects of sense in their entirety’: Skt. 
visaya- rv; ka mahayása-(a)n ‘the doctrine of the Mahayana’; ka-parartha-(a)n 
‘altruism’ (Skt. parartham TUAR, ‘for another’); ka-sarbwajnata-(a)n ‘omniscience’ 
(Skt. sarvajūatā aðan ‘ia J); um-abhyasa ‘to study or practise’ (Skt. abhyasa- sem); 
umiwarana ‘to cover’ i.e. the native prefix um- and Skt. vivarana- fia uncovering 3 
o-Warawirya-kéna ‘to bestow excellent strength on’ (Skt. vara: at and virya- dH); 
the compound warawirya ‘might, power’ is found in the OJav Arjunawiwaha. 

Yet we cannot put all the Sanskrit in this text on a par. The word atikāsta 
Sourring in § 42 in a ‘translation’ of the Skt. svasamayam alisayasaulhyadam 
hajadhvam ‘be attached to your covenant whigh gives imperishable bliss’ which 
tuns like thig : atikāsta rumaksa sai hyan samaya, apan sirg wénan umehaken than 
Gmuitarasuka ‘adhere (Skt.) very much (Skt.) to the divine covenant (Skt); for it is 
“le to give the supreme (Skt.) bliss (Skt.) certainly means much, toa high degree 
nd not very bad’ (Skt. atikasta- ftāe); the change of meaning-which has also 
poured in other languages ia quite intelligible?* And other We too, are used 
ata Uncommon in India proper. „The term iek, BRE oy 
"bo highest or whole trati spiritual knowledg : 


t Shastri Collection. 


(sie) o 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
113 : Digiti j Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
or ‘the best sense’) is in this and other Old-Javanese texte uged in such Con. 
; d dance with the) truth, in accordance with the trug Seng 

notatiońs as (in aocor sentials, in the main'**, which were no doubt deri S 
of the word; really; the essentia * in IRMAS jas ^ Srlveg 
from such adverbial use a8 We fiud in Skt. parama? pus X really, in the 
true sense of the word. Ina comparable way pramukha is used in the Senge of 
Skt. pramukhe THA "in front of’ (OJav. Brahm Pur.) etc. The word abhimukha. 
(Skt. abhimultha- afugu) *turned towards, facing which also expresses the conno. 
tation ‘being before the eyes (of things of which a prospect is held out)’ &ppears in 
the Kamahayanan as a complete synonym of the Skt. anagata- WAMA future’, of, 
in this conneotion, such Skt. compounds as yauvanabhimukhi ‘approaching puberty’, 
In some cases a slight formal difference can be stated : thus varika- ‘cloth’: Skt, 
varaka- 41%. The long compounds upon which we in places come show a certain 
degree of ability in operating with Sanskrit: kawaka-mala-(a)dy-upadrawa (816) ‘the 
attask (or in the more usual OJav. sense: ‘distrese, misfortune’) of mushroom, dirt 
ete; karatalabyawasthitu ($ 39) "being in the palm of (your) hand’. We cannot, 
however, always be eure how far these long compounds were formed by Javanere 
scholars or had been found in Indian texts. 

In a similar way a text like the Brahmanda Purana is crowded with Indian 


object’ 


FETT); manasika-putra ‘son born from the mind’ (Skt, mānasikapuira- MAEI); 
bhütendriya the gross elements and the organs of renze' (Skt. bhütendriya- zaleza) ; 
tamomaya consisting of darkness’ (Skt. tamomaya- ARRA); dewarsi ‘a saint of the 


Moreover, hundreds of Indi 
an proper noun ; i 
Javanere readers of these texts : in the KAROS iC NET ANR 


vinities, holy men, mythological kings, mountains 


tioned. Misc af iar rivers, etc. etc. are men- 


ein do nof reappear in later texts, but a considera- 

logical saccus gs and were predestined to form part of the mytho- 

* n. Among them aro Angira (Skt. Angiras- AINA) 

and as ae of Trnawindu who likewise occurs in the 

EVA son of Agastya; and king Prihu, who 

> Saving come forth from his father’s 

ount of his wicked character, and who, 

of a cow : in Bali t 9 earth, whom he had milked in the form 

who here comes fo in a somewhat modified form, for Prētu, 

ies by thrashi MINE) of bien father Maharaja Wene ”7 after he 
^ 1 Je 1 18 elected ki : 

à) ‘the Earth' to yield food; di A of Bali, and foroes Siti (< Skt. 

eeds in introducing tho cultivation 


arm after the sages had kil i 
E led 
being the first king, n DN 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


] Digitized b j Foundātī ennai eGangotri 119 
nardākika (Skt.) gain (SLE) turi, sddaraka (Skt, CO ; 
ma „ag)ta sira; tan hana pada niren bhuwana GEN oe ra- 8I Wc 
? aka- BSE) nin bhuwana (Skt.), tat i 
kt. kalarika- % ovn uo Tatan hana musuh 
PME (gkt.) nira. Pages in which the number of 8 U^ wanya pramukha (Skt,) 


: 8nskrit 
ans are in the proportion of 4 to 9 are not rare in the text, Mes and the native 
exceptional to find Sanskrit words used in those Darts of the Brahma no meang 
va urana and 


tho parwas which translate or paraphrase quotatio the origi 
pon’ (Skt. ayudha- aga) 18 explained through`asira ni missis al aaa 
Ata); gandharvarāja TETAS by ratu nin widyadhara ‘ki ‘weapon’ (Skt. 


‘yoa 


ganskrit before the OJav. portion and which could n 
nese word for ‘king’. But- why has (ibid. 184) candra ‘moon’ ( 
in a quotation been ‘translated’ by šašadhara ‘bearer of a hare (i. 
tatadhara- AWAIT)? 

Especially interesting are the explanations of Sanskrit words of phrases 
given by these Javanese authors themselves. When Romaharsana is introduced 
the meaning of his name is made clear like this: "roma i.e. ‘the hair on the body’ 
and harsanam i.e. standing erect (of the hair) ”; dirghayusa is explained as 
‘whose life is long; "it is surrounded by water’: that is the meaning of dvirapa 
(Skt. dvirapa ZUT ‘double water); apah (Skt. apah 819: "water ie. ‘the Seven 
seas; in connection with the proper name Jaratkāru the anthor of the Adiparwa 
remarks that jarai SIA is a name for ksaya ‘decay’ (Skt. sra). 

Interesting are also those cases in which the native author derives a Sans- 
krit term in a way different from the correct etymology or divergent from Indian 
usage: thus Bhismaparwa p.59 nirahara ‘abstaining from food’ (Skt. nirahara- 
FIE) serves as an interpretation of nirāsiļ in the text (BhG. 6, 10) : Skt. nirāši? 
Frat : free from desires': the Javanese author has connected the word with 
Skt. asnāti AIM ‘to eat’. 


Skt. candra- Wz) 
e. the moon)’ (Skt. 


Often the same idea is expressed twice: in Javanese and Sanskrit words, . 


Thus, Adiparwa p.16 we find: sat kumāra ‘six boys’, followed by the Jav. rare 
Remar-siki, and dvādašūrāh ‘twelve spokes’ followed by rwawélas sénkérnya. The 
Sanskrit words are not always literally borrowed from the original text, nor do 
"they always precede either. Thus the Jav. i pingir ikas lwah is immediately fol- 
lowed by i tīra nij, nad; ‘along the bank of the river” (Skt. tīra- tX and nadi- adt; 
Adip. p.30), N s ‘ 

> To give an idea of tho character of the Old-Javanese parwans of the Maba- 
8 I first quote a portion of the Bhagavadgita (5, 2 ff.): 

aaa: aida facea | 


Tasted Haat FIAT 11, €— 
(where tat takes the place of tu) ‘the renunciation of works and their disciplined 


Performance both lead to final beatitude; but of those two discipline of cis 
p Verior to their renunciation.’ The interpretation literally kak " fruit 
(ma attjāsa and yogasannyasa (this must be pepe Cs orl: Skt. 

rà Phala : Skt. phala- we) kla)-adhisreyasa-(œn br e n 
"ireyasa, fazaa, the words are not in the Pot. Diot. & 


asa appea 
yon weigh i them both, yogasanny 
Ein oe importance ort Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


bhirat 


ut if rs to be superior 


d Monier Williams). . 


S. 


ue 


ANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
120 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati i t 
NEM. the man who proceeds to perform 

to karmasanntasa, for ; p ow (duhkha : Skt. dukkha- $a), E 
(karma : Skt. karma € 8 arī (K P or ?:-a-fan Mec 
yoga does not d E kājā a). Tho next quotation which follows ūri 
yoga : Skt. CREUSE po 4 ki nir brahma nacireņādhigacchati (th xd 
mediately, is BhG. 5, 6 II : yogayukto a rab vithout delay’ Ago 
who is disciplined in discipline attains FORD e ys | po : AY) Which ig 
trauslated like this : ‘such is the state of the ascetic (wiku) who cultivates 
without delay he shall attain to the world of Brahman (bralmaloka). 

In the following Ines the Skt. kurvan (et. 7d) is rendered by lēkas (Jav.) ma- 
prawrtti (Skt. pravriti- agfa activity”) i.e. he goes on performing actions , fighran 
(st. 8c) by aitambura (Jav.) sarwagandha (Skt. sarvágandha- waite) ‘ho is smelling 
all kinds of porfumes' (expressing the idea of smelling without a definite object), 
The other participles (pasyan, asnan etc ) are translated by Javanese terms. To the 
pada 5, 8a naiva kimeit karomīti (‘Iam doing nothing at all’) an interpretation is added 
which runs like this: I am not performing actions (ma-prawriti), I do not establish 
(s-um iddha-kēn: Skt. siddha- frg ‘acconplished’) tho objects (pa-wisaya: Skt. visaya. 
faqa) of all censes (sarwendriya : Skt. sarvendriya- aafaa)’. As other texts the 
Bhismaparwa alro contains phrases formed by combining native and borrowed ele- 
ments: bheda (Skt. bheda- WZ difference’) sunken ‘different from, besides’. 

In the Old-Javanese kakawins the numbers of Sanskrit and native words are 
not seldom in the proportion of 1 to 4 or 2 to 7. Such lines as Wrhadrathāputra 
ri šatru nūtha "Wrhadratha has the enemy of the king as a gon (a-putra : Skt. Ja 
'son'), in wbich all the words with the exception of a prefix and a proposition or 
particle are Sanskrit, are not rare: tatkala ratnaduhità rika sokacitta ‘when the 
princess (Skt. raina- Ta jewel end duhita gal daughter!) was very distroseed (Skt. 
foka- t5 and citta- fw 'mind')?* And in this stanza (Harivanga 43,2) no less 

„tban 11 words are of Indian origin : 

yan wirya kapti naranātha jaya kiteù rat 

yan saktya dibya wenananrurahen triloka 

yan swarga towi kaharépta yadin kamoksan 
: a tan dadya mithya sakatēn katémunta natha 
(If you desire courage, O king, so that you will be victori : h ld, if you 
desire divine power so that you will be able to destro ne a lā a a 
desirous of heaven, or of final emancipati WC PEN ; Wo K i ue i 
o yas 609) 2 pation, it will not be in vain, you will attain 

At places ? 

Dn og šai es iM of form or meaning can be stated: Arjuns- 

wheel’) (Skt. yantra- qz ‘any instru cus, disk’ (mod. Jav. janira means ‘spinning- 

nese way: sünukhzne (: sa ‘atl Bija poe complicated derivatives in tho Java- 

+ suff. -an + possessive suffix -¢) ‘all th erage nol bhe loanword viki LS 
at comfoits her”. 


ss 


long 


Ycga, 


Qu the whole, i& depends on the 

8 learning on one hand and on the 

how many and what kind 

ve Some examples. In ES 

we find 98 Sanskrit words, nO 

the name of the text) which Probab] TARRY „Be there no obstacles’ : taniu ad li” 
Y means ‘thread, cord, warp’ in a transfert? 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by AANSEN WEBS e and eGangotri ; 


: 191 
9088, of, in Sanskrit, tantu- wg in "——————— 
8 


‘ Bara * 3 
a family’ etes yalina- KA ended and carita- afed A a peg of 
vatives; asitkala (sio) i.e. the past” i.e. Skt. asi; STIENI it was? and xe rS de 
manusa- i.e. AIJT man, human) penes Mahameru FRAG ‘the wae fan 
Meru’; Mandalagiri- WUzEfft i.e. ‘the mountain Mandara: liiga M 
2 emblem". 


phuvana- 333 world’; orim tālā ‘earth’ Jombuģiņa i.e, Janbudvipa. RAAT ‘the 
continent of the roso-apple d ; ca India’; sadakala SUIS ‘always’. Mandar à 
parvata: WFQW4 the mountain M.; janma sq “creature, being, race’ Bafinra- 
yen ‘lord’; jagatpramūna- SEED Standard of the World’; ma-yugha, ite biao 
wbich is the Skt. yoga- ata concentration’, and 6 repetitions. In du ni 


to 4 native terms 
E stock of the Sans. 
kris language, but some technical or unusual terms are mixed up with them, thus 
such compounds 
as fawawedhüna i.e. Savavidhana- wafzara ‘tho ritual disposal of the dead’, 

We are now in a position to revert to the inscriptions and to summarize 
the main particulars bearing upon the substitution of Sanskrit by the vernaculars 
and the influence exerted by the former on the latter. The ancient Malay inserip- 
tion of Kēdukan Bukti (Palembang, Sumatra) e.g. begins like this : svasti šrī 
sakavarsātīta 605 ekūdast suklapaksa vulan vaitakha dapunia hiyam nayik di samvau 
maxalap siddhayatra di saptami suklapaksa vulan jyestha dapunta hiyam marlapas 
dari mināha tamvan mamāva yam vala dualaksa daian koduarutus cara di sūmvau 
daian jalan sarivu ilurātus sapulu dua vanakna datam di mata jap sukhaciita 
di paūcamī suklapaksa vula[n]...laghu mudita datam marvuat vanua...srivijaya sid- 
dhayātra Subhiksa...'?? In this inseription—which has not yet been interpreted to 
the satisfaction of all scholars concerning themselves with it'?'—the whole ot the 
opening and all dates are in Sanskrit, with the exception of the well-known native 


tula (class, and mod, Mal. dulan) ‘month’; in the Sanskrit words the endings i 


have, however, been omitted. In Sanskrit dictionaries the form siddhayatrika- 
Renis is considered a wrong reading for siddhiyatrika- aanas ‘a person 
who makes Pilgrimages to learn magical arts or to gain good luck or beatitude, 
but this inscription clearly gives siddkayātra which apparently means to under- 


take a voyage to gain supranormal power’. The word vala is the Skt. bals- 4 —. 


‘army’; laksa- ww the numeral for ‘100000’; cara means ‘travellings = o 
sni ei 

cara. s); sukhacitta, which has remained a frequent SOS ira e eg) 
cheerful’ (Skt. sukhacitta- gafaa ‘mental ease’); laghu ‘pleasant (okt 

snd mudita ‘glad? (Skt. mudita- gifs). Tuwo in Palembang 
, Second Old-Malayan inseription—found at Talang ANO eh the 
Sumatra) — which ig one year younger, the date ig likewise an an ie 
exception of the word for ‘month’, written in Sanskrit. It records-a prar 


: ion of 
At ig, in-Buddhist terminology, ‘an intense longing, an inei M " that 
ds man who aspires to the highest excellence of enlighten maa E lee 
s Sct, addressed to a Buddha to obtain his blessing 80 tha a} reads like this:"** 
in dd ha, himself’, : The word is in the inscription which = Um (‘of different 
er all that has been planted, coco-palms eto. dian Satur?) and the fruit- 
liga, ^ Phrase containing Skt. samisra- afan andert dE Skt» Aak) 
abi (“but also’: Sktceurftst Zahaniaitua to Hon tajaka- or tadga: 
api (‘algo? : Skt. Gatī) the gardens, talaga (ponds «R ` 


S Digitized by Ary qma RE dg Stine nm Badd eGangotri 
ita (‘virtuous actions’ : Skt. sucarita. qaf 

azis, T8171), 55 and the (other) Gr E : ga Tā) per 
formed by me (be) prayojanakan (with ae to Meee prayojana: ata aim’ &nd 
the native eufüx -kan) puņyūnya (the good of: Skt. punya ga and Ma], suffix) | 
sarovasata ‘all beings’ (Skt. sarva-sativa- adata) Se oaracana (movable and imm 
ble’ (Skt. cara- 1 and acara- aa), varopayanya (che best means’: Skt, vara- qx 
‘best’ and upaya- STA in its Buddhist shade of meaning: 'the means or stratagem 
applied by a bodhisattva to save the creatures to whom his heart goes out’) to 
attain to sukka (joy, bliss’: Skt. sukha- ga). If at the āsannakāla (this word Seomg 
to mean here moment of resting or something like that,'° though it literally de. 
notes ‘the hour of death’), antara marga (‘on their way’: Skt. antara eiut ‘on the 
way, during’ and mürga- ZW1 "way'), they are hungry, they (will) find aharg ("food : 
Skt. ahara- MZN)... Their pasw-prakara (‘cattle’: Skt. pasu- Tx, ‘of various K)» 
Skt. prakara- NĒ ‘manner, sort'??)... (may) erddhi (prosper? : Skt. vrddhi- gf (ARI 
meatation, prosperity"; they may be secure from all upasargga (‘calamities’ : Skt. 
upasarga- STAÑ pīdanu (this must probably be pidana ‘vexing, oppression’ : Skt. pīdana 
Wea), svapnavighna ('insomnia” : Skt. svapna- FAN ‘sleep’ and vighna- faz "impedi. 
ment?) Whatever they do, kathamapi (‘in any way’: Skt. kathamapi) anuküla ('tavou- 
rablo': Skt. anuküla- AJF) (may) all the graha planets" : Skt. graha- Hz) naksatra 
(asterisms : Skt. naksatra- IAA) (be) to them; nirvyādhi (‘freo from illness’: Skt. 
E cs MM S not aging’ : Skt. ajara- AAT) during their activities. Tath- 
Gatī may 3 RI their servants’: Skt. bhrtya- 3391) (be) satyarjjava 
E € and straightness’ : Skt. saiya- & and ürjava- AHA) drdhabhakti (‘firm 
in devotion’: Skt. drdha- ££ and bhakti. af), mitranya (‘their {ri 4 , m 
1-3 + native suffix) not be kapata (‘deceitt I" A ers a id j uS ee 
be anukūla bharyya (‘faithful spouses’ aS, d ras, deer. tiki M 
to Malay usage: Skt. anukūlg- AIEE “a T CUM e: these ewo clemente Pa conta 
further, wherever sthananya (i.e. ‘where s Un d co! and branya atat wifo ) 
+ native suffix), may there be no d noy pre : Skt. sthana- #414 ‘abode, place 

+ ( thieves’: a word of Indian origin), ucca 


(‘persons committi i m 
ng violent d E 'vi ? 
2 n t e ka > Skt. ucca- Sa violent’) vadhanya'™® (murder- 


Wq' 3 
dära- WER ‘adultery’) etc. etc a slayer’) paradara (‘adulterers’ : Skt. para- 
Apart from the ab 


Ova. 


» 80me others occurring in this record 
Vanamitra, 8 Buddhist term for 'a good 
Y for ‘a spiritual adviser’ : Skt. P0- 


gether wi : 
totpūda. EU vd marvanun "to rise’ serves to 
bidon flaps ur. "P6 coming forth of tho thought 


F, ts and , 7 t 4 tad’ 
kt. &mfzafaza. ris and crafts’; samahitacinta ‘having 
ahmā's ci t dhairyyamani ‘firm in thinking’ : Skt 
9 thought-gom’; cf. Pali brahmassara; cintamaniniahana 


anut ; 
: Bkt, aafaa ean et samedi ‘highest and complete ' 
and other Buddhist terms. Another 


Ord is-avasang (S. 
Sit, 
Teena. Haam) used in the adverbial sense of 


; Svastha. vq do d and a nafive D 
CC-0. Prof: Satya Vrat Shastri dcin eoo D, on the Kota Kap? 


Digitized by Arya SEAN PETI dh OkborRend eGangotri 


123 


NOTES 


; There is no good history of ancient 
‘Javanese literature. Some useful arti- 
cles may be foundin H. Kern, Verapreide 
Gesohriften, vol. V-X (The Hague 1916- 
1922; most of the contents have been 
written much earlier); a short survey of 
gome main works and topics and a select 
bibliography are given in J. Gonda, 
Letterkunde van de Indische Archipel 
(Amsterdam—Brussels 1947) Inleiding 
(Introduction); C. C. Berg, Inleiding tot 
de studie van het Oud-Javaansch, (Sura- 
karta 1928) is a. rather subjective book; 
H. Bh. Sarkar, Indian influences on the 
literature of Java and Bali, (Calcutta 
1934), while constituting an industrious 
and often useful compilation, is not 
founded on personal research and gives 
evidence of many nisunderstandings 
and inaccuracies (see my review in De 
Indische Gids” 1935, p.687ff.); R. C. 
Mejumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies in 
ee. IL Suvarņadvīpa II, (Cal- 
outta , p.61ff. and 155ff. 
These inscriptions were edited by 
H. Kern, in Verslagen en Mededeelingen 
der Kon. Akademie v. Wetenschappen, 
Amsterdam, afd. Letterkunde, 2d series, 
Vol. XI, (Amsterdam 1882); re-edited in 
Kern, VG., VII, p.55ff.; see also J. Ph. 
Vogel, The Yūpa inscriptions of king 
Mülavarman, in BKI. LXXIV (1918), 
e N.J. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche 
4 edenis*, (The Hague 1931), p.70ff. 
The bibis Krom, 0.0., p.236. 
lographical data are given by 
A iom 0.6., p.76. 
punt by Kern, VG. III, p.2678.; 
SEN - Low, An account of several 
Ort Am found in Province Wellesley, 
"XVII of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
«1 (1848),.9, p.6og. 


: aa the Siamese town Red- 


3 


See, however, Krom 


Mentioned in Cifedsorseurdusa dri Boisction. 


Rae K + 0.C., p.76. 
ern, VG. VIT, p.Lff. and 199g. 
J. Ph. Vogel, in Publicati 
i $ ations of the 
Oudheidkundige Dienst in Nederlandsch. 
Hats I (1925), p.lēf.; Krom, 0.0., p.TTf. 
- The Sailendra inscriptions have 
recently been discussed by J. G. de 
Casparis, Inscripties nit de Cailenāra-: 
tijd, in Praeasti Indonesia T, (Bandung 
1950) The Ligor inseription has been 
published by G. Coedés, Le royaume de 
Srivijaya, in “Bulletin de l'École fran- 
çaise d'Extrēme.Orient', XVIII, 6, p.l; 
B. Ch, Chhabra, Expansion of Indo. . 
Aryan Culture during the Pallava Rule, 
as evidenced by inecriptions, in ‘Journal 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal’, I, 
1935, n? 1, p.20f., and J. Gonda, in 
Twenty-five Sanskrit Inscriptions, 
(Leyden 1948), n? 10. 
? Chhabra has, however, seen that the 
name Visnu can also refer to the king. 
1 Published by R. G. Bhandarkar, in; 
‘Journal of the Bombay Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society XVII (1887-89), 
II, p.1ff.; see also Bosch, TBG. LXVIII, 
p.57ff. ‘ 
n See Bosch, TBG. LXVIII. p 16f.; P. 
Mus, in Bulletin de l'Ecole Fr. d'E. O. 
XXVIII p. 526f.; Krom, H. J. Gu-ch.*, 
p.137. 
12 Seo TBG. LXVIII, p.19. 
13 I refer to Krom, Inleiding tot de 
Hindoe-Javaansche kunst", (The Hague 
1993) I, p.165ff. The insoription ha- been 
edited by H. Kern, see XE ers 
Seo already above- "See. also F. D. 
Bosch, in TBG. LXIV peri paron 
and 271f.; and Kron Ma Javaan- 
iedenis?, p-124. ` 
cie pē IU malons Ot 
idkundig Verlsg 1923, p.390; TBG. 
bo d Poerbatjaraka, Agas- 
LXIV, p221 oP 906) - 
den Arohipel (Leyden 1926), 


7 


I. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


124 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation ChennaiandeGangotri.— — 
eee 


.51ff. 
: In a sankala or sénkala words stand 


for numerals (e. g. sun’ for 1, ‘eye’ for. 2), 
their numerical values added together 
making the date which it is desired to 
record. The word itself has been ex- 
plained either from the Skt. samkala- 


- eS ‘addition’ or (less probably) from 


Skt. Sakakala- TESIS ‘che Saka-era’. 
16 Krom, o.c, p.210 and 232, and the 
books referred to at p.210, n.8. 

For the Sanskrit inscriptions found 


in Bali see W. F, Stutterheim, Oudheden | 


van Bali (Singaradja ( Bali ) 1999), T, 
p.34ff.5 the records in the Old-Balinese 
language are dealt with by the same 
author, o.o., p.68ff., and by R. Goris, 
Djaw& XVI (Jogjakarta 1936), p.88ff. 

27 This votive inscription on the image 
of Ámoghapàsa; found in Padang Candi 
(Sumatra) bas been edited &nd discussed 
by Kern, VG. VII, p.165ff. 

1 See E. Ohavannes, Mémoiro composé 
à l'époque de la grande dynastie T'ang 
sur les religieux éminents qui allèrent 
chercher la Loi dans los Pays d'Occident 
par I-Tsing, (Paris 1894), p.119 and 
pIVf.; J. Takakusu, A Record of the 
Buddhist Religion as Practised in India 
and the Malay Archipelago, (Oxford 
1896), esp; the Introduction (Thesis Leip- 
Bic) 1896). p.XL. Compare especially I- 
Tsing, Mémoire, P.60f., and the note by 
Ohavannēs, and p.165f, 

™ Irefer to M. Winternitz, 


1920), p.186. As is well 
18, in the Sanskrit canon 
of what in the Pali c is 

called a Nikāya, dial pu 
m History of the Su 
p.90; :860 also Krom, o, 


Pe 


wrote a succinct paper on it: ‘Eene 
E FES ud. 
Jav. Sanskrit grammatica? . BKI, T 
(1901), p.630ff., which haa been utilize 
by H. Bh. Sarkar, Indian Infuenees o 
the literature of Java and Bali, (Caloutta 
1934), p.107ff. . 
22 Wt cetera, see L. Renou, Terminolo, $ 
gio grammaticale du sanskrit, III (Paris 
1942), p.119. 
** Of. Renou, o.c., I, p.140; p.160; W, 
| p61. 
| ** Renou, o.c., IIT, p.15 (qui fait partis 
de la voyelle’). 
*5 The OJav. explanation of the term 
‘labial’ is not missing | Ie 
*5 The information given by the Indian 
theorists ig, as far as tho accentuation 
in post-Vedic words is concerned, of g 
purely speculative character. The 
, ancient Indonesians may, on the other 
| hand, have been interested in it, because 
holy texts continued to be recited in an 
accentuated way. Seo M. Haug, ZDMG, 
XVII, p.799ff. 
21 Cf. Renou, o.c., TII, p.120f. 
** It may be mentioned that kha, cha, 
jha, tha, dha which form no part of the 
Javancee system of conson ants have been 
omitted in the author'e (or, what is 
more likely, in a copyist’s) enumeration. 
The other aspirates are, however, not 
Wanting. Compare our remarks on 
OJav. orthography of Indian words 
(chapter II, section 2). In a comparable 
Way the long vowels, with the exception 
of Z, are omitted. Tho correct number 
and order of the Sanskrit sounds waa 
however, known in ancient Java, for the 
Sang hyang Kanahayanikan (p.63f.Kats) ; 
has thom. À 
^? The term ig not in Renou's Termino- 
logie grammaticale. 
*" To this point we shall revert else- 
Where, Ag to the Gaigodaka- Sarkár, 
o.c., p.109 remarks that ‘it is no other 
than our much too familiar example 


Ganga udaka Which we used to read in 
8choolg’, : 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. Z 


Digitized by 


SANS: 
Arya SRRLT- IN dNDOSRrA! and eGangotri 


= Jaynboll, Sapple n»a5 (893 above), TI | 


p.282, n? 3896 (1). - 
32 8. 
van heb Oostersch Genootschap 
Noderland (1929), p.8L; the same, 
ganekrit Texts from Bali (Balidvipagran- 
£háh), Gael wad's Oriental Series n° 67, 


( Baroda 1933), p.XXXI and 87 (this 


otherwise useful book omits Old-Java- | 


nese and Balinese translations or para- 


phrases and is, in details, often rather | 


hastily and carelessly written). 
33 I should like to remark, in this con. 
nection, that among the manuscripts 
containing grammatical or lexicographi- 


which calls itself Karakāsangraha (eic) 


(See Juynboll, Supplement Catalogus, | 


II, p.215, n° 5075): this small portion 


of a Sanskrit grammar {accompanied by 


an interlinear OJav. rendering) begins | 


with the famous name of Vararuci 
(Vararuci Gha...); has at p.5 the remark 
iti karakasangraha samūptam (i.e. ETI 


Lévi, Verslag van het 6° congres | 
in 


forms (and the 
tives). 


°° For othor instances gee Juynboll, in 
BKI. LII, p. 639¢. 


*7 Juynboll, Su 

ae = šā ši Pplement Catalogus, IT, 
7 In one of these works, the ‘Adi- 
swara’, Javanese misspellings of Sans- 
krit works are far fcom being rare; thus 


| siti instead of ksiti- fafa, See Juynboll, 


cal matter there is another fragment | Supplement Catalogue, II, p.205, n? 
Ča 1 De E) 


4009. Another text, the so-called Eka- 
lawya (the title has tentatively been 
explained by Van der Tuuk, KBW. Lp. 


| 146 as a ‘corrupted form’ of ekalapyas 


but I ask myself whether it stands for 


| ekarthalabhya- ‘to be understood in the 


1 


Wig (sic) AIAH) and there starts treat- | 


ing the compounds. Opening with 


gives an interesting versus memorialis : 
fag: atgtt ara: ašanu qug a 


Sarkar, Indian Iufluences, p.110f., while | af gerou 
; dewa), sura : sajūt (OJav. spirituous 


reminding as of the fact that king In- 
dravarman III of Campa is also said to 
ave been versed in Pāņini's grammar 
oto., rightly adds that the above versus 
memorialis might hava passed to Java 
*5 traditional lore without the actual 
Work being ever present in that island. 
i ā Olā-Javan ese literature. 
h ve its 9.0., p.XXXII and 891f. As 
au nown this method was also put 
Praotice in India proper. Levi, p. 


` Cal = 3 
fied grt Bárasamgraha in whioh a versi- 
abstract of tha Ramayana is inger- 


9 exemplify the verb-gaoti0%of. Satya 


Oro are also other such reminiscences | 


refers to the Indian grammati- 


same meaning (as synonyms)’, deals with 
words of identical syllables (e.g. bara, 
bari» baru) without considering the quan- 


| tity of the vowels, the numerical value 
avighnam astu atang this section | 


of letters, synonyms for trees, metals, 
earth, water, clouds, stars, various gods, 


! animals, parts of the body, mirror, 
agai ana: gaps: fadi T (sic) | 
adding examples of these categories, | 


house, boy, etc. and, in addition to this 
a list of homonyms, e.g. sura: pandita, 
sura : buta (i.e. bhūta), sura : dewwa (i.e. 


liquor’ (so Skt. sura- JT and sura JU 


' are meant). 


3? Tt goes under the name of Canda- 
kirana (Skt. caudakirana- aefa ‘the 
"hot-rayed one, i.e. the m pee 
ied by H.Kera, Un dicüonnair 
M. in Aotes du VI? Congrés 
onal des Orientalistes, tenu en 
1883 à Leide, I, 9, (Leyden p 
pli. = YG. IX, xe £t Der uyn: 
Supplement, 5, pat’ : 
ae ls in Mededeelingen ie 
dam Academy LYIT, p.208. Ed KA 
to the text the king Jitendra caused the 


tranglated.. - 
resti 


Internati 


196 


* 41 See also Kern, VG. IX, p.278, on 
Buādha's names. 

42 We discuss this word elsewhere. E 
43 Krom, Hindoe-Java&nsche Geschie- 
denis?, p 151 also emphasizes that suoh 
handbooks could be of no use to Hindus 
who did not know Old-Javanese. The 
same scholar makes some good remarks 
on the historical value of these texts: 
on one hand part of the names of gods» 
objects, etc. which it con’ains will have 
been translated or adopted from the 
original Sanskrit without their being 
known in Java, and on the other words 
may have been interpolated at a later 
date. 

‘t There are also vocabularies extant | 
which give metaphorical or mystical 
interpretations of names and facts 
occurring in 'sacred' literary works (see | 
e.g. the Sukemabsga i.e. Sūksmabhāsā 
TAN: Juynboll, Suppl. Cat., I, 
p-216, n? 4518). 

** The text has been edited, tranelated 
and commented upon by H, Kern, 
(Leyden 1875 = YG IX, p67f.), 

o“ Of. st. 8; 109; 111. 
sort of vikrti, 
in OJav. kawi, see Kern o.c, 


had lost almost any underg 
the contexts of this ‘poem’, 


** I refer to Krom, Hindoe 
Gecchiedenig:, p-298f, 


+ T refer to VG. IX, p.73f. 


*" Bee e.g. M Winterni 
D ; ernitz, G 
der indischen Litteratur, TII, Po s 


" Bee J ūynboll 
U, p.491, : Supplement Catalogus, 


tanding of 


-Javaansche 


Digitized by Arya Saft N KRAL dC TON FUP Le angor 
b .—. ————— 


Kern, o.c., p.75f. 

54 See H Kern, Kawi-studién, ( Th 
Hague 1871 ), p.100. 9 
55 See I. Gusti Poetoo Djlantik, Ben 
Balisch overzicht van de veramat 
de Nagarakrtagama, BKI. LXXXI 
p.116ff. 

56 "When I first heard this beautify] 
prose hymn recited in Bali, I wag Under 
the illusion that the Sanskrit original 
would be easily discovered in Tudia’, 
S. Lévi, Sanskrit Texts, p-XXVIII, and 
p.58. 

57 ‘T can only say tho same concerning 
these two beautiful stavag which de- 
serve to be classic, even in India’, Lévis 
o.c., p.XXVIII, and p.58ff. 


en van 
(1985). 


| 5* See F. D. K, Bosch, Buddhistische 


Eegevens uit Balische handechriften, 
Mededeelingen Akademie wan Weten- 
schappen Amsterdam (Amsterdam Aca- 
demy) Lett. LXVIII B 3, (Amsterdam 
1929). 

** Juēvi, o.c., p.XXIII and p.46. 

*? See the papers by Tj. G. R. Soeka- 
wati and P. Wirz in TBG. LXVI and. 
LXVII. 

‘l For further information seo Lévi, 0.0., 
p.XXTff. 

"* See Lévi, o.c., p.XXIXff. and p.718. 
^ Lévi, o.c, p.XVIII. The same author 
emphasizes the tantric character of 
these texts which &re, moreover, charac- 
terized by the Bulinese feature of com- 
bining Sürya and Šiva in one deity, 
Parama-Sivaditya, i 

** See R. Friederich, in “Tijdschrift voor 
Nederlandech-Indič? 1849, p.818 and in 


his Voorloopig Verslag, in VBG. 1849 
(and 1860),p. 10+, 


2 The spelling 06=y, 


The form Arthaweda which is both, 
Palacographically and pseudo-etymologi- 
paly easily explainable ocours in manu- 
Scripts of OJay. texts (Brahmandapurans 
for instance) beside tho correct form: 
This Arthaweda murt have been develo- 


e 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Red from Anéhawaweda,- 


Digitized by BANGER] Tolmianpenensa and eGangotri 


197 
nd,in Notulen van het Batavia- 


67 Brumu 


an Genootschap, I (1864) p.91, Van 
88 


der Tuuk, and Brandes (see Goris, o.c.,p.” 
e 


NE 
E uH. Juynboll, Supplement op de Cata- 


aus van de Javaansche en Madoeree- 
pus handschriften der Leidsche Univer- 
Peite-bibliotheok, II (Leyden 1911), 
p 834 (n? 4673) even says that these 
vades are collections of spells and incan- 


tations. d 
69 Goris, 0.c., p.144. : 
70 Qf. e.g. Saurapurāņa 18, 84; 41, 76, 
49, 19; 44, 60; Kālikāpurāņa 66, 22 etc. 
71 See W. Caland, in R. Goris, Bijdrage 
tot de kennis der Oud-Javaansche en 
Balineesche Theologie, (Leyden 1926), 
p.46f.; Lévi, o.c., p.XVI. 
72 T refer to Lévi, o.c., p.XVff. 
73 Lévi, o.c., p.7ff. 
"4 Of. Goris, o.c., p.19 
75 The reader may be referred to A. Zie- 
. seņiss, Studien zur Geschichte des Oiva- 
ismus, in BKI. XCVIII (1939), p.75ff. 
This paper has largely superseded the 
chapter on these texts by Goris, o.c., 
p.75ff. and Sarkar o.c., p.34ff. 
"* Minor corruptions have been em- 
ended. 
"' These words generally open Old- 
Javanese works. 
"* See Zieseniss, o.c., p.164ff. 
”” Edited and translated by J. Kats, 
(The Hague 1910). 
** Re-edited and translated by K. Wulff, 
Bang hyang Kamahāyānan mantranaya, 
in Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Sels- 
kab, Hist. filol. Medd. XXI, 4, (Copen- 
hague 1935) Wulff calls it ‘eine An- 
Sprache bei der Weihe buddhistisoMer 
ehe. 
|. I refer to Wulff, o.o, p.8; N.J. 
TN Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaan- 

m kunst, (The Hague 1920), I, p.305. 
QNM J. 8. Speyer, iu Zeitsohrift der 
hat prx morgenlündischen Gesell- 
m < VII (1913), p.3478. 

uf jeden gloka tolg aleio 


; gaa atēttiismostedātt!!? 


paraphrase, dig meistens mehr enthāl 
als der Veta, gelten weniger; die we 
gabe seines inhaltg ist somit Ras, 
frei, zuweilen enthält der javanische 


text mehr eine kurze darlegung deg 
segenstandes, der im sloka angedeutet 
Ist, als ei 


ne eigentli ! 
(Wulff, 0.C., vii ERN E 
*3 Mention must be made here of the 
rather unsatisfactory method of editing 
adopted by Kats and the unmethodical 
attempts of H. Kern to correct the Skt. 
stanzas after the OJav. portions : see 
Wulff, o.c., p.i9f, 

** Quotations in Sanskrit have been 
printed with spacing, other Sanskrit 
words used by the Javanese author have 


j been left untranslated and explained by 


an English translation in brackets. 
*5 See Wulff, o.c., p.19. 
"6 Edited by the present author: Het 
Oud-Javaansche Brahmāņda-P urāņa 
(Bandung 1932), (Dutch) translation, 
(Bandung 1933). 
87 I also refer to my paper ‘Einige Mit- 
teilungen über das altjavanische Brah- 
manda Purana’, in Acta Orientalia, XI» 
p.218ff. : 
88 The Bhismaparwa has been edited by 
the present author: Het Oudjavaánsche: 
Bhigmaparwa, (Bandung 1936); see also 
his work ‘Aanteekeningen bij het Oud- 
Javaansche Bhismaparwa, (Bandung 
1937), and ‘The Javanese version of the 
Bhagavadgita’ in TBG. LXXV (1935), p. 
368. ii 
89 Tho structure of the Bhagavadgita is 
ially instructive : in the introduc- 
especially in : 
‘umber of quotations followed 
al translation, is com- 
in the didactic ae 
ga $ i ly larger, in the 
kājas i 5 co several series 
important 0 "T aiately, follow ad bean 


tion the num 
by a rather liter 
paratively low, 


f padas im | 
Neo. have been taken from the 
E J am at thg moment, 


M bie to do 50 than 20 


Digitized by AANS Fo GSP ORO And eGangotri 


ears ago when I wrote my introduc- de l'Ecole française TExtréme.Oriens 
E remarks on the Brahmandapurana, eg (1930), p. 29ff.> see especially zi 
Āā bus 0.¢., p.7Off. | 171 Coedés (see bis paper p. 87) 


| 

32 Among the other Old-Javanese works | 
in which slokas are quoted is the £o- | i; I sa 
called Tantri Kāmandakas one of the | acquit une puissance magique qui lui 
: permit le mois suivant de ge libérer (ae 


128 


E : interpret, 
it like this: "Le roi se rendit d'abord en 


bateau dans un lieu, non précisé 


numerous versions of the Pañcatantrain | 
the Archipelago (edited by C. Hooykaas, quelque chose dont la lecture n'est 
Bandung 1931) There quotations are , malheureusement pàs certaine); ensuite 
often handed down in a very corrupt | de quoi il conduisit son armée et ga 
form. The date of the text is uncertain. i suite, tant en bateau que par terre, en 
". J. Brandes, in TBG. XXXII (1889), p. | ērocession solennelle et joyeuce et fit 
112f. and 129ff.; see also Krom, Hindoe- apparemment une cérémonie pour confé- 
Javaansche Gerchiedenis?, p.94. | rer à son royaume les pouvoirs surnatu- 

' 34 See also Kats, Sang hyang Kamahā- | rels qu'il avait été chercher au cours de 
yanikan, p.130 and Wulff, Sang hyang ; Bon voyage’. 


Kamabāyānan mantranaya, p.67. '? Not all the Malay words have been 
?* Wulff, o. c., p.386. Another meaning | translated into English; all the Sanskrit 
is ‘excellence’, A ; terms aro quoted and translated. I have 
*5 See Tjokorde Gde Rake Sukawati, | copied all orthographical details. 

Legende over de oorsprong van de rijst... | '°? The word has survived in Malay: 


onder da Baliërs, TBG. LXVI (1996), p. | mésra ‘absorption, intimate mingling, 
2r EE a P. Wirz, Der Reis. | heartfelt (of feelings)", 
au und dio Reisbaukulte auf Bali und | '"* In Malay tētapi ‘but 4 
ay télapi but, however’. 
ZR TBG. LXVII (1927), pair, | ws In Malay tēlaga. 
aaa this am appears to have | 196 Coedés, o.c., p.66 accordingly propo- 
idi Padum AE the patronymic Bes to read asanakala : Skt. dsana- AA - 
" Tho example m S i i abiding’ and kala. mre *timo'). 
e 4 v ‘ . ji : 
* $,82nd 7,1 (edited Harivange DE Malay pérkara affair otc", which 
handelingen KR 18 discussed elsewhere 
1 : uut, TX S s 
(2 volu- | 108 The last two Sanskrit words are not’ 


0. o., II, p.16. clearly legib]o, 
p, Lanta Pangglaran, ed, by Th | _ The Buddha is the spiritual guide 
Pigenud, (The Hague 1994) He ace Th. | virtuous friend Par excellence, but any 
100 , Of. x 1 

The text has been edited, S REPOS ae arshant can act as such. See also 
and discussed by G. Ooedča oedès' note, o.c., p. 41, n.7. 


Ca 
tions malaises de Brivijaya, in A 7 Edited by Coedés, o.c., p.46ff. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


] 
3 
A 


Ventory o 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


CHAPTER III 


SANSKRIT LOAN. WORDS FROM THE Pa 
"VIEW OF THE HISTORY OF gpyyp p UE OE 


The study of loan-words can render yeomor Services in 
ledge of the spread of Indian influence in the Archipelago. 
try to discover what were the principal ideas, products and in 
tanta of these regions learnt from India in the earliest peri 
and to what provinces of knowledge or spiritual life belon 
borrowed by the literary way. The negative aspect of thi 
was already discussed by Kern, Brandes and other scholars, that is to say the 
question as to the Indonesian civilization before the Hindus made their influence 
felt, In a famous treatise the former scholar! brought to light that the Indone- 
sians, when residing in their continental country before their diftusion over the 
numeroua islands of the East, were acquainted with navigation and with some 
essentials of astronomy, that they cultivated rico, knew about iron-founding and 
perhaps also about cattle-breeding. He arrived at these results by showing that 
the words used in connection with these cultural achievements were part of the 
common and original Indonesian. Ia the same year Brandes tried to demonstrate 
that the Javanese culture before the arrival of the Hindus wa3 characterized by a 
series of achievements such as the acquaintance with irrigation and rice-growing 
on irrigated fields, with bronze, copper, iron and gold, with a political organiza- 
tion etc., and to mention also some points which have been rejected, or at least 
disputed, by later scholars,? a monetary system and theatrical and musical perfor- 
mances of their own. The Javanese origin of the wayang, the Javanese shadow- 
play, was, Brandes argaed, clear from the very fact that the technical terms used 
in connection with it were native and not Sanskrit. But the terminology of batik- 
Work is also indiganous and yet it may nowadays be regarded as almost certain 
that this industry was imported from India. Though most of the terms bearing 
Upon music are likewise Javanese, it is open to doubt whether tho gamelan-orches- 
tra owes its existence to purely native inventions. It hae, further, been er 
that newly-imported series of products and modern products of Western ski ; 
Wore often in no time denoted by indigenous terms. From all thia we may s 
olude that the mere absence of a Sanskrit terminology ina particular a 
cultural achievements does not necessarily prove the absence of Indian inf ns 

it in certain provinces 0 

__ T Order to give an idea of the spread of Sanskrit 1n lean 

iden wat or intellectual Life it will be best briefly to discuss some co Sm 

ideas ang +s i f civilization and to draw up an in 
Some of the principal provinces of c ; 


f the main terms used to express them, 


deepening our know- 
From them We can 
ventions the inhabi- 
od of their contact 
ged the terms they 
8 important problem 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya A&R EBuRNatle RBS dnd eGangotri 


130 
SECTION 1 
MYTHOLOGICAL AND LEGENDARY FIGURES, AND HINDU 
GODS, DENOMINATIONS 


i ld-Javaneso Brahmāņdapurāņa, Agastya. 

= ae E M non of books of the great epics and in the 
pina end iun of the ancient Javanese a host of names of Indian gods, 
Ar E and superhuman figures are found, The register of proper nameg 
(divine powers, geographical names, mythological persons etc.) px ee 
edition of the first-named text (148 pages) fills 45 columns, It is there ore, 
almost an endless task to dress lists of these naniss, which, moreover, often have 


re interested to find some 


In one case an Indian 
Were identified, in the other names for the same divi- 


te beings; here a borrowed god assumed another 
nderwent a transformation. 


nity developed into separa 

character, there his name u 
If we cast a, glance at the contents of the Tantu Panggélaran? or the 

Korawásramg we 800n perceive the correctness of Kerns view* : relying on the 

names of the godg ne beings alone, one would imagine 

that the Indian Pantheon ig deseri 

however, not only as far ag th 


the Sanskrit literary texts. A 


Siva in hi 
u) and ascetic, 


and Kārtikeya, His Prototype is doubtless t 
who likewise called their god G 
religioug traditions to his w 


S aspects of king of the gods, 
, and father of Gaņoša or Ganesvara 
he Siva of Indian ascetics and tantrists 


tru T ‘the teacher’, Ag a teacher Siva relates 


guru’s on earth me ife Uma, as a teacher hg is, especially revered : all 
the princi Y ready most Venerable, Besides the very fact that Šiva was 
9 principal pergon jn many myths ang tale , y 


i i ; m ibuted 
to hig Popularity, Ag how 8 seems to have largely contribu 
: ever, m ; : É s 
talk prefer to Tin E AT A any modern Indonesian Muslims in ordinary 


ri 
Pa ® Lord? and Siva ig rarely mentioned by nama 
wn 


e mention the name of a powerful 
other hand, no d qe. vs designation. There is, on tha 
ndonesian Bh S ha 
PATEE B 
Biven in Indonesia to thi j tera (Skt 


ture he i 
ndanege literat i 
alay literatura Bi o considereg identical with this divinity.” 
Brahma D, Bitara Bie poate Guru Occurs beside p. ; kt 
e a Bisny Ā Bide ara Bērhamma (< Skt. 
CCS Bb gane remped 


ra Indira (< Skt; Indra 47%)» 


SANSKRIT IN IND 
(0) 
j ion GEM, And eGangotri = 


however, introduced i 
replacing the old divinity Mula 
nevertheless, half Sanskrit : mala. - 


+? G 
goda became Mula Jadi s sons, and he himself retired into the pk oe 
a e 
names, at least two of them 
Guru, which hag, in all pro- 
-Javanese colonization on the 
à). After the Hindu- 


ules the universe, was 
ta'üla." The Buginese 


to which we now revert, this divinity 
was, of course, also the first of the long series of teachers ( dewagurus : the Skt. 


-devaguru- JATE can mean ‘preceptor of the gods! and "god and preceptor’) chiefs of 
mandalas (Skt. mandala- ATES) ‘religious territories, cloisters and their territories’, 
who ordained wikus ‘monks’, A revered dewaguru is also called Bhatara Guru, thig 
name then being a mere title. k 
As Bētara Kala Siva the destroyer is often identified (because ot his black 
| colour) with the Black ghost or Black spirit of Indonesian demonology. Interme- 
| diate zones, such as that between clearing and primeval forest, the dangerous:time 
| of sunset and other moments and localities which are regarded as fraught with 
Peculiar dangers from evil spirits are assigned to Bétara Kala. en 
Another name of the same divinity is Parameswara : Skt. Paramesvara- TAAT 
‘the Supreme Lord, God’, a name applied by the Indians to Siva and other gods. 
Elsewhere Paramegwara is identified with Virūpāksa: Skt. Virüpaksa- freq, 
aD which in India is another name of Siva as represented with an odd number of eyes 
\‘diversely-eyed, having deformed eyes’). Side by side with Parameswara, Šiva: Skt. 
Jiva- fira, svara: Skt. I$vara- $311, Mahadewa : Skt. Mahadeva- RRIA occur, in the 
Tantu Panggēlaran and similar books, as names of different divine porsona; In 
Peninsular Malay Siva's name Sambhu : Skt. Sambhu- WY the benevolent bas be- 
Come the first part of the name almost universally ascribed to the bos x 
| spirit," The Korawāšrama, on the other hand, expressly identifies M 
Pitamaha : Skt. Pitümaha- anz, Janārdana: Skt. Janardana- SMRT a 8i 
Krsņa : Skt. Visnu-Krsna- fisur-giu atc.” NEN civic interestin g 
It cannot be our task here to enter into details EE Skt. Brahma AT, 
adventures asoribed by these texts to Uma: Skt. Uma SWb Brahma: ti. 


^1: Skt. Kama- SM and 

and many other gods and goddesses. Suffice it to say wea. p SAR, re- 
y . ` : s t 
att: Skt, Rati. UT are like Gana and Kumara : Skt. Gar Sanskrit texts be found —. 


Presented ag Bhatāra Guru’s children; - Gana- oan roa Skt. Vayu- 14 the 

«8 another form of Gane£a's name: Skt. Ganesa- TH; M a perhaps, Pigeaud sug- - 
Ind ig g strong divine being, able to lift E E 

Bastas? because in Java bayu also means ‘strength oF P 


: Javanese. 
T : ial attention. 
` he god Brahma ig wopthy, ete hat Shastri Collection. 


texts often cons - 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
TM d a d in modern speech brama ( « Skt. brahma sn) jg 
nect him with fire, an term expressing this idea. Such words as Dz 
krama ouo a NM a tikhin- faa, ‘fire’) are even used ag names o 
dahana- att kā identified with the sun and whose colour is red, T4 is, hoy. 
this god who is V n although Hertel's effort to show that brahman Was origi. 
ever: beyond dou pa bi the cosmic fire is inadequately founded on facts, , 
ER S uiry into the fiery aspect of Brahma in India will bring to light 
So i E the Tantu Panggélaran he is called a blacksmith, ang the very 
mee, d iron is the volcano Brama. Malay texts know him ag Bérahmg 
spot where TU eds Bérma. Nowadays he is best known in the Malay 
ME ale E ine kētika (Skt. ghapika ate) Benois ‘time, when the in 
Bérma is in the ascendant (with spesial referonce to divination) € 
In the same text Iswara (Skt. Isvara- Z, a name of Siva) 18 Feprosented ag 
a teacher of speech and language, Wiswakarma (Skt. Visvakarmā, arnt the diving 
architeot or artist), as is only to be expected, as a carpenter, Mahadewa (Skt Maha. 
deva- AZIA one of Siva’s names) as a goldsmith, and Ciptagupta (from the Skt, 
Oitragupla- RATA one of Yama’s attendants who records every man’s good and 
evil deeds) as a draughtsman, a function which may be explained by the fact that 
he is also called Ciptaikūra (from Skt. citrakūra- TT AKTI a painter’). | 
Side by side with Wisnu ( whose name is identified with other names) we 
find, in this text, a female deity concerned with the cultivation of rice and female 


accomplishments. In later Javanese and Sundanese folklore and literature her 
most usual name was Dewi Sri: Sk 


of Vigņu's wife. '5 The Balinese bel 
ced to submit to Vigņu's love; after 
her body, the rice from her nave].!* 

Widely revered as the deity of the ri 
der Tuuk tried to connect 
Bhatara Guru’s equal 
tion of Visnu, the consor 


182 — 
& regiona 
hana (guy, 


fluence of 


ce-crops (Javanese, Sundanese, Malays), Van. 
god Soripada, who is regarded as 
which he thought tobe a dosigna- 
t of the goddess Sri; Wilken, hewever, preferred to derive 
nction as an honorific prefix, and 
as a royal form of address (Malay 
yal feet’, cf, Sy; Paduka ete,).07 
The Balinese know ni ame of nava sana (Skt. nava 
A A p dedicating chapels to them : Iswara 
EET ie ISA (SE.), Brahma (8.), Rudra (SW.), Mahadewa (W.), 


"h Siwadčvi, i.e. Siwa and his consort 


With the formula para (which indi- 
kt. devata žaar 'divinity') all divine 
like other inhg 


bit ; ider 
arer of power ang ‘identity it ents of the Archipelago, cons 


With spirits or divinities of Hind" 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


The Bataks of Su 
the lizard a be PE 


SANSKRIT IN I 
j Foundatiā ONR hana eGangotri 


] 183. 
20 to wit Boraspati of the house and Bora. 


rigin » JOH : spati of the goi E 

° divinity residing in tho earth and blessing the crops, Tho NC id being 

peen connected with Skt. Brhaspati. gzet, Perhaps, as Wilken -€— fum 
1 e- 


gpati was a god of wisdom—in Bal; NES 
cause iq eloquence Sara ii Sara sai: called after the goddess 
D ion betweon-Brhaspati andit eee ib Pn Am MS Perhaps because of a 
s (^B. of the ds when plaing nue s mk, 8 pray to Boraspati ni 
: her peoples o i 
. Cie As Es E p occ concerned who are not yet 

mentioned 1n D Y, too, have in this case and others adopted 

some Sanskrit words. In the language of the Serawak Sea-Dyaks (N BU 
bilara or pétara denotes a.group of spirits (Skt. bhaļiara- UEN ‘Lora’ (hs M )) 

Debata or deibata (< Skt. devatā ‘godhead, god’) are revered by the Batak i : 
of Central Sumatra: they are gods of whom Batara Guru is the most M 
Two puppets which are regarded as powerful givers of life and blessing e 
revered as gods of life' : debata idup (idup is an IN. word): In the mu bet 
traditions of the Javanese the dewata, jawata, juwata aro well-known figures, "The 
Sundanese, too, revered their ancient divinities under the Indian name of dewata; 
ratu nin dewata ‘king of the gods’ was a designation for Batara Guru. Among the 
` Dyaks or Dayaks the word has assumed such forms as jewata. jebata and even jata. 
According to Hardeland?* jata applies especially to the divinities of water and 
rivers; every large river has ita own jatas, each of them ruling a special territory 
and residing under the water in subterranean palaces. The lizards are their 
servants. Like the Bataks the Dayaks adore these gods among other reasons with 
a view to offspring. The inhabitants of Siau (an island of the Savgir group) believe 
in one highest god, whom they call duwata or ruwata; he has created the world, 
hut ag he is not illdisposed towards men he is not revered. The Bolaāng-Mongon- 
dow (N. Celebes) call him Ompu (‘grandfather, lord’) duata. Besides, they believe 
in a class of higher spirits called duata who can enter into their priests. In the 
Philippines divata or davata ( Bisaya) or dinata (Manobo) are the couls of the 
deceased, * 


Not unlike many devas or ancient gods in India proper the beings denoted 
by the Skt. word for ‘god’: deva- Ča have also in the Archipelago almost lost their 
ancient high position. In modern Malay a dewa is ‘a minor divinity or a demi-god 
^3 Occurs in fairy tales etc.'; sometiines ‘a fairy. Further itis an honorific, used 
in ancient titles. In Javanose it has become a literary word for the gods of mythc- 
logical stories. Likewise in Sundanese where it is used in the same way for the 
Pre-Muslim godheads who are lower in the scale than the bataras. Elsewhere the 
Meaning of the word varies: whereas in the Ngada-region of the island ot Eloresjit 


A island 
18 pre.emi Being, in other parts of the is 
minently used as the name of the Supreme Being RES. 


inhabited by the Manggarais the meaning is rather vague, thou Mec 

i e Prayers sometimes prefers it. In West-Sumba it means something > ible dā 

but it is rather difficult to get an insight into the exact sense: urine we 

visible exist, together with or connected with an invisible or ni sists ali 

Which ig called its ndewa,?é Though coexistent tbe ndewa at pers d cordis 

E 9 same Place. An object, a person, 8 body bas its own SP ped enei 
enod by its ndewa, A process, an action búíongsto 8 person © à 


"ON8eguenog ji 
8 belong to the sphere of the ngewa. bill called pitara : 
In the isle of Bali thesd. Eptiriieborimnependenf ABI? pos 


134 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
——— — — Digitizedby Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Skt. pitaras (Gar: eaten the by form pirata. has doubtless eprang bs 
pitara by metathesis; a third form pitra or petro, which seems especially to ^s a 
to the souls of those persons whose corpees are not yet cremated, Topresentg th 
Skt. preta- Na ‘the spirit of a dead person, esp. before the obsequies aro, Perfor. 
med’, which was also known to Old-Javanese authors. 

‘In classical Malay books we often find the bidadaris, a sort of kindly fairig 
who preside at the union of lovers. The Cams know them as bidiadhars A 
aériens suivants de Siva’. Their name, which in Malay sometimes ccours ag bigis. 
dari, derives its origin from Skt. vidyadhari- facit ‘a kind of female superhuman 
beings possessed of magical power’. It is also known to tho Javanese : widadari 
the Balinese : widadari, widiyadari and dadari (‘a divine being of female sex’) to 
the inhabitants of the island of Aalmahera: in the Tobelo language widadari de. 
notes ‘a kind of spirits’; cf. also Mac. Bug. Bar. otc. bidadari "legendary Women in 
tales etc. In the Malay romantic tales a number of bidadaris ere mentioned by 
name : Sčpērba or Sēkērba, a nymph of Indra's heaven: Skt. Suprabha NW Nila- 
Utama : Skt. Tilottama Rela, who in India is an apsaras (the name has been 


Sérigandi, Sargandi, Sérgandi, who in a romantic tale of Javanese origin isa wife of 
nd E Sugandha gTa, who Mbh. 1,123,63 is among the apsaras who - 
chanted the praises of Arjuna, The Sundanese knoy 

anted th ; f 1 know Sumbadr: 
Arjuna's wife: Skt. Subhadrā gaz. aiio ~ 
a bas E vakgas (Skt. yaksa. au ‘superhuman beings or apparitions’; 
Dough generally considered as benevolent, thoy are sometimes said to cause demo. 


serpent able to come down from 


Over a large area in the g 1 
larg ense of gu 
Oday. sakti, Mod.-Jav. ssh; 

Mal. sakti, Gayo idem elo, T 
Invisibleness and similar pro 


» magico-religious potency’: 
Po ney; Sund, sakti, Bal. sēkti; 
!8 power involves invulnerability, 


er fo co . 

by such A mpass extra-ordinary events; 

0 ss Ch ex ; y D 
re and prophetic figures ha ploits of sakti, Even in modern times warri- 


ie the word is uzed to translate 

* or Bērma Sakti, lit, ‘the sakti in 
orking Bérma’ pr something 
ession to dennte ‘the Milky 


or of Brahma? ig usu 


similar, The combinat; 
ao Ombingtion Bima-sakļ; is a 


t that the idea expressed 

n 6880, 

onesia most] y B forms o Mores Sabre 

me Porgong! » (ta rada by Tripurusa . A pun (as es 
27 * Skt. tripurusa- 


Pteme Bein ; 
8 being identi ith 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. "DE identified w 


j i and eGangotri 
igiti Samaj Foundation Chennai an 
Digitized by Ape Rana F fi INDONESIA 


185 
S nu, Siva). The OJav. sa tiga dewata Tripurusa ‘the three (IN. 
prabmā» as K is explained as Brahma Wisnu Iswara; saņ hy 
gods me (tiga bhatara); 39 another designation is 
'the three aj In the Archipelago Siva is the 
qi tiga $ 


lac specified by the names Sadāsiva Sa 
8C E 


words" 
aù Tripurusa ag 
‘the three saktis’ (saz, - 
main deity o 


da-siwa (Skt, 

which is 2 (Skt. Makašiva- Aza) and Prama-sitva ( 
va NK. 

Maha- 


onym for Tripurusa is Tryantaka (Skt. 
curious jā ‘end, Yama’) is found in a ‘law text” 

«d^ ) v vr 
antaka- E has been preserved : bētara tëri 
term à ee an honorific of the first Malay ruler 
gorved & 


f this Tripurusa 
hy 


sadasiva- aaa), 
Skt. Paramasiva- Wf) A 
tryantaka-, tri. fa "three! and 

In Malay textg the Indian 
-murti or bētara teri; the word also 


- In asimilar way Yamiuan (‘Lord’) 
b a title. "According to Balinese traditions the Supreme God is sea- 
S Br 5-3] S 

Sakti has be 


č à : Skt. padmāsana- Walaa), surrounded 
is ‘lotus seat’ (padmasan?, padmasanā : SEE. pa | i 
. ted on his lotus 6e ), Iswara (E.), Batara Brahma (S.), ete. (see above). These dei- P 
byBaters dide to reside in parts of the human body. When praying (ma-teda i 1 
tifa zo A Dp a’) the Siva-priest invokes Batara Prama (Skt. parama- A)- Siwa 
Biineeda- 83 Mahadewa, Mahaswara, Rudra, Sankara, Sambhu, Iswara. The 
ui p pe Batara Prama-Buddha with Dyani Buda (Skt. ec 
i A E OK. - 
EN ù hyaù Tatagata (Skt. Tathagata- aama), kuta < (Skt a 
ma Sat a): Sri Amaga-sidi (Skt. amoghasiddhi- sata) Siva's name ids 
C d SM siio known, as are the Sanskrit vidhi- fafa fate, vin E 
(Skt. kāla- TE ges to the same god : saù hyan (OJav. the ira 2 S a e 
by the Au p : sa hyaù Hari=Wisnu (Skt. Visnu- fara), san p d kri vs 
lien DS avolied fo ak eminent brahman (Skt. sūrya- 4 E šā Talis en 
Sun' also ap sndra (the h is not pronounced = Sk : | 
i 7) Hindra or Hendra (the bu "= 
me e IR or evil spirit dwelling on Me ee bo 
an me m ‘king of the wood, lord of vegetation, M Sid Basasnon 
NEM me or Viae a text dealing with ae Ge ee 
eee m Us (Skt. raja IA ‘king’) together with’ ues Pu —- 
vad gi of creatures presiding over e OU Ene 
; Q: 4 in India someti : > t 
fied with Visnu ky Ru b = ge mean Lord (Skt, pati- g) ae ; 
! e end puc y. am the souls to their abode—; = ihe ee or 
nga- AF)’, con IE 
| < Hue e M of pradhina (Skt. He conceived as femi- 
y 2 rce of tho materia s brought mio 
ae g a pcr | ās as masculine, are sometimes a 
Si 
5 EN n a Tripurusa.** ; in Old-Javanese literature. 
Connection with the Tr p MN es Uses i we 
Yama (Skt. Yama- 33) is repe E Yama is not unknown. mk, 7 
T d Malay authors Bēiara Kala (Skt. kala- 818); 7 
0 Modern Javanese an Šiva. fita) and ( nes: 
tradition he is identified with Siwa (Skt. noca too s ie rk) 
Special cult ig his share, but Siwa (in pns (Skt. dharma- R) = c 
ga I8 also called sai, jj (the divine) ws). Although ho f PS ae ea 
in i Fratarāja- Sd es rákgaga (Skt. EN 
8 of the deceased (Skt. A onsidered as a T&<gasa C In Balinese 
it: damstra. FU ‘tangs, tusks’) he iz p nai) is his attribute. 
evil demon’). the maco (gada, Skt. g 


ied his place, who 
f >) has occupied Fa 
literatur SUN lled Jogor Manik (manik i ragupta (Skt. Raga), a ; 
Un ERO the good and evil deeds 


; d is Surātma?” 
Na diar «Ci is Suri ; 
' divine Secretary who in lauki... name of Oltragupio) 

en. Another secretary (or rather, an : 


Digitized by Arya BamaitauDdátonIbH2Q AS Fare Gangotri : 
136 ut 


mes n eA, ‘soul'?). 

Skt sura- SA a pee ox guardian of the infornal regione, Gorani. 
; ae ^ EN (Skt. Ghoravikrama-, i.e. ghora- Sh ‘terrible’ and vikrama. 
kruma as Yama s Utpāta is elsewhere callo] Upata, and described as a demon who 
3 <Skt. kimkara- frat ‘servant’ and bala- aw ‘army’ : the 
bviously abbreviated > Bala), 


‘aun ‘heroism ’). 
together with Cinkarabala ( 
army of Yama's servants; this name was o 


38 
tch over the entrance of hell. M 
ee Though we cannot here enter inbo topics and problems pertaining to the 


` history of Javanese thought or literature, it may not be oat of place to give g, very 
suecinot summary of somo texts in order to show how Indian mythological and 
legendary names have survived among the Javanese. One of the many Javanese 
lakons (play for wayang performances) deals with the arrival of the famous Agastya 
who introduce] Hindu culture into the Southern regions of India and into Indo. 
nešia,** and who in Javanese texts is also callod Agasti, A7gasii. In the Tantu 
Panggélaran*? the lord Jagatvitesa (Skt. jagat ANZ ‘world’ and visesa- fag ‘superi- 
ority’) made his thumb—if Pigeaud is right in conjecturing angustha (Skt. aigustha- 
asu) instead of angasļa which is given by the manuscripts—'un object of yoga’, so 
that a dewalt purusaikāra ‘a divinity of human form’ (Skt. purusa- Y&T and akara- 
SITSR) came into being who was called Agasti (sic). In the lakon referred to above,“ 
the reverend (bagawan : Skt. bhagavan ATA) Baratmaja, who:e name must be de- 
rived from the Skt. Bharadvaja- Wizl3, had a son Kumbayana, i.e. the Skt. Kumbha- 
yoni- grafa ‘who is born in a water-jar’, who crossed over to Java on the back 
of a mare with which he begot a son, called Asatama (< Skt. Asvatthaman- AWARI) 


nom. asvalihana, She, after being wounded by Kumbayana’s arrow saru tama 
(<Skt. Sarottama- UTA ‘the best of arrows’) 


keeps 


called Karpa (Skt. Krpa- $3) and his prime minister of 
kt, garjita- afa ‘roaring’) who asked him to become their 


giants, who was offended b i Karpini 

(her Indian name is Kryi MS 5 ; ed because princess 

jected him. Kurugaji PTN Karpa’s sister and king Kurugaji's daughter, had re- 
64)!, Whose name hag been explained ag sprung from Kuruhaji, ,& 


and Jay. haji ‘princa’, was ki * : FF, the well-known ethnic name 
After having married Karpini Kum- 
er Sucitra*? (Skt. Sucitra- gia ‘very 
Z hides itself, A dom of Cémpala, a word under which 

* After arriving at tho capital of “Sawojajar 


Word of Indian orig; S = B 
(from Skt. Ga origin) where king Arya (Skt. Ārya- #14) 


two arr ows, the Ariya-sénkals (<Skt: 


id”, chained bably MIA, form like sankhala ‘chain’: 


Va Prot BE heit gelegen, in both Indian and Java- 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri , 
SANSKRIT IN IND ONESIA , 


e TET S 137 
í ego epic tales) and the Roda-dēdali (< Skt. Garuda. 
m à 


iil bird, and Jav. dadáli swallow”+5), Durna left fo 
i a and Kurawas (Skt. Kaurava- za) who had j : 
winds (Skt. jala- e ‘water’ and tunda- qva ‘beak, snout’) in the es called *Jala- 
The third of the Pàndava brothera bears the name of Bra 8!0n" Jati-rokeh, 
sent an Indian *Vratasena (vrata- sta ‘Yow’ and senā War * “a May repre. 
(Bharala- TA a well-known proper name); the fourth 
Nakula- agg); the youngest is called Sadeva (<Skt. Sah 
Kurawas under the command of Dursasana (Skt. Duhsa 
to apprehend Gandamana; as they did not succeed 
who carried him off a prisoner. The play concludes with G 
ment, Durpada's arrival and intercession for the culpable. 


TRS the well 


andamana's punish. 
As is nob difficult to 
ar’ (Kumbhayoni) have 
the greater part thoee 


ya legend has given rise to soma 
discussion is Manumanasa or Kanumayasa which in many ‘historical’ works of the 


Javanese appears among the ancestors of the Pandayas.‘é According to Hazeu this 
name has originated in brahmano manasah (putro Vasisthah) in Mbh. 1,1745, 
which, however, is too general an indication to be applied in this case, according 
to Poerbatjaraka in Manur Manasya (sūnuļ) i.e. Agastya. ; 

In the classical Javanese wayang texts (the Javanese dramas), the stories 
and narratives connected with them and other writings of a mythological character | 
& host of Indian personages are over and over'again mentioned, but their relation- : 
ship and adventures have often deviated from the standard setin tha Indian epics and 
their names have often been mutilated. Besides, the scene has been laid in Java and” 
the regions outside of the famous residences of Hastinapura, Darawati (Skt. Dvara- | 
vats FRA ‘Krsna’s capital’) was believed to be inhabited by būžas (Skt. bhüta- 4a | 
demon’). In the shadow-play Abiasa*” called after the famous Indian sage Vyasa | 
TIG, the son of the rsi Parāsara— instead of the form Abiasa we also come across 
Abyasa and Biyasa < Vyasa, which coincides with Jav. biyasa < Skt. abhyasa ae 
study, discipline’— we see how * Durgandini (Skt. Durgandhini gūtrarit) ‘the ill-smel- 
ling one’,*® i.e. Satyavat who in the Sanskrit epic is also called Gandhavati are 
the odoriferous one’, is cured of her fishy smell by the reverend (bagawan <Skt. 
hagavan "UND Palasara (Skt. Parasara WA. She is the daughter of Kos 
the king of Wirata: according to the Mahābhārata Vasu dg or Uparicara, End kā 
di, is the father of Satyavati and king Matsya or Virata- ATiz tho king 0 


^layas (Mbh, 1,a.63). The latter is called Maswapati- < Masyapati TS 


purs teyas” 
d Maisahņati) i.e. Matsyapati : Skt. Matsyapati- R? x kri. K e 
:—"Urgandang ‘ths ill-smelling one'^? in the Javanese p'ay. sun Gaja: 


i n anchorit 
of P alasara, and Düxgandini, has been born, he wails, M e aE 


80n 


irs Gajalwaya- THA the city Hāstinapurā, hue her second husband — 
is Singa, the moment to beoonis a king. Durgandini romat *Talkanda. Sai i had 


ie nianu dewa (Skt. Santanu mig) king of * Talkonda or from his first wife, and px 
Song, DE (Skt. Devavrata- 458, i.e. BREEN d name rafem tovi 
rata (Skt BT oight? -aa vow /; : ATE 

trays - astau Ae eight, and wala; AT tiesn of the king of Wira ag 

TOES Other Persons tādas om the stage aTa Sit tHE ys the prine minis 


018 ; e. 1 e 
"Sin other texts called Sveta (Skt, Sveta- āra ‘the white on 


x Digitized by A ANSERIT IN INDONBŠTĀS eGangotri 

4 ` 
ter *Naga Wases (Skt. naga- ATT onal M ee SB ‘excellence’ 
his king *Indranata, the ‘king of Re i ae ča } ? en aoe tn the OJay, 
Adiparwa p.98 (Skt. indra- &7& Indra, lord and nit m 1 T protector, lord’); 
hia daughters Ambalika and Ambaliki: Sit. aud OJav. Ādiparwa Andika A T] 
and Ambalika aaīfēāi. Instead of Kast tho naine of the kinglom is Tasik Mady: 
‘she honey-sea! : Jav. tasik ‘sea’ and Skt. madhu- AY honev.. In other shadow.. 
plays the name of the king is, in 4 more original manner, Kasendra i.e. Sit Kacin. 
dra- $194 ‘the ruler of Ba iares; there his kinglon is Widarba (Skt. Vidarbha: 
fiz), which as a matter of fact is another country. In acc rdanss with the Sines 
krit texts this ruler had threa daughters, the third of which is called * Ambahini (Skt, 
Anba AF31). Ewewhere the names of Bhig na's brothers are Citra Puda and Citra 
Sena, whioh re nind us of the Indian Citragada- 633114 and Vicitravirya- fāfaaiti; 
the former is in another text called Citra Gada: cf. Skt. citra- faa ‘con-picuous, 
excelent’; pada- 7 ‘place, rank’; senā 441 ‘army’; gadā 721 ‘mace’. Often an 
Indian hero has got two names: Jayadratha WAZA, the king of Sindhu, is also cal. 
led Sinduréja(<Skt Sindhuraja- facia). 

Generally speaking, it may be said that hosts of Sanskrit proper names 
belonging to the mythological and legendary sphere occur in the Javanese books. 
whether they correspond to Indian personages or kingdoms, or owe their existence 
to the nhanta-y or miaunderstanding: of the Javane e authors. Thu» Arya Mahu- 
dara, Adhiraja, Jayantaka, Jaya Nagara, Raja-Kilantaka, HNRaja.Kuļara, Raja. 
Durga: Ryja-Sémbawas Raja-Dinda, Raja-Gutaka, Ruja-Buwana, Mērtasuta, Kir. 
EUN E suni, Cin Kiron, Oi 
"Sat. mahodara- "RN “rire? s S "dette pūrs BEL of von $ 
rious’; jaya- sq ‘victory’ and agave TN Ml TV 3 RUTAR T 
FISAF ‘time regarded as the gol Weis j e xu RE (ue d 
Kuģara, the name of an OJ .v, law-text: Du ci SE Me phon d 
sambhava- 834 ‘origin, capacity’; edi. stis e o pom Gl BMC Y contor 
danda: ‘a king’s sceptre or authority, pw pa pa ž control, punt bimen m dd 
2% ‘horse’; bhuvana- an c NM Dupibaient inflicted by a king’); gholaka- 
mortal’; kérta in the Jav. sense of CAM ae » na amta 7 
„made ready, well done, oultivated cj i er, prosperity; safe’ (of. Skt. krta- $1 
language’; nīlavati sitet 
beautiful”; candra- 
conspicuons’; smara- 
one’; sura- t ‘god’ 
love with anot arriage” ; vigatā firmat ‘a girl in 
sara- TARN ‘sandal-wood? or “a sec are sēj FEAT ‘great lord”; gandha- 


Malay texts of th ; nao diversity of mythological names t0 

romance t » Hi t sang 
(e ype. In the Hikaya 

9 story Eri son Samba and Yajnawati and 

homa and Krsna appears in’ a Malay 

t. WEN and TH); dewa Batard. 

(Mat. ‘goa head”) Mahabisnu (Skt: 


cud (we el B 
'Mahávissu. seen ‘th alara yañ 
WT ‘the ARE kan ee god Vigņu'); 


X Bat ; Dew; Pértiwi (Skt. dev; Prihivt 
sara < Skt, Para; D ara Baruna: Skt. V 3 Low j- 
CP hiken vn Shep goeie TT, tho reverend Pua 


+ < Skt, Aügiras. alga; Maha 


Cn of Balin’); Anila kt, anila. aft); Salp: 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
j ion Chennai and eGangotri 139 


ewa Caku Acah, Cakra-waca or Antakawaca < 


; Skt. Nata] 

ü D S wütaka, ACA- " 
n A (‘bing’) Dani Swara or Danu Sora, Who i~ the Indian god ae Boo 
M ie. Kubera the lord of weaith'; king Bani Dacre - Dhanesvara- 


rma : Skt. Druma SH; . the heroes Karta Du asudeva. agga. 


ing Dé R 7 rma:OJav Ketag; 
Brem Mansapati (Skt. Matsyapati (seo above) ); the ‘ministers’ pue 
E rasandha- awards Fralēmba : Skt Pralamba. T33; Wira Ankasa p 
úùkesa : 


oJ. Haranga : Skt. hirānga- Jug "Indra's thunderbolt’ S 
OJav. foxt has Muhodura : Skt. makoto nātzu; Tujumaya or Tinjomaya < gkt 
tejomaya- astana ‘consisting of splendour; a prince Suranata or Surata : Olav. 
Suraiha (Skt. Suratha ga; the ascetic Karanda Dewa : OJuy. Gunadewa (Skt, 
Gunadeva- gnža); his companion Durga : OJav. Daruki (Sct. Daruki zits); Wisa 
Dewa who represent Skt. Visvamitra- "Ws; Kirana who is the Iudian Karna 
(Sit. Kiria- 995  Krena's wives Rukmini or Ruknēni, Rukni: Skt. Rukmini 
gI and Jémbuati: Scr. Jümbavat; MII; ths a E e Pea 
Yajnavatt agat; queen S .tiyabana or Sētia Bona : Sit. Satyabhama ammm; the 
fenale servant Puspa Walt: Sct. OJav. Pusprwati $313 Ti the elephant G:jah 
Mina (Sks. gija- TF ‘elephant’ and mina- FA ‘fish’, a word denoting, in Malay, 
a makara: 8 £X. ‘sea-monster’, “a whale’ or ‘a walrus’; in OJav. the form gajamina 
occurs); the supranormal weapons Sumoga-moga (OJav. sy Amogha : Skr. amogha- 
aatq ‘namo of a spear; candérasah: Sct. candrahüsa- 3x38 ‘a glittering 
scimitar’; tērsulak : Skt. trisula- tag ‘trident’; astakuna: Sit astakoņa- AZAN 
‘ostagon’; theflower Wijaya Mula (< Skt. OJ«v. Wijayamālā AITAS ‘Garland 
of victory’, mulia “distinguished, valuable’ < Skt. mūlya- HET ‘value’); the chariot 
Wilmana < Sas. OJav. vinana- fara ‘self-moving aerial car —the OJav. wil 
‘giant, demon” may have exerted influence upon the form of the word; in othar 
Malay works we find the forms walimana, walman and the correct wimana?*; the 
walimana is described as a harpy, endowed with the power of speech and acting as 
Boma’s steed—; the gurda (cr géroda <Skt. garuda- 188) Mahameru (Skt. Mah 
meru- H31AG ‘the great central mountain’) being Krepa's mount; the re ideuce raju 
Trisna < Sit; OJav. Pragjyotisa- aneta; the kingdom Mandura, Manura : Skt. 
OJav. Madhura FFI = the more frequent Mathura AJU; and many other names, 
part of which are free or almost free from alterations: Narada, Arjuna, Jayasena, 
Suranata,.55 i 
Enumerations of divinities in which Sanskrit names appear side by side 
With Indone-ian are not rare. In aa Old-Javanese text» passing under the name 
of Ādipurāņa anfeguin, but not identical with the Sanskrit book of the Same ido 
a hastuka (sic, i.e. Skt. astaka- AZS ‘a group of eight sa Mis m 
consisting of Antavišesa the name of which may be considered as migā s 
Anantuwisesa ‘of endless superiority or excellence’ (Skt. ananta- Ward pu 
k $ periority A: 6 gp noue 
and vi-esa. AG ‘ex "x Simuanirmala (Skt. Sünya- WT void and nt 
cellence ); Sunyanirm 


Mudralh) Kurna (she 


d= 8G Ē RAC xt kt. niT- 
EM unsullied, clear’); Enin-nirmala (OJav. iih pure, eee piers 
mala-): ^m : ʻi is connection 
m Y Tan-ana (OJav. ‘not-being’) aud others; in this ful monkeys appear 


Ot clear. "Tu the Malay Hikayat sang Boma seven powertul DEPO 3 
from R SSS y ya agada- A&F name ofa mon ey» 
-om terrible natural-phenomena: Añgada (Skt. a 2 (Bet. Salya- WO or śalpa- 
z . gis); Cucak Raun 
i ‘dart’ and prabha Si ‘aplendour’); Sēmeru (Skt. Sie 3 from a Skt. or 
(Mat, cucak ‘yell >. the word may bave arisen fr WR 
NT yellow-crowned bulbul ; ? and mukha- 83 face i Cucak. P 


, ee . $ 
name ); Sinamuka (Gkb. TM: t ias Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA l 
IU IT EM | igiti rya Sama} Foundation Chennai and eGangotri BEE:w 
. . 


te dian influence has left many traces in ancient legends, traditio 
andian x 


In Bali the ancient rei and ancestor of the family of the Bhy 


ng 8nd 


: ; a s E gus hag 
A i irion saint of the popular institution of cock-fighting. In the "Malay 
ecome , 


‘Annals’, which date from the oarly XVII" century, i P a story of wandering 
Qc it, Kaliiga- alts) signifying & district On the oromandel Coast) who, 
Kalinga gs me or title of Bicitram (Skt. Vicitra- fafaa wonderful, charming 
Sk Cina) was considered a descendant of oder bhe Great.55 He Was tho 
in ot a Raja Suran, supposed to be identical with an XI"' century Cula (Skt, Cola. 
NTa people and kingdom on the Coromandel coast) who was Rt enmity with the 
Malay empire. Accompanied by Nila (seo further on) Pahlawon ( hero, champion’), 
Kisna (Skt. Krsna- BN) Pandita (Skt. pandita- aftea ‘the loarned one’) and Nilq 
Utiama (which elsewhere is the name of a nymph of heaven, the Indian Tilottama : 
Skt. fistan) Bicitram Shah came from heaven down to a mountain in Palembang, 
where he was made ruler of the country, given the title of san Sapurba (Skt, 
Suprabha JAA likewise an apsaras), married raden (a Javanose title) Sindari 
(Skt. sundari get ‘lovely’) and engendered two sons, Mantaka (< Skt. Menaka ax] 
anotber nymph of Indra's heaven) aud Nila Kisna (see above)”. The moun- 
tain to which the founder of Malay royalty came down was afterwards called 
Mahameru (Skt. Mahameru Hz1Az ‘the legendary central mountain of Hindu cos- 
mology’). The girl in whose rice-clearing Nila Pahlawan etc. had descended bore 
the name of Wan Malini (St. Malini afsit ‘garlanded; fomale gardener or flo- 


anskrit, but the second part is not 
clear. In another ver.ion the archangel Gabriel killed ‘that navel of the earth, 
After the monster had been destroyed its 
(Jin Sakti) and the hollow of its eyes 
dfather' also used ag a term of distinction) 


WEN) Guru, In this tradition various native, 
blended once again. 


tongue became a Wonder-working genie 


Siva, who is here called Dato’ (Mal. ‘gran 
Mēntalg (<bētara, Skt. bhaļļāra- 
Indian and Muslim elements have 


Dn gave ici la 
deviations as Sakarba < Skt OJav. a sufficiency of examples of such Malay 


r mythological beings or geographic objects have 
Meghanāda- (=Indrajit, Rāvaņa's son, lit. 
In the Korawāframa, the well-known 
also designated as Saripati, probably 
f Jav. wrat (wrhaspati : "wratpali), 
stitutions of this kind ari 'a definite flower, the campaka : 


“cloud-noise’) Was al 
god Brhaspati (with 


because sari could be taken 88 
wrat meaning ‘flower’ 


led Harikesawa which may be consi- 
: y bee 

i 3 kt. Hari. gf and Kešava- ma,” Asno or 
SSI perius "fd, the well-known 


MARET S 
M ale 2 rather frequent spelling of the Skt. 
aB horse Uccaihórayag. (Skt. s=$:mag,) apperti 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


; 8 mutilated form 
twin-godg,6 In manuscripts : 


Nairrti. 1g the Kore wāframa I 


ASSERIT IN INR ONG SRA and eGangotri 


141 

At Though the name of Mucuk 
Uncesrawa. 

a9 


unda who assisted Krsna ig also f 
orrect form (Skt. Mucukunda JJF), it ha t 
jn ite C 


id ound 
a 81n the course of time been muti- 

. Mriyukunda (Skt. kr D cud eid : ES (n. 
lated : X? 3 Was the son of Dursantaand sañ 
me may have gri 


‘pereonal’ article) Kuntala: the first na 
vaneso peret ion eco 
A deva (Skt. Vasudeva- 383), tbename o TéDa 8 father, the second is Dusyania 
rei Dusyanta- ZAFT) and the last represents Sakuntala (Skt. - akuntala ara ), 
(Skt. A ai by her correct name in the Adiparwa, As Dharma ( Skt. Dharma- 
who a Krsna's name Damodara (Skt. ztātax) are sometimes m; 
ges Carded as & mutilated, form of Damodara, 
may ez Saptarčūga is used ag à designatio 
va g:it actually is the name of-the mountain wh 
papiere the word-is Satasriga- RIS (the mountain) 
g a 
m practised austerity (Mbh. 1,119,49). The na 
p a transformation of Wana-Kalinga (Skt. vana- 
Fate tines region) which is a name for India*5, 3 À 
me I Malay: foklore the “Bird of Paradise’ or ‘bird of the gods’ (buron dewata) 
ig oft m cand rawasi, céndérawasa, céndérawaseh, céndérawanseh, céndérawansa, 
ae Fs, form being regarded as the Originals : Skt. candravamsa- aes one of 
a in ar race’ (also candrawamsin- ef): the bird ig held to live in the p 
= a constantly on the wing, never descending to earth or alighting ou a tree. 
o ius y not be out of place here to remark that many proper names were 
i LOWE in accordance with pseudo-etymologies or pad on 
on. i i i ith Jav. èr ‘water’; the same hero is 
the name Arjuna is brought into connection wit : Mes K 
called Kunta (cf. his name Kaunteya- 784 Kuntīs son’), med 
correctly taken as ‘point of an arrow’ (cf. Skt. mati M 
then names were corrupted in transcribing them E E 
deva (Skt. Guņadeva- it interpreted as Kuru. ue iuit —— 
The Javanese have also created ee EM MP ar 
names or, rather, given an existence as myiho PES peel. ESL. 
one of their ancient texts5? Lokaphalā (sic , Krtanjali, NUI 
BUS ‘world-protector, regen 7 
of mythological rank : Skt. lokapala- «31 f kings); krtāūjali» sexus a 
(in India this Word is also used as & proper noun d pore šie ca 
Pērson who joins the hollowed hands in R cs EXC c end of 
family” respectively. In India the fire which is i aoial bene DE 
; fit is sometimes a sp i ee 
dvery Period, the so-called Kalagni- PISI it to aten called EZ A lila 
mē ts Siva în a few Olay pica E dt =q ‘the void or non-existent’. In 
ime ag destroying all beings, death’ and Mit Es of the mythological being e 
nda, irama Kg pem s É "ET agara ‘(the forming of a 
m which Probably represents the Skt. di E Hanumat’, such a construo- 
tion p Deelally the dam supposed to have been , 
On be} 


a by name, was intro- 

Sing a ‘conquerer of the sea"? A young man, m the Skb. word sago- 

duoed into he Javanese tradition by a mere minni rname." Ina passage 

ra BE boing of the same family’ being taken as 8 bb, VEZ) Ee o 

at the Mod. J Ši Brata-yuda (i.e. the main story of ās corrēsņondinē ir. ae 

ing irata ig mentioned, Arya Nirbita by name: ae E pushed pak. 
narrativo e OJav. text Bhārata-yuddha 11,10 say erstood by the later poe 


isunde | 
*tlossly (Skt, nirbhita- Ffin. «ba eaae elena Pec ion. 


Another form of the same 
n for the ancestors of the 
ere they are buried: the Skt, 
with a hundred peaks’, where 
me Bana-kelin may be consi- 
a7 ‘forest? and Kaliiga. «fes 


* 


E eT. 


s cct dpi iis - 


ECT sī: ter, 


- SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
143 Digitized by Arya Samaj 5 f 
a +. existence to a corrupt text Or & wrong rond a 

The palih ee TC sarihiva- «fd and asraya- SUA ‘princes who HS ķi ko 
S tne OJav. text > parthivasraya > pürthivrasaya. etc.?? Moreover, i 
Es Ee came to be indicative of two different objects; thus, Haste 
(Ste, Hastinapura- gf tg and Gajahoya (<Skt. Gajāhvaya- AMAT) are two tow 
(Skt. The Sundanere believe in & kind of goblins or spirits s to send es 

whom they call Duruwiksa; the same name is applied to al evil-doing pid 
"the word is the Skt. durbhiksa- gfau rearcity of food, teal 


in a forest etc. 1: ; 3 ; 
dearth’. The ‘avening-time’ ‘Skt samdhyākala- aF) has likewi e been D 


sonified : the Sund. sandekala are goblins walking at dusk and sending illneg, and 


Qs, 


calamities. : à K: 
On the other hand cases are not rare in which the name of the divine being 


became a common noun. In Balinese the name of the famous gemi-divine monkey 
Hanumat- (Skt. EAT), to wit Hanoman, came to denote a baboon. In Sanskrit * 
Surabhi g f ix the name of a mythical cow; in ancient Java (aa well as in 
India) the word can denote a cow in general. In the cour e of time tēksuku and 
garuda became Javane e literary or 'inytho'ogical terma for any ‘xerpent’ and any 
‘griffin’ re:pectively (S-t. Taksaka- ATE ‘a famous king of anake-” and Garuda "1€ 
Vigņu'» bird’). As to the last-mentioned name, the Mal. gžroda (< Garuda-) could 
pot only denote, in romantic tales, & eupranormal mount or vehicle?? but was 
also identified with the roc or monster-bird which destroyed ships; then, euch 
eagles as that carved on the Mexican dol'ar (which was, therefore, called riùgit 
gérodaan or gérdan ‘the dollar (Mal.) with the eagle’) and similar birds were like- 
wise called gérodu.74 "o 
Proper names of mythological or legendary personages concisting of a Sans- 
krit and a native part are not rare : a princess Candana-Stkar (Skt. canduna- 
SPIA sandal and Oday. sēkar ‘flowev’) and a female anchorite Kili-Suci (OJav. kili 
i nun and Skt. suci afa ‘clean, pure, virtuous’) may serve 48 
SN DUE ME Well-known Indian heroes have, apart from their Sanskrit 
, another name, which is either entirely indigenous (e.g. when Nakula 
AES is called Pintén and Sahadeva azza Tansen) or M m it element 
(eg. when Duryodhana- gīlaa owns the name of UR m E UN e Skt. 
jaya- TA ‘victory’ is no doubt represented, OE al mai 
Some titles and desi i 
parts of this book. Let it be suffi 


(sewa)-sogata found i S with the frequent term rst-saiwa 
in the Tantu Panggéluran and related dooumentx, also culled the 


1 „and usua e Y 

(ARE Tu e 2 ily translated by “the brahmans of the ri, gaiva 
omtnatjon ,' ”, eterm drāhmaņa which a bosenna 

Bivaite) and Buddh; d Th n hich appears to serv 


as a collective designation u Y n gene 
makes i 
i f s believe that the ‘clergy’ or the priest i j 


three groups,?5 which 
ar 
adherents’. "Ihe term PL | Cargas: Bt. paksa. ga "faction, party, (group of 
nia 1n all pro resent uP t' i lar ety- 
" & cage of popu 
"being more plausible than any 


Digitized by ŠĶA SE Ra duod eios faeere and eGangotri 


: -ARS 
s. The grammatical rules of Javanese do not 


1 j : Prevent us from asanmi 
o change: ‘the S. doctrines’ >‘the adherents m assuming g, 


Javea: ; 
manti - [G of these doctrines? s 
es o way the word tyaga (Skt. tyaga- e114 "giving up resigning’) de * S 
d enotes g 


r : ( noth ) icul ^ paksa 
comf er) par ticular pakga. The adherents o he bheraw k 
of (& D f di dum > (Skt. 
mem Specialize la smasūnagamana 


"bhairava- Ña applied to the followers of a Saiva cult) 
FIMA 'hurning ground” and 


sa, they frequented burning grounds: Skt. smasana- 
i.e i 
terature their namo Survives as berawa or 


ganana- aaa ‘the going to’. In later hi ire 
biraw 1, which in literary speesh also means frightful (cf. the Meaning of the Skt. 
ord) In another text, the Caturpakg »padesa, five pakgas are enumerated whisk 
are called after the five elements: prihivipaksa (Skt prihivī TH earth”), Gra 
(Skt. dpah AIT: water ), tejapaksa (Skt. tejas bb light, fire, splendour’), $ 
(Skt. vayu- IZ "air ), and akacapaksa (Skt. akasa- ARVA "space'), 

Hinduism which found it3 way into the Archipelag» in a comparatively uni- 
form appearance was in tke course of time penetrated by Javanese (and other indi- 
genous) elements; besides, its various aspects and ‘denominations’ tended to grow 
together and to fuse into a single body. Nowadays the Balinese acknowledge no 
more than one ‘Hindu religion’, the agama hindu, or agama tirta ‘the holy water 
religion’ (lit. Bal. tirta ‘water’, esp. ‘holy water’: Skt. tirtha- a ‘place of pilgri- 
mage on the banks of a sacred stream, piece of water). W th the excepsion 
of the Büddha-priests all Balinese priests are siddhanta, i.e. adherents of the Saiva- 
siddhanta which has either ousted or absorbed the other denominations. Y t the 
infl ence or the mere na nes of Pa-upatas ‘Sit. Pa-upata- NY ,” Bhairawas (Sct. 
Bhairava- RT 1)9? Wesnavas Sit. Vutsņava- quu, Brākmaņas, Rsis,*? Soras i.e. 
the adherents of the S in : Sit. Surya qi, and Ganesa has survived. ` 

The names of some of the above-mentioned divinities also occur in the £0- 
called katuka or kutixa lima of the Malays: ‘the Five Tunes : Skt. ghaģikā qud: 
the day is divided into five part», and five days form a cycle. To each of the-e 
divisions a name is assigned, the names being Maswara (Maheswaru', Kula, Séri, 
Brahma and Bisnu. The order is shown in the foilowing table: 22 


bayupaksa 


morning forenoon noon afternoon evening 
_ Ast day Maswara K. S. Br. B. 
2nd day Bisnu M. K. S e 
8rd day Brahma B. M. K. E. 
th day — gàri Br. B. M. a 
bth day Kala S. Br. B i 
NOTES 
|: 081: NE 
i H. Kern, Taalkundige gegevens ter 5 He Korn VO eee 
9Paling van het stamland der Maleiscb- | * Talkos eferred to F. S. 


^ 
5 z : der may bore 
olynesisohe volken, first published in P p. Kasaroeng, 


® Amsterdam Academ 1 : | Brings, € 
y (1889 , now: g3fi. ge K 

yo VI p105, o Hesse pe W Skeat, Malay Magio, — 

3€ Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Ges- | " See °F 858. 


(The 


„hiedeniga, 0.478. : | (London 1900 dere Die Religion ^ — 


0 
k, 


Edited by Th. G Th. Pi$6vadp(1994)Vr venduto 1909), Register, £. V- RS zt 


Edited by J. y, Swellengrebel, (1936). | der Bats 


: me in den Indischen Archipel’ 


144 


Digitized by Arya Sama, REKHA hEN m OomNdoefPangotri 


15 See also H. Sohürer, Die Gottesidee 
der Ngadju Dajak in Süd-Borneo, (Ley- 
den 1946), p-15f. 

'! See Skeat, o.c , p.89 and 282ff. 

12 T refer to Swellengrebel,-0.c , p.210 
13 Pigeaud, o.c., p.218. 


14 See my book Notes on Brahman, | 


(Utrecht 1950), p.4f. Li 
'S See o-ga K. A. H. Hidding, Nji Pohatji 
Sangjang Sri, (Leyden 1929), and Pigeaud, 
0.0., p.208f. 

16 I refer, e.g. to S. Lévi, Sanskrit Texts 
from Bali, (Baroda 1933) p XXVIII, 
who adds that the name of Sridewi is 
algo given to the rice cut, but not yet 
thrashed, while Umadewi is the holy 
name of the rice-seed, Girinatha (cf. Skt. 
Girisa- fa Tā otc. ‘Siva’) the name of the 
young plant, Garigūdewī the name of the 
rice after transplantation. 

™ I refer to G. A. Wilken, Het ani- 
misme by de volken van den Indischen 
Archipel, in "Indische Gids' 1884, II, 
p.69f. The Mal. paduka represents Skt. 
pādukā IFI "shoe, slipper’, 

™ KBW. III, p.163. 

^* See Hadji Hasan Moeatapa, Over do 
gewoonten en gebruiken der Soendanee- 
zen, edited by B, A. Kern, Verh, Kon. 
Tnst. V, (The Hague 1946), p.91. 


7° In this Way the ethnographer A. Q. 
Kruyt expressed himself in ‘Hi 


Hague 1906), p.193 


i .198. 
gedis in het volks- 
ynesiërs, BKI, XL 


PV Hardélana. Daj nae 
A. Hi + Dajaokgoh. 
Wörterbuch, (Amsterdam 1859), panes 


ng Particularg are com- 


p.497ff., esp. p.500, n.l. 
*7 Bee H. Hasan. Moestapa, 0 
2 Bee-Wilkinson, MED, IT 
?? See chapter VI. 
|” Irefer to KBW. II, p.610; of Vy 
Seo also Kern, VG, IV, p.168. . d 
*" For further particulars See R, Goris 
| Bijdrage tot de konnig der Oud-Jevaan, 
sche en Balineesche Theologie, (Leyden 
1926), p.56f. 
?? I refer to J. J. Meyer, Trilogie alt. 
indischer Müchte und Feste der 
tion, (Zürich 1937), III, p.214f, 
*? See K. C. Grucg, Bijdrage tot de ken. 
nis van het Baliech doodenritueg], 
(Thesis Leyden 1928), p.11ff. 
** See Meyer, o. c., IIT, p.316 s.v, 
°° See Goris, o.c., p.57f. 
96 Bee R. Friederich, Voorloopig verslag 
van het eiland Bali, in VBG. XXII 
(1849), p. 41; and H. H. Juynboll, Die 
Hölle und die- Hóllenstrafen nach dom 
| Volksglanben auf Bali, in Baessler-Ar. 
chiv, IV (1914), p.80. 
° See KBW. III, p.79. : 
** Seo Tjan Tjoe Siem, Hoe Koeroepati 
zich zijn vrouw verwerft, (Leyden 
1938), p. 207f. 
?? See Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den 
Archipel, (Leyden 1996). 
| ** Tantu Panggélaran, p.99 P. The pàs- 
| Sage is not quito clear. i 
| "' To be found in Ch. te Mechelen, Drie- 
| en-twintig wayang-vorhalen, VBG. XL 
(1879), n° 19, p.958. 
"^ A'large' number of these namos are 
not in the Mahābhārata (soe S. Sorensen, 
n Index to the names in the Mahabha- 
rata (London 1904ff ) ) neither in the 
ignu- or other principal Puranas. 
hayo marked them by an asterisk. It 
cannot be our concern here to race 
their origin. i 
CADDO prince Sucitra is presen 
at the svayamvara of Draupadi: 
" 8.186, kon 
I refer AJ. u, De la 
Do GA aa) p.s6it. The 


«C. D.LB3; 
: p.970 


Vegeta. 


Digitized bygAryésgattei nante hene and eGangotri 


iow acia 


Jp the wayang this arrow is repre. 
45 Jn 


t bk oint of which j 
sented by a dart 7 ne p ich is 
haped like a bird. d 
a Seo G.A.J. Hazeu, Oud en nieuw in 
do Javaanse Letterkunde, (Leyden 1921), 
T; Poerbatjaraka, p.31. E 
p Fāited by H.C. Humme, Abiasa, (The 
Hague 1878'. 
48 This form 


and MW. 
49 Not in the Pet. Dict. and MW. 


so In the Skt. Mahābhārata this Sveta 
ig mentioned 6, a. 47. 
5! See Hazeu, 0.6., p.350, n.2. 
s2 A list of proper names occurring in 
thelakon (shadow-play) Kurupati rabi 
can be found in Tjan Tjoe Siem, Hoe 
Koeroepati zich zijn vrouw verwerft, 
p.259ff. 
53 T refer to the summary of the volu- 
minous Malay work given by A. Teeuw, 
Het Bhomakawya, (Thesis Utrecht 1946), 
p.2lff. The same author has tried to 
trace the Indian sources of this work as 
well as the OJav. poem Bhomakāwya 
(p.108), which he has translated in full 
(p.40f). 
** See chapter IV, section 3. 
* Other names may be found in Teeuw's 
summary. 
** As is well-known the Persian-Muslim 
Iskandar, the legendary Alexander the 
Great, has played a considerable part in 
RS and Indonesian literature (see 
(EMS Leouwen, De Maleische Alexan- 
s p (Thesis Utrecht 1987) ). The 
€ Šā Muslim Minangkabau, which 
fall ot ebang 8 place after the down- 
ame e great kingdom of Sriwijaya, 
mae poe described as a descen- 
Cm cae along with the Em- 
em is Us and the sultan of Rum 
‘p | “O Byzantium). pi 
EA Other version and particulars 
royalt ‘Winstedt, Tho founder of Malay 
a 


Gs and his conquest of-Bakbjm una 


is not in the Pet. Diet. 


or an 


9rpent, Journal of the Malayan ' tioned, 5 


ally represents Indraprastha: | Branch of the R 


mr ae 
; oyal Asiati 
Singapore 1996) eee” 
** See KBW. IV, 619, - 
5° Bee 9.8. my rem 
p.354{f, i 
EU Swellengrebel, 
that Hariketa ( 
have blended. 


Society, IV - 


arks in Lingua, I 


oc, 7.229 surmiseg 
Skt. ga) and Ketawa ’ 


5! Sometimes Uncommon names haya 
also been mutilated on the Eroznd -of 
corrupt spellings of manuscripts; thug s . 
and m have been interchanged in Huta- i 
mana instead -of Hutāsana, Hutatana 
(Skt. Hutatana- araa) (the god of) fire’, 
E The reader may also be referred to 
Swellengrebel, o.c., p.989. r 
** For particulars see KBW. TH, p.118. 
** See also KBW. II, p.519 and Swel- 
lengrebel, o.c., p 293f. 
55 See W. F. Stutterheim, Een Oud- 
Javaansche Bhīma.cvltus, Djawa, XV, 
p.55. i 
66 Wilkinson, MED.II, p 209. 
67 See Skeat, o.c., p.110f. 
68 Gee also Tjan Tjoe Siem, oc., p.59. 
In Javanese texts Arjuna is repeatedly, 
given the name of Janaka, which appa- 
rently is the same word as the Mal. 
jēnaka ‘tricky, wily, roguish’, the epithet 
of the pélanduk ‘mousedeer’ in the tales 
devoted to that animal : Pélanduk jénake 
‘the wily mousedeer. The word has 
certainly nothing to do with a Skt. gai. 
naka- or jinaka- Sis; fire "relating to 
the Jinas, Jain’ (Van der Tuuk), nor with 
Hindi janika aft ‘an expression with 
more than one meaning, a double-enten- 
dre’. The word may be regarded as In- 
See Tjan Tjoe Siem, 00-, 


ian. 00s. 
ue with whom I cannot agree In all. 


eol8. 4 e AE 
EM so-called Pratasti bbuwana, eC 


Pigeaud, ogi pat <. (The ” 4 
70 Seo J. Gonda, : 2 
Hague 1938-1936), p.344 (16) and noto 
and Swellengrebel, 0-0» T. Else 


da 
E elephant Saiuban " 
Meri Celtegian. joo Siem, 0.64 Pet 


d 


“IIL, pa7t. 


‘rather ciro 
"the wicked 


146 


M by Arya Sams ARSKA En he P OBSIAsor 


.197. 
71 T refer to. Kern, VG. X, p 
72 See OJav. Bharata-Yuddha 13, 91; 


` of. Brata-yuda 18,16,4-7 and 19,5,4-6. 


Jav. patih (which in all probability re- 
presanta the Skt. pati- qfa ‘lord’) is a 


S SERT i ; 
` high title: 'prime-minister, in modern 


times a high Javanese civil servant. 

73 Yet the original character of Garuda 
is still dimly known to the Malay pes- 
sant who, when the sun is suddenly 
overcast by clouds, says Gérda is spread- 


- ing out his wings to dry’ (W. Maxwell, 


quoted by W W. Skeet, o.c , p.110). 

"4 A Sundanece bridal couple of high 
rank has sometimes to sit down in a 
galudra-paksi-naga.liman carriage, ie. a 
carriage with an elephant’ (OJav. liman) 


head, a nāga's (Skt. naga- ATM ‘divine or | 


mythological snake’ ) trunk, and the 
wings (Skt. paksin. fag "having wings') 
of & garuda; see H. Hasan Moestapa, 
0 c., p.87. 

7° See Pigeand, 9.0, p.38ff; Swellen. 
grebel, oc., p 977; R. G.ris, Secten op 
Bali, Mededeelingen van de Kirtya Lief- 
finck-Van der Tuuk, Singaradja-Solo, 


76 Tt will be discussed in ch 

Section 3. E id 
do Pigeaud, 9.C., p.41, n.l. 

?* The reader mi 


Ziesenisg, 8; 


sya, Patufijala), 
mentioned. . 


Rh DEATH 
As to the life her 
eafte 
Umstantial aah O14-Tay, 
are chastised,1 


86 and Bali 


el peda 
8 of th 
Ye e infernal region 


1931, ITI, p.42. 

*" Such terms as Bal. 
mùlādhāra- RSTI ‘the mystical oj 
situated according to yoga dcs 
above the genorative Organs arg ‘a 
known. The ritual Practice of the a 
called poiica-tattva "the five elomenty ; 
now abolished in the official ouk: ty 
well-known five Ms of the Indian Salta 
ritual: madya- AM ‘spirituous liquor 
wine’, mümsa- Him ‘meat’, matsya. mu 
‘fish’, mudrā- HFI ‘parched or fried 
grain’, maithuna- Raya ‘coition’. As to 
smašāna cult etc. seo Goris, o c., p.44, 
E The great popularity of the goddēss 
Sriis referred to in other sections of 
this book, She is sometimes combined 
with sadana, sēdana ‘prosperity, wealth, 
the deity of riches or money’ (Skt. sa. 
dhana- araa ‘accomplishment, means of 
enjoyment, commodities’): Séri.sédana; 
88 such she is revered in the shape of an 
image inade of coins. According to Go- 


Mula-darg (Skt 


tis, 0.c., p.48, the sēnguhu priest repre: 


senta an autonomous remainder of à 
Vaigņava religion. The sénguhw (<saii 
guru ? Skt. guru. Je) recites Sanskrit 
mantras at annual sacrificial services, 
using the sazkg ‘conch-sheH’ (Skt 
SaAkha. "gt ) and other objects belong: 
ing to Vigņu's attributes. 

"* Nowadays ascetism eto. is a thing of 
the past in the i-le of Bali. By rsi the 
Modern Balinese understand priests (ot 
People acting ag such), who do not be 
long to the brahma-waisa. j 
"* For detailg seo Skeat, Malay Magi 
1900, p.646, 


SECTION 9 
ILI LIFE HERRAFTER 


3 N inat 8 
hese texts give, for insianc” 


t where 
* 'CC-0. Prof. Salya dash pirepligstion- and places of tormen 1 


the highly complicated an 


SAÁNSKRIT 1 
Samaj Fonā BRA and eGangotri 


C] stematized descriptions given in post-epic Indi 
By 


name 


an literat : 
5 of special hells these. Indonesian ideas and Ed 


hn es by India, are rather simple. The ; 5 
Minen ata ALB), niraya (Skt: rayon regions themselves are called 
um S ats *regioa"), nirayaloka, nirayapada (Ss. E ge (S 
aides; occasional mention is made of other Indian words: 
fradistinction to Hindu or Buddhist usage, do not refor t 
The form awect always represents the well-known Bra A 
aR aaifa, of which various Indian traditions were in circulation, I S 
` Jiterature it is one of the eight great purgatories (mahaniraya) and P S Buddhi-t 
niraya aate, is often found as another name for it. ARS Mi arm, mahd- 
niraya only occursin the OJav. Agastyaparwa (p. 354), where this a es 
like maharorawa (< St. maharaurava- HH ‘a Particular hell’, at p 380), seen 
to be only 8 somewhat. more stately term for niraya, an OU ruo: in MET 
Rorawa (Skt. raturava- AT), too, is-sometimes found to indicate the, or an infernal 
place of torment in general. After the name of the god who rules over the dead 
the residence of the tormented is also called yamalaya (Skt. Yamálaya- qasa) Re 
yamaloka (Skt. Yamaloka- aneta) ‘Yama’s residence or Yama’s world’. By the side 
of these the curious yamani occurs which has been explained as a shortened form 
ofyamaniluya?; the full compound has however, as far as I know, nos yet been 
found in Indian or Old-Javanese texts. Anyhow, yamanilosa which is another 
variant, will be a combination of this yamani and Skt. loka- ētē. There is also 
a general native designation kawah which at the same time denotes the well-known 
‘cauldron or pan’ in which the wicked are exposed £o great heat, a crater and a 
‘large saucepan (in a sugar:mill). A usual epithet for this cauldron is tāmra 
gomukha ( or tambra gohwaktra; also kawah tambra gomukha, gomukha tamra* ). 
There has been some discussion on this term and the concepts to which tt referred.5, 
. W. Kern has rightly suggested that originally tāmra gomukha may haye baen an 
epithet of kawah, i.e. a word for ‘infernal region’ in general. In this connection 
I should like to point out that in puranic texo‘ tamrakunda- WARS tamrakum- 
! bha- TAF, lit. ‘a copper basin, or copper jar’ respectively, gomukha- arga, lit. 
| cow-faced’ are names of hells in the Hinduistic system. Like the other special, 
! names, mentioned above, an infernal place named (tūmra) gomuka may have lent 
its name to the Javanese to become a synonym of kawah. In Modern Javanese 
S the word has been altered to candra dimuka which means ‘infernal cauldron’, but 
also serves as a name of definite craters. 
A (seri: ARD infernal region is the asigra 
i is dist, of which is ae v d OL 
E Nord blado quus p ) The term. was not wis 2 
AYanese auth t kinda (which ia a prose version of the last boo: 
of the Ra TER va the U ARA lated into Old-Javanese. Another 
term, f máyana) it has been correctly trans H. Kern’ likewise denotes à 
foe ound in the Kufijarakarna, which according to agree with the 
. "WOrd-tree* (he comps patra eto.), is kalpakandaga. d EE *khadga- 
said \ne compares asipatra eto-), :nversion of a Skt. Raga - 
S in considering this word as a Javanese inv +°. the kalpakaņdaga i8 
Va Which Was not known to him, for in the same text". S 


E^ Borih p Ss sharp. thun 
: Ventura ta a tree or plant the thorns of whioh A9 "Le oo of kalpka 


regard the wordomdar. igeni hdi ollection. z 


th their num 
à erous 
terminology, though decidedly 


qaqa, the ‘Sword-leaf- 
a thousand yojanas...s 
aves, which are 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA ; 


148 : ; i ai and eGangotri — — — — 
aa ene err do har ef Kalpataru ga = 
ETENE MN one ot n b means ‘a thorn’ or, in general ‘anything ES 
“tree of paradise , "i wee a kind of tree or a special tree? we might compare id 
sis ira E m. with thorns or a thorn bush’. Farther, in the II 
LUE at E punishments the sdlmali (which is a large tree with stout 
Pu i kles) appears as ‘a tree with long iron thorns’, mounted on Which 
hard conioa E sinners era pierced; instead of Salmali or Sālmali MER, RRR 
i cats the Visnn Smrti has Kantakasalmali (i i » ame of an inferna] 
region. But there remains room for the supposition (pas a pa has another Benge 
and that the members of the compound follow each other in K Sanskrit Way: 
Anyhow, the word kandaga occurs in other OJav. texts to denote a sorb of sharp 
weapon; which perfectly agrees with the general sense of Skt. kantaka. BUZE (also 
‘the point of a pin or needle, sting, prickle ). ; i 

Another name for tho ‘sword-tree’ is OJav. kayu curiga, the first member of 
which is a native word (‘tree’), the second a prākritism, repeatedly to be found in 
other OJav. texts (in Malay cžriga, curiga ‘a short sword or dagg 
lent to Skt, ksurikā Ra, whence also churikā altar ‘dagger, knife’. 

One of the ‘chambers of torture’ described in Buddhist and other Indian 
texts is the sanghata- 887, so called because massive rocks of heated iron meet to 
crush the victims. Tho Kuījarakarņa" ig acquainted with this name: it makes 
mention of the parbwata (Skt. parvata- Ta ‘mountain’) saigata (sic). In another 
Version of the same narrative, in which a number of Sanskrit names aro substitu. 
ted by Javanese words, tbis infernal locality is called sela (rock, mountain” <$kt, 
eing at close quarters: pinching’), which is a familiar 
term in other such descriptions, In the Bhīmaswarga!? a bhūta (Skt. bhüta- Ya 


m3 of Siywit lures tha tormented dead to this place ‘and 
„Puts the rocks into Operation. à 


an 


) n 
er’) and equiva- 


often mentioned, 
er in which the Wicked arei 


eir necks is called (ēpddut (J 
As to the cu 


ic the root vlag- 


nging the neck”; it may have conti- 
ryan. And, furthers that in Hindi dala 
d down, subdued etg? “pressed down, to be buried under, to sink, 
i kia notin a position to point out 


that i term u : ble 
at it pon made up by meang of Indian TU omi diii 
; &vanose texts ma] B. 
sea which occurs in the te also mention of the vālukā» iq gand- 
7 9 valukdrnava NJENA ' 
Prasthanikapary q's book of th ahābhā 


pas „arata (17,2,2) and also in the OJ8Y) 
vag, when they haye à On north of the Himalaya, to be crossed by the Panda: 
o Approaching Mount Moru, 
ta is given an opportunity 
rnal regions, to which he 
The Middle. avanese Bhini&- 


lit 
ule ko ConBBOd by those who are on the 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i Yen and hi y 
peo noted by a guide by the ai p others in the info 
8^ regards thi, sand-sea ag a lo inners” ro 

3 08, 


SANSKRIT 1 S 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Founda SPONSES and eGangotri 


1: 
; ards hell, and in $he likewise Middle 
Mes the infernal regions underneath scis Tantu Kāmanāgka itis a 
ation .of dung and urine, in which snakes, wor 
live. The memory of & sand desert apparently got lo 

altered to mem NN E TA bird').'e 

In the version of the Kufijarakarpa edited TOM 
b infernal locality called oyahbhumipatāna (sic) 4 maa — of 
manuscripts of another redaction of this story ayalibhumipatang seems t E 
only form of the name. H. Kern, who did not understand ayah s e the 
yon’ in this connection, supposed the name to bea corrupted form Werl 
fyhūmipattana = Bhumipattana ‘the underground city’. aho: 

Among the names of the infernal animals some are Sanskrit : the i 
yaksa or šwāna yaksamukha (Skt. RATT", FA ATHA) ‘a dog with the head "i 
a rakeaca’ (OJav. interpretation given by the text’ itself); the monstrous and 
malicious bird paksi yaksa sisantana or paksi yaksamuka (Skt. paks mer 
qdt aga) ‘bird with a yalsa's head';" H. Kern was in doubt S 
sisantana was 8 corrupted form of asipatatra (why not asipatira ? : Skt. ara). 
Elsewhere the bird is called paksirāja (Skt. paksirāja. PERI). Thisis a well- 
known epithet of Garuda TEZ, the ‘King of birds’, Visnu’s vehicle, which is some- 
times said to play a part in infernallife." In the Javanese descriptions this bird 
is often mentioned, usually as a crow with various sharp and pointed objects for 
wings, a pick-axe for a beak, swords for claws and attacking the condemned. Ti 
would appear to me that the name sisantana may be explained as si (the native 
‘personal article’) and Skt. satana- MAA? 'hewing or cutting of, destroying, 
felling’. In the Kufjarakarna a yaksa agnimukha (Skt. 4 Aga) ‘a yaksa 
whose face is fire’ and even a fire with the head or face of a yaksa (agni yaksa- 
mukha- AfA ATHA ) figure among the infernal horrors? — « 

The wicked themselves are sometimes called papa-naraka**, which looks 
like a Javanese ‘compound’ (Skt. pápa- 414 ‘wicked’ and naraka- «tā hell) ‘the 
sinners in the hell’; in Old-Jav. papa is often applied to sinners who after death 
suffer the torments of hell. In the Kutara-Mānawa pūlaka (Skt. Wa) ‘sin, crime’ 
and its synonym papa (Skt. pāpa- TT ‘evil’) are used to denote the regions of 
torment, > 

The vocabulary bearing upon the ancient Javanese and Balinese disposal 


of the dead contains many loan-words from Sanskrit. In a short manuscript 


Written in ancient: language** and dealing with the sawawidhana (Skt. fava. aa 
the text the altered form sawa- | 


corpse’, vidhana- fara ‘disposal’; at the end of . me TA 
wedana is used, which has become a Balinese term to denote the ritus! gor 
Ri à dead Person**, ceremonies for the dead’) we read that the corpse (sawa : i 


helle, consisting in an agglo- 
ms, leeches and other vermin 
3t so that the name. became 


N 


.Sava- qq) must be placed on a mat?” of Lusa (Skt. kusa- EU Bs xar 
«sed at certain religious ceremonies’) after the manira SEE e ts 
. Migico-religious formula’) dum ** ah hum phat ga wa pha bas o am Due 
Ņ puo à thread (tantu : Skt, tantu- ed) is fastened to the handia — M MÀ 
Ņerder to + vajrasattuamudrā asaagai tha 


rd 
M ; Mh is diamond). Then the ‘five =< = 7 
Nira vajrasailva, the essence or hoart of which ia diamond) Oe E E 
cid Paīcadhātu (Skt. paca 477 five” and dhatu- TS ; 

adkātu are to be put in the mouth- of the corpse. 


.om 1 i 
| ade of iron, gold, coppeig Gin mofdspipobbeek cereo five 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
150 Digitized by Ay à on Ghennaran NT ri m 
k mulets etc. (>'amulets’) which 
i i aning of ‘strokes on à t : : 
T: ET Po im 32 This meaning is not given 1n the ee: 
"found in o i e ; he syllables na mo bu ddh 
pieces of metal must be inscribed with t y a am d 


tively:(nomo Budähaya vH Būrī) Adoration ee ana enveloped with 
id of betel. Other texts inform us that I8 act is accompanied by th 
chewed ES mantra ‘the formula which is completely filled with life’ (Skt. ja 
tion is to construct a pancarénga, i.e. a small building made of candana (Skt, 
candana: a747 ‘sandal’) wood with five poste šo contain the ashes of the de. 
ceased’? : the etymology of this term is discussed in another chapter, 

Next, obeisance must be paid to the bhatara pañca-tathāgata ‘the Lords, thd 
five Tathagatas’ (Skt. bhat(ara- NEW, pañca- I= lathagata- AANA a Well-known 
epithet of the Buddhas, of the exact meaning of which there was probably no fixed 
tradition); a caru (Skt. caru- Nē ‘sacrificial food”) consisting of five oblations (dana: 
Skt. dana- 317) must be presented to bhatāra Ratnatrayayoga (i.e. the ‘three jewels’ 
(Skt. ratna- €) of the Buddhists, to wit Buddha, dharma and sangha, “Buddha, hig 
‘doctrine’ and his ‘church’ ”; considered as a godhead; in this connection yoga (Skt. 
yoga- atv) seems to mean something like ‘team, combination’); an image (pratisļa 
(Skt. pratistha fast ‘base, pedestal, consecration of a monument or of an idol’) 
must be made of plaited leaves, and & formula aum bajrasatwa hram ah pha reci. 
ted.* Thereupon the sthapaka, i.e. the ‘officiating priest'?5 (Skt. sthapaka Fatt ‘the 
erector of an image’) bas to fetch various requisites, among which are pandanus 
(kekari which will have developed from ketaki : Skt. ketaki šast ‘Pandanus odoratis- 
ie ), a panah (Jay. 'arrow') puspawarsa (Skt. puspavarsa- ZSTAÑ 'flower-rain') in 
oo m MN ae with & ‘thunderbolt’ and boll..."** purwwakasa 
and perhaps subha- JA a, as Ku Bra, NUS vajra- TA; gha NaRa 

picious, prosperous’ and rdja- Us). Thereupon the door 


d | 6 

b CM ci EN) must be opened, pūrwūdi dgneyadi ‘towarda the east (Skt. 
an south-east quarter (Skt. ügneya- WAT), etc.’ and the gods are made 

to descend into the figure of a, dra 


: ; A gon at the foot of the bade (i.e. a high construc- 
d in ode Corpses) : this figure ia called nagapüsa WATIT or nagabandha 
Or lasso used in D GEN NAE the former denoting "a sort of magical noose 
monial acts the priest in * ila sunke as a chain or fetter’. After other cere- 
bhümisodhana- fastus) th, pon the ‘cleaning of the soil’ (bhimisodhana; Skt. 
res (mandalas), akétanandain =a of which is the smearing of two mystic figu- 
Space, atmosphere’, prihiņš oft 2 Prihiwimandala (Skt, akasa- AIPIN free or Open 
„77 The text eonbinnes PUN earth’ and mandala- ATES ‘circle etc.’ : 

& blazing wind (pr obably OA Jwalawála bajrawata anipati brahmasutra, 1.6 
(bajrawata: Skt, vajravata.. i Skt. Sarwar is meant) and a thunderbolt-wind 

ahmasūtra. +), Next the ut dh (Jav.)thesaored thread’ (brahmasütra ‘Skt 


; ive to- 
‘saran : Jay, IN ai les ah hram tram hrik ah must be PI 


E 


ig also 
These five 


Serm-syllable, syllable contain; and suffix -an affixed to Skt. bījāksara- ate 
(Dāficobrīhi : Skt, Pañcavrihi ning the Primary principle’): the five rice-grein? 
Paicagagya. ihi- qif ; 


bf the five D 


afwosidi, which is Skt. pancausa 


alya : Skt. mal In 


A- * : B. 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shasht Col Tem. etc. are put in readinesi 


1 


Digitized by Arya Samāj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


151 
obscure passage these ingredients seem to 
n 


‘on is dewahara ( Skt. TZT ) “food for the 
ae a variant of the loan-word bali (Skt, 
fon in comparatively ancient Old-Jay 
d verbal forms expres general idea of ‘sacrificing’) has been ‘erected’ (this 
ig tho literal meaning of Skt. ropana- tam which can be the base of the form ropa- 
nakčn), OT; rather, deposited, assigned (if what seems plausible, üropana- (Skt. Gro. 
pana- aitan) isat the root of this word); à formula `i 
taksi (sic) ‘you, goddess, are a witness ( Skt. toam devi 
nominative form of sāksin- ufa ‘witness’), 
the soil. 

Now, the sutrapata follows: this form no doubt 
sūtra- QA and patha T2) ‘the recitation of the canonical 
the author of the Nagarakrtagama (64,5) calls the souls for heaven, and the corpse 
(sava: Skt. sava- TA) is placed in the coffin. In this passage many Sanskrit words 
are used: kumbha (Skt. kumbha- FA jar’): gandha (Skt. gandha- «e ‘perfume’, caru, 
a pisah pulita i.e. ‘a banana (Jav. pisai) in bud’ (Skt. phullita- Sg ‘expanded, 
blown’). Then a püa (Skt. Yat) ‘worship’ dewahara (gae above) is performed inclu- 
sive of an adiyoga (Skt. adi- snfz ‘first’ and yoga- ata 'yoga')'* and a ceremonious 
eireumambulation (pradaksina: Skt. Saf&tm) executed with the dašakrodha-manirats 
(Skt. dasa Z ‘ten’, krodha- SCI ‘anger’, mantra. AFA formule). The dead person is 
laid down towards the east, if he is a mahāsukā: towards the west, if he is a bhata- 
raka: the former word is the Skt. makāsukhu- aaga a Buddba’, the latter the Skt. 
bhattaraka- WENS ‘a great lord, also applied to a particular class of Saiva en 
Buddhist priests). Next the corpse must be burned (bkasmi: Skt. bhasmi- JJ. 
After other ritual acts, which need not detain us, the catur-mudra (Skt. catur stg 
'four' and mudrà, see above) panca-tathagata is performed and SE aum 
Wairocanāya swaha ‘bail to Wairocana'4* (Skt. Vairocanaya svākā e F M 
nounced, to which the words drésyajah hum bim hoh samaya sēti 2 = $ ki EC a 
bajrajiya ah aum werocanaya swaha are added, the Sanskrit MR ioe 
Bey Thereupon an upaksana (mark eee WI. obscure words 
SII) must bo made, a direction which is followed os Mee 
maidrghya aksama : Skt. arghya: 8*3 with the ES = etful reception), honour- 
expressing the general idea of 'offering (something at a e i, to endure» envious, 
the (as a guest), offering water’, and ER. aksama; TSA or geb something by sup- 
incompetent ete, ?' the OJav. meaning to try to inā collected in the middle of 
Plications’ seems preferable. The bones and siha " (Skt. asthi efe bone’) s 
the building with five posts: ...ikai (Jav. article) as Vana (Skt. paca VFR fve! 
Jav, "in*) madhya (Skt. madhya- W% ‘middle ) ni oe (in a transferred senso) 
and sihana- RUTA ‘abode, house, locality; bearing; E denotes a play-house, stage 
„TE Probably used asa synonym of ranga (Skt. & Me on (7) has made the 
similar simple buildings. After the sikūpaka pü 


ife and sons 
3 , his housewife and sons 
toul of the deci person renim (o DARE Pasa i : Skt. putra- JA. 8018 


OP d puir ial, 

utumb; : Skt, kulumbi Herat ‘householder (sio) is m five-coloured gs 
snd adi. erf ‘eto.’ collect tho ashes which are oosstors' (Ske. pitara ac) t tho 
And an Offering ig presented to the pitaras anoss ri warama samuha, N A 
following passage is not dieat Pinjdiptagamataelti Gdlēdion, apod : krama niñ daksi e 


À sagt’) is 1ndt 
Saa (Skt. err ‘offering presented to the prie i 


Serve ag dewahara, Which in my opi- 
gods, offering’, 42 


i After the offering 
lie ate ‘oblatiog’), Which is already 
anese texts and nowadays gervog as a base 


stands for sitrapatha (Skt. 
text’ which according to 


X 


« 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati S i and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN RUDORBESPa 


152 


i a au 
utlama na 16000 sa ksatriya pancagunakna maniri 


: ama 7000.. £ 

nistha 3000 EE e rule concerning the d. ( tres in which the d. are to 
I) ac o west ( <Skt. kanistha- fag ‘smallest, least’ ) 3000, the 
be presented ) ts: * 


middlemost (Skt. madhyama- quem) 7000, the Won E Mw: ps 16000, for 
vM eu kt, ksatriya- qaa) the fivefold amount must be paid (Skt. paiicaguna 
ri eva DE 3 g native euffixes -akén and -a), for an officer (Skt. mantrz wer 
gsagm fivefold and native suffix 7 R seti t thie text à 
‘minister etc.) and a prince the tenfold’. Ia the final cec in of t i ext we find 
the borrowed words gni (Skt. agni- alt 'fire'): yajamana UD yajamana. IATA ) 
‘the person having the eacrifice on ceremony performed and paying the coats’: 
parikrama (Skt. parikrama RFR succession, order: Henna (to be) swept 
together or collected’ (Skt. samihya) aza); bajana ( Skt. bhajana- waa) vessel, 
cup; upacara '(ceremonial) decoration’ (Skt. upacara: STAR reverence, ceremony 
ornament’); fadrakaryya i.e. sraddhakarya (Skt. sraddha- AVE and karya- BI) ‘the 
performance of a sraddha, i.e. a funeral ceremony iu honour of the departed spirits of 
deceased relatives’; pitryajña (Skt. pitryajna- £347 ‘an oblation made to the pitaras’), 
It would take us too far afield if we tried to give summaries of some more 
texts bearing upon cremation. Let it suffice to mention the following Sanskrit 
words found in them or used in connection with the disposal of the dead. Among the 
requisites and the ingredients of the offerings are, for instance : wilmana‘® serving 
as a ceremonial ornament: Skt. vimana- IAT ‘a self-moving aerial car’; a domya- 
yudda of the shape of a wilmana*”, a word the form of which curiously coincides 
with the name of the teacher Ayoda Dhaumya (Mbh. 1, a. 3) who tested his three 
disciples. A mukasancadana (Skt. mukha- YE ‘face’ and cf. samchadani- Sgtzst ‘that 
which covers’) must be placed on the face of the dead person. With the toya amrta 
water of immortality, holy water’ (Skt. toya- ata ‘water’, amrta- AWA ‘immortality’ 
Bhatara Gurus? malo the dead return to live. Other terms for the same are 
o cs r a e 0). ürthamrla or tirtha alone. Offer- 
token of gratitude, 2° E : V zi e vga ted to the guru or spiritual pare tik 
(also Sa as n offerings relating to the 4aben 'cremation-rites ^ . 
native prefix Pie er cs ded T AN So Be d 
Telg, an after-feast? (Skt, AR sitas: Bonn; the résiyajia ‘sacrifice to tas 
" X eacrifico to the reis i.e. ‘study of the Veda ); 


the dew Ya (S t dev na- [Cp and n fi KU bhitay gn qs 
h anyana k D ay a, J j 
: Ya] ) na buta Yajna (S . 1 (t 


are called pë-baktiy-an : (Skt. bh beings’ respectively. Certain funeral ceremonies 


4 « ^ P 5 " 
who wants to follow her decea, akti- afā 'devotion'). The eremation of a widow 


; d husband ; 1 ADA m 
satiya "such & widow’ = and was called in Balinese mē-satiya frc 
Y cf. 5 
basa: Skt. sat; ad, 


fe, appearing in the 


whom oblations 
816 pres pros à 
ghost» which ig nearer CE according to 


Wood, a large fore 
1 st-tree: 
Vigņu or Rudra’ res; the 


Shape of 


other descriptions it is a tree- 
- Vanaspati- aaxagfāss ‘lord of P 
and aloca fret gaya Vrat Sisi DBI Aberin made to it, a name ° 
* Sanaspati, Prajāpati (Skt. prasapa” 


Digitized by Arya SdNéjIcBntiationr ensi qnd eGangotri 
N T p - a... = se : = 
4 tor and a divinity presiding oy i 
HM SUM a i 5 Over procreati ion” 
(Skt. aiga- eg ‘limb of the body’ and pati. qf doo m 
» Antaboga (Skt. Anantabhoga- 


i t king ‘whose coil 
aqeaut the serpen g ils are boundlegs’ £ 
"dark, dark-blue, black’ and paks qs 'birā') in md 7 kā (Skt. nila. ate 


bird, Krürapaksi (Skt. krūra- FR ‘cruel’ and paksi), Ciika 
kimkarabalā TE&4v* forces of the Kimkaras”6) 
a names of divinities and powerful beings to w] 
brahma is the name of a formula (sa-ba-te-ha-yi) 
jówara, Brahmā, Mahadewa, Wisnu, Siwa and consisting in an aggregati 

initials of Siwa’s five faces (paicawaktra: Skt. paicavaktra- E ets 
the five-faced, Siva’) : Sadyojāta or Sadhya, Bāmadeva, Tatpurt Te Rods 
(Skt. Sadyojata- qus, Vāmadeva- TRZA, Tatpurusa- Wu, A 
gma, forms of the god Siva).*? 


am. : sica- 
Teprerenting the divine powers of 


tsa Aghora, Īsūna 
ghora- Aart, Hana- 


NOTES 


! The subject has been dealt with by | p. 153. 

W. Kern, Oadjavaansche en Dali-che | " Kufijarakarna, Kern, VG. X, p. 58; 25. 
hellevoorsteliingen, (Thesis Leyden 1934; '2 On this text see W. Kern, p.13. l 
typewritten). On the religious beliefs of | '* Other variants are kawah blagada, si 
tho Balinese see R. Goris, Het geloof der | blagaduba, brégédabe. See KBW. IV, 
Balineesen, in Djawa VIII(1998),;p.41ff. p.1001f ; W. Kern, oc, pL In 
2 Of. also W. Kern, o.c., p.22. ; Sundanese the form balagadama applied 
* Van der Tuuk, KBW. IV, p.465. The ; to the hell or to a purgatory for the 
etymology proposed in the Javanese dic- dead. The addition latak ‘mud, elime, 
tionary by Gericke and Roorda (< yama- lava’ makes it clear that tho ideas con- 
dhani Skt. AAATAY) is less acceptable. Cf. | nected with this term are similar to 


also KBW. IV, p.464.- | those of the Javanese. 
* KBW, IV, p.798f. Other forms are ; '* Compare the passage Rgveda 1, 138, 1 
given by Kern, o.c., p.98. | and 2 in which the verb occurs ! 


15 See H. H. Juynboll, Drie boeken... 
p.83. ax 
16 T cannot refrain from mentioning 
that the author of the OJav. Uttara- 
kinda who rendered walukarnawa bi 
ik.(‘sea’) lebu (dust?) was so muc 
wee t that it was calied 
e tormented a8 


* Seo e.g. R. Friederich in Tijdschrift | 
voor Nederlandsch Indië IX, 3 (1847), | 
P354; M. A. Muusses, Koecultus bij de | 
Hindoos, (Thesis Utrecht 1920); K. C. | 
Crueq, Bijdrage tot de kennis van het | 
alisch doodenritueel, (Thesis Leyden ; 
1998), p10; W. Kerptole page | impressed by the im rs 
* See W. Kirfel, Die Kosmographie der | & sea that he É- 16 
Inder, (Bonn-Leipzig 1920), p. 1616 | e "YG. X, p.60:18. 
H. Kern, VG. X, p. (57, 23) 47. Also |" Seo Hi Bot Mi 
kalpakandagu, | me 
v. 62, obapien G., p.68. 
" The prükritisms, d instead of f, and |” Kugjarakaran de pat. 
-ga instead of -ka, will be disoussed in E ee L'enfer ipdier, T Bond: 
9 next chapter (see also Pischel, § 198 21 See Ln , 
dhisme, in 4 


_ 8nd $ 69g. 
Le Progg Vet Spe galendQ0- g 


Visnusmrti 43; of algo 


18 For the form swana see 


the next - 


Journal Asiatique vin, 20 


154 


22 Ag to. the form s868 chapter IV, gec- 


tion 1. 
13 Kern, VG. X, p.58. 
14 Søe e.g. W. Kern, 0.¢., p-98; 68. 
5 Edited by KC. Orueq, Bijdrage tot 
de kennis van het Balisch doodenritucel, 
(1921), p.488. In tho summary given 
in the text I have not mentioned occa- 
sional Sanskrit words of the common 
categories (pada- ‘foot’, pañca ‘five’ etc.), 
26 See also Crucg, o.c., p.54 and KBW. 
TII, p.198. 
27 After the cremation the asthi-wedana 
(< Skt. asthi and vidhana. afea, am) 
‘the disposal of the bones’ is performed; 
the ceremonies are concluded by the 
ütma-wedana ‘the after-feasts’ (the word 
of course represents Skt. ama WEAI 
‘soul’ and vidhana- faa). 
** It ie difficult not to believe the word’s 
kalasu, also written kalaša) being of 
Indian origin, bat I have not succeeded 
in tracing it. 
2 For aum ree chapter IV, section 1, 
ie A mudra is a particular position or 
intertwining of the fingers, practised in 
religious worship. For bajrasatiwa see 
aa Sang hyang Kamahayanikan 
e Hague 1 
0.0., ud Mo ēnā Crucg, 
*' Bee also Cruc 
** See KBW, T 


n the hand 
AN, Crucg, 0.0., p.99f : 
** See above, ` s 


** In other texts the w, 
A Word 
superintendent of an ; denotes * 


a temple.priest, a pri 


& 


1 of th 
Buddhist Priest. Beg P.de Kat 


(The Hague 
1922), p84, 
raphy of the Manuscript 


tion"... 
CC-0. Prof. Satya ved Retr 


DONESIA m 
Digitized by ArSABSRA ES A Chennai and eGangotri 


| 38 See also Crucg, 0.0., p.90 note, 

39 See e.g. also Kats, o.c., p.l74te, 

^? This thread is worn over the shoul 

der. In the Asramawasanaparwa (m 

boll, Drie boeken, p.48) the term šito. 

pakarana ‘auspicious instrument OT ex. 
| pedient’ seems to be synonymous with it 
(Skt. siva- fara and prakarana- THN), 
*! See also KBW. IV, p.246 : ‘the petala 
of the flowers serving as underlayer for 
tho oblations’. 
^* Sanskrit lexicographers give the 
meaning ‘divine food, ambrosia’, In the 
OJav. Ram. 20,52 padewaharan (Jav. pa. 
-an indicates locality ) given in Juyn- 
boll's Woordenlijst is a variant for 
padewagaran (Skt. ūgāra- WIMI ‘house’); 
id. 25.12 ‘place of sacrifice’ is the general 
meaning. Hence the meaning, given by 
Van der Tuuk (KBW. II, p.469), pade- 
waran ‘chapel, oratory’. Crucq’s trans- 
lation of dewahara (p.59) ‘cleaning or 
purification of the chapel’ is not clear to 
me. 

** In other OJav. texts üropana means 
'to grant (a wish), to comply with' <'to 
assign’, ; 

** Orueq (o.c. p.56) is probably right in 
Suggesting that adimūla is a synonym of 
mūlayoga : see Kats, o.c., p. 96. 

** Crucq (o.c. p.56) refers to the term 
bajra-krodha (Skt. vajra- a ‘thunder- 
bolt’ and krodha- «ta 'wraih') mention- 
ed in the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan 
(p.58 b 46; cf. p.102). Krodha is a name 
of the mystic syllable hem [3 or hrum & 
For tho significance of the mantras see 
e.g. A, Danielou, Yoga, (London 1949), 
p.84. 
A: Swaha is an Indian exclamation used 
™ making oblations or at the end of an 


vocation. Vairocana is the name af 


One of the Buddhas. 


"7 The Skt, asthi afa ‘bone’ is in OJav. 
texts often written asti and also deno- 
tative of the ‘ashes of the oremated 


ergon’: NM E E 
Person’; a Da-nasti-an ig a ‘royal crema 


Collection. 


Digitized by Arya S&majstontgatign GROUT eGangotri 
i Ses Crue, 0-0- 3 155 
48 See Crucd, 0.C., p.38. 


W. Kern 
49 See also the first section of this 1 0.0., p.60 


product of adaptat: 
chapter. J : | *5 For the cn 
so Gee the first section of this chapter. | Indian sources se 
s! See Grucg, 0.C., p.61, n. | altindischer Māchte u 
sa Orucg, 0, PALIT is wrong in consi. | tation, (Zürich 

ring these words as Balinese. According to in M 
s". Van der Tuuk, KBW. III, p.198 | served k BA us pre- 
explains this word as šawasāna which | (Meyer, o.c. THY 85) jo F rajapati 
cannot be correct: W. Kern, o.c., p 60 | is offered, Aigapati and me a pig 
supposes it to bea ‘contamination’ (Skt. | conduct the soul stet ee 
savasayana- ‘place for the cremation of | residence, ceased to its 
corpses’ and šmašūna- ‘burial-place etc.'). | ** Kimkaras are a kind of rükgasas aot- 
s As there exists a by-form (tēgal | ing as Yama's servants or messengers 
pamasaran) without an internal ñ, which | *” See aleo R. Goris, Bijdrage ion de 
oan be connected with the native base. | kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balinee- 
word sasar ‘to roam about in misery’ (cf. ' sche Theologie, (Leyden 1996), p.62. 


SECTION 3 
RELIGION AND MYSTICISM IN GENERAL 


As we have already remarkel the Javanese did not keep aloof from Indian 
religious and soteriologic tendencies. Both Saiva and Buddhist teachers had or 
made many opportunities to make known their ideas about salvation, aud 
various texts in Sanskrit, or more or less Javanized versions spread over the it- 
land. The Buddhist tracts or writings passing under the name of San hyan Kama- 
bàyünikan (Skt. mahayana- HEA and Jav. ka--an, forming abstract nouns), and the 
Sivaite texts Bhuwanakoga, Bhuwanasambgepa and Tattwa san hyan Mabàjiüana, 
which are written in Sanskrit,? are, like the Old-Javanese Vrhaspatitattwa, among 
ihe most important remainders of Hindu influence in the Archipelago. They con- 
tain systematic expositions of essential topics and dootrines and of course abound 
in Sanskrit technical terms, which from these and similar writings and from the 
oral instruction of the religious teachers found their way algo to other ciroles and 
other texts. As the Sanskrit words occurring in the above-mentioned xd Es 
rally speaking need no comment from our point of view, We confine ourselves 
Some remarks on such terms as have continued existing In. le tek Jul self; 

The word OJa v.atma ‘soul, self, conscience’ (Skt. alma AT 


De RR, (arinciple of) life’, or vital 
Soul etc”) is still a literary Javanese designation for the oa io? 


spitits’; in Balinese it means ‘coul’, or ‘spirit (of a denessec Malay the word has 
Ìt is & poetic expression for ‘heart, mind» soul, inner ties nd means water of 
mostly developed to utama? (which is now obsolete): air e M a UR 
life’, in old texts utama jiwa (Skt. jiva: Sta ife) is à E tho side of suksma, 
Overs, though it also expresses the idea of lifesD I: "serial principle, 
Which in lit. Mod. Javanese moana ‘spirit, spiritual, divine € e'), there. existed also 
ROL” (vaj: Suksma ‘God’. hyas being a native term for divin mec 

th a DE Prope get tisrsokšaisRi c Supreme 


9 form sukma : Skt. sū sma. 


Sow cf also 


E- 


6 Digitized by Arga S&a Mbuta AR ha And eGangotri 3 
15 S BAIN. 


Bal. suksēma ‘subtle, pare io m 
spirit’ and sometimes nature, T ENG wi A to go 
xut) sukma means ‘to breath ones lasti ere. Ch passes 
out dv to body in transmigration’, sometimes also used asa vague complimen. 
Saga A addressing a girl efc. Lit. mod. Jav. prana (Skt. prana- pH "breath. 
breath of life, one of the five vital breaths or stroams of energy ie 10 vārioug 
parts of the body, spirit or vitality ) means heart, tho inner man; jo Balinese 
poetic style the same word Gamers such a range of Beane A an can DE indicated by 
‘all that is connected with life’: breath of life, heart, inner life ete. ; 1b can also 
denote ‘the fomale privy parts’ (in Javanese it can be a iranin inggil torm for 'clito. 
rig), the principle of life being often regarded as residing in that part of the 
body.* The word budi (Skt. buddii- FF ‘the power of forming and retaining con. 
captions and general ideas’) is discussed in another section of this "book; in Java, 
nese it can, apart from other ideas, express such notions as ‘(a person's) way of 
thinking or mentality, intelligence’, in Balineso also ‘will, desire’; in Malay and 
Sundanese it oftan applies to ‘charactor, disposition, temper, mood’; in Malay to 
‘character, graciousness and charn, qualities of mind and heart in general, often 
implying prudence, discretion and kindnoss', in Sundanese also to “appearance, 
mien, looks, face’. In ancient Javanese texts the Skt. manas- AT: "thought, mood, 


inclination, ete., mind, i.e. all mental powers; 
and cognition’ exprea 


Li vos 
g; soul, epirit’; Sund. sukma ‘spirit, e 
Si aye D m 
temper, disposition’, naluwarkin ( 
Mal. sokma ‘the sou 


TOU 
EP. the human 


the internal organ of perception 
808 also such ideas as ‘disposition, inclination’; nowadays it 
is a krama substitute for ‘heart’ in the transferrod sense of the word (in a similar 
Way in Sundanese), in Sundanese it ie a lémés (i.e. the Jay. krama) term for ‘heart, 


LI . H . . 
thought’, and the derivative ita.manak means ‘to think, ponder, consider’, aud also 


‘to be kind, obliging’; from an other shade of meaning, viz. ‘find pleasure in’ (ef. 
Skt. ‘affection, inclination, desire’) the sense of ‘to want, to desire to have’ and, 
hence, to buy’ (as a lēmēs term) have developed.* Skt. citta. fat ‘thinking, thought” 
intention, mind’: OJav. citta, Mod.-Jav, cila (lit ), cipta’ ‘thought, idoa’, the latter 
form also meaning "wish, phantasm, illusion’; Sund. cipta tavā? denotes ‘imagi- 


nation, fancy’: ] i j : 
P ancy; the verb nyipla, derived from cipla, “to imagine, to direct the soul 
on» to transform oneself by though$-concentration or 
ete.), to represent oneself a3 etc,” 
m 


transferred sense), desire’; Mal, cila 
d Dover" (mé-ncita ‘to crea 
mental and creative pow 
-an often helps to form V i 
sense of ‘creature, produ 
Pen's product”, Anothe 
is Mal. cinta which developed i 
regret, love, solicitude, mourni 
ous longing, love; Solicitud 
(«8kt. virahī fav ' 
feeling, passionatel 
ment’, Mal, ‘feelin 


e of ‘thought-concentration, men-` 
in this sense the by-form cipla 


t form, 


ng much thought, i.e. cato; 
© express the idea of ‘amor: 
8 etc.” Phrageg with cinta are: cinta bérahi 
from a beloved Person, lonoly', Mal. ‘strong 

longing’; Cinta rasa (<Skt. rasa- va ‘senti- 
In Ola-J avanese the Skt. indriya- gfegam ‘faculty 
. 9» and also ‘Lust, passion’, and, further, it 18 
7 8ccording to Van Eck? the Balinese hendri4 


In Modern Javanese indriya 


$, unhappines 
Separated, e3p. 
Y in love’) ‘love’g 
82) ‘affection’, 


Digitized by ava NSB FoJātatisb Chennai and eGangotri 


167 


an "à i z 
nd pancadr Ya are still the expression f 
X or ‘thé 


the longer forms pancendriya (lit.) 
gans Of sense.” 

As already appeared from this change of meaning and th, 

in the foregoing pages, the specialized, technical sense of € other discussed 


a * Sanskri 4 
Indian literature and in Sanskrit texts or quotations used skrit terms found in 


by the anci 
€: uv t Pm ancient J i: 
gcholars and experts made way for more general "and more popular en NM 

- nnotations. i 


Tho Skt. dharana- RU eg. which among other things expresses the id 9 
ding, bearing’ (also in OJav. Adiparwa) and in OJav. technical liter kā d 
well-known meaning of concentration”, is already in Old-Javanese pes e 
in the sense of patience, forbearance’; cf. lit. Jav. darana ‘id’, Sund. Peo 
gentle’. Ske. samādhi- ama however, has preserved its meaning: nowadays Moa. 
Jav. sēmēdi is a term of mythology and traditional literature : religious) concen- 
tration . 
Now the history of a considerable number of words in the domain of mysti- 
cism, religious practices, and religion in general is especially interesting because 
the Muslim mystics and propagandists who succeeded their Hindu predecessors in 
the island of Java not only introduced Arabic words for concepis already denoted 
by Indian terms or for ideas similar to those already known by Sanskrit words, 
but also provided the latter with somewhat different connotations. If is worth 
while to dwell upon the part played by these mystics in the process of adapting 
the traditional religious and psychological vocabulary to the requirements of other 
cultural circumstances. Their influence has been great, for they, whether as 
individual missionaries or as members of organizad brotherhoods, often were the 
leaders in the work of conversion among the superficially Islamized communities. 
Though many of them were illiterate, they brought many converts over to Islam 
and laid the foundations upon which in later generations the influences of ortho. 
dox law and theology could raise a more complete Islamism. *By their influencó 
modern Javaneso mysticism, though consisting of a mixture of Hindu-Jayanese 
and Muslim elements, has,.as far as its basic ideas are concerned, been inspired on 
the principle of direct and personal experience culminating in union or absorption 
into God, as taught by Muslim mysticism. In the Javanese writings proceeding 
from the earlier Islamized mystic circles many Indian terms and ideas, which were 
current among Sāmkhya and Vedānta adepts, were adopted, but they were adjusted 
to the new circumstances and incorporated in the train of thought of Muslim-Java- 
nese mysticism. The Indian ideal of moksa- Atā ‘final deliverance or emancipation 
from any bodily existence’ was given up.'? ; f Sick 
According to one of tho favourite doctrines to which the Muslim mystics in 
the Archipelago adhered the inner. man is divided in 4,5,6,7, or even 12 paris, or, 
rather, his inmaterial e is designated by 4,5,6,1, or 12 names which are 
: al existence is design i tio insight or moral- 
Put in a definite order and correspond todofinite stages of mystic 
religi ; tē. p ivi i to the development of the 
“Blous life, to the gradations of the Divine Being or sychological-reli- 
Universe. In these enumerations Arabic, Sanskrit and Javanese p 


Slous terms have been mixed up." In the Javanese mystic PE bs m 
19)* Goa Says that he has caused the five ‘elements at ka iut te hich will be 
Adam’s material body. They are : nur ( < Arab. nür ‘light ) e , in- 
dealt with further on ), roh (< Arab. rüh the incorporant hich here refers to tho — 
Münotivo life’ ( SAKI nafs ‘animal life, soul’ and dt. ee a 


m . 3 A Other sources, however, - 
ental and intelleotuat faatigns V SHE URN Cēkēeler $ 


five ot 


net E 


j Digitized by Arya Semen Tour dation SOetBS Ind eGangotri 

168 et cs. eem -— 
enumeration. In this connection ru words suksma and rahsa 

ad as members of such a series, corresponding to states E 

fthe way towards salvation or to other concepts, are especially interesting 
stages 0 he Lena ia the second highest stage and rahasya or rahsa the highest, then 
Sor d Ph highest and rahasya the third highast, or suksma is equal to roh 
an K a =f Neh suksma and rahsa. Another passage in the Sērat 
2 6. do sarde the abora elements or principles as members of an involving 
bs : ēdi iude g sanctuary in Adam's head : in the head are the brain, in 
the brains the kernel (mani, viz. of mental power), in the kernel tho budi, in the 
budi the napsu, in the napsu the suksma, in the suksma the rahsa ( mystery’), ‘in the 


23 
rahsa I am, says Ged . 
The already diseuezed term suksma was also used to translate or interpret 


the Arab. ahadiyat ‘absolute singularity or oneness’ for which the Indonesian mys. 
ties possessed some more designations.'* Hyaū Suksma is the ‘Universal Soul’, the 
ab-olute being of God, which is in the human creature as the soul and the princi. 
ple of life; it is the divine life dwelling in man, the immaterial, God.'* The phrase 
a-imaga suksma'* denoting the goalof ascetism, concentration and all activity on tho 
mystic path seems to express the idea of ‘experiencing the unity with God who re- 
sides in the human heart: the more literal sense probably is ‘to assume or to 
possess a body (raga) which isentirely immaterial and serves as a residence of 
Hyai Suksma who is the immaterial par excellence’. The word is also put ona 
par with the native nyawa which denotes the ‘spirit or immaterial principle of life 
(of a living being)’ as well as the ‘soul’; but suksma ia sometimes also said to be 
the being of the nyawa'.'* On one hand suksma and rasa are regarded as related, 
būt not identical principles (see above),on the other hand they may be interchanged 
0 suksma is called the true rasa, the rasa of the body.'? 

A Now, it is not easy exactly to say what connotations were meant by these 
mystics when, resorting to the favourite term rasa. It often served to translato 
the Arab. sirr ‘secret, mystery’, which refers to the most subtle and most hidden 
and Fi elements in the human heart in which God is said to reside, the ‘spot’ 
where God and the soul are in contact," or —according to other expositions?'—it 
belongs to God, and in the body it is a loan in whick y à t 
In Javanese mystic t E an vhich tho creature has no pērt. 

; ;ys4e texts this divine principle is also called rasa, ‘but not the 
ordinary rasa’, "it is not the rasa (‘feeling’) which Wo boh th 
rasa which is felt in the heart 22 Tho m which we feel in our bodies, but the 

5 ear and pure heart receives the supreme 


diverge from this 
which are repeatedly for 


again suksma i 


Y to emanoipation,? from the ‘ordinary rasa 
in Sanskrit, had a wide range s Ti Indian word which in Old-Javanese, 8 
^ connotations (‘essence, enjoyment, sentiment, 
D indeed; blended with the former. Juife is con- 
eing of Essence of God (Ar. sāt>Jav. dat). Io 
pou rahasya, i.e. God oan be tonai: 
guiya t. Uman- ARRA 25 rahasya, or rahasya=sirr is spoken 0 
"Mm fons of i "ti MARKU doctrines and popular writing! 
Posmogonts (| pepe doctrines Concerning the u Siu uou gps ande aeta, ji 
1eories and elements of Loy of all were often mixed up Vi 
CC-0. Prof. SI Apdieariasications, and couched in confused 


Digitized by Arf SSR} Foundatign RR! and eGangotri 


- E ——— 159 


' m ie and 6 A 
connected, in some way or other, with the Subjects under C Origin but all 
ston, e, 


4 Profound or 
nur cahya (‘glows light? < Skt. 
eing of the atma, etc. Here the 


ator of lifo have amalgamated 
The heart as God's residence in man is ane M 
royal resideuce, court’: Skt. asthana- IETA ‘hall of RS mr 
nala, which is still used in literary style (‘heart, mind): it ig iie Se E 
‘consisting or made of reed(s), a hollow stalk, a tubular vessel or vein of the bod 
ote,’, derived from nada- A3 or nala- RG ‘a species of reed, etc.” Asis valks 
the ‘arteries’ of the subtle body, which are rooted in ihe root centre, play T 
important part in „Yoga speculations.*” In Upanigads and other works these 
‘ducts’ are brought into connection with the heart from which ihey are said to 
proceed.** The root centre in which the end of the central ‘artery’ opens, is con- 
nected with the heart. The centres of the subtle body were also called ‘lotus’. 
These ideas found their way also to ancient Java,?? where mala was used for ‘vein’ 
as well às for ‘heart’, and such expressions as nala ni hati nira (OJav. hati ‘heart’) 
‘nala ot his heart’; nala nin twas (OJav. 'heart) ‘nala of the heart’; twas nala are 
rather frequent. As in India the heart was often called ‘lotus-like’ (Skt. Ardam- 
bhoja- TIANA ete , and as nūla- A1 also denoted ‘the hollow stalk of the lotus’, 
the meaning of the word could easily develop to ‘heart’. As is well-known the 
heart (lit. Jav. kalbu< Arab. qalb is an important element in Muslim mystic thought.° 
In the curious mixture of Indian and Arabic terminology the kijab (eee 
above) is said to split up in foam, vapour and watar (toya : Skt. toya- ata) each of 
which forms another triad; this system also includes the Hindu theory of the 
sthūla- and linga-šarira (Skt. vqz-, fēg-art).'" The aima (‘soul’) is held to be 
the bearer (wahana : Skt. vēkana- 3183) of the akadiyat eto. Apart from the buds, 
the function of whičh in this connection bas already been mentioned, the term 
Pramana is worth discussing. In Indian philosophical terminology pranata; pili 
denotes a means of acquiring certain knowledgs’; the Sāmkhya which pac 
much influence upon the epos and the puranas admitted three pramanas, to wi 


- te » & - 
Pratyaksa- Seq ‘perception by the senses’, anumana- AJATA inference, and sabda 


wz‘ i m ; three being the most common or 
+ authority of the soripts'. The first of these wr T 


Important pramāņa, the Javanese sometimes took this ^) anah tig S 
also ‘ocular evidence, direct perception (by the eye) eto: s di ae obo ERG 
SXpresg such ideas as ‘olear, understood, to make clear, to ae pe dad 
fromana Was made to refer to visual faculty and eyesten. 

«gēbioneā Mod. Jav. pramana ‘visual power’ and 


s vident 
o , érmana clear, evident, 
t be able to see ) distinotly or exactly ; t p 


e' still more obvicusly 
9 original meaning. Another sense of prama atic 


"mented u ; he popular Dewaruci^*, i 3 
kt, Vrkodara. S i tb Sh a Vistai ebtetrāated in the nature 
x q +6. 


e epic he 
& 


i (beside pérmana and pramaném — 


» and (verbal) mērmana-kūn ‘to seek after Me in Javanese mysticism i — 


DigitizeA NPIN Sha FOAN oh Chennai and eGangotri 
160 EL. EM ——" 9X 
— oe r touched, i& has no form and no colour, ‘but 


: ing : 1 not be seen no i 3 ; : 
Highest Being : it gan ry which you see, which shines and radiates is called pra. 
lvory 


33 [t is the life of thé body. It forms unity gūt abe ae E MM dwells, 
cH + share in the body's pleasure and sorrow. lt 18 in the ody, but 
but it does nos share th it when it is reparated from the bedy the jattey 
does not sleep or cat E ETE Is (the pramana) is able to wear the rasa (gge 
lies dowu powerless an > uo isa) gives it life. It has been favoured to wear 
above ), for Ens AM n is regarded as the rasa (‘mystery’) of the Being 
ae aes UU pramana is explained as the highest light seon when a 

M * A E lours. And in the Serat Tjabolék ?* the pra- 
person in the agony of death sces colo E f ae 
mana is called a ‘screen or veil’ (werana <Skt. vtrana- IRTI a means of resisting» 
impediment, obstacle’), i.e. the kijab, covering, but at the samo timo showing the 
Most High, who is heré called Hyan Widi (Skt. vidhi- fafa Destivy or tho Creator ). 
Or it is said to be a "material soul’ embracing an ethereal kern. Thus it becomes 
clear how pramana could appear in such enumerations as ‘the true aima, the true 
pranawa (cee further on), the true pramana, the true suksma, the true aikara. Though 
we must, of course, reserve our judgment?5 with regard to the change of meaning, 
hecause the texts are not yet edited in their entirety, we may consider the renso of 
the lit. Jay. pramana ‘vital spirit’ and also that of 'heart-beat? as allied, and suggest 
that the sense of pramana in Javanese mysticism (to wit the principle which is the 
exponent of the divine life, individualizing itself to form the life of a human being) 
is, in general, the outcome of Indian ideas about the soul in the living being, though 
Iam not ina position to give an exact Sanskrit prototype. Yet, it may be remem- 
bered that Skt. pramaza SAI can convey the sense of ekatva-, ekatā TE, THAI ‘one- 
ness ,and, further, that already in the Upanigads the soul is called the self-luminous 
light and the light of the Personality (see above), S 
beine CEA or something like ‘image (of the divine reality, without 
` bas hesitatingly been E. MU pageone m aties texta and 

called illusion’ and anga (Skt. aj A C alma EE QVE RIRU, O 

After the spread of Mu a x at member, body p : 
tion on the sacred syllab] ecd infiuence in the islands of Indonesia the modita- 
i n 8 om © and Rob formulas ag namah Sivaya aa: famam 
ar trati ; c 9 
there is no god but reer jon Masi Wed. di 
8 constituted by the Jay, phrase Kali.ma], gling o n ae $ 
the disposal of the dead 38 ; an-ma hosada. In an BV. 
the aksaru kalimowisadda is quoted 

» however, the form kalimahosadha 
but thig Weapon consisted in a book 
i a could be transformed into a blazing 
' Whe fiames wero nothing but mantras and 


the puppet, made of 


Muslim elements j 
text dealing with 


& v 1 : ? 
a Very efficaci ery efficacious drug or remedy 


5 
Panacea’, In ant’. The phrase under 
aslim confessio 


es it was re.interpreted as 
n SEN. 
not entirely dug T of faith; we can Oy TATRA nS 
es ANT) ‘the sacred g ey linguistic Processes. The term 
3 $ & 2 
ghtenmont and tho heart’s Ei ed came to express the idea of 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat ShaterdoiieGtion Mod, Jav. literary 


Digitized by Aras maj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
ANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
161 


„tylo “a oleat insight’): Om, namas and’ 


: similar mysti 
in the pure and enlightened heart. Es 
i 


: The Conversion 
Mobammedanism was made easier because attributive 


Siva= God, now bscame considered as belonging to Allah: the Skt. y; & 
'being everywhere, all-pervading (often applied to Brahma Siva i ki” M 
term has been borrowed by OJav. authors : wibhuh*® — ang ib i à isna)—the 
or all-pervading (spirit)’ from that time onwards b Sma TAR tho subtle 


| ty h ecame attributes of All ; 
term like sarira (Skt. Sarira- AAT 'boly) for ‘the individual soul” was sist 
by Mu-lim mystics." The phrase jati (Skt. jāti- WR in the sense of ‘tree E 


genuine state or character’) nit (Jav. 'ot') Sarira stands for ‘the spiritualized 
body’ ds opposed to jisim (Arab. jism ‘body’) ‘the material body’? When ādā 
entirely overwhelmed by Dum SUDORGE Power of Allah’s love which causes him 
to lose any consciousness of indi viduality he has entered the state called sarira 
kanugrahan (Sst. anugraha agag (showing) favour’, a term denoting, in Indian 
thought, God's grace’, i.e. His power of stopping the course of karman for a soul 
on whose condition of suffering He takes pity); then one is favoured or blessed 
by the ‘Lord of love’ (wibuh iù sih: Jav. sih ‘love’). His osik jivaraga ‘the move: 
ments of his physical and psychical life’ (Jav. osik "inner urge otc.’, Skt. fiva- Gta 
‘life’ and raga- TIT in the Jav. sense of body)*? may, however, not be identified 
with Allah’s rhythm of life. 3 

In Indian thought the term dahya- ala is used to denote the idea of ‘being 
outside, extrinsic’, and adhyatmika- or adhyatmika- AYi AK, SICURRHE to designate 
what is connected with the person, the soul or with internal life. Both terms 
occur in OJav. texts, the former being applied to things material and to the body, 
the latter (also adhyatmaka- ATAKA) to things psychical and spiritual, In the Sang 
hyang Kamahāyānikan** the term mahodaya ( Skt. uz ‘pre-eminence, greats 
fortune, final emancipation included’) is explained by wahyadhyatmikasuka (‘mate- 
rial and spiritual happiness’), i.e. wealth and consideration, and deliverance from 
old age, illness or death and final emancipation respectively. Tn Muslim texts these 
two terms are regarded as equivalent to the Arabic words zahir exterior, external, 
exoteric’ and batin ‘interior, esoteric’. In the highest transcendence there is mo 
wahya and no dyatmika (<adhyatmika), i.e. no e NAM 
reality, nothing mani hing that is not manifested, nothing 
ating Tdi ae E J eS wahya has become a literary word for 
‘becoming manifest, appear’; the originally Arabie batin has, ee 
assumed the senso of ‘candid, sincere’, jatmika in ie a tē be ee 

The term bastu-jisim is used iu tho censa af ae pes jism (see above); 
Skt. vastu. A€g ‘any really existing substance, matter an liy": Skt. vastu in the 
Bee alone, however, denotes ‘reality, i.e. the ony wor Jav. béslu a3 a word- 
Philosophical sense of ‘the real’. Hence, in old-fashioned Mod. 


ase for ‘to be realized”.** henomenal 
: —' ity of God and the pheaome! 

The true faith consists in experiencing the unity o the process of d 

A ible aa it, is alter- 

Very near to the Absolute and almost as ine a reflection, the 

described as: cahya (Skt. chāyā- SU rel ge E shape’); sifat, sipat (Arab. 

tr g Quality, attribute, mee, Bante) est BAAS Iection God): and dewana. 


n 
Om Which or through which..." (Mod Jav. sipat quality (rn. 


cing 
ately 
Spleng 

i; « 


Digitized by Arya SagmgjrfroumdatiwDOneB'gSli nd eGangotri 


162 


NEM S oq which has survived in tho sense of Jav. kaluwihan 
? 


The last-mentioned logically connected with Skt. devana- gam in the sense of 


‘excellence’, has been etymo 
‘splendour’.‘” P re the mystical unification to 

As ig well known mystics often compa e a ETE Sexual 
union. Hence the introduction of erotic feumigology into their sēj ulary. Mus, 
im Javanese mystics distinguished one kind of Buyeuia love (asmara** <8kt, smafg- 
= ‘ove! from the other. The perfect union is called asmaragama, a term also 
e Beide one of the vital airs which play a part in Javanere myaticiem and 
the terminology applied to which is sometimes combined with erotic terminology. 
Thus we find asmaragama in the sense of the breath’ or vital air ( vital energy ) 
which comes out of theinside ofthe body, whereas asmaratantra stands "for the 
‘breath’ expelled from the lungs and the mouth. These words look like secondary 
applications of smaragama and smaratantra which are given‘? as synonyms of Skt, . 
kamatanira- FIATA, a title of a work on ‘love’. The vital air breathed out from 
the nose is called asmara-juwita, the second member of which represonts the Skt, 
fivita- Sta ‘life’.s° A name given to tho adherents of a radical ‘doctrize of spiri- 
tual porfection—Jav. kasampurnan (from the Skt. sampūrņa- aqui 'accomplighed!), 
the term used by Muslim mystics—is birawa (a-mbirawa ‘to bo a birawa’). This word 
is no doubt identical with the Skt. bkairava- Ña, whick being a name of a form of 
Siva was also used to denote a definite class of his adorers, In both applications 
the word was used in Old.Javaneso texts. Muslim circles adhering to similar ideas 
and practices apparently adopted this Hindu term. It has even been supposed*' 
e word birahi which must, however, 
Tēt "separated (esp. from a beloved person), 
In tantive wiraha (Skt. viraha- fax) ‘separation (esp. 
= Of lovers)’ is repeatedly used bat tho adjective must have beon known ton, because 


à i to be drawn to the other sex, to be attracted 
in Malay birahi, bérahi e 


vo (usually of se 


are remarkable : birahi (1) *to be in a period in 
2) pleasure, delight, affection, to feel affection for, 
In Malay we find such more or less tautologio 
word for ‘longing, yearnings feeling of 
ashik is a expressing somothing like ‘got smitten 
impassioned’), Thig pee of Arabic origin (‘ashiq originally 
ovo (of religious pir eoo term being also used for ‘trans- 


Lin love’, ( 
and (3) ‘learned: knowledge’, 
phrases as cinta bérahi; 
love’) bérahi and ashik bērahi (nowadays 
;& lover, inamorate, 
ported with divine 1 


imself superior to any law or 


Sie 28 Skt. pradhā T « 
OF tapas- WW; ‘(tho E0-ca] i ee ic the unevolved matter or nature” 
9 likewigg 


erm), to acqnire some secret power (in 
4 Gall : i 
CC-0. FUP espana Sep tasira- ee) ‘scientific or reli- 


the Muslim 5en£O of this t 


Digitized by arya SES IEdun Hid Deme end eGangotri 


c 163 
gious book' is used pu o the Arab, lafz ‘vitera 
text, formula etc. . do au Tana- ARAN ‘concentrati 

o express Su 11D88 as “irmnes3 or , 

s e i Javanese authors,5? who; "—À S € ies i 
tho originally Skt. dhūraņa ARN "holding, bearing; Xon ces Hur 
suffering, enduring. Already in early Muslim writings the word WE m 
connotations of the Arab. sabr patience, toleration, endurance E = 
modern usage the twin-formula sabar-drana (<darana) express the dude eH 
(enduring much), patience'. si aa 
The Muslim teacher Pangéran Bonang Toused his readers to atpiro to kasidan 
‘parfection’ in the senso ho attached to this term which of course is the OJay. ka- 
siddha-an ‘ perfection and the miraculous power originating from it^; Skt: and OJav 
siddha- fa, ‘accomplished, perfect, endowed with supernormal KC! To = 
press the idea of ‘punctuality’ in religious matters (fasting etc.) these texis some- 
times use the word nastiti which, though now out of regular use, elsewhere is 
equivalent to our ‘accurate, conscientious, cautious’ in a more general sense. Tha 
living form sētiti ‘scrupulous, precise” at first Sight impresses us as a related 
word. Without doubt, the OJav. a-sthiti (native prefix a-) ‘steadfast, precise, seru- 
pulous’, a derivative of Skt. (and OJav.) sthiti- ftufā ‘settled rue or practice, main- 
tenance of discipline etc.’ is at the root of both of them:** cf., e.g. OJav. a-sthite 
ma brata (Skt. vrata- A1 'observance') ‘firm in fasting. In Balinese poetical usage 
(h)astiti even developed to ‘devoted; pure; sacred, beavenly-minded'. In Muslim 
mystical texts the word sipta appears in the sense of 'deep or proper meaning' as 
opposed to terms which convey the sense of a more superficial understanding.“ The 
Sundanese form sipta which is recorded as a dialectal equivalent of the usual Sund. 
cipta ‘to imagine, to call up before one’s mind’ may be related to it, the OJav. sipta, 
(sometimes sita) ‘the more or less hidden meaning of an utterance couched in figu- 
rative language, a proverbial saying’, and also ‘a hint, warning’ is certainly iden- 
tical. I would propose to consider this word as a clipped form of saisipta or sañ- 
ksipta** to which OJav. authors not only attached the meaning ot abbreviated 
condensed’ which belongs to the Skt. samksipta- afaa, and, benco in short, and 
eon ‘to be silent about', but also the sense ot ‘the meaning of gestures, the BOE 
lng of indirect intimations of facts. In the "Book of Bonang?' the forms sipta 


and Sansipta, moreover, interchange. 


nce’ >Jay, lapal “(Arab,) 

" € i 
on (i.e. ‘to maintain the 
leal and mental processes’ 


rance, 


NOTES 
i . The first 
- Edited ana translated by J. Kats, (The | I, in BKI. xov, Me 
“gue 1910); part of thia collection also | text going by the Ši oga» founded on 
"ES Walt, Sang hyang Kamahayanan | is 8 manual of Sivalte y 


the belief that macrocosm and microcosm 


Antranaya, Det Kgl. Danske Videnska- d go on the faith that: 


berneg S A) H 1 n 
1 ? = dentical 8 = 
(1985), Slskab, Hist.-phil. Medd.XXI, 4, n who is only seldom ri e i : 
2 3 of tho- 
8 : is the foundation 0,77 
hte qo, “iotenise, Studion zur Gesobi. | persons S end of this yoga is especially. 


des Ģivaismus: Die givaitischen | world. T 


Y8temea : theistic & 
Cmo in der altjavanisch@rCttotstays visant cd 


ction. ES 


nd philosophic - T 3 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


164 


sound-mysticism. The second Bhuwana- ; 
koša is chiefly concerned with nyūsd | 


- practices. The Bhuwanasamlsepa Yad- 


Www deals with the dootrine of sūnyatā | 


graal, the doctrine of the so-called 
paiicāksara (the formula namal Sivaya), 
the theory of the five ‘states of the soul 
(jāgra. TIA, supta- ga, svapna- Ta, 
susupta- i88, turya- Ja), the doctrine of 
om and its five components and corres- 
pondences, the gods presiding over the 
quarters of the sky in connection with 
round-symboliem. 

* And thus become homonymous with 
ulama ‘superiority <Skt. ultama- SAA 
‘highest’, 

4 I refer to Ph. van Akkeren, Een 
gedrocht en toch de volmaakte mens, 
(Thesis Utrecht 1951), 
(being a dissertation on the Javanese 
linga-cult}, ch.I, 9. According to an 
ancient Javanese belief the most essen- 
tial element of the male human beings 
resides in tho linga (Skt. fez) or organ 
of generation. 


E Interesting, but vain efforts have been | 


made to show the Indian origin of the 
well-known term mana, whic] 
seems to be a prevailin 
concept, though it ig, 
in part of Melanesia. 
‘Man’ XXII (1999) 
in ‘Archiy für 

XXVII (1999) 
(I refer to 

Dynami:m, 


1 nowadays 
Ely Polynesian 


A. M. Hocart, in 
» D. 140; R. Thurnwalā; 
os ilonsvwisšensoha! [y 
D. 104f. ang other sch 

H. Wagenvoort Ru 
(Oxford 1947) 
attempted to Connect ihig 


mana with Skt, manas. aa, Thurnwalā 


» Roman 
p. 8) have 
Austronesian 


Digitized by Arya Samaj FoundationChennairandeGangetri— 


„| conclusions of the above scho 
| 


Iotroduetion | 


indeed, algo found | 


——— 


. F ~ 
' introduction of this or sim 


words from Sanskrit into the 
of these. ancient Polynesians 
| doubtful. So, Miss Prof, H, Koh 


ilar loan. 
language 


18 ver 


| is quite right in pointing 


been too rash (seo her Paper. Mana 
Manas, Menos in ‘Mnemosyne’ TII. 10. 
| (Leyden ` 1941), D.54ff.). It j 
| further, be a highly improbable SUBEes- 
| tion to coneider the Polynesian word 
| a loan-word from Indonesia or 
element introduced from Indonesia into 
Polynosia by migrating tribes, for the 
| meaning of manah in Javanese eto. ig far 
| from being identical or reconcilable 
with that of ‘supranormal Power etc 
| Other words of similar scund discussed 
| by A. Capell, the word ‘mana’ in 
‘Oceania’, IX (1938.9), p.89f. have, in 
my opinion, nothing to do with the 
Polynesian mana either. See my re- 
marks in Notes on Brahman, (Utrecht 
| 1950), D.78f.—Let us, in this connec- 
| tion, dwell for a moment on a still 


would, 


an 


| older, but likewise highly improbable 
Suggestion, dug up to corroborate the 
guess of the Indian origin of Pol. mana 
| (I refer to Wagenvoort, o.c., p.8): the 
Word tābuvay which occurs in the 
Atharvaveda (5, 13, 10 atga) has (already 
by A. Weber, Indische Studien XVIID 
P. 215 and, after him by other scholars, 
whom I have enumerated in a note in 
Wagenvoort/g book) been regarded as 
the origin of the Pol, term tabu. But 
the form tābuvaņ is not sure, as the 
Paippalāda.recension has tāvucam AIZ, 


| 

| 

| 
emphaei y 4 
ey (A of migra. | and though tho meaning of this word 
word to thea BENS) Carried tho remaing Uncertain, I dare maintain that 
NE En islands of Polynesia, | it ig not ‘tabu’, À 
Pv ead [ose migrations’ | © For this form gee chapter IV, section 1. 
than is 4 > Pub much earlier! 7 According aes 930 

a done by. Thornwaja vA Ing to Wilkinson, MED.Lp. 

assumed that they took place ai A ne 5 9 power denoted by cita is explained 
dat p era As the Aryan Y the Malayang themselves by the 
cutbure did not reach th acquisition of the g normal power 
of the Ganges plai 9 eastern part | called sakti Nun 


n before + 500 B C, the 


m) but 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection: 


( Skt. šakti. aft; ) through 


ascetism tho power could also be 


m——— 


i , q : : 
prating one's thoughts on a person or 


“object go as to induce a miracle. Think. | 
ing of talismans, on formulae and pray- | 
of miracle-working saints ate | 


ers OY s 3 S Š 
examples mentioned in this connection. 


s R, van Eck, Eerste proeve van een 
Balineesch-Hollandsch Woordenboek , 
(Utrecht 1876), p.4. 

s The word pancadriya is also given in 


g. Coolsma's Soendaneesch -Hollandsch | 


Woordenboek, but the author signifi- 
cantly adds that it is not understood by 
everybody. 

19 Tt would take too long to enter into 
particulars and to review all the outside 
influences and doctrines which found 


their way into Muslim inysticism during | 


the centuries in which i& was formed. It 
must on the other hand be remembered 
that there were also Indian 
which put union with God before ‘final 
emancipation in the literal sense of the 
term. 


11 d 
I refer to H.Kraemer, Een Javaansche 


primbon uit de zestiende eeuw, (Thesis | 


Leyden 1921), p.93íf. 

12 See Kraemer,o.c., p.94, n.l. 

' A comparable passage is quoted by 
Kraemer, o.c , p.158, where rahasya ( = 
sala) is identical with God. 

„The reader might be referred to D. À. 
Rinkes, Abdoerraoef van Singkel (Thesis 
Leyden 1909), p.99f. 

* Compare, e.g., the passages mentioned 
in P. J. Zoetmulder, Pantheisme en 
Ree in de Javaansche Soeloek- 
eratuur, (Nijmegen 1935), Register, 
P. 429, s.y. 
d p Zoetmulder, o.c., p.223 and 930. 
18 word has been discussed in 
another Section of this book. 
i See, e.g, B. J. O. Schrieke, Het Boek 
van Bonang, (Utrecht 1916), p.62. 
22 9, Ss Zootmulder, o.c., p.209. 
Massignon, Al.Hallaj, Martyr 


m i , 
« Y8tique de Islam, (Paris 1999), p.478: 
sive ultime 


Digitized by arya SRS FE Tu ab ER Rona end eGangotri 


nged in an indirect way, e.g. by concen- | 


schools | 


enveloppe C&W- RrebSnjvatēatl RANKS. 


——Ó— 


Ies AR AN Nicholson, Studies i 4 
Mysticism, (Cambridge 1991), es 
Quotes Abu Said): That sirr ; 
stance of God’s ds Gun 18 & Sub. 
by the bounty Mes ooo 
y and mercy of God, ...who 
ines Sant a 
| that need and a : z He contemplates 
orrow, and in His bounty | 
and mercy depotits in that heart a, spiri- | 
| tual substance which is hidden from the | 
knowledge of angel and prophet. That | 
| substance is called sirr Allah... That | 
pure sirr is the Beloved of Unitarians. 
| It is immortal and does nob become 
| naught, since it subsists in God's con- 
templation of it.’ 
| 7? See the text quoted by Zoetmulder, 
| o.c., p.178 and discussed by the same 
| author p.909. Many words of Sanskrit - ` 
| origin are used by the author of this 
passage : jiwa : Skt. jiva- šitā ‘life’; sa- 
| pa-kārya nira (Skt. kārya- EÀ deed") ‘alk 
| his deeds’, cipta <Skt. citia- Fad (see 
| above); purba ‘beginning’ < Skt. pūrta- 
| Tā ‘first’; karna ‘ear’ : Skt. karna- «m 
| ‘ia’: basa ‘speech’ : Skt. basa 4141 id. ; 
swara ‘sound’ : Skt. svara- TY; branta 
‘amorous longing’ : Skt. bhrānta- AFT 
‘confused’; brēsta ‘ruined’ : Skt. bhrasta- 
XE: murca "disappear: Skt. mürcha- 358 
swarga ‘heaven’ : Skt. 
bumi ‘earth’ : Skt. 
suci ‘pure, clear’: Skt. 
supreme : 
nala heart: 


| ‘stupefaction’; 
| svarga- aŭ ‘id. 
bhümi- fü id s suci 
suci- Bla; wisesa eminent, 
Skt. visega- AAS superiority 
kt. nala- Te eto. i | 
i Thus in the Aksyupaniseds md 
gake of brevity I refer to eo i 
Yoga, (Pris Bucarast 1050 p 5 

24 +, the meaning basic 775 a 
ee (essential) juices (of | 

Iso ‘the corresponding 

to. (gee R. Goris, 


constituent 
bod y) and C 


ae" 


„ves in literary works. 


°? The reader might be referred to 


166 


Digitized by RANSERET Funda Dental and eGangotr o ROS 


tot de kennis der Oud-Javaansche en | 
Balineesche Theologie, (Leyden 1926), p. 
651.) was used by the authors of ancient | 
Javanese speculative and psychological 
texts, Io Mod. Jav. the word also 
means (corporal and psychical) feeling . 
The third meaning given in the diction- 
aries, to wit "(secret or gubtle) meaning 
(esp. in mysticism)’ belongs to rahasya, 
which as rahsa, or rahsya, rahstwa survi- | 
The sense of | 


‘semen virile’ conveyed by rahsya ori- | 
ginally belonged to rasa. 

25 Of. Kraemer, o c., p.108, and p.100. 
26 In the writings of the Javanese mys- 
ties the meaning mystery, secret doc- 
trine is also given to rahasya, rahsiya. 
Another senso is : ‘the female privy 
parts; cf. Skt. rahasyani romani xgeifs 
atm ‘the hair on the privy parts’. ! 
^? Now see also M. Eliade, Techniques 
du Yoga, (Paris 1948), p. 194f. 

^* S. Dasgupta, A History of Indian 
Philosophy II, (Cambridge 1932), p.344ff. 
2 See e g. Goris; o.o., p.81f. 

3^ I refer to Kraemer;v.c., p.89. 

23 See e.g. the text discussed by Sch- 
rieke, o.c., p.62. Schrieke’s explanationg 
(p.70) are in my opinion not exact in 
all respects. 


Zoetmulder, 0.0., p.216ff. 
33 See also B.M. Schuurman, Mystik and 
Glaube im Zusammenhang mit der Mig 
sion auf Java, (The Hague 1933) 7.19, | 
and van Akkeren, o.c, I t cone ON 
en ntroduction, oh, | 
*4 Quoted by D, A. Rinkes i 
(pend 3ip TBG., LIII 
?5 See Zoetmulder, o.c., p.219f 
F See Kraemer, o.c., p.98, n.1 : 
Zoetmulder, o.c, p 
e » O.C., p.71; of, p 49 
2 Edited and translated by Chon iof 
drage tof de kennis van het Bali i 
doodenritueel, D-111f., ee algo p.33 a 
2 Àn interpretation of the phrase, ae 
un KBW.II, P.226, is sanjata pay 
808001: astrawara Dustakamaya, This 
a 8 


— 

| magic weapon also occurs in Wayan 
g- 
plays; seo J. Kats, Het Javaansch Tooneel 


I, p.57. Other forms of the phrase aM 
klimosada and klimosadi. See also Gonda 
Enkele opmerkingen over woordvorm. 
ing, in BEI. C (1941), p.164, and C, 6, 
Berg, in F. W. Stapel, Geschiedenig van 
Nederlands-Indié, IT, p.49f. 

‘0 Cf. also KBW. III; p.621, where such 
native interpretations as prabhušakti 
‘lordly power, tho Lord's power”: Skt, 


| prabhusakti- YU; bhatara ‘the Lorg’: 


Skt. bhattara- VER; wirya ‘strength, dig- 
nity’: Skt. virya- AV; wrddhi “growth, 
happiness’: Skt; vrddhi- gfg; samrddhi 
‘thriving, excellence’: Skt, samrddhi- 
WuÍZ are given. 

‘" See Schrieke, o.c., p.78. 

** See Zoetmulder, o.c., p.230. 

** Of. Kraemer» o.c., p.17; Schrieke, o.c., 
p. 144, 

^* Edited by J. Kats, (The Hague 1910), 


| 8. 11, p.19. Of. also ibidem b.35, p.41 and 


b. 39, p.45. 

** See also Zoetmulder, o.c., p.156. 

** See also Zoetmulder, o.c., p.357. ' 

‘7 The reader may be referred to Zoet- 

mulder, o.c., p.176. 

** For the form of the word asmara see 

ch. IV, s. 1. In lit. Mod. Jav. asmara can 

convey the meaning ‘sexual union’. 

** KBW. III, p.326. 

*? See also G. W. J. Drewes, Drie Javaan- 

Bohs Goeroes, (Leyden 1925), p.208. 
Zoetmulder, o.c., p.271f. The author's 

Suggestion that birahi has nothing to do 

mih Skt. viralin- ig improbable. 
Wilkinson, MED. I, p.193. 

** See also KBW. II, p.406. 


54 
As to the n- of. chapter IV, sections 
1 and 3, 


55 See Schrieke, 
ROW, III, p.995, 
5 Puno KBW. III, p.493, 

pte by Sehrieke, o.c, The printed 
ext hag adopted the spelling san sipta 


resins the OJav. honorific article 


o.c., p.148. Of. also 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Sat Sven RONEN AES eGangotri 


= 167 


a 


SECTION 4 
RITES, CEREMONIES, AND LAW 


Up to now the daily ceremonies in honour of Siwadi ¢ T 
^w 3 m 2wüdil R rA 
fanka), Siva-Sun, i.e. Siva as Sun-god' are Derformed in the Mi SHE E 
Sanskrit element in the stock of words related to them and in Ne ; ali? The 
is considerable. During the worship the officiating priest Wears a ee used 
sirowisla ‘head-band’, yajropawita "the sacrificial cord? (Skt. yajū S 
AUG are 3 - Vajūopavīla- qtd 
algo in OJav.), gazitri ‘rosary’, etc. The first of these t si 
å : = še terms 18 composed of Skt 
Hras- fat: ‘head’ and Skt. vesta- NE ‘a band, an enclosure; the same second el S 
ment is found in the term karawista? which no doubt contains Skt. kara- SY pur 
and seems to be either synonymous with sirovista or the name of a similar object. 
The last of the worda mentioned recars in Javanese ; jénitri and the more origi- 
nal form génitri denoting special seeds (viz. of the Elaeocarpus angustifolius) which 
are strung to serve as a rosary; iu Oid-Javanese ganitri occurs as the name of 
the above plant and ganitrikundala (Skt. kundala- SYS ‘ring, ear-ring; tie; the 
` coil of a rope’) as rosary.‘ In all probability the word was Sanskrit, for the 
Jains used the Prākrit form gaņetteyā, beside which Skt. ganitrika fuf is 
mentioned; both words denote the ‘rosary. 

The main ritual acts are talabhedana ‘the separating (spreading) of the (pal- 
ms of the priest’s) hands (over the vessel containing the incenee) : Skt. tala- aw 
‘palm of,the hand’ and bhedana- 43a ‘splitting ete.; karasodkana. the purification 
of the hands’ : Skt. kara- FX ‘hand’ and sodhana- Waa ‘purification’; pranayama 
(the texts have prana yama) ‘the restraining of breath’ (Skt. prüna- MW and ayama- 
IIMA); the muttering of the astramanira ‘atrow-mantra (Skt. astra. sti and manira- 
AFA )*; the writing of the tryaksara (consisting of) the three sksaras, to wit A U M 
(Skt. tryaksara- 477) on the surface of the holy water when this is prepared; the 
muttering of a great threefold mantra addrossed to the mandalas i ries 
( Skt. mandala- ATZE) of Agni, Surya, Candra Fire, Sun; and Mea vB P 
sürya- qa and candra- 4% ), the trimandala ( Skt. tri fr “three, i bis 

NA is RET c ; eans a'hymn of praise’ (Skt. puja 
recitation of a pūjā, which in this connection m j! : 

T i ngā (Skt. Gaigā ugi)” by the priest who- 
Wl‘worship’), in honour of the goddess Ganga eae nested it e 
8e fingers take the position called amrtamudra the ae tonula Rid 
of immortality'; the muttering of the spi dii ‘place of pilgrimago 

, i Ww ye 4 
to the seven (Skt. sapta- Bra) sacred Eee. { a collection of mantras which 
on the bank of a sacred river’); the muttering 0 


i i derived from purāņie Sūryār- 
18. repeatedly used for liturgical ends „ilā a Mēs eb i 


Senas (Skt. sūryārcana- QUAI ‘homage Pal udra SA!) and preceded by two 
Padmamudré ‘lotus-rudra’ (Skt. padma- WW and T (Skt. ananta- Ward and Zsana- 
bodily postures's, the anantāsana ‘endless bee o 
Jand the padmasana ‘the lotus posture E. in the Gher&i 
Which does not appear among the postures oda i 
other prominent texta dealing with this subleo agg o tbe S 
The mantras apecitibd? igata Beliae SC catür- aF ‘f 
Paturaiswarya ‘the four superhuman poveri 


` 


Digitized by ArysSdansdj Radndaliof REX Sha eGangotri 


168 


À A jy such as omniscien*e, swiftnesg : 
ayaa ‘supremacy, n kāja Fey ive CERCLE addressed gg tē 
power of assuming forms Bs MN ala) "knowledge, wisdom”, tairagys ( ma 
(Skt. dharma- aa), pacea ki ki BI object.’ and aivarya; tho Spa. se EUR 
vairagya- dum) EE E sapla- ag) vowels (Skt. SVATA- tat) and gee 
vyaijana m ee ea) in (OJav. preposition riù) the lotus flower with ani 
sonants Sids a BEES) thenatoatfakti ‘nine powers or faculties” (Skt 
leaves (Stt. a af’). thagritaitioa (Skt iri- fa ‘three’ and tativa. asa ‘principle, 
nava FA id x M. p anything’) ‘the three true principles’, to which bolongs 
ae ae "5 külamantra "the most excellent mantra? (Skt. küla- qz 
PE rus highest, wost excellent’) expressing the fundamental unity of Siwa 
and the Sun (and running like thie: Om hram hrim sah paramasiwadityaya namah 
(Skt. at at ēt a: grafraitara au: "Om ete. obeisance to the highest Siwa-Sun’);!2 
the brahmanga (Skt. brahmaiga- ATF), which is the same collection of mantrag ag 
are pronounced during the talabhedana (see above), but applied to the human 
body (head, face, heart: pudenda ard fect): we can compare the Skt. exprossion 
brahmāigabhū- AMF “one who has touched the several parts of his bedy during 
the repetition cf mantras'; another name for the eame is Siwikarana which at 
first eight seems lo reprerent Skt. svikarana 4AF ‘making one’s own, acquir. 
ing,'* but may also have been connected with the frequent OJav. and Bal. siwi 
‘to respect, obey; pay homage etc.” which continced in ure in Javanese literary 
style, and according to Van der Tuul'> gees back to Skt. sevī. Bat (stem sevin- 
afa) ‘attending on, honouring, servant’, that is to ray, rather to a Prakrt form 
corre-ponding to sevī.'5 The next mantras are called Siwáiga, which is a counter- 
part of brahmaiga (seo above);'” garbhamantra (St. garbha: xà "womb, interior’ 
and mantra. 743) in which the compound Sivagarbhahrdaya- firme gs occurs : 
‘the secret knowledge filled with Siva; the astagraha, i.e. Skt. astagraha- AEE 
the eight planets or concerning the eight Planets’; the caturiarpana i.e, Skt. catur- 


¢ D C n S ere t M 
“gz four and tarpana- adm satiating" ‘the fourfold satiating’, and the cuturrest 
the mantra relating to the fo j 


The next part of 
‘bell’ (Skt. ghanta zy). 


Zr vgis, 


the ceremony consists in the con-ecration of the gantha 
the mantra acco’ 


set of formulas going by tl mpanying this act is followed by another 
and Skt. kķamā Sa tae PA of Pa-naksama (native prefix pa- forming nouns 
upon Note vata: ja ss Uaec or, after the initial Words, Om ksamasva. There- 

, Once ag ; zt AM T" = 
ber of this phrase represen callo] saiaskara we : the firat mom 


x Uy . . 1 , 
the second is a native wor R ritual sanctifying, consecration , 


M n 
by numerous mantr ko 


 'ecent''e (Skt. gandha- aa), which is 
or ‘scent box”;!? aksata "unhusked 
ns, i.e. rice’ (Skt. bija atx), kopt 
kt. puspa- 467) which is also called 
the explanation of which has put 


/ 8eed-cor 
by the specia] name kalpaka A 4 puspa "los e (8 
18 Word 


kG is also Used in ot} 


CC-0. Prof. Satya hat Sesto eel egit Van dor Tuuk?! if osp9- 


Digitized by Asa Sama BAER Shennai and eGangotri 


————————— ÉÓu 169 
« m 22 TER. put. | 
4 otes ‘a pucuk flower’? with its leaf, put 3 Der | 
cially Ge aprinkled with hol "As tie ooscon 
‘ast been sprinkie sh holy water’. As the ga Perron who 
has ju me word serves in modern 


javanoso usage as a literary equivalent of ali-ali ‘ri 


decide Y Particular passage.23 
The der!v& st or depsudence' : in th 
Bbārata-yuddh Et: ; of food are said to be scattered e 
a-nalpilea: Di vars Lira piv adoration’ (prefix pa. and Skt. namaskara st i 
ig the interpretation given in a glos-.** Flowers are, however, often e p 
exprose these sentiments. In Balinese the word has been bee m i 
pika,** denoting, according t> some authors a kind of curouma. This ini er 
fectly agrees with that of the Skt. kalpaka- CIK ‘a kind of curcuma, ns 
called karcüra- dX and kalpaka- PIF ‘Curcuma zerumbet , given by Indian m 
graphers. Like other plants of the curcuma family the Curcuma zerumbet etc 
wore and are supposed to possess a spacial power which makes them fit for ritual 
and magical use. The scented abir(a), for instance, is made chiefly of the dried 
and pounded root of the Curcuma zerumbet. Curcuma is, according to the Bhavisya- 
purāņa, the most valuable and meritorious presentation one can offer to the Sun 
(1,178,258. .* A 
Now, what about the Mod. Jav. meaning of kalpika ? There is an interesting 
passage in one of the OJav. Mababharata-books, ^" corresponding to Mbh. 15, 31, 
olif. : datai ta sira riù Gaigā, mangaway ta sira kalpika sapaūgēl ‘they reached the 
Ganges, they made a kalpika sapaīgēt (the last two words are obscure). Juynboll, 
no doubt led by the meaniag of Mod. Jav. kalpika, translated : ‘they formed a cir- 
clo'.?? The Sanskrit verse preceding this Old-Javanece passage and constituting the 
original from which the latter was rendered, has nivešam akarot annata, be 
made an encamping’, i.e. ‘he encamped there’, whereas the Calcutta edition eie. 
have nivasam akarot fammi, ‘he passed the night’. As nivesa- FAT can also 
mean ‘arrangement’, ‘mark of fingers’, or ‘ornament’, OJav. kalpika might, if need 
be and if it could express euch a meaning, also be supposed a mistranelation. We, 
moreover know that kalpaka- &&T& in the Mbh. means ‘rite, ceremony , à meaning 
which fits in well with the context. Sufficiont evidence of flowers serving as rings 
is on the other hand not at our disposal. So I would guess that the ma A a 
kind of ornament (‘flower’) has, by way of substitution,*” taken the place of an. 


other (‘finger-ring’). i si 
l Other terms deserving to be mentioned in this connect po 
‘holy-water basin’ (originally Siwa's water : Skb. Siva- fad an Buddha-priest 
Water’); Sandi ‘a banner made of copper (turned round when ma u D 
mutters) prayers’ (Skt. čānti- UF 'expiatory rite for * x. il ceremonies 
The next objects to be discussed in connection with the ‘amp’ (Skt. dipa- 
Under discussion are dhipa ‘incense’ (Skt. dhūpa- qs) and 8 Bija udakāījali ‘the 
1). Ritual acts, performed after the above ceremonies $9 e and padyargha 
offering of a handful of water’ (Skt. udaka- 33% and siis for the two accompa- 
or Püdyürghya which must be taken as ® dvandva-compoun 


1 i? and argh- 
nyi : washing the feet an 
ving mantras are addressed to padya water be xis respectful reception dA AC 
en 


gr After that the. mrtyuīt 


jay, j, esPeotively : of. Skt. padya- ata a K — bu 
n 18 Performed.?% Thiectonnj. sjalviikstidēti Caegioto, 
tcoming death”, is found in tho OJav. Bh 


a 22,7 flowers, vice and offering: 


170 Digitized by Ary SAARE buti e TRA ha Gem 


arrow of supranormal efficacy which confers preservation of lito and Victory on 
the battle-field (cf. also 92, 9). The section of the Balinere tūrvasewang im 
discussion begins with this mantra: Om derghoyur-bala-wrddha-ialii kaya: 
mrtyunjaya, in which the power which overcomes death is addressed 08 & cause i 
ot longevity, vigour, prosperity (wrddhi?), and capability. It is also called dirgh, 
ayu(r) ‘long-lived? (Skt. dīrgha- AA and āyus- aly:) or saptawrddhi the sevenfoļā 
increase or prosperity.*' Ths term mrtywajaya occurs also in Sanskrit texta on 
ritual, e.g. Garudapurāņa &.18, but the contents and application of tho mantrag 
known as such is not the same. This is in harmony with tho fact that Balinese 
manuscripts on ritual and other religious subjects likewise mention Various 


.mriyunjaya-manitras, °? : 
The following ceremony is the ma-bhasma (ma-: native prefix forming verbs): 
the priest smears bis body with sandal-unguent, which is called bhasma. In Sans. 
- Erit bhasma (4844 n.) ‘ashes ‘in general)’ is also denotative of the sacred ashes and 
similar stuff emeared on the body.?? As it was (and is) a customary practica to 
smear ashes on the forehead to indicate the religious body to which one belongs, 
the word came to be uced also in the sense of "outward mark of adherence to such 
or such ‘denomination’ " (OJav. Tautu Panggélaran 115). In Bali not only any line 
on the forehead but also the eprinkling of holy water on that part of the body can 
be called bhasma.?* Aftor the priest has put on his pontificals, he takes his rosary 
(which has to consist of 108 ‘beads’ (seeds) and proceeds to mutter his inaudible 
c MU BH. java- aq) and to indulgein meditation (dhyana: Skt. dhyāna- 
Pas mar MR his soul (ima : Skt. ālmā ARRI) from the abdomen to the 
a eM aem ae ve x gni Sources it is conducted to tho dwadatdngula. By 
- air ag ha: Skt. sikha frat) is meant and the change of senge— 
~ expressing the meaning ‘having the breadth of twelve 
Fom such texts as Agnipurāņa 303,14 : atmdnam vojayilvā 
es dvūdašājigula. is an attribute of the word indicating 
twa sits down in the fontanel and the priest recites 8 
so-called grim-mantras (the syllable 
» almost all preceding formulas and some whioh 
māja ERR 8 prepared : amrtikarana, lit. ‘the mak- 
ries). Of the mantras to io i IFA is not given in the Sanskrit dictiona- 
I only mention the ‘king's y this final section of the ceremonies 
and mantra. q23) or stawa (Sk (or ‘royal mantra’ rūjamantra : Skt rājā UM 
of the Sun’ (Indonesian or sūrya (Skt, sūrya- qu ‘sun’) ‘praise 
bhuwana: Skt, tribhuvana. Fraga ); Ka tho "formula of tho three worlds' (tri- 
RAD, the "favour-formu]a? : 


i 9r à moment, The following names 
i astra: Skt, astra. aq + Uroes:36 Bal, naraca : Gkb: ndraca: 
i le (Skt. qu) ‘lotus’; vilva: 
. Sada, A 

- IER ‘inyi da- TEF "(the gesture) of the 
CC-0. Prof. Satya vial Sere (Ugeiettro)" Um ERAT EU 


Digitized by AY ASIF F cun daaycshespel and eGangotri 


— oa NM. 171 
rase turning the rosary’ ee al 
ted by the P "My may correspond to the aksanaty asme 


‘the gesture of the rosary of elae ; | 
CO maenol mudras are astoiasi ee 1 ete. Other Sanskrit Words | 
Eta: aati ‘the not terrific’; musti. gfe ‘the Kor ce of eight mantras”; 
— 1 ‘the gesture of tle breath-control’, ed hand; prāņayāmamudrā 

As to ie d "-——— with the Balinese y 

ditions it is interesting to notice that not on £ RA 
population, brahmanus, ksatriyas, wesiyas, and a mc Ad of the | 
q7, vaisya- AXA and südra- Z) which bere may rather be called cast t ( h Run 
castes not being known to the Balinese)?” have continued to Er en 
à » but also 
number of other concepts and terms relating to social grouping: triwas ( E 
above) the members of the three highest classes’; caturwansa citer A 
jalma (<Sxt. janma ara) "birth'?* dwijati ‘twice-born’ (Skt, doijati- fzanfā) = 
& designation for the triwansa, and ekajati "once-born? (Skt. ekajati- Gasnfa which 
occurs in Dharmasistras to denote a šūdra) as a name for the rest of the popu- 
lation. According to come authorities the brahmans are also called utama nin 
utama ‘the excellent of the (Oday. nin ‘of the’) excellent? (cf. such Skt, expressions 
as dvijoltama- fzats ‘best of the twice-born’ i.e. ‘brahman’), according to others 
"this titie is due to the priests. Thero are brahmana siwa and brahmana boda, i.e. 
agaiva brahman and a buddhist brabman. As to the latter category they are 
few in number and are heid to be dezcendad from originally Baddhist families; the 
padanda buda ‘buddha- or Buddhist prio-ts’ belong to the boda families. Both 
categories have to co-operate in celebrating the principal golemnities. But the 
` bhrata (i.e. Skt. vrata- Aa ‘vow and holy practice’) of the Buddha-priest is tradi- 
„tionally held to be more severe and difficult than that of his colleague. The term 
rēsi (Skt. rsi- *RÍX ‘inspired sage, patriarchal saints, promulgators of Vedic hymns 
ete.’) is applied to persons belonging mainly to the second and third class who aze 
in possession of limited spiritual competencies; tho "Wedas' are seemingly kept 
secret from them. Ordained brahmans are called ka-rési-an (native ka--an forms 
adjectives to qualify nouns as having undergone the process or being affected 
With, or subject to, the concept expressed by the base of the adjective), or para- 
wiku (para forms collectives). The term wiku often occure in Old-Javanese texts, 
incidentally translating Skt. muni- fa ‘sage’ and denoting -ascetio, monk, reli- 
Bleuse, or, in general, a person devoting himself to religious life ; as à Msi. 
it undorlios nouns expressing the idea of ‘religious life, berait's life, bes qe 
Connected with solitary life’ (ka wikw-an; ka-wiku-n) and verbs denoting $ E 
The word is still in uso in Javanese literature, and has found its kit e E 
South of Celebes.^" There is no reason to call in question = pem t 
posed by Van der Tuuk“ and other scholars : it is the M. form“? of 
religious mendicant eto.’ of the Buddhists, in the Middiss 3 i, Jn Old- 
the Skt. bhiksu- fug ‘religious, and often esp. & Buddhist mendioant.- - Nu 
i gous (>tega, whioh in Fot- 
Avane3e texts hermits and ascetios are also oalled Ee ; Skt, tyaga- SU 
Jav. came to mean ‘indifferent, shrinking from responsibility : 
resigning’), ; ans who are not Or ec 
ISA ae word used in Balinese to dag bee :( brahmana ) ulaka. m 
CNN he etymological point of view 18 (O)Jav. and Bal. sound s 
ance with correspondences between 5 


San be Connected with ox. PII visiche alee BAEEESN 


eligion, religious law and 


> Bporadically m 


Digitized by Agrex&ggmejdropRdatioD CNārShitand eGangotri 


eC 
th’: Skt, balaka- WSF. In the language of law the Skt. word OXDresseg the 
or youth’: Skt. 


idea of ‘minor’, and lexicographers, moreover, ROT o ci e of ' 
simpleton’. In a rā cd M way OJav. at 8 Sometimes reg 

: rā xpress tho opposis à 
SEs WM has not adopted the way of living of a tapi** (‘female ascetic’), 
says a hermit.' In Balinese olaka is especially used as a synonym of the native 
bajan ‘young, youth’ to denote a brahman who is nob or not yet a pedanda, even ií ho 
is'an old man; the verb ztulaka means to be a bachelor : Tt would, further, be a 
tempting supposition to connect also the Malay word bēlaka with Skt. balaka.. Malay 
dictionarica give the meaning “quite, altogethor, without exception,’ which is indeed 
usual Bet the phrase muda bélaka can be found to express the idea of ‘quite young’, 
bodoh bēlaka to signify a person who may be called ‘an absolute fool’. As the 
reinforcement of an adjectival expression by means of a synonym—which can be a 
borrowed word—is common,** bëluka may have originally beon a synonym of the 


fool, 


m sj xut Ortied 
e of ascetic, hermit, religieuse ete.’ : ‘my daugh. 


. first element of the phrase, and after losing its original sense have developed into 


a term expressing reinforcement: émas bélaka ‘nothing but gold’; perempuan bélaka 
‘(they are ) all women'.*” The Minangkabau usage is practically the same, whereas 
the Sund. balaka has like the Mod. Jav. blaka and apart from the sense of ‘naive 
and not well versed (in religious law)'^ two meanings : (1) ‘quite etc”, (9) 
‘straightforward, frank’, As words for the latter quality often deri 
from ideas which imply artlessneie, *? 
insuperable difficulties,5^ 
1 Barred from priestly olfices are the kubyanga, i.e. ‘the crooked and hump- 
€ C ci EE id” and aiga- ag limb’ ), and the cucaka, cutaka, or 
T jās e v A undergone disgracing punishments' : the und erlying Skt. 
Peu ts p to be dentiyed of, to loose’ (cf. Skt. patita- qfàa ‘fallen, 
e iae S cw probably be derived from a Prākrit cutaka (Skt. 
TEMA es i dig ly)? and suff. -ka -&) or from Skt. cyutaka- fas, which 
To be GER kis cuta (Skt. cyula- īgā) is given to degraded brahmans: 
or consecration for a ‘dition eee by ma-diksa (Skt. diksā dts ‘preparation 
Temony , also found in OJav. texts)*'; and by ma- 
b. pudgala- 32% ‘soul, personal entity; individual, 
nO of Siva: a-pudgala is, in an ancient text, sido of a 
Priest or teacher’; apadkala (sic, <apodgala) is used 
which it is explained, A thi rite" (Skt. kria- FA and diksita- Afaa) by 
i me idea ie.ma-wintēn, which has 
as derived from pawintén; a variant 
, à purifying prayer, the brah- 
e preferably applied to mental oF 
- The pupils of an ordained priest 


ve their meaning 
this semantic detail cannot present 


th 5 
e me y numerous ksatrivas is called prédeut 


dewa (Skt. deva- 4) ‘your majesty; princ? 


0 always preponderat d “st congort'*+ are likewise styled desse 
ed in political influence, are addressed with 


the word gusti ‘mister 
Aur M. tier”,55 
Aria Bēltlēn elo, i.o, in «out classas of the wesiyas aro called Aria seniom 
ention is made of PRI ‘Tespectable, noble’ and a native name 
CC-0. Prot SAJA raného aget ri d by the Indian nap? 


Tessed with 
by a pádmi f 


1] 
applied 


DOO SE —— 
Ea J E 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Ene 173 


pandala,---beld impure and being excluded from a:soci 
ont" ** The term candéla which is also found in OJav 


ating with their fellow sub. | 


: S texts : 
to dyers in blve, dealers in leather, distillers, E ee M 
1 e state of im- 


resulting from such activities ends when th ivi 
€ activity itself is. sto 
- stopped. 


oritative Indian books the candala- auge 
nd Zs (Y x 
d a brahman mother. (Manu 10,12) is the son ofa 


purity 
In auth 
sudra an : 
We aro unformed that foar classes of priests are distinguished®7: the 50- 

called suklabrahmacari who observe lifelong chastity: this term composed of Skt 

sukla- BE ‘pure’ and brahmacürin- AAMA ‘a person who ie M i rJ 

and observes chastity', is also found in OJav. texts: Ādip. p.36 ju d 
celibate, is called a suklabrahmacāri, and a circumstantial account of their obliga 
tions is given in an ancient "awbook':they have to avoid speaking to women A 
even looking at them, and also to escapes meeting them when other people are not 
pre:ent; they have, moreover, to devote themselves exclusively to prayers and 
meditation;** the irésnabrahmacari who observe lifelong chastity after their wives’ 
death: the first term,** which is repeatedly found in OJav. texts to express the 
ideas of ‘desire or love’, is, of course, Skt. irsya qum ‘thirst, avidity’; the sewala 
brahmacari who being married discontinue sexual intercource when they are 
ordained : I would suggest connecting this name with that of the Indian ‘moss- 
eaters’: a class of ascetics who live upon moss (Pkt. sevūla- da18)**. Lastly, the 
grhastabralmacari who observe no chastity wbatever: Skt. grhastha- pisi ‘the 
brahman who, being in the sezond period of his religious life, performs the duties 
of a father of a family’. As far as I know I have not found these terms in Sans- 
krit texts. 

When about to marry both mau and woman must be marriageable : this 
quality is, as far as the youth is concerned, denoted by the loan-word truna <Skt. 
laruna- AKM ‘juvenile; youth’. 

A widow or widower is called reida, 
(‘widow’); in Modern Javanese randa ‘a widow or à 
Sundanese randa ‘widow’, sometimes al-o 'divorceo'; in Minangkabau the word is 
used more loosely of 'wifeless men and husbandless women of a certain age, 
including old maids and old bachelors,*' but Malay bas janda S apo. 
viously married but now husbandless, which is sometimes applied to Ax bis 
These words are doubtless identical with Skt. and Pkt. ronda wel a Eo 
Which is *widow'.5? 

For *on the father's side or paternal’ a 


the Balinese have the terms sakin purusa an 


m G 3 
| Us ale person, 
S i i rgo Skt. purusa- SW m 

rn pu s. UE things denotes original source of 


i tu a ip j t ] 
Oundati , lved matter or na 10 88 principle and 
dian philosophical thought purusa and pradhāna are con- 

the pauranio 


i à ; n DS aun 
ceived as the enjoyer and the enjoyed, 88 S feminine principle of 


a 


which is also found Sn Oday. texts 
divorcee witlr children’; in 


nd ‘on the mother’s side or maternal’ 
d sakin pradana respectively. The 


th i derstood: 

. «ese Balinese meanings are easily to ber pradhana deri 
claim! and (from wwan ‘man’ pradha : also 
The eldest son 15 called Saien: ceci ( ; 
offspring’. In Java the same word denotes 


174 


Digitized by ASNS kR F oN AAA CREE ana eGangotri 


i : sometimes considers one of hi 
rson. Curiously enough a Balinese father RS of his Song 

person, en an adopted son.** Itis of course Skt. samtāna- dūra conti 
saponara Me race, offspring, gon Or daughter. This word is in Bali seldom 
ene NER: A child born out of wedlock is called astra; the term may 
applied t E s : PINN 
perhaps be conneoted with the lit. Jav. phrase gare or asta) lwiyan ‘to have 
aun! intercovree', but its original meaning is not clear. A 

For adoption, i.e. the ceremony proper, the term widi-widona can be used, 
which is the Skt. vidhi- fafa ‘rule, statute, law’ and vidhana- faam "disposing, 
arrangement, regulation’. The compound has already been employed by ancient 

ene L ? a . 
Javanese authors in the sense of ‘the formalities required’ : Adip. p.19 in con. 
nection with a marriage, elsewhere** in connection with various religious per- 
formances. Among the many Balinese terms for varietios' of relationship there 
are only a few Sanskrit. A polite word for ‘the relatives’ in general is warga: ` 
Skt. varga- al ‘group, company, family’, or in general ‘multitude of similar Persons 
or objects; in court-usage putra (Skt. putra- JA) substitutes the native words for 
'(&0n, daughter), child’; guru is a polite word for ‘father’ (Skt. guru- 31). 
g J 

Sexual intercourse of & man and a woman without marriage is called mē- 
mitra : (Skt. mitra. IXA ‘friend, companion’), a euphemism not unknown to other 
societies and languages. 


jwadana- SARIA occurs in Sanskrit in the sense of ‘life-giving’. In tho Balinese 


e already referred? enumerates the 
(Skt. vrddhi- afa ) ‘profit from lending money’ or 
he terminology agrees with the names of the kinds 
t Indian authorities”? it would not be improper 
à Kayawrddhi is (in a corrupt text) defined as : the 
dharma-book by Narada ccm in work, i.e. pays interest by working. The Indian 

Pains the term kūvikāvrdāhi. (mirmay) otherwise, 
interest received from tho body i.e. milk received 


(labour), the In 
debtor himself : Skt. kāri, 
forest multiplies ' 


g i Digitized by ARN RTRĪ TORA 49868073! and eGangotri 
== 175 


fers from Brhaspati's statement : bhogalabha. sober is 
ent i6 making use of a house or taking the produce of AN is profit by enjoy- 
" the case of a mortgage’. a field in lieu of interest 
in Educated Balinese people know that the āgamas (Skt i : 
on of) traditional doctrine or precepts’) ‘codes of Hindu Pic ATA (collec- 
g the existence of other and more &uthoritative Hm though pre- 
ME 


wbich dif 


tion Ot 
uppos!? l 
ne used as sources of law,”* enumerate six or eight varieti UD) Lou | 
the so-called sadtatayi and the astacorah. The first category, the n S "el ot felony, | 
back to Skt. sad TX ‘six’ and atatdyin- IAA ‘a person ae See M | 
who endeavours to kill somebody, a murderer, and, in later texts uu dem 

A : + 2! 17 E eI k 2 8, anyore commit- 

ting a serious crime , cop»priges?? the incendiary the poisoner, the amuck-r 

the man who utters slander concerning the king, the witch or sorcerer defin 
who violates à married woman. The ‘technical terms for these kads" 
given in 8 Sanskrit verse, quoted (in a now corrupted form) and explained in An 
of the ‘codes’.”” The other category of criminals, the asta-corah (Skt. asta- 9 ‘eight’ 
and cora- att ‘thief’) includes the man who commits the theft, the man who incites 
another to stealing, who gives food to a thief, who lodges one, who is on friendly 
terms with a thief, who gives hints to a thief, who helps one, and who’ hides a 
thief.2° Although I am under the impression that corah and dusta are,in this connec- 
tion, used indiscriminstely, astadusta clearly applies to ‘murderers’ in the Kutara- 
Manawa text edited by Jonker*': Skt. dusta- $E, however, usually denotes fg vil- 
| lain or guilty person in general'.?? Osher crimes for which till now Sans&rit terms 
have been used are Bal. agamiyagamana ‘incest’? (Skt. agamyagamana- AVAMATA 
"illicit sexual intercourse’), or ( abbreviated ) Bal, gamiya; drati krama ‘adultery’ : 
OJav. dārātikrama ‘violation of married women’, acompound not known to me 


from Sanskrit texts (Skt. dära- qT ‘wife’, atikrama- afaea 'violation). By para- 
blameless conduct, be she 


dara the Balinese understand taking hold of a woman of 
married or not, making unchaste proposals to euch a woman, entering her place 
without permission, or suing a woman for divorce without valid reasons : Skt. para- 
: dära- WAR 'another's wife; adultery’, aleo found in OJav. books. ? 
An interesting word from the linguistie point of view is Bal. ndžsti ‘working 
charms, practising witchoraft etc., derived from désti, which, alternating with 
the native leyak, denotes ‘a witch possessed of the faculty of killing or causing 


diseases’ : one of the words resorted to in explaining the verb ndisti is the Skt. 
levolent purpose’ which was well- 


abhicara. afia ‘employment of spells for a mā T à 
known to ancient J S. i. The Bal. word is doubtless identical with 
Mod. Jav. (lit.) dēsti ‘a charms esp. a magic devic 
notation not unknown to the Balinese who use P edi 
Some and charming the woman of one's choice.S* As dinrésit an the idea 
them derived from drēsti are used by Middle-Javanese authors to BS pa 
of ‘Practising witchcraft’, the most plausible inference seems e - drsi- di 
those words as atymologically identical and to connect them WI eT 
S faculty of seeing: look, glance. Van der Tuuk** suppo* S 

alinesg meaning to have developed fro 


‘Polson in the eyes, poisoning by the mer 


ation to this I should like to point a ind 
` , Sty Or evil glance’ drgáhg "nà- gaul remo S 
` evil. N Ļ Apa : ig nob wantlde 
. SVil-eyeq?, The belief m the now a Mratiihestl re Ron: 


e for winning 8 girl's love’, a con- 
pecial dàetis for becoming hand- 
d panrésli both of 


176 Digitized by ARANSSKBIFoENa ISP RGRRAr ana eGangotri P 
ee ue it is nob beyond tho USER possibility to consider 
to tbe vowel e in E akri& form : as is well known?" Pkt. geddha- TZ correg. 
dosti as influenced by a i rete. Words for ‘witchcraft; sorcerer ete,’ haya 
ponds to Skt. d ie m" ‘black art, wisdom; oracles; BONE, ete,’ arg 
various enivei ons; E f them, but other semantic sources are not wanting. 
more often at the root o : D MO lew and justice are Bal; kērta ‘ad Viser 

Other words used E -—' consulted by the prince and his judges’. after 
and interpreter of the p ae kērta ‘Court of kérta’, i.e. ‘a priestly court’. 
Hee CEU pe pun E ee also denotes the customary law itself; kérig riù 
D1 m a. po ‘world’) means ‘public order and security ; nrēta-yai, 
ee fore transitive verbs) ‘to establish peace and cR in a ape The 
meanings mentioned last belong to Skt. kria which has eimi ar sameway: in Oday. 
texts;®? as adviser etc.’ Bal. kērta must be connected with Skt. , kartā af (nom. 
sg.) who does or makes, who acts in a gelierous ceremony, priest . Another pon 
for ‘customary law’ is drēsta (Skt. drsla- €€ seen, experienced, settled, fixed’, 
"Lines of conduct to be followed in public life” are ealled tata cara or tata 
krama. This expression, which also occurs in Javanese (correct manners, good 
form’), must, in my opinion, be regarded as etymologically identical with Skt. 
tata- aa “extended, spread, etc.” (root tan- ag ‘to extend, be protracted, acomplish 
or perform (a ceremony ete.)’), Tho main OJav. meaning of tata ig ‘put in order, 
in a row, in rows, consecutively’. "In Mod. Jay. tata denotes such ideas ag “proper 
order; orderly; put in order; cultivated, educated? 
correct manners, stateliness etc,’. In the other member of the combination we, of 
course, find Skt. acara- WAR “conduct, good behaviour’ or krama- %7 ‘manner, 


regular course’ rerpectively. The abbreviated forin cara is already found in OJav. 
texts, 


. . . € . 
„in Balinese it means politeness, 


There are three means of acquiring certain knowledge about the offender 
ne the crime, three proofs: the Bal, tripamana : OUR. tripramāņa (Skt. tri-f& 
( ame p pramana: RAIM ‘evidence et:.'). They are: the saksi ‘witness- 
es) <Bkt. saksi atit id^; the lekita ‘written evidence’, in common parlance ‘the 


by-laws of the village ete,'0 according to an author on the subject’! "the com- 
munications and declarationg of the accused’: 
lekhita- which beside likhitg- fefar ‘writing 
(likita in the Same h 
altered form of likita; &nd in 


Witnesses’, Corpus delicti’. Th 
sing. 


"written'?2, or represent an 

‘indications, traces, ‘silent 
18 last-mentioned word is worth discus- 
anifestation, visible appea- 
yakti) can express the idea 
i "real, reality etc.”, but also 88 
A and pamyaktan (pa--an are native 
further, developed into bēkti which 


Y 8ynonym of yékti * 
Instead of paz; the for end appears in cilmd-békii (see further 


on)=cihna-bukti, 

bukti ‘exhibit, evidence’: m with th : Jav. 
? i Mad. bhukty * 9 Y-Vowol became usual : 

evidence (ka-bu ky; *b & pro 

Jav. bēkti ‘homage’ Interestingly enough; tbe 

) sometimes also appears as bukti. 


" b. j. = 5 
<Bht. Ult; spy LIU. APG and Dēkts < Sur bhakti, HOR) 


o MIB T sarts 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vs tri Balitinn, Possession’, which 18 


Digitized by Aryan Ramndationfegnai and eGangotri 


Sis R ISI — — rā 177 


+, Sundanese in similar meanings (ef. als CT LIMEN m 
od be rich"), in Madurese ( bhukte ), in pamana possessions’, 
literary Javanese to express a sense which ig like 

o been mistaken for the other ? *5 
the on A 1 

Asa considerable part of the Hinda-Javanese law-texts hav 
+ vestigated in an adequate manner, it must ff 6 not yet been 
inves E E 6 sulice hera to make come 3 
sional romarks on the problem touched upon in these two questio provi 
nion scholars have failed to observe that Bal. bukti is, under ae In my opi- 
TRA clearly used in the juridical sense of Skt, bhukti- ats oe V circum- 
from lawful ownership), usufruct”. Plots of ground belonging to d M 
to tho prince or the government the right to the use &nd e of Brass 
a dignitary during his tenure of office, aro called bukti or laba?s: m» MS to | 
Skt. labha- STA ‘gain, profit'."" The samo word came to the Bataks in the ae 4i | 
‘gain, profit’ : TBat. bukti (written buiti). In the second place the term bukti ig, a3 
we havo already stated, iu the Balinese documents repeatedly used in connection 
with the saksi and the lekita. Now, Indian authorities say that means of proof are 
twofold, human and divine, aud that the human means are ‘documents, witnesses 
and possession’: pramanam likhttam bhuktih saksimah 1m4 Rifai xps: aga, 
The Balinese formula ‘the lekita are stronger than the witnescez, the bukti is stron- 
ger than the lekita’?? goes back to similar Indian rules of law: ‘Witnesses are supe- 
"rior to circumstantial evidence, 2 document is superior to witnesses, undisturbed 
possession for three ganerations is superior to all these’, Brhaspati says"? Narada 
4,77, moreover, states that even if there is a document or witnesses to support 8 
man’s title, when there is no enjoyment, particularly in the case of immovable 
property, there is no validity. Possession (bhulti-) was given great weight as evi- 
dence of ownership. Is is perfectly apparent from a number of texts'?' that a dis- 
tinction was made between ownership aud actual bhukti which could even be con* 
flioting with ownership and unlawfal.'?? In Balinese customary law bukti, apart 
from the above sense of ‘usufruct, possession etc. , has come to signify ‘a visible 
token indicative of the crime, indications, corpus delicti (for instance, & cow with 
Which a thief runs away) and when conveying this general meaning the word 
shows connotations which, if I am not mistaken» remind us of its more original 
use. So, I would venture to suppose that in Hindu-Balineso law bhukti like lekita 
has changed its meaning and that the Balinese use of bukti originates in bokant 
evidence of actual possession or usufruct > indications". A Balinese E 
one term is: (we speak of bukti) when the behaviour (eyil conduct) of t ae 
minated) is manifest to the public'.''? In my opinion there ean us Mi dcm 
that it is the history of Skt. bhukti-, nos that of vyakti- weiaroiClsct as 
būt in the sense of ‘indication’ vyakti may have exerted HA cina wiyakti, & 

The three pramāņas are, in Balinese usage, also a fug ‘mark, symptom" s 
ip P cr somponteiy deri E 3 28 s game phrase can aleo 

D i v" (see above). Apart fror a used for ‘token showing some- 

ibe wn eye-witness’. In Javanese eina s he longer ‘expression was cihna 

» document in support, corpus delioti , and the i 


Cue } S c the Malay term cima quia à 
"wA 9 Cihna bēkti ‘corpus delicti. With these We ee um 


® connected: it denotes, as a popular nA 106. and: usi 
v Ned to allow a divorcee to remarry her former nusbans dian He 
Way of popular etymol Ai Ep Petr diemegbnesto AB" ^^ : 


1 leld, harvest? and ; 
Wise Sanskrit: ‘foog? ? Or has 


178 Digitized by ABNER UON EQUES and eGangotri 


—— 


mediate husb 
Among the words 


= * 105 
and being the ‘token or document . 


for ‘swearing an oath’ Exon Bipeoiatty interest ug; it 
hnical term is ma dewagama which (ag dewagamg) 


i i r, the tec 

ih parties to a suit swear, av | 
ci in the OJav. Kutara-Manawa § 904 and 210 where it means ‘oath? a 
"arden!" and 'ordeal!"%: between these two methods of finding the truth mo 


only a difference in degree." The term has, to my Enowledge, not been foung in 
Sanskrit literature"? Ifone of the parties concerned bees the oath the term 
used is ma-dewa saksi, lit. ‘to (call upon) God as a witness’ : Skt. deva- 23 ‘god’, ang 
saksi ATA cf. Skt. devasaksya- IAIA tertimony of the gods, i.e. before the gods ag 
witnesses’. Some authorsinform us of the details that this oath is taken in a temple, 
and that the term is only applied to the swearing of members of the higher classes, 

For ‘the act of expiating’ the ancient term is still in ueo : Bal. mrayascata; 
it is a verbal derivative from prāya*cita which is found in OJav. texts in tho enge 
of ‘expiation, atonement : Skt. praya‘citta- galaa ‘id.’ 

There are several technical terms for ‘instituting legal proceedings’, among 
which ma-wicara : Bal. prefix and wicara, which in this language serves as a base 
for several derivatives denoting related ideas : a surat (a native word for ‘written 
document’) pa-micara is ‘a charge or acousation’, 8 pa nwicara ‘the official indict- 
ment’ etc. '°? "The rource of this term is, of course, Skt. vicara- am ‘procedure, 
mode of acting, inve-tigation’, a vicarakartr- fitz is ‘an invo-tigator or judge’, 
Ahn rd ensi lopli monning lera, eosin 
>‘speaking’), the K.tara-Manaw ^v. deliberation’, hence ‘reasoning, discoureing 
TM) luga m. E. E uses it n the technical tense : $ 69 in & verbal 
Malay the word (bicara) likewis AM t rd Straits oo ae 
ding, and in Ngadju Dyak (Ens ans a court-case (in general) or legal procee- 
ihe most usual form) means ‘a "m eo ars endusara (whish seems tole 
judge’; its derivatives e A on & point B controversy put before the 
the same form (bicara) Ras ES no 3 meanings. In Maca-sar and Buginese 

ngs of meanings: ‘discour-e, speak(ing), 


U iminal trial. In ancient 
Binal form wyawahara (Skt. vyavahára- 
ocedure, contest at law, administration of 
oars E word has had a curious history : in 
d entitling hi a eae rE c ase of tke 

& him to make Inquiries about the objects 
other form, which may likewise be 
to wit the lit. (byawara) bayawara 
of lose, theft etc. given to one’s 


"a common practice; 
justice’) has come to light. M 
old-fashioned usage a (layaj;) 
delivered to the 
stolen’ (Jay, 


; legal pr 
In Javanexe 


Wyawara (whioh 
The Balinese 
blem. Ina xe : 
Raja Quotation from anoe constitut ; ro” 
rami. uaia Hoo n E treating of dO & rather difficult Un 
Which is pug on par with Pu royal policy”) wa a CE of du 
- r - 

CC-0. Pror (Sja pratiBadstis Collection pagt 16 term "i isawa 

shs dēšdūrčsta, šūstradrēsta with 


* 


Digitized by AAS RR SE AN Ces S eGangotri 


i 179 
we have already dealt in this same chapter 


: B The term ie, ; 
« Ut m ir, in th 1 
d as policy, political precepts of (originated b , e main, . 
y) the authority w 
y who now. 


neil’ or some translation to 
ms Perfectly clear, but how ig 
Ting it as an abbreviated form 
Ta, Jav. order of the members), 
and Kd. Sunda 2,96) is used as 
Parameswari RAJIN Hence, I 


i su the initial n being substituted by tha tenuis of 
M ros. 1 this hypothesis holds, the more frequent pa-swara or pé-swara can be 


regarded a3 & shortened form,"* extended by the native prefix pa- which, generally 
speaking, helps to form nouns, especially nouns of action. The Balinese by-form 
sowaras and its meaning to divulge, to communicate publicly’, leads us to suppose 
that stara ‘voice, sound" (Skt. svara X43) bas exerted influence upon it. Van Eck's 
dictionary"? explains paswara as what bas been epoken by the prince>ediot, 
command: the laws of the country', but I have my serious doubts._ 

If a. Balinese is committed for trial he has to appear at the appointed time 
with his witnesses, & security, some dishes with flowers and cakes, some pitchers 
full of water and seating mats for the judges. These utensils are called the prateka, 
a word also applied to the ingredients of composite incense. It is the OJay. pra- 
tyeta, which often means ‘specification, detailed descriptive statement made in 
reference to the names of a group of individuals, to the items in an.enumeration”; 
besides, it stands for ‘each single one, one by one etc. : the meanings of Skt. pra- 
tyeka- màr. Moreover, a memorial or plaint, drafted beforehand and called kanda 
forms part of the prateka. Itis difficult to dissociate this word from the Jav. 
kanda ‘account, narration, story, and as a base to tell, relate, say, which bas 
been derived from Skt. kända- ats." Ia Sanskrit, this word means any part or 
any distinct division of an action, a sepa- 
moreover, in some of its meanings con- 


which 


explaine - | . , 
aday3 takes resolutions which are laid before the cou 


tbat effect. The connection with Skt. niti. HS agg 
sawara to be explained ? n sad Suggest conside 
of Skt. īsvara- EXT lord, king (nītīšwara> nit swa 
like OJav. sort which in OJav. texts (e.g. Nag. 91,5 
a title of a queen has been detached from Skt, 
think, the modern term titi swara, 


MM m 


portion, division or chapter of a book; 
rat j artment, a branch’; it is, 
ae st wave ‘chapter, part or section of a work’. In Javanese these 
two words have, as far as I see, coalesced. Ram. 8, 149 we come S am 
meration of various kinds of literature: katha (Skt. katha- S41), dr 
afa) pūrwakāla ( pūrvakāla- E EI "of olden times ), purai kis ex pu M 
aji, parwa (Skt. parva TÀ), kanda (Skt. kanda- TIS division e and didsdkid) 
ries (about adventures) of olden times, ‘ancient bistony M es may probably 
books, fragments of the parwa and kanda variety , from W " ro side by side with 
conclude that the kandas (book-) of the Ramayan’s wr ur development of 
the parwans of the Mahābhārata have contributed to we NECS texts: kanda as 
the word under discussion. Another meaning stands out in ae a pi 
8 base of verb forms denoting such processes 8% be ) "7 has, to all appea- 
The last connotation ‘grouping’ ( transitive and EN khanda- 813 conveys such 
rance, been the starting-point of the davolar ae is, in shis respect t00, almost 
Meanings as ‘assemblage, multitude; Skt. kanda- ; : 


| Bynonymous : 'oluster, multitude’. Med sakaraita, a term borrowed 
Oomplicity and support of criminals 879 4 ig not correct to derive it from 
by the Balinese from their ancient ‘law codes. 241 rita REST co- : 


NS Skt. $ "€ 
^ base karahita,"® for dtjsglesrly a modification of $ esi 


é Prof. sat Shastri Collection. P oe 
Operation’, A by-form is sakrata.“ Eee 


180 


Digitized by ANSE Oh ANOPEHERKA ana eGangotri 


ny other terms in Old-Javanese texts of the Kutara-Manay, 
ais AI writings based on them which will excite the interest of 
variety and the 23 


d . the H 1] yence of I dian culture and languag 8 upon other Cou; 
b "ns 2 In 
yone siuayıng 


* ever . add ta ndom selection. By the nat f tion. 
tri Í south east Asia. Lat us & ra ec 
T168 O: -OAS 


as Kutara-Manawa ($8; 21) understands five cases of foroo majeur 
gūdhāraņa the Kuta tion» seizure by tho king, inundation) which dispene» i 
(theft, war, ae Qs posit. Jonker!*? surmised that these ‘five general 
depositary from GARM ie in the sense of 'the five universal disasters’. qt. 
or universal ono3 C ās ‘sin, crime’) ‘the five serious sins” aud similar 
the paticapētaka (Skt. pata šā (ibo ABS calamities were paūcasadrša, if the eXpreg. 
expressions. Other s "m is correctly considered as having arisen from 
sion panca sédrasa, CC p RES 'similars proper’), aud, according to 
€ M LA aña ‘usual’, and pancabhaya- (Skt. bhaya. 313 ‘dan. 
E Kutara-Mānawa dovote3 a Luāiber of clausos to the concept sthasa 
‘crimes of violence’, and gives a definition of it Which is a cross vai e ac- 
counts of its naturo and its limits taught by the Indian authorities Manu, Yüjiiaval- 
kya and Narada.'2? Tho word salsa is a derivative from sahas Nē: meaning force’, 
and sahah, Narada (17,1) says, is also termed bala- AS, and balatkara- AGIAN is a 
well-known Sanskrit word for ‘employment of force, violonce?. 
this very meaning, as walātkdra or wālakūra in OJav. texts 
word walat has rightly boen held to have arisen from 
syllable.'2? In the Kutara-Mànawa walat an 
sāhasa a-malat (a verh derived from wal 
appropriate in a violent or illegal way’; 
walat-sahasa is another com 
lized walat, moreover, 
importuning', The Ba 
kanya EFT] ‘gir 
TS fruit’) and some more vari 
ing unlawful treatment. 


It occurs, with 
and the frequent OJay. 
the first part of this quadri- 
d sāhasa interchange as synonyms, or 
at) forms unity bo express the idea of 'to 

the full form «alatkara occurs in § 157; 


, 
bination forged by the authorities on law. Tho natura- 


conveys such connotations 
lineso juridical ex 


» walat-drawe (Skt. dravya- gag "property'), walat-pala (Skt. phala- 


as a girl etc. are the objects suffer- 
ese walat hag undergone an interesting 
t means ‘punishment, affliction, cala- 
nces, disrespectful treatment or affront 
enēration; the faculty of inflicting such 
hich Cannot he treated disrespectfully without 
evil consequen cop’, Quite unlike tho meaning of 
er, remind Ourselves, that wilayat has been used in 


Ar i "bet . 5 : 1 
abian origin, expresses in Persian and Hindi not 


only the idea of ‘power, authority, high Office’ 


nese men of lett i ; „Which has been borrowed by the Java- 
AA Euh also that of acis, holiness’ whieh in Java seems to have 
Kutara-Māna fojo 4 et about Confusion with walat,'25 


efect oka Vāltpārusga as ‘abusive words censuring 
reefing at him in an angry men (00d, behaviour, birth, family, abilities ete. oF 
S of UBER Mone of the Various definitions given by the 
Offences, Tn other:codes censure Tings comprehendg the same catalogue of 
authority Narada) is ; "o of another's country (alg tioned by the Indian 
S Āā Included, T, fé sam us y E 
7 f “Svaneze text explains 
8 other people, epiti, > Wounding another, killing animals, 
+s SPiftin i , 
CC-0. Prof. T E gusna 


„A bin 


Digitized by ARE PR Chennai and eGangotri 
ANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


—— E 181 
» Another crime described in the Indi NNUS 
1 gsault + x ndian books i a 
n *the unlawful coming together of a man anda (M Q5) senarakan. At- 
zal enjoyment, 


it proughs about by force, hy deceit, or by sen 


be 5 s : sual passion’, In K: 

- 8 947 and $ 250 the same term is agpeciatic «1: : in Butara- 
oom pecially applied to the third kind of 
adu š 


In the same work ($ 232) an ‘expiatory fine’ is in 
E horseback or driving a vehicle run into other peopl 
culpable homicide, and this fine is termed gamidara. 
this word with Skt. vidāra- faa tearing, cutting, lacerating (Jav. prefix "i 
nasalization), cf. also ;eidaranas PEST ‘the act of breaking cee A a 
delict is mitrünurüga : performing magical rites in order to put a stop to ostia 
acts of another and to win his hear? (Kutara-Mānava, $ 174): though we might 
expect to find mitranuraiijana the term is perfectly clear : Skt. mitra. faa "tried? 
and anurüga- AFUT affection; anuranjana- ATER the act of conciliatins affec- 
tion’. 


flicked on persons who, when“ 
9 and so become guilty of 
I would propose to connect 


In OJav. texts the word sadu, spelled in various ways, occurs to express 
such ideas as ‘lodging a complaint, giving notice or information, denouncing’: a 
man has to give notice of stolen property found in his house and hidden there by 
the thieves. A by-form is prasadu.'?7 The derivativo sadon (< sadu-- -an)!** com- 
bined with hina (Skt. hina- t4 ‘insufficient, without’) means ‘inveracious’. 
Although, for all I know, Skt. sadhu- T3 has no juridical sense of the above des- 
cription, attention must ba drawn to the fact that the root sadh- T4 conveys the 
juridical meanings of ‘enforcing payment, recovering debts’ and that sadhana- Ua 
alse stands for ‘means of correcting or punishing’. Moreover, the usual sense of 
Skt..sēdhu- ‘correct, honest, virtuous’ might have developed into ‘to act correctly; 
to give notica as it should be’. Yet, some semantical link, some particular use in 
a law-text is still missing without which this otymology caunot be regarded as 
established, 
The Jav., Bal. ets. dénda, dénda ate. ‘fine’ is, of courso, the Sit. danda- 47$ 
staff, the rod as a symbol of power, application of power, punishment of any kind’. 
In ancient Malay law persons guilty of treason were like Hindu traitors impaled. 
It seems that this form of execution was unknown in other regions of the Archi- 
pelago. It shows its place of origin by its Sk. name: sula spit, sharp stake, 
E (on a pointed stake stuck vertically in the ground): Skt. Sa. TW spit, 
Dike’),129 
The Kutara-M&nawa!?? refers to several kinds of slaves viz. dhwajahrta mi 
dhoajahria. waaga ) ‘captured in battle grhaja (Skt. grhaja- BH) born in tha 
house's dang A agza ) ‘a person enslaved for non-payment 
k K andadasa ( Skt. dandadasa- «9S3 ; ho serves for his food as 
a fine"; bhaktadasa (Skt. bhaktadasa- WS) slave M 3 tedly found in these. 
Other distinctions and classifications of this kind are zonek mar IL. 
Long lists are given by the author of the Adi-agama. 
authorities point out that some cate 
868, or can, though incompetent in disputes 
. ìn grave matters only, or if it is impose! 
sompetont, Rē! a M d Bro p qualifications af w 
ŠOTOSS Such Mies T RAM S 
UU terms aa but SkET dieser an ass E 
& bhittasaksin. E GLEN means ‘an oyo-wibnes 


texts, 
Indian 
Witneg 


Witnea v 
"under certain CIICU 


Digitized by AD SE RP. SN datDOSESRAi and eGangotri 


182 


das ‘a witness who isa gambler’; ekasaksi taken in the censo of ‘a fema] 
M U to which the meaning ‘a witness who is impotent, a eunuch 3 
woman wbo never discharges the menses mouse criped. The last'termikag been 
corrupted : it should be himsaka (Skt. himsaka- fat) hostile persons and cheatg 
cannot be made witnesses, and the meanings of the terms have undergone reinter 
pretation (if this is the correct term!): in the Sanskrit texts the ekah TF: ig ‘a single 
Besides, ‘a marked man or maimed’ must not act as a witness: cedaiga 
a term which has remained in use in Balinese customary law: Skt. cheda- ¥z "n 
ting off, deprivation’ and angu- Ar ‘limb’, Where has the compound come into 
being? Probably in Indonesia, if a word afgacheda- AFFF was altered into chedūiiga: 
under the influence of chinndnga- fist ‘whose limbs have been cut, wounded eto, 
which is not given in the Sanskrit dictionaries cither.'** 
There are also divine witnesses: the trayodasasaksi (Skt. trayodusa agza and 
sakst «TU or ‘thirteen witnesses’, enumerated in the Adi-agama :'?* biyoh e (the 
name has been developed, in some way or other, from diyoh or dyoh, i.e. Skt. dyauh 
dt) bumi (translated into Balinese by gumi which has developed from buni): Skt 
bhūmi- sa ‘earth’; candra : Skt. candra- 373 ‘moon’; arka (translated by sur y 
Skt. sūrya- QA) : Skt. arka- 4% ‘sun’; gēni < Skt. agni- ala ‘fire’; Ec 
Bt ; : ire’; yama- (properly the 
ord of the deceased, translated by sabda to speak, order’; Skt. $ z i 
i sonu d by „order; Skt. sabda- Az); anila: 
Skt. anila- ads ‘wind’; ratria (sie): Skt. ratri- Ufa ‘night 
‘ ae 3 : Skt. rūtri. WA night; dwisande (translated 
by evening, but the OJav. text 35 corr 1 i 
oco (O V : be correctly has evening and morning’) € dvisam- 
norsk visam yo- ZAA adj. and ubhe samdhye SH UA in the Mbh tt; 
dasudiya (‘morning’ according to the Bali inte : M 
e RE A o Balinese interpreter) which looks like a cor- 
om 4N (gat: the ten regions (east etc., and, in addition to them, 
n over ead and underneath’); hrdaya (Skt. hrd Sorc 3 vhi 
appears in parallel texts and refe Lo Le eniti - Ardaya- t3) heart, soul which 
dont PM px oe EEA rs P € (purusa) who resides in the human 
à NON EC -am apah (explained by toya< Skt. - : Skt. 
ad "ES gn yawa (which means ‘day’) : 2137 iesākt boyas RUEL 
er terms are e. ; - 
buddhi- g3fz noc A RM ‘persons guilty of serious crimes'!?*: Skt. dur- 
Crus a 9 3 ili i 
durniti- gát 'impolioy, aitondu PA applied to other transgressora!?? : Skt. 
money-lending is called lob. ee 4 2 eios or evil-doer in connection with 
amount (of a debt)’ ig called ich (K 5 E. 5 gees covetousness’. The -total 
Autara-Manawa, $ 167 and elsewhere): Skt. 


pinda- Íquz in the gg í 

- ngi ) 

is used to express the o OMM Skt. saiketa- aka ‘stipulation, agreement’ 

: & tl a Gin 

avadhi- wala > OJgv. awadi, which me; another term for ‘time, limit’ is the Skt. 
fixed, reseryed'J4" Tt would be i BS CDD to have developed also the meaning of 
expressed by the Skt. laukika ES js exactly to know all the connotations 
general custom’ in Met IVA 4 belonging to or ocourring in ordinary life, 


under suspicion’ n idioms: in ‘ On. n 
picion', n law-books'!*! it oocurs for being 


explaine 
H , 
witness ; 


, 
person. 


NOTES 
* The Agnipurā 


deseription of f th ; 
: an adoration addressed to a al begins by stating that 
8 the gun, etc, 
a 1 . 
to the sun) are Used; | d Td Balinese Sūryasewana has been 
CC-0. Prof. Satya viet eH WithibytidR, Goris, Bijdrage tot de 


BANS 


K 
Digitized by Arya SAR AN ANDOU Sz and eGangotri 


ig de . 
jon logie, (Leydēn 1926), ch. I, to 
go 


ó exposition, which cannot be 
E a as final, we must refer for the 
ete vocabulary and a survey of the 
pativ Lan 38 s whole. See also P. de 
Put Angelino, Mudra's op Bali, (The 
Hague 1922, s p 
the same year in the Folkwang-Verlag, 
Mala i W. as vol. XV of the saries 

D 


‘Kulturen der Erde’). 


3 Which was not clear to Goria, o.c., | 
p43. In a text edited by Grueg, o.e. | 


p.158 karawista serves to wrap round a 
jar. In the OJav. text Korawasrama (ed. 


J. L. Swellengrebel, Thesis Leyden, | 
Santpoort 1996), p.30 a wilesayatawa | 


(Skt. bilesaya- ATT "an animal which 


lives in holes, a snake’ and sava- 34 | 


'corpse') does duty for a karawista. 


4 Sundanese has ganitri, by-forms men- | 


tioned. in KBW. IV, p.648 are ginitri, 
guniiri. 

5 T algo refer to Petersb. Wörterbuch in 
kürz. Fassung sub voce and R. Schmidt, 
Nachtrāge zum Sanskrit-Wērterbuch 
(Leipsic 1998), p.165. 

* The term is found in Iudian texts. 

7 Who is the most holy river and is 
represented by the holy water. 

* Bee e.g. A. Danidlou, Yoga, (London 
1949) p.95ff. 


T The well-known lotus posture is con- | 
sidered by some schools to be the best | 


sana, 


"^ Bee also the remarks made by Goris, | 


Oc, p.24. The anantāšrama is repea- 
Ry mentioned in Balinese sources. 

In Sanskrit navasakii is a bahuvribi 
Serving as a name of the great gods Siva 


di Vigņu. These nine formulas also 
ta T in purünio texts, the first of them 
ei 


qu. co 7Um diptayai nanah Ž ù QA 

(splen a tam adoration to the blazing 

n id) (power), 

z E diin Sources dealing with rela- 
Jects use the term mülamanira- 

Primary or fund&fnürtel tawa 


r Oud-Javaansche en Balinee. | tra’, 


a German edition appeared | 


^ Ct. Kālidāsa, Kunā 
and Malia umarasambhaya 3, 15 
|“ In itself the f 
| 88 & cvi-form fr 
| 


Sanskrit ? (Or Schmi 
tin Sa . Schmidt, 
o-c., p.345 : sivibhūta-). The form $ini- 


| wik H |, . 

pee (OJav. infix -in-) is quoted 

ES « IL,p.213 from 8 passage dealing 

vith the tolemnization of a marriage : 
marrying' is one of the meanings of Skt. 

svikarana. (sitam). 

|  KBW. III, p.209. 

| '5 See Pischel, $ 82, 


1 A native commentator, quoted by 

Goris (o.c., p.80): interpreted siwanga as 

like Siwa’, cf. OJav. kadyanga beside 

kadi meaning like, as’. 

'* Fine powder of aromatic wood. 

1° This and the other utensils are des- 

| cribed and represented in H. J. E. F.Sch- 

| wartz, Gids van de Ethnographische 

| Verzameling van het Bataviaasch Ge- 

| noot-chap, Zaal Bali en Lombok, p.f, 

| plate VII and VIII. 3 

| 22 Van der Tupk, KBW. II, p.262 is si^ 

| lent about an etymology; Juynboll asks 

| himself whether the word is Sanskrit; 
Goris o.c., p.94 gives some forms or vari- 

| ants without saying that they are Sans- 

| krit. 

| » KBW. II, p.262. 

22 Rosa sinensis L. 

23 geo e.g. Kidung Sunda 1, 19b, and 

| Berg's note (BEI. DXXXIII, 1924, p.65). 

| 24 Qf. eg. also Kd. Sunda 9, 17, where 

the token(s) of subordination offered by 

dependencies are called panalpika. 

25 Goris, 0.65 p.34f. MES 2 

16 Geo e.g. J. J. Meyer, Trilogie altindi- 
cher Machte und Fe te der Vegetation, 

(Zirioh-Leipsio pe er 

17 Juynboll, Drie boesen, ps 

19 zarā osoa RAL? i SR 


een kring’. : 
29 This linguis 


T Es chapter. 
Lebnaierin.tne,nest ee 


tio phenomenon 


184 Digitized by AE SANE 


20 See Goris, 0.¢,; p.d7it. 


31 Tn a mantra, quoted by Goris, O.C. | 


p.38 thase seven wrddhis are Sound 
ted : ayutordd li ‘increase of vital E. 
(Ski. ayurvrddhi- agate), m u 
‘increase of renown (Skt. gorda 
gāttgtz), wrddhi prajūā-sukha-srīvā (sic), 
i.e. (vrddhi- BF, prajūā Wut: sukha- Fa 
aud i AY ‘increase in intelligeuce, hap- 
pinezs and fortune’ (cf. Renou, Gram- 
maire sanscrite, (Paris 1930), T, $ 86 c); 


dharma-santana-wrddhis ca inereace in | 
; 47 Words for 


dharma and offspring’ (Skt. dharma- YÀ, 
santüna- Grate). 

** I refer to Goris, 0.2 , p.40 

3? Bee e.g. Meyer, o.c. I, p.101ff.: and 
Ill, p.968. 

** T also refer to KBW. IV, p.959f. 

?* The texis of these Balinese mantras 
origin or character. The rājamantra 
runs as follows : Om hrom jrim jvaline 
namah | Om hrom rum rainepalaye na- 
mah | Om hrom krom kulaputryaye (sic) 
namah | Om hrom kum kulaputryaye de- 
waya namah. 

4€ We put on one side the question how 
fat the meanings of these In 
Indonesian etymologically 
exactly agree. 


dian anā 
related terms 
See also tho remarks 
made by Sylvain Lévi» in "Actes du XV- 
II? Congres internationg] d 
tes', (Leyden 1932), p.ī59, 
?' See V. R. Korn, 
Bali, (The Hague 1924), p.69£. 
** The terms sudra and 

mostly used by member 


es orientalig- 


calur-jalma aye 


MD themsely 
ksamen men, people belon 


groat mass’; ksamin ( kës 
he derived from Sam 
variant of sama * Bk 
the same, 


es wan 
ging to the 
_\ sesamen ) must 
? which, being a 
t. sama- WR ‘equal, 
» COmmon’ in Bali- 
Javanese ser 


i * KBW. III, p.459. The 
3 of the three | 


the tommonerg them. | 


y INDONESIA : 
ANS or SĒR and eGangotri 


m. 


i 40 T refer to Korn, o.c., p.79, ^O 
41 KBW. III»; p.502, 
*? Of. Pischo!, $ 31717. 
** Bal w oro in tho ‘Anlaut’ of & Won]. 


Jav. té or wa (Bal. odal : Jav. tvčda)) 


44 Bee chapter IV, section 3, 
i ** Quoted KBW. III, p.579, 
| ** A frequent phrase ig Mal. muda bilia 
| ‘in the epring of life’, the first member 
of which is the native word for "Young, 
the second tho Skt. bdlya- NGA ‘child. 
hood’. 
‘virgin’ or ‘virginal’ often 
also express such ideas ag ‘unmixed, 
pure, uvalloyed’ (Engl. virgin gold). 
'** See R. A. Kern, in H. Hasan Moes- 
tapa, Over de gewoonten on gebruiken 


der Soendaneezen, (Tho Hague 1946): 
| p.159. 
give a good impression of their Indian | 


Cf. Engl. naive (which can express 
the idea of ‘frankness, candidness')< 
Lat. nativus ‘inborn, natural, not arti- 
fieial't frank < Fr, franc ‘free’, the 
gamo word as the namo of the people, 
Frank, the Franks having been the only 
free class in ancient Gaul or France; 


Engl. ingenuous ‘frank’ < Lat. ingenitus 


"native, free-born, upright". In English, 


| virginal is raid of a mind which is unso- 
; Dhisticated and untouched by prejudice. 
| MT 

| ^^ The now disused Jav. wlaka ‘without 


anything (special)' belongs to the same 


i , Broup of words, 
Fet adatrecht Yan | * In OJav, adiksa (a-, native prefix) 


pupil". 
word-end 
niin often appears among the numerous 
STOups of sounds which aro used in 
varying existing native and foreign 
Words (ece ch. T, 8.1). 

a In OJav. texts Such connotations 88 
Purifying power or influence’ are also 
expressed by thia word, of. e.g. Agastya- 
parwa D. 873 (45). 

* This word is disoussod in another 
section of this bool, 

55 Thig Word, which in Jav. is a name 


LI . 
means to have an (ordained) 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat S29 thectarin co and royal persons (kr: 


Digitized by BS Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
IN mai 
S E - 186 - 
difficult to account for. As we | s 


2 a 4 gosti (KBW. IV, p. 732) which, 
als0 


* The go. ns Kite 


| Quoted as "Jonker'g 
other hand, also stands for Skt. | and translat 


à-Mànawa, often 
code of law’: edited 


e ed S 
m mtg assembly, rw we may | Oud-Javaan: ck Wal EE 
perhaps guüppo-e denas ae word | See p 90, § 961, and also Jonker’s note 
from ? ionge M "member (or | 5 p r 

ent) of the C | ee e.g. Manu 9, 

Dern, History of the Indian | und Sitte, [ues 
Archipelago, 8 vol. (1820) II, p.238. 98i. According to some auinar ee the 
s7 See Korn, 0.C., P- 355. eldest son of a member of one of the 
se Quoted KBW. III, p 136f. Balinese triwanea inherited four fifths 


s [n manuscripts irgņū is sometimes | and the compound; one says that in 
deformed to krésno (i.e. Skt. krsna- Bsn}! | | connection with inheritance the com- 
60 T refor bo Shatavdhani Jaina Muni | | pound was called pauca udara. See 
Shri Ratnachandraji Maharaj, An illus- | Kutara- ‘Minewa S197 I T7). 


trated Ardha-Magadhi Dictionary IV, | For uddhara see also T. G. Lekkerkerker, 


(Bombay 1932), p.884. | Hindoe-recht in Indonesié, (Amsterdam 
«1 For other particulars see Wilkinson, | 1918) p 84. 
MED. II, p.309. | ** Jonker (see above), o.c., p.91, § 2628. 


«2 Of. Mundari dinda ‘spinster, unmar- | *? We shall revert to this word. 

S abos | 7? T refer to P. V. Kane, History of 
«5 Compare already SvetaSvatara-upa- | Dharmasistra, ILI, (Poona 1946), p.418. 
nigad 6,10; 16, Maitryupanigad 6, 10. | "' Brhaspati quoted by Apararka ete.; 
Whereas part of the later Saiva ti» | see Kane o.c, p.419, n.680; cf. also 
sophers consider Siva and his ‘Power’ | Jonker, o.c. p.233. i 
(represented as his wife) Sakti as the | "7 Tho text has the corrupt reading, 
primordial substapces: for tbose who | karaka wrddhi. :. 3 
kept the creative principle māyā cr | 73 The two kinds of intereat mentioned 
pradhàna as distinct from the god and | last aro discussed in ae uc 
undergoing independent development Most Indian texts deal wijūsfūtīji 


dd 
the Sakti idea was not wanted.—See, e.g., | Byhaspāti and Gautamas IGS 
ļ 
D 
| 


also R. Garbe, Die Sámkhya-Philoso- | two more varieties. Sze also Kane, 0.6, 
phie? (Leipsic 1917), p.62. As to other | p.419. 933 supposes the 
meanings of Skt. pradhana- Walt OJav. | "' Jonker, E laga i etymologi- 
&uthore repeatedly use it to express the expression lo De 


idea of 'chief person, the most essential 
or important.. , and also as an equi- 
valent of our 'money-lender' or ‘credi- 
tor’ (Skt, dhanika. alas or uiiamarua- 

‘creditor’), a senso which may 
pave been derived from ‘chief person” or | (164) oig 
‘origin out of which the money has | 5658 and 


o Im 
ome’, but is not known to me from | Eoo 918 


ally. 3 
» Another Indian term, used by Gau 


tama, is adhibhoga- M 


a6 I refer to Korn, 0.04 D: abt. An inte- 


the Kutara Agama 
anslated into Bali- | 
ju Djlantik - 


anakrit texts, 
‘ | ring justice : 
«The verba] form nyēntanayai means | in duisi PY. 
6s ae dont a son`. , be noi ae 
gr, Poll, Drie boeke $: eoe RH Oe 


186 


Digitized by Ana Samer raugdation ftavrat pad eGangotri 


= Li 
be taken into consideration’ ( see also 
KBW. I, p.619), to wit the lokadrēsta 
‘the reputa ion of the justiciables to 
whom tho law is administered (Skt. loka- 


vix ‘the world, ordinary life); the | 


pūrwadrēsta the traditional and exem- 
plary custom, the conventions of society 
which decide what is proper ete.’ (Skt. 


pūrvā- vā "former, ancient, traditional, | 


customary ); the desadrésta ‘the custo- 
mary law of the villages (Skt. desa- da); 
sasiradrësia ‘the lino of conduct and 
rules laid down in the aganias’ (Skt, 
Sastra- ATA 'a book or treatise of divine 
authority, a manual of rules, a religious 
or scientific treatise’). 

77 Tn Old-Javanese sad WX is found in 


compounds and sometimes ag a single | 


word; tatayi occurs (as far as I know in 


Middle-Javanese texts) beside the full ' 


form ūtatāyī. 
78 See also Jonker, o.c., p.86, 


mašāstra 3,16; Visnusmrti 
™ See KBW., lic. In 
Javanese paraphrase 
` gloka runs like this: 
agnidah wisyadas ceva 


5, 1911. 


8 are given, Tho 


astrodyatakaras tatah 
aparwanes ca han tatah : 


Desunes ceva raian; 
fo which the following Dassage A 
daratikrama. The word aparwvanes ig 
& corrupted form of ūtharvana. MAAN ‘a 
Person engaged in magic’, 
99 Seg Kutara-Mānawa $91 (Jonker 
p.40f.), Jonker, p.170 already GERM 
Manu 9, 278; Yājūavalkya 2,276 à 
Similar texts Which agr ee 
With thig passage. 
?! Bee Jonker, o.c, 
*! Ina ‘law-text? 
z sloka is given which in a 
orm enumerate '8 ej 
(here ealleg eiut ns 


^ sta ‘ei h i 
sons ‘Skt, asta. wp db peli Zi 
kah i.e. Skt, himeata, fíax eo Visa. 


injurious, enemy? (i. 


ĉo to a point, 


1 p.96 and 163f, 
quoted KBW. 


$ 945, and | 
KBW. ITT, p.166. Ci. og. Vāsistha Dhar. 


"Jonker's code” only | 


ew 
CC-0 BE Gaya Veatcbhigelri 


| ) 


impel. 
8 ex. 


person who doos other People injury 
coddekhah, i.e. Skt. codaka. leq | 
| ling, who impels’; bhoktah which 
| plained as to wound a guiltlesg Person? 
but seems to represent Skt. bhokty. (ae 
| nom. gg. bhokia) ‘who enjoy 
(in a similar text quoted by 
p.163 bekta is road which may be a some. 
what less corrupted form and represent 
a verbal noun meaning ‘who hurtg ); 
bhojekah io. Skt. bhojaka. stag ‘who 
gives to eat’; sakacarakah (<saihamedra. 
; kah or sahacdrakah, Skt, MER UH: ?) 
| "who proceeds togother, associato’; priti. 
| kah : Skt. pritida- Stfatz ? (or=prītikara. 

MART ‘causing pleasure to’? ‘who gives 
| pleasure, affectionate? ( ‘to bea friend 


8, Cats, feels! 
Jonkor, 0.0, 


of the criminal’ according to the nativo 
| interprotation) ); stānadahi.e,Skt.sihāna- 
AT "place, abode! + da. Z ‘giving’; tratah 
, Le. Skt. tratr- (Alā, nom. sg. trata) ‘who 
saves from..., protector’, The OJav. in- 
| terpretation exactly agrees with Jonker's 
; text, p.36, $ 1, where, however, the 
| Sanskrit terms aro wanting. See also 
| Jonker, p.163f. 


| ^* Also in ancient texts; seo KBW. I, p. 
| 444, 


| ** Other particulars 

| KBW. II,p.462. 

SKB Ww, I, p.414. 

| 9G io to Hastings’ Encyclopaedia 

| of Religion and Ethics, VIII,p. 319a and 

| Vip: 608; 610. Seo 0.g. guch texts a8 
ĀSvGSūtra 1,24,14; Pā1GSūtra 1,4. 

Ou Pische], GPS., p.96,$ 119. 

** See e.g. T.C, Lekkerkerker, 0.¢., p.194; 
orn, o.c., p.12; 38; 267ff. and passim. 
n one of the Balinese states a priestly 

Court wag in former times entrusted with 

the administration of justice. Sometimes 

Priests werg Appointed jaksa ‘chief jus- 


tice, judga’, 4 faksa is often also spoken 
of ag kērta, 


89 . 

nls word ig discussed in another 
fection of thi 
90 


8 book, 
Sajecta by popular otymology 
ation, boen altered to liù mn 


may be found in 


Digitized by AAS SAR EFF ēdndātībO Khemgai and eGangotri 


187 


E € , € t$ 
kita may mean we' or wish. 


kitai Korn, o.c p.254, n. 2. ( 

g1 Quoted by Korn, 0.C-, p.40%, D. 4. — 1941), p.159). TODA 

$5 yajíavalkya 2,86. See Kane, o.c., | ceeded in tracing this SES EN ERG: 
TIT, P. 339i. — literature, m in the IN. 
93 geo F. 8. Eringa, Loetoeng Kasaroeng, | 196 T algo nist M 

(Tho Hague 1949), p. 3691. — | 0.206 ana 910. er's remarks, 0.C., 
5 Gompare Skt. vyoman- AHF, space, | 107 Seo Lekkerkerker, oo, p.121 


ip > OJav. byoma "id. > lit. Mod. Jav. | 


mantara ‘air, atmosphere’). 
55 Thus Eringa, p.369. 
96 T. refer to Korn, o.c. p.457f.; 474; 
gee also p.157; 214. Cf. also Kutara- 
Manawa, 9 74. 
97 Qn lābha see P. V. Kane, History of 
Dharmašāstra, TII, (Poona 1946), p.777, 
n.1501. A terrain given by a Balinese 
prince to & temple is called a laba pura 
(pura, see ch.III, s. 6). These royal 
plots of ground are called druwe-land : 
druwe 'ownership <OJav. etc. drwya, 
drbya ‘possessions, property ete. <Skt. 
dravya- 3*3 ‘object(s) of possession’. 
s Yajfiavalkya 2,22; see also the other 
texts referred to by Kane, o.c. II, p. 
804., 
99 See Korn, o.c., p.254. 
100 T refer to Kane, o.c., p.306. 
171 Seo e.g. Kane, o.c., p.324. 
'? Seo also Kutara-Mànawa, è 267, in 
fine, and the corresponding passage in 
Agama, Oud Balisch Wetboek (transla- 
ted into Balinese by Gusti Putu Djilantik | 
and Ida Bagus Oka, Batavia 1909, p.75). | 
o Adiagama, Oud Baliseh Wetboek | 
(translated into Balinese by Gusti Putu 
Djilantik and Ida Bagus Oka, Batavia 
1909), p.57. 
"* As under Muslim law a divorced 
Woman cannot remarry her former hus- 
band unless she has been married to 
Another man in the interval, an un- 
attractive person is paid to marry ber 
end divorce her immediatēly when a re- 
* Marriage is desired. 
a KBW. I, p.564 where Van der 
cheer deriving the word from Skt. 
dita. ftw ‘becoming a mark 


poma (bo 


ee also the same, Tobasshs*spxak sist Eoi 


kunst, p.19 an 


108 
Wi Although Devagamastotra- znana 
| 2 C. are titles of books. One of the Hindu- 
| «avanese codes of law’ preserved in Bali 


| nese; it only means ‘conversation, talk, 
| topic’. For ‘lawsuit’ parakara (<Mal. 


| us T also refer to my remarks in ch. IV. 
1 


| given KBW III, p208—The initial ten- 


| men 


d my remarks BKI, c 


is called Dewtgama (one of the manu- 
scripts has dewaghama!) which deals with 
evidence, false accusations and several 
juridical topics. The Bal. dewagama ‘oath’ 
may have borrowed its name from this 
ora similar text dealing with ordeals 
etc. 

12° T refer to KBW. III, p.465. 

uo The meaning ‘to speak’ is wanting in 
this language. 

nı Barge has borrowed bisara from Begi- 


pērkara, Skt. prakara- TX cf. also pra- 
karana- AFW) has been introduced. In 
Bisaya bisála (< Skt. vicara- ATR) means 
‘word, expression. See Korn, o-c., p.19 
and 261; Lekkerkerker, 0.6., p.153. 

"2 KBW. I, p.lī2. 


The form Swara instead of Īswara i8 


uis of titi is discussed in the next chap- 
section 1.—The form sowara is 
tioned in KBW. TH, p.209. 
atter for considera- 
her member of the 


ter, 


us Tt would bea m 
tion how far the ot 
jjj «niti. i ented by 
compound jiti < niti is repres 
tho word-base titi (KBW. Ib p652) 
which seems to convey such meanings ; 
as ‘being ccrupulous in performing 
customary practices, ruling, visions 
er. (il 
ue van Eck, Eerste Pe van 
Balinessch-Hollandse™ 4 e 
(Utrecht 1876), pe s 
from completes i nog; 
2 Gerioke and T.: 


eg 
lection. 


188 


-ach-Nederlandsch 
or MN 1901), I, p.400. 
17 Cf. e.g Bhārata-Yuddha 26,2. 

"5 Thua KBW. II, p.62. 

u KBW. l.c. 

110 Jonker, 0.c., p.211. 
` südharana dharma is the dharma which 

is common to all humanity. 

"! Adi-agama (see sbove), p.4l. 

same work has also the hybrid com- 

pound panca-susah ‘sho five troubles’ 

(p 43). 


122 Of. Jonker, o.c., p.171 ff.; Kane, o.c, i 


III, p.525ff. 
123 This etymology has beon proposed 
by Van der Tuuk, KBW. III, p.581 and 


Jonker, o.c., p.174; Juynboll, Wdb. is | 
But see also | 
H. Kern, Da Fióji-taal, Proceedings | 
Amsterdam Academy, Lett. XVI (1686), ' 


silent about this point. 


p.216. 

124 I refor. to Gericke-Roorda, II, p.54, 
"5 A. W. T. Juynboll's List of Javanese 
and Sundanese words of Arabian and 
Persian origin (revi-ed by H. H. Juyn- 
boll), BKI. XLIV (1894), 
„On this point, 

126 Juynboll's etymology (Wal, 
"Parhaps from Didara’) seems incorrect, 
"7 Kutara-Manawa ,§ 53 Sse KBW. III, 
p.110 and Jonker, o.c. p.177. 

"* Rangga Lawe (ed. C, C. Berg, Wolto. 
vreden 1930, Bibliotheca Javanica I) 
10, 12 spalt sadhon, The combination 
hinasadu (sic) is found in a 
quotad KBW. III, p.140. 

125. Sas Winstedt, Ola Malay Le 
and Malay Customary Law 
P.23; und Wilkinson, MED. II p.496 
130 Kotara-Mánawa, $ 15; 169; "10 8, 
Jonker, O.C., p.234f, É AC 
' Compare e.g. Many 8,415, 


"5 Adi-agama (see above), p 671. 


8 See also KBW, IV, p.937, 


"^ The Skt. cheda- za h 

28 spr 
Sundanese (>cedy (s) AVR A 
kabau enceda (6+ nasalization, 80-c. ie 
Prothesis) damaged, injured’ yp 


p 938 : 


passage 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat SPDaahaarátom js v a XV (1935). 


Digitized by RÀ SR Fbinddi:6X Chena and ermi ' 


Handwoordenboek | 35 O.c., p.170. A timilar liet i 


In Indian works | 


The | 


p 200 is silent : 


gal Digest i 
, JRAS. 1945, | 


a 


= 
8 foung 


„im the OJav. Adiparwa, p.70 (Juynboly’, 


edition ) where Mbh. 1,74,30 ia quoted 
„and explained. There tho order of the 
| divino beings is : sun, moon, wind, fire | 
sky, earth, water, hrdaya (translated » | 

| 

| 


ātma) ‘heart or soul’, Yama (see further 
| on), day, night, dawn and dusk and 
Dharma. These divine beinga are said to 
be witnesres of the evil acta Performed | 
| by man. See also Manu 8,86. | 
"5 Quoted KBW.TI, p 614. SÉ 
'37 There are, in addition to the above | 
; enumerations, lists of ‘the six qualities’ | 
; (sadguna : Skt. sadguņa- «Zn! ‘the six 
measures to bo practised or advantagea’) 
termed sandi : Skt. sandhi- ufru "agreo- 
ment, reconciliation’: stana : Skt. sthāna. 
TATA ("knowledge of) the propor place’; 
naya : Skt. naya- 3A ‘policy, prudence’; 
kriya : Skt. kriya fey l'action, perform- 
ance of ections in accordance with the 
dharma’); dwigata: Skt. dvigata. Zaa 
'Enowledgo of ambiguous (words); and 
sraya: Skt. asraya- IT ‘having recourse 
to” retpectively; of the sapta-upaya (Skt. 
sapta-G"a ‘seven’ and upüya- SNA ‘moans 
of succass’, to wit ksama, dana, bèda, 
danda, upeksa, 


indrajala and marya: as ig 
well known the usual enumeration con- 
|! Siste cf the four firet-named ‘expedients 
of royal politics’ only; somo Indian || 
authorities, however, add threo others, | | 
and this Balinose list follows Kāman- 
| daka and the Agnipurana, the last term 
having developed from the Skt. maya 
gidi deceitful trick? ( according to the 
Balinese text jt means ‘to transform 
i onerelf into another person or appear- 
PRES i and othor similar enumerations. 
T Soe Korn, Adatrecht, p.991. 
AN di-agama, p.8f. i 
s T also refer to Jonker» o.o., p.170. 
"8+ Adi-agama (see above), p.26; of. 
KBW, rrr, P.679.—Finally, tho reader 
might be referred to R. Goris, Hot gods- 
dienstig karakteyr der Balisehe dorps- 


Eee 


di fa dd 


Roe 


igiti j i i and eGangotri 
Digitized by Arya Sama! Foundation Chennai an 
BASSE IN INDONESIA 
o = 189 


ns 


SECTION 5 
MEDICINE 


As is well known many Indonesian co 
yetem of medicino which is linked with ra! 
8 


has alwaye been during the early 


communities still contin 
ligion, magi 
stages of Searching a 
of the world. Among the prescriptions of the pawan 
ative practitioner and often professional ‘magician’ i 
other parts of the Malayan countries) or the bomor ( 
Northern Maliya, who likewise, bo-ides being a skill 
kinds of witchcraft) many are so ancient that th 
Muslim religion and sometimes even grave 
that numerous Sanskrit words too, hay 
words as bahu ‘shoulder’ (cf. &1:o kēpal 
Skt. bahu- 4 € 'arm','; nadi ‘the alte: 
the (arterial) pul-e' : Skt. nodi aifz 


ey preceeded the advent of the 
ly conflict with it. So it is no wonder 
e been preserved in their vocabulary. Such 
a bahu ‘the point or angle of the shoulder’: 
nate expansion and contraction of an artery, 
‘tuba, a tubular organ, vein or artery of tbe 
body’; sēndi ‘joint, mu-cle, tesdon : Sir. sandhi. afa "joint or articulation of the 
body’; kēpala ‘head’ (also in k*pala paha ‘tho groin’ (Mal. paka ‘thigh’) and simi- 
lar expressions)? : Skt. kapala- TTS ‘cranium, skull, skuli-bone'; bulu (a native word 
for ‘hair on the human body with the exception of hair on the head’) roma "body 
hair'—in Minangkabau dialects romo € roma means ‘heir on the pudenda’—, and lian 
(a native term for ‘hole’) roma ‘pores on the skin’: Skt. roma wa the hair on the 
body’; biji-biji ‘the testes’ and biji mata ‘the eyoball (Mal. mata 'eye?) which is an 
-i variant of bija which in Min. bijo su:vives in tho sense of grain, seed as tija 
Ha ‘seed, grain, Semen’ are connected with anatomy. , di uec "e e vi 
‘syphilis’ : cf. Skt. rājasimha- Wales; sambaran (Mal. pounoing) bula S s 
of one who is considered ‘to have been pounced upon by an en es 
or bota”: Skt. bhita- WA “demon, goblin’; naga balun (Mal. puc ra ni 
stick’) ‘a monstrous animal like a mountain dragon believed 2 an lā pains 
With blows from its tail’ and ‘an affection consisting in griping Her dues 
in the body’ : Skt. nüga- TIT ‘a serpent-demon’, are ps > Ur. ‘a cold in 
The Skt. šlesman. 3&cH4 ‘mucus survives as sēlēsēma or sé 


C d 
> still denotes a woun 
the head, acute nasal catarrh’;* Skt. tunna- gw ‘hurt, cui stili ‘swoon, to faini 
tūna; m ; à rca, mórca swoon, 50 8/77 
, b 


Ln i 
existences’ (as si 


canoer’, 


Othor Sanskrit words aro still in use to pU. ae 

„sed 48 remediag: gula dērawa syrup” : Skt. drava- T 
abst, troo”) céndana (orietur 
^ ©8pecially among the Hindus living in the Mi 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESI:/ 


190 a 


T ode tA = SS 
es prescribe it in rice-gruel for phe pur pu fever? . 
Skt. candana- ZA ‘sandal (Sirium myrtifolium) MEN ìgo oS one of the* 
tajās fa Malay remedy for toothache: Skt. "i EUS 16 Indigo plant’; in 
ingredients 0 lant used after childbirth? or in making a remedy for head. 
Pi: M p Skt. pūtāla- T17 ‘(one of the seven) regions under the 
PME ne nen of serpent-demons eic. and bhivmi- ufa ‘earth’; the shrub 
naga buana ‘dragon of the world’ is mostly used for making ponibices : Skt. naga- am 
and bhuvana- Jad world, earth’; from a Geenen known as vēlihara (Justicia sp.) a 
decoction is made which is given after childbirth : in all probability Skt. parigraha- 
qftaz ‘surrounding, wrapping round’; rasa or raksa metallic mercury or quick- 
silver” is for instance rubbed behind the knee for elephantiasis: Skt. rasa. TA ‘id,’, 
The Malay practitioners not only resorted to drugs, but also to various 
magico-religious performances with the intention of curing sick persons. Thus the 
bomor conducts a village performance known as pérmainan (Mal. ‘play’) pētēri (in 
Mal. ‘princess’: Skt. putri Jat 'daughter') for curing purposes, or with the object of 
abating an epidemic.” The long invocations," exorcisms and other recitationg 
which form an intrinsic part of the ceremony’? though introduced by such Arabic in- 
vocations as: In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate’ and containing 
such holy Muslim names as "Mecca, Medina, the House of God’, are not free from 
Hindu survivals: side by side with the Muslim prophet; Adam, the Archangels 
etc. and with figures of native names Ranjuna (<Skt. Arjuna- aga) and Bētara 
Kāla (Skt. bhatlara- WER and kala: BI) aro mentioned. Séri Maharaja (Skt. sri At 
majina aama) is invoked in the same line as Arin Tanar (Mal. "The wind of 
Tanar) Which is called masyur (of Arab. origin) ‘famous’; ‘the hundred thousand 
si" tā ac) Rd ‘the hundred thousand dewa’ (Skt. deva- 
cerco ARĪ Oi or the dewas are distinguished from jins and 
m Arab. skaitān). When the bomor has reached a state of frenzy 


and swo gi: fale € 4 REM, ; 
E ons he is considered as representing a pēfēri spirit in whatever he says or 
oes and as actually in possession o 


For these spirits, which are all 


Malays themselv 


Banjuna!?, like his broth 7 
er Bim 
(Skt. Narada- anz ? 
Apart ana), Dewa saù Samba (Skt. Samba WU son of Kr 1 Jambavati) 
ndian heroes are ropeat A TD DN od 


the above description : ‘Peace be w 


, le jungle land | 
name, your origin ig gan Ranjuna Mark : na eg oet sprung ja 
une We 


my words; if ye do not listen fo 


ra äl 
piena à ptions) t : drohaka- Atam which is foun 
TAFIZ belonging toa fo he gods of olā (pērbakala dewa : Skt. pūrvakāla- 


rmer time’). "is 
ts a mee documents are often untranslatable 
ell aware of the value of mystery, of 
ie words and even incoherent 
Powerful incantations which aré 


" +0 wh 1 
ated may e geen Sen Vinh o Da and concepts of foreign 
Combinations as kérama t kē-sakti-Ott 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Ch i i 
g y RRNSRRIT IN puero eGangotri 
F + 


M Er 191 

ich is half Arabic (karamat working miracles’ said of hol a —— 

ate.) and half Sanskrit (sakti- af power’, in the IN. Pe Āri uijā RAE 
etnormal power') 


„am such invocations as Hantu tanah (Malay ‘Spiri 

2 bumi (Skt. bhumi- afa), Jin Hilam mS E Roh (spirit? 
aed pair uuaa i Enn Ši course being meant).!6 Further i he n is 
like jin kuni? parem indéra a yellow (Mal. kunii) celestial i jm hs 
(Arab. jin)" Meis is, according to a bomor consulted by a Euro MS 
‘the internal spirit that is supposed to control the seven (sic) ns scholar," 
term panca- indëria (Skt. paiica TA ‘five’ and indriya- giza ‘organs à aoe a 
found elsewhere ; from the use of a Sanskrit word like Orrin ma ĒRS is also 
kind of plume on the heads of horses etc.’ in connection with a diim eer 
consisting of dark, coarse, vegetable fibres tied together with cotton’? to cae 
the wearer against the charge of a wild boar (Mal. babi, hence cēmara bs) Qe 
the syncretism found in lists of jins (see above), e.g. in that of the 'genies ot the 
royal trumpets’ (Perak), including the Four children of the Iron Pestle and other 
primitive spirits, Brahma, Visnu and Indra as well as King Solomon and ‘Ali the 
fourth Caliph; even the Sultan of the Unsubstantial World (maya =Skt. maya siat) 
is not wanting, and side by side with jins with royal titles in Persian we come 
across female fairies with Sanskrit names;?? from the tabu vocabulary used in refe- 
rence to rulers and magicians which is half Malay, half Sanskrit (e.g. anugérah ‘to 
give’: Skt. anugraha- AZAS favour; murka angry : Skt. murkha- Ha ‘foolish’ etic.)?'; 
from the use of Skt. manira- W*4 Mal. maničra and Arab. dw’ ‘invocation, prayer 
eic.) » Mal. doa for ‘prayer-charms, spells or magical formulas, which, often 
forming part of a primitive ritual, are employed in various circumstances**— the 
etymology of the third term for ‘incantation’, jampi, has not been definitely 
established.?? . 

In various other traditions and ceremonies the syneretism of Indonesian, 
Hindu and Muslim elements—-the lasi-mentioned influence is sometimes only a 
veneer— can be observed.** In later ages a Malay ruler was the Shadow of Allah 
on earth’, but formerly he was regarded as an incarnation or receptacle of a Hindu 
divinity or a Buddhisatva. To graft the Indian conception of a mediator-king on 
to the Malay shaman-ruler was, indeed: not 80 very dificult. Dues 
and Negeri Sembilan are still installed with ceremonies containing Brahmanīca. 


icitram (<Skt. vicitra- 
and Buddhis A 25 i thronement the name Bicitram ( : 
dbist elements MM Perak prince, water is poured 


fafa brilliant’) is whispered into the ear of a ‘a (Skt. Sra- 


down VN itary herald entitled Sri Nara-dirdja (Šā z 
over his shoulders by a hereditary o illustrious emperor of men’; 


» nara- AX an iraja. afaa 'emperor) ‘the illu 
after the Mee itan puts on royal dress, of wbich pee Es Eu 
like the dragon Antaboga (Skt. anantabhoga- aaant and the WS Mor 
Mandakini ‘a broad-bladed short sword (Skt. churika Eo Ner s m" 
heavenly Ganges (Skt. Mandākint- geqifestl) form part. e ads s QE NN 
the new ruler takes his seat on the throne; then the be in Arabic chara F 
formula in corrupt Sanskrit (though now written down ees 
extolling the new ruler as a great king an : ; 


Justice, hig nc term cirt 
power of healing? The te iance” W 
S there is a Malay word céria ‘fidelity, loyalty, E 
nation-formu] a in RinucC@Rins Sotiovsas SRAN Collegian. 
AYN- ral ‘duo observanoo of all rites and custo 


wh 


qu 


- gods Brahma, Siva and Vignu respectively 


Digitized by ANAS TN FavpdzzttarsAennai and eGangotri 
i 4 <<) imams 


————— E TOU a 
eas 


192 
ee à 
This section would, however, 


i ME 
exteusive Balinese me lical literature 


à vents? to such 
; 1d Hindu elements 4 > ae « 
nally Indonesian at cS genuino Indonesian or pure Indian. In tho most 
itg aspects that 16 1 
about any of its 


, mountain. villages we find real Hindu institutions and conceptions, in 
onec M sid trog—such as the courts of tho old princes of Bali and the 
the most Hinduized e obsorve pure old Indonesian practices and ideag.?! 
pool ees x E the first place in religion which pervades the whole 
In every provine? o! Er nthesis of Hindu and Indonesian elements makos its 
pst ua. Bis of the island the various aspects of this 'eultu- 
proseno RE a M Ts reflostion. An important part of the treasures pre. 
Eu e CEA libraries is formed by handbooks for various arts and 
e conr which the medical manuscripts are vory numerous i piere oe 
scripts are called usada < Skt. ausadha- aigu herbs (colloctively),herbs used in medi- 
cine, medicament, medicine (in general). This term is also used for medicament’; 
the verb ausadha or jusada means ‘to go for medicaments’. In the sense of 
recipe-book' or ‘book on medical science we also come upon ihe name wisada, 
which probably has nothing to do with Skt. vistda- faatz ‘lassitude, despondenay, 
weakness’. The name of the special disearo is added to tho term usada : thus usada 
mala is a ‘handbook for patholegical enlargements of tho thyroid gland (goitro)': 
as one of the Indian names for this disease is gandamala NUZAIT1 ‘inflammation of the 
glands of the neck’ (lit. "a garland consisting in cxerescences of the neck’ ), the 
Balinose mala may be considered identical with Skt. mala RISI. Moro complete 
handbooks of medicine are the so-called dharma-usada (Skt. dharma- 3a ‘norm, law 
etc.); they are less specialised. A highly appresiated standard work is the Buda- 
kacapi or Buddha kécapi, called after a holy man of this name who teaches the art of 
the physician: we would suggest connecting this neme with Skt. Buddha- 9% ‘the 
Enlightened One’: Buddha was sometimes calleda ‘Master of medicaments’ (bhaisa- 
jyaguru), and kucchapa- 591 ‘tortoixe’, and a proper name: the twenty-fourth 
Buddha, the third of the present aeon, Kacchapa (Pali Kassapa Dasabala) is said to 
have prowulgated various teachings? One of the chapters of this text deals with 
the payment of the physician : the most common way is that of offering bim the 


third 3 of ihe sesanlun "the sum in money which is offered to the gods : the 
EPUM {reduplication and word-ending niun instead of S irom, sar pe 
sence sū. sūra- WW pith, essence’: the god i ja 
essence of the offering. gods are supposed to have takon 


ə highly incomplote if we do not mention the 
30. The culture of Bali is a synthesis of origi- 
an extent that wo can hardly say 


The Balinese physicians are fo 


into three groups : nd of speculation, They divido the disea:05 


warm, lukewarm and cold diseases, attributed to the Indian 


: à They also believe four spirits to fol:ow 
aa ĶINAS ARI D fo hie death. "These Spirits have a AGEs get -cf 
the coma plant, Ind pe MERI vanaspati- aqaa ‘forost-treo, 
ama "lord of creat à gnu; Mérajapati< Skt. Prajapat- 
ot creatures (algo applied to various gods)’, eta.24 From Indiam 


elements, ou which their A NM of tho five mahābhūtas REZIJA ‘the gross 


particulars incorporated into 


! ' Were, together with many theoretical 
five vital powers’ 


„in ee e dosrine. So was the theory of tho 
CoS HS, GRēRCurēasrersi; GARES (ox udana), byna (the 


wers manifesting in the nose, eyes, 
0 ; 
fod, the st 
a Ti 
Cs =en 
n. gan, vyāna- saqa. 
ud 
pa pO 
Skt. idd- RSI, 
dow 


= 


1 The shifting of the meaning is discus:ed 
in another section of this book. 

2 The reader may be referred to J.D. 
Gimlette, A Dictionary of Malayan Me- 
dicine, (Oxford Univ. Press 1939), p.119. 
3 The patient is described as being cover- 


is intended (Gimlette, o.c., p.209). 
* The form of the word 
elsewhere. For 'influenza' the phrase 
dēmam (Mat. ‘fever’) sēlēsēma is used. 


> This word is also used in the transfer- | 


red sense of ‘injured’ (feelings) or ‘evil’ 
(fortune). The literal meaning ‘battered, 
a damaged’ seems now to be obsolete. 


‘tho earth, i.e..the abode of the mortals’ 
(givon by Wilkinson MED. II, p.134) of 
Course comes from Skt, martya- mei (a) 
mortal and pada- YZ ‘place’; we also 
find manjapada. 


Several kind 
t 


Unpleagan 


lit t taste of medicines, or to faci- 
rs. 


ü 
See Gimlette, 0.c., p.40 who also men- 


1 F 
9n8 other internal and external uses 
Ey the Malays. 


Cire Moi 
$ E Umstances mention, Har E 


a 
9 a decoction of it by boilin 


Digitized by Ary! Ura PES uAaatiaaL henge and eGangotri 


mouth; conl 
ools etc.; responsible for eatin + 


or going and other motions): Skt, 
The Indian names 
es, the so-called veins Bal. ida» piigala, susumna e 
, pingala- fag ‘the two channels which 
nward to the lower end of the spinal column 
susumna- qu; further. Dal. gandari: Skt. gūndhā 
hast gūt, jiwa: Skt. jihvā- lagī, purusa and alia 
pust- S31 and alambusa AZTAT, and other names,:e 


NOTES 


ed with heat-spots, but it seems more | 
likely that a clinical case of possession ' 


is discussed | 


6 v H * 
The homonym mérca in máérca-pada ' 


yi 
The word gula is dealt with elsewhere. , 
e 8 of sugar are used, either : 
act as a preservative, to disguise the i 


me the suspension of insoluble pow- | 


ol up the plant in silence; under 


193 


a Aklā g the circulation of the 
8 ete.; for Vomiting, c i 
prüna- Hut, -8 "x a 


of a 


! strils and go 
in Indian Yoga doctrines',7 
TL "edit; asta Or asti: Skt. 
purusa or lémbusa, i. Skt. 


| (T. H. Burkill and Mohamed Hanif, 
| Malay Village Medicine, in the Gar- 
| dener's Bulletin, S. S, VI (1930), p. 
265). : 
'" The play is (or was 20 years ago) 
also performed for tle purpose of dis- 
covering stolen property, punishing an 
enemy or winning a woman's love or 
with the object of obtaining proof of a 
wife's infidelity. The rite is circum- 
stantially described by J. D. Gim- 
: lette, Malay Poisons and Charm Cures", 
(London 1993), p.69ft. . 
u For Malay incantations and similar 
' texts seo W. W. Skeat, Malay Magic. 
' p.589ff; papers by R. O. Winstedt on 
‘Malay Charms’ and reluted subjects e.g, 
| in Journal of the Federated Malay Sta- 
tes Museums IX, (Calcutta 1929), p. 
{99ff., and 931ff. and other publications 
by the same author, the titles of which 
' ean be found in R. Winsiedt, The 
Malays, a cultural history, (Singapore - 


zo 
5 
«= 
o 
A 
5 
ga mee 
= 
ri 
Oo 
B 
ct 
5 
© 


13 Arjuna is for in8 
; an incantation cited 
| ma, Saiva and S7 


me; nd.m 
si ee abi 
ast m 


194 


Digitized by RASSERLT F9Īnd X2 ee and eGangotri 


Arjuna... So that she is broken and hot 
with love...» In other spells “Ali and 
Fatimah as well as Sri Rama and the 
great ysis are invoked : ‘Obey my words, 
trapped elephant! If thou obeyest not, 
thou wilt be killed by Sri Rama... 
There is, no doubt, a considerable ele- 
ment of truth in Winstedt's suggestion 
that the Malays are apparently indebted 
to India for & charm of this kind and 
have forgotten or purposely omitted the 
accompanying ritual, but erotic and 
other private magic is practised by so 
many peoples and the devices resorted 
to are so often similar (seee.g. H. Webs- 
ter, Magic, Stanford California 1948, 
ch. XII) that direct influence of the 
Atharvaveda, to which Winstedt alludes, 
is not probable. 

™ For the word béntara see chapter IV, 
section 1 (aphaeresis). It has tentatively 
been connected with Skt. avdntara- 
aaar intermediate’, 

'5 Gimlette, Malay Poisons etc, p. 40f. 
and 237. 

"© See Winstedt, Journal of the Malayan 


“Branch of the Royal Asiatic Sociot 
(1925), T, p.83. alll 


mes of Muslim or J, 
find Siti Indira Sēndari : 
Fatt ‘lovely beautifal ? 

; i di 
Bota (Skt. bhūta. NIS 'spirit') i ca) 
Kala : Skt. pūrvakālg. Tae “(h 


* Other Mala 


pendant on a state-spear; plait 

toupee of false hair for enlarging m 

coiffure’. . The word has already m 
n 


discuseed. 
20 For particulars see R. O, Winstedt 
Shaman, Saiva and Sufi, a study in the f 
evolution of Malay Magic, p.39ft, (esp 
v. 39f.). i 
*' Tho Skt. nara- 4X ‘man’ survives in 
Malay as a sort of honorific eloment jn 
titles : Nara-sinha (Skt. simha. fag 
‘lion’), Séri Nara-waùsa (Skt. vamsa- qq 
'(noble) family’). i 
22 Seo e.g. Winstedt, o.c., ch. IV. 
23 According to Wilkinson, MED. I, 
p.442 and II, p.106 this term applies 
šo the use of incantations in 80-called 
black magic, in contradistinetion to the 
uses of ubat (philtres) or talismane, 
whereas incantations in white magic are 
doa, and mantéra in modern usage denotes 
a magical formula of any sort, The 
Dutch lexicographera translate jampi by 
"magical formula, exorcizing and Klin- 
kert, Mal.-Ned. Woordenboek? (1916) 
p.368 also mentions the meaning 'medi- 
cine, esp. a draught over which formulas 
have been muttered’, Gimlette, Diot. 
Mal. Med., p.89 explains the verb mē- 
njampi by ‘to cure by magic, e.g. when 
the bomor breathes on the face or body 
of his patient, using appropriate incan- 
tations, with the idea of curing him by 
80 breathing on him”; jampi-jampi 
means ‘the use of incantations by the 
bomor 9r pawan’, e.g. when the Pahang 
piyan calls spirits to help him before 
Sweeping a bunch of twigs and leaves; 
chosen from Special plants seven times 
ever a sick man’s body in order to exor- 
cise pains in his bones. The authors 
rM regard the word as Sanskrit. 
je right the original must have 
aaa pa- AT muttering prayers; 
»* » Spells, names of a deity and 
mparable formulas’ or (and) japin- 


az: ; 
Hi T one who mutters prayers otc.’ (for 


24 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat SIASERBÜIBARAI and for the 4 see cb. 


Digitized by ^aiexismal Tornada Gheanal and eGangotri 


` 


195 


: ts in favour of | 
, There are argumen pur ot | sword hag also p 
"m view : the Sundanese meaning of | cora (Hindi tera E ees into 
t ‘„ formula by means of which an kian. agger’) sa medañ 


O npe & ) , o c ed 

TA spirit, plague or evil influence in ** See Wilkinson, MED. T 

general aro exorcised, a person is made Winstedt, o.c., p 140 B 

ral nerable: an object (e.g. well-being, : ?? By Wilkinson, Gs. d D.229 : see V, 
«i; D. :Bee Yan 


n, children) or success in an Ronkel, BKI, 
? VOU is attained; medicine, the points out me eU. ce 
Ca forms expressing the idea of pronounced by a leg kas. 
verba : vl egendary person called 
ng by muttering such formulas’ | Bat : compare Hindi bhat Me, which i 
(soe also R. A. Kern, Soend. Bezwerings- | the name of a particular mized caste E 
formules in BKI. LVI (1904), p.603f.); | hereditary bards, genealogists, and 
the Balinese pó-nyampt (base jampi)'a | heralds, including some Muslin bards 
styptic’, but, according to R. van Eck, following a mixture of Hindu and Mus- 
Bal.-Holl. Woordenboek, (Utrecht 1876), lim practices. 
p.261 ‘strictly Speaking a mantra mut. ! °° R. Goris, The Balinese medical 
tered over wounds and also ‘charm, literature, Djawa 17 (1937); p.2811. 
spell’. In Old- and Modern Javanese  *' Goris, o.c., p.281. 
jampi means ‘draught, medicine (uowa- . °? The library of the Kirtya (Founda. 
days also in a general sense), which fits | tion) Liefrinck-Van der Tuuk-at Singa- 
in with the Bisaya (Phil.) dampi ‘medi- ` radja had, in 1937, already collected 
cine' (Skt. j often appears as d in the more than a hundred different works 
Phil. tongues), Min. jampi ‘magically ! on Balinese medical science (Goris, o.c., 
powerful medicine, Bat. pa-njampi | p. 281). 
‘styptic’; in some languages this mean- | ?? An edition and a thorough study of 
ing (‘styptic’) seems to have come into | these texts is urgently needed. Accord- 
prominence (seo also KBW. IV, p.415) ing to curious native interpretation thā 
This fact and the formal side of the name ‘Budha kšcapi” means: ‘a man who 
etymology upheld by the said authors, is really aware of his conscience", for 
however, deserve our attention : the | budha=budhi (Skt. buddhi- alā mind, 
form jampa has, as far as I know, not intellect’) means conscience, kacar 
been found. On the other side Jav. japi means to be aware (rasa < Skt. rasa- 
(regional krama), beside japa (Skt. japa- Ta “feoling’), pi = the native pituwt 
IW means ‘a spell, esp. as a curative’. ‘really’. 

I also refer to R. O. Winstedt, Hindu ** For these Ba 
survivals in Malay custom, Journal of | scienca and thera 
me ara Malay States Museums, ` Heine 
3 Sos 3 e E d Jolly, Medicin (Strassburg 
Dum k Winstedt, Kingsbip a | 
D: 134g. nt in Malaya, JRAS. 1949, 
as Ac d a 
SU a to the tradition Bicitram | 

p (OA of the first king of Šrī | Bi: H. R. Zimmer, Hi 
Wag MIS Rags) and Sin ganong su | cing (Baltimore Ma. 194 
gta e an ancestor of the Minang- BAS Voss | ( 0 s 

" E p 38 r 1D! 
dest NM might bec weary d oe ient 
» 0.0., p.138. The name of the | PY 


‘ouri 


linese physicians, their 
peutics sea W. Weck, 
Volkstum auf Bali 


m 
e 
vc 
n 
= 
< 
at 
o 
rt 
£u 
© 
(=) 
er 
[3 


d Digitized LAKE St PKR ER fhai and eGangotri 
196 = ———— 


ee 


ale spermatic fluid: | mala- AS in the sense of ‘bodil 
em 


S ik Y exore. 
tion or secretion’ (prefix pé-) 


i.e. the male and f : i 
d Skt. smara- «HX ‘sexual love (p.106); 


(the disease) pēmali, probably from Skt. ! 


SECTION 6 
ARCHITECTURE 


As not only the nobility and property-owning classos but also the average 
Balinese and village- and other communities have temples of their own, the number 
of religious buildings is, in that island, very largoi The village temple is often 
called pura desa (Skt. pura- 3X (fortified) town (temples are surrounded by walls) 
and desa- T place, rogion' in the sense of ‘village’ ); on the coast eea-temples” 
pura sēgara (Skt. stgara- MIT ‘sea”) can be found. Among the objects to be seen in 
a temple are the padmasanas ‘places or tables of sacrifico and thrones for the gods", 
a word also used to denote a special form of catafalquo or pyramid-shaped scaffold. 
ing or building in which corpses are transported? : it is identical with Skt. padma- 
sana- THEA ‘a lotus as seat (of an idol), and ‘a particular posturo in religious 
meditation’. The author of the OJav. Arjunawiwaha speaks of a ‘jawolled lotus- 
seat’ (padmasana mani, 9,4).2 The most sacred part of the templo is the god's 
residence during the ceremonies, the mystic representative of the holy mountain 
which is, according to the ancient Iadians, the centre of the world, the Meru (Skt. 


Meru- XF), a steeple pyramid-shaped building of that same name.* In the north of 
the island the main gate ofat 


„ing, controlling’ (raksa whic} 
‘subordinate’ (padu, 
with the lit. Javanese padaraksa which 


he lit. expresses a more original sense ‘guard, guard- 
house’: it is the Skt, pudaraksa- q 


TW foot-guard', in the plural also ‘armed 
ant in battle to protect it feet’ (also known to 
likewise cal! SET The corner-pillars of a Balinose house are, moreover, 
ikewise called padu-raksa; they are* the guardians of the compound. In Java the 
Word gopura, gapura (Skt. gopura- NFE) bas survived to denote 'a gato’. 

be discussed in this connection is Skt. liiga- fex. The 
Old-Javanese texts : sometimes it ig correctly explained by 
arca AF1 worship; image destined to bo worshipped’—the 


8 also Used—; a king ig c u 25 i ld and 
ghter of an PAA $ 18 called the liiga of the wor 


; in Bali a 
956 when being in function, and the scaffold- 
? corpso threw herselí 
as ‘omen, favourable 
7iga-(a)n conveyed the sense of some- 
iliigan ri (Jav. ‘preposition’) ‘as ap- 


thing by which 
pears from.. The lit, 


Digitized by Arga Semeiiouncafion. ONES and eGangotri 


- T : ———M— 197 
sigo or mark". In Bali people understand by —— TnS 

for a F © lication) a sort of id Y à pa-la-lin 
and yoduplica a idol, made 


— 


ga (pë-lë-liñga; prefix 


> of coins, ¢ 
ar (a kind of palm). : Andal-wood or leaves of the 
Another interosting word is Jampana, which idet 
recent Javanese texts to denote a kind of palanquin : it ig ne ancient and more 


ta gedan-chair'. Van i Tuuk mentions another meaning: Visi M pa 
ie conveying oblations ; in modern Dalinese a jémpana is ‘a ake construction 
when given oblations; a sedan in which the ashes are conveyed t "s gum 
Although the houses of the members ot the four Bali 0 the sea’, 
differ in size, not in ground-plan the names indicating their des E mainly 
same. The brahman lives in a griya (<Skt. grha- TE 'honte'), a er not the 
‘nobility’ (a ksatriya and a wesya) ina puri (Skt. puri qi Foren e ot i 
ganctugry of a temple, in later periods also ‘ab » own; the 


ode). The houses of 
Š M MS Ke £ persons of 
lower rank are denoted by native terms? A similar differentiation of the 


meanings of words in accordance with ihe social rank of the owner of the object 
they denote can be observed elsewhere: in Sundanese the house of the chief of a 
district (wedana) is called bumi “ground, soil, site, abode’ (Skt. bhūmi- af ‘ground 
soil, earth’). The terrain on which the house of a brahman will be built is called 
gajah ‘elephant’ (Skt. gaja- Tā) because the god of wisdom, Ganesa, is elephant- 
faced; that intended for a member of the second or third class is a siia ‘lion’ (Skt. 
simha- fag), because strength and power are equally natural to the king of animals 
| and to those people. A sudra’s building-site is called a wraksē;: although the 
outward form would lead us to connect it with Skt. vrksa- 4 ‘tree’, the etymo- 
logy suggested by Dr. Lokesh Chandra — that it is connected with Skt. orsa- 39 
‘a piece of ground suitable for the foundation of 2 house’ quoted by MW. asa 
lexical word and probably connected with Skt. vrsala- 9% ‘a Südra/l— must 
| undoubtedly be professed. When a temple is to be erected the site is a duuja, 
from Skt. dhkvaja- 3st ‘banner, standard, emblem, attribute of a deity', but also, 
according to Indian lexicographers, ‘a place prepared in a peculiar way for build- 


1 ing.” 


Parts of a Balinese puri the names of which will interest us, are: the paseban 
| a gort of ‘front yard’ destined for audiences, feasts, etc. : Skt. sevi. Wal in the 
sense of ‘homage’.'° ‘Front yard’ before the house of & nobleman vas also tea 
meaning of the word in ancient Bantēn (W. Java): it etymologically is the niece 
IN. pa -an) where ‘homage’ was paid’. In modern times Surakarta bs applies 
the same term to special small buildings." In Old-Javanese Skt. E eee 
bly, public audience, good society etc. was used for court, e er ta p 
room for audiences and other public functions of the ruler’, and, fur 


; and 
Pany, party? : - current in Balinese, Javanese and © 
& AY, Party. Tho meaning now curren pinos eto.) may be der 


erring to people Rear e 
a 


h has been y 
),2 though the: 


a 
. A hybrid compounglgdenptiBg Ate Spas cat 
Sitiñgil, lit. ‘the high (Jav. igi grouk tle 


, ' S ietīt 
Digitized by SPR Sen Fpundatigo Rhesnai and eGangotri 
198 


pu 


1 | , 3 1 = " Jg. V. Iso in ‘poli e Ba 
i U sed 1n architecture are e g Ja (a I 1) 
Other Sanskrit terms u e 


t fof a Javanese house; it already OCourg 
í hich supports the roo i : 
weet cen sakha Wal "branch; door-poat - The tent in which, 
ši RT. UC MM the cireumcision is performed is called made-réjga : Skt, 
in the Surakar : : > 
sembly . " i 
raiga- WẸ stago, piso Er meaning of the loan-word OJav. witana (Skt, Vilüng. 
& E ae d ! hag changed to ‘an open but permanent building ( Mog. 
SUA ac MA AZT ‘an open hall)? The word apparently algo 
i a i hall, elsewhere (Jogyakarta) called baùsal (Jav. ‘hall’) këncana 
eae eae Faa) in an ancient Dutch travel story'* the term succasana 
f > (Skt. kancana- «15 
uan a (St sukhasana- Galda 'a comfortable seat”) seems to mean the same 
m A T GA, the Surakarta term bañsal sasana-sewaka ( Skt. .seoaka. 
S MD 4 he Jav. candi ‘sepulchral monument and ‘any 
Was attendant!» OJav. sewaka). The Jav. cand 
i in stone’ may be supposed to represent the Skt. 
pre-Maslim monument erected in stone a 4 ae: 
Candi s"$t a well-known namo of the goddess Durga to whose cult re 


already been made. 


NOTES 


' A photograph may be found in P.AJ. 
Moojen, Kunst op Bali ( Balinese Art ) 
(The Hague 1926), pl. CLXXVII. 


* Bee e.g., Orucg, 0.¢., p.61; G.K.B, Ager- | 


beek, Gebruiken en gewoonten in de 
afdeeling Zuid-Bali, in TBG., LVII (1913), 
p.1-14. 

* I also refer to KBW. IV, p.169f. 

^ À meru has numerous roofs or floors 
one above the other; see e.g. the sket- 
chez in the above-mentioned book by 
Moojen, p.86f. 

* See Moojen, 0.¢., p.101, whore a sketch 


ofa Balinese temple-gate ig added to 
the text. 


* According to Moo 


jen, o.c., p.61. The 
north-east pillar 


is the sariraksa, in 
which word we must recognize Skt. Šrī 
AX ‘the goddess of prosperity and raksa. 
W or raks Ua ‘guar ? 


Dewi (Skt. devi Fh) Sr; 
over this corner; T 
ig called Sanajiraksa, Which 
nion, represents sc; (the per 
cle), Bal. a7; ‘prince’ and í 


The south-west pill 


| Sanrudraraksa by name,is under thepro- 
| tection of Batara Rudra, who is easily 
| recognized in the agglomeration. The 
; north-west pillar, the Sankalaraksa, is, 
finally, said to bo guarded by Batari 
Uma : in Sanskrit kala S1 is one of 
the names of the goddess Durga or Uma. 
| ” I refer to W.F. Stutterheim, Oudheden 
van Bali, I, ( Singaradja, Bali, 1929) 
p.200. : 
* In Java the word puri meant a royal 
residence',in the first place the rulers 
residential quarters and then also the 
whole palace enclosure; see W. Stutter- 
heim, De Kraton van Majapahit, VKI. 
VII (The Hague 1948), p.83f. 
* According to Moojen (o.c. p.61) who 
Probably relies on native informants the 
‘banner of religion’ is meant. 
1 See chapter IV, section 3. 
" See Stutterheim, De Kraton (see 
aboye), p.55f, 
 Stutterheim, De Kraton, p.21. Of 
KBW. IV,p.876. 
" Bee Stutterheim, De Kraton, p.86f. 
'* See J.K.J, De Jonge, De opkomst van 
hot Nederlandgeh gezag over Java, VI, 


CC-0. Prof. Sty DAOA EYER hoim, 0.6. p.79. 


SS. 


L—— See ee ee UIN 


Digitized by Arya SSRA odatan GER and eGangotri 


199 


SECTION 7 
NUMERALS AND CHRONOLOGY 


t has repeatedly been said that numerals pr 

5 Tru human body anās et Wer terms for family relationg 
aD j M OE mained unchanged. Except 
for some minor deviations and substitutions the lower TE. numerals h pee 
been persistent in retaining their inherited symbols. Yet, ir Hs IE 
borrowed numerals from other languages: Arabic numerals found Rem es have 
African peoples; IN. languages have, e.g. in Celebes, influenced each NA 
the Philippines Spanish numeral often came into use instead of the dmon of 
the native system cf counts In all langvages of the Finno-Ugric family the 
terms for seven and hundred were borrowed from IE., in gome of them also 
the word for ten’. ; Sometimes the European way of counting and ciphering was 
introduced by missionaries and coon adopted by the populations among whom they 
worked.” As far as the higher numbers (above 1000) are concerned borrowing ig 
quite common : the Engl. etc. million comes, by way of French, from Ital. millione; 
the Newari lak, lakh, laks ‘100000’ is a loan-word from Sanskrit. 

Like the ‘Original Indo-Europeans’ and the ‘Original Semites’ the ‘Original 
Indonesians’ had a remarkably developed system of numerals : 1-10» etc., 100 and 
1000. For the higher numbers either words originally denoting such ideas as 
'innumerable, much, bewildered, dark, obscure’, or borrowed terms came into use. 
For, 10000, besides the expressions for 10 X 1000, the Sanskrit laksa. SA is widely 
distributed over the Archipelago: Malay, Gayo, Javanese, Sundanese, Macassar 
(lassa), Buginese (lassa), Tagalog, Batak (loksa). But how is the remarkable fact 
to be explained that the Sanskrit meaning of this term ‘one hundred thousand’ 
has shifted ? This problem has of course two aspects : first, how has laksa come 
to mean ‘ten thousand’, and, in the.second place, how has the idea of 100000 been 
Worded? To express this, Malay, Sundanese, Javanese and other languages =e 
introduced the Skt. koti- HUE ‘the highest number in the older system of B. ho 
ten millions’. T would suggest explaining tho semantic change from the ELA 
such numerals are in practical life only denotative of the vagna idon did ged in 
Inconceivably many...’,? and that they have, in the course of time, wa E: E 
the Archipelago as so-called limit-numbers (the highest numerals known an a 
; K E The fixation of the new 
es meanings of the round numbers RE NE. Some languages have 
kept m value bas often di ailišā Mat ide: Sasak kēli means any high 

© vague and the fixed meaning side by 5 
"ūmber'; but also “10000 or 100000°.* topi have heen 
" Whereas the numerical value of laksa and e higher v 
„ uta- T ‘ten thousand’ is held to have assumed m log. 
m Malay etc (M uia), a hundred thousand in Bb 
CoA 7 the Skt. niyuta- MFT A VEY 
general RAY however, represent the + suia — have been 

Y a million’, and—ayuta also becoming 1 


ies numeral. In Balinese ha-laksa i s 
Weight’ « ha-bara 10 000 090 (Sy, Gira, STU. astri Collection. 


= 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
200 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati A As. 


—— 


Sometimes lower numerals have been borrowed too. That such Skt. Words gg 
sapta ara for ‘our’ and seven —often in compounds : paūcānang. RE. 
CNN šaguna GAJN ‘ten-fold’ e&c.— occur in OJav, texts, ig E 


: f lso das 
aa ‘five-faced’; cf. als "x ae reg: 
ES ^ as & kr. ter: p d 
surprising. In Mod. Jav. dasa 6% has, moreover, retaine kr. term for ‘gn’ à 


. dasa or hadasa)." 

Mess. M numbers may, in general, give rise toa Nablexs of interesting 
guostions. The ordinal for ‘first’ is, for instance, rarely derived from the car. 
dinal. "The Indian grammarians excluded prathama- WW foremost, precoding, 
first’ and pūrva- qå ‘being before, former, initial" from the class of ordinals, They 
were right in doing so, because the functions of the first’ aro different from. those 
of ‘the third’ eto.” Whereas in Malay ‘the second’ otc. are expressed by tho native 
cardinals extended by the native prefix ke-, ‘the first’ is (yar) pērtama from the 
Skt. prathama- S4H ‘id.’ Beside the same loan-word Gayo also has ké-sa, which ig 
IN. Whilst, in Ledo (Celebes) the ordinals from 2 upwards are formed by prefix. 
ing ka- and’ suffixing -na to the cardinal, ‘the first’ is pamula-na ( from pamula 
‘beginning’, from Mal. etc. mula ‘origin, source, beginnings’ : Skt. mila- Az ‘root, 
beginning etc. ). 

It may be of interest to add here that in Tagalog fractions can be expressed 
by means of bahagi ‘part’, which must be connected with the Skt. bhaga- W7 ‘share’ 
and bhagin- mAT ‘having, entitled to or receiving a share;? in Malay the word 
bēhagi means ‘to apportion, to mete out’ (2156 bagi); cf. Gajo, dial. Jav. bagi ‘ia’, 
eto. TBat. bagi ‘part, let’, babagi ‘to divide’. 

A curious group of words is Mal. dua, TBat. dua ete. ‘two’. It has nothing 
to do with Skt. dvau zt ‘two’ (Latin duo etc.), but forms a widospread Austronesian 
group, regularly represented by loro(<the reduplicated roro) in Javaneso, and 
other forms beginning with 7 in other languages (IN. dwa). i 

: A numeral, the ultimate origin of which is uncertain, is the Jav. siji ‘one, 
also in siji? "one by one, each, piece by piece’. 
form of sa-wiji which in literary usage means 
ae a vhrase salah-sifi ‘one of the t 
-in-) meant eri SE VM ira saah suiii pad Un Jawi ( infir 
ĪRE Diosa ult oe uM m piece” (in counting), e.g. iue 
ferred sense of 'offspring!); TA S t Vin literary usage also in the Ut 
the eye’. Tt is, of course, identical Sus ki SS ju «jas ihe puri ; 
Like Mad. bighi, bight”, which Emh 2 pa seed, grain’ (also ‘testicle’). 
the idea of ‘stone of a fruit’. Besides a goed Tonk A eke expī vēss 

„the Malay word is a numerical classifier 


used in connecticn with nd b durian-fru tt 
: i small (rou obj 5 i ij i i 
i D ile ‘t kA > ) jects : durian dua biji 1 d fruit Wy 


is identical with § zz Press this idea Javanese also uses iji ‘piece’, which 
The Mal, biji spre und. hiji ‘one; piece’ (and further i ike t sal) 
al, biji spread to ot er in general like the Jav. 347 


her : XR ; 
eto.)', As IN. f in Ü Ed : Ach, bijeh C ria grain, sbone (of a fruit 
t. words in -a are not rare—this point will be 


discussed in the next h i 
GAJAM i AR kia „onnedt wiji, biji with the Skt. bija- 
nese: OJav. wija (cf, al > bten, ebe., which wag borrowed by the Javā” 
algo T The IN. words for *ono, A by one 


under discussion, 
ija (written idjae in Hardeland'g ES ro DIR ue sd vi 


is etymologically cognate with Skt, bīja. RESA : itmay reprosent a word whioh 


It is correctly considered a younger 
Lj . 2 a ‘ 
one’ and is still denotative of ‘a, à 
Wo, either’ (Jav. salah expresses such 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDON 
Samaj Foundaton Vili and eGangotri 


In tho preceding chapter we had already an Opportuni 
k terms relating to & chronological system p uity to mention some 
w discuss this point more closely. Thore is 
Iva month3 was introduced into the Avchipel 


e consists of twelve months, which 


Bata 
ug nO 
of bwe 
us. or -pralaka; the term may be sonnel cel t 

parte Ten months have Balinese as well as Sans 3 a parilekha. wee *out- 
une $n numbers: kasa ‘the first” ete.; the two gi the former being only 
J The Sanskrit names are Srawana i.e, € E B: indigenous 
Aija Bhādrapadā SUCUS ve month Bhadra or Praushanada js EN ts 
aaga; Kantika, ie. Kani TURE, Margasirsya, i.e, Margasirsa- manele, Pu 
io. Pausa- qa; Maga, i.e. Magha- ara; Palguna i.e. Phalguna- TET: peu 
‘gpring-month’ ie. Madhumūsa- AZAM or Cetra, i.e. Caitra- ša; Wesaka, s 
Vaisakha- data; Jvesta which also occurs in India instead oi Tice Soc 
Jyestha-müliya- putni and Asada, i.e. Asidha- ANZ. These same names travel- 
led also to the South of Celebes : cL, in Buginese, Sarawana, Maiasira; Naga 
(< Maga); Palaguna; Manasetti for Cetra, ete. They, however, belonged to the old 
and now obsolete Buginese calendar. In Bali these names have fallen into disuse 
except for the fixing and arranging of definite festivities and ceremonies. 

Apart from these twelve Hindu months and the era beginning in 78 A.D. 
the Balinese borrowed the seven-days’ week (saptawara : Sit. sapia Wi seven’ and 
vāra- at ‘day of the week’; cf. saptadina-, saptadivasa- Aiza, Atāizau week) and 
the names of its days. Whereas the Javanese called these days Dite: Soma, Aigara, 
Buda or Buddha, Réspati, Sukra, Tumpak (tho last being an indigenous term) 
respectively, the Balinese say: Dite or Rédite, Soma or Coma, Aigara, Buda, Wre- 
haspati or Wréspati, Sukra and Saniscara, i.e. Skt. Aditya (ya>e) aifza ‘Sun’, ef. 
the Skt. ravivara- TAAR ete. ‘Sunday’; Soma- Ata ‘Moon’; Aigüra- AFR ‘the planet 
Mars; Budha. 3 ‘the planet Mercury’; Brhaspati- galā ‘the planet Jai 
Sukra- JE ‘the planet Venus’; and Sanaiscara- TALAT the planet Saturnas! 

For the sake of divination the Bataks possess a systematic division of the 
day in five moments which one has to know in order to bo fortunate un to 
succeed in one's undertakings: the five pormamis. This native Nec 
derived from the first of these moments, called mamis. The gecond is DOR 


ERN i ici he day; 

Kala. $S, the third sori : Skt. Sri- at, which is the ausprerons money Tee 
i- Aa sh Bisnu: Skt. Visu : 

the fourth borma: Skt. Brahma- mW; the last Bisnu ie. e 


moments are charaeterized by special colours, manis bai ad 
White, borma rod, and Rot hue This system ‘answers to a pel e 
(kutika) lima ‘the five (Mal. word) moments’ (< Skt. e. T ARS 
time, 24 minutes”), the first component of which is known & 
Mahesvarg. RRIAT bo. Siva. m 
à Besides; the Batake resort to a kind of diviner * € 
are ae finding auspicious momenta. Most ot M ; 
D anskrit, e.g. TBat. musiha i.e. mūsika- hus rau, D 
Vulture’ (h he system). T 
another Um RE AM Mese is vilia tk a 
JA ‘moments’ were borrowed from the Indian (01 — 
NU system) : Skt. mesa- ÑT ‘ram, Aries’s "107 sa [^] 
` Vrsabha. gu "bell, Sp sp Sent Sili Bon. Asti 


- 


. y | E n- 
tablas called paigordā EE 


K, b | orda 3 
used ho eight psigo 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


902 i i i 
t. karkaļā- az fab, Cancer’; sia." Sk. "Simha- fag ‘lion, liso 
“Ut, K a g em ‘girl, Virgo’; tola: Skt. tula JSI the scales, Libra’. ] 
haniya: Skt. ga ds io Scorpio; dano : Skt. dhanu- or dhanus- “F, uy: 
Sle M makara- HT ‘the sea-monster makara, Ca 
ES derived from (humba : ) Skt. kumbha- A jar, Aquarius’; 


mina- Ata fish, Pisces". 


harahata : Sk 


Pricorny,’, 
i 
mena : Skt 


NOTES 


1 See also H. Gostenoble, Die Chamoro | ? Bal. ha-~ Jav, oto, Seaan IN. element 
Sprache, p.959. ezpresniyo of the numerical value ‘one’, 
> See eg. P. Hambruch, Die Sprache See J. Gonda, in Bingkisan Budi, (a 
von Nauru, (Hamburg 1914), p.37. | volume dedicated to Ph. S. van Ronkel, 
2 N. Adriani, Sangireesche Spraakkunst, | Leyden 1950), p.135ff. 

(Leyden 1893) p.299 rightly remarks | * Of. also Skt. bhaga- WIT ‘part, share, 
that in the isle of Sangir the Mal. (Skt.) | fraction’ (often with an ordinal number), 
sayula ‘a million’ is a synonym of ‘num- , '" For particulars the reader may be 
berless’. 3 referred to J. J. de Hollander, Handleid- 
* R. Goris, Beknopt Sasaksch-Neder. | ing by de beoefening der  Land-en 
landsch Woordenboek, (Singaradja, Bali | Volkenkunde van Nedorlandsch Oost- 
1938), p.150. | Indië, 5° ed. by R. van Eck, (Breda 
* H. Kern, VG. X, p.975. | 1895-1898), I, p.419ff, and II, p.718 f. 

* "But nobody, perhaps, understands the | ' It is described by Van der Tuuk, 


exact meaning of these concepts’ J.de | Bataksch-Nederduitsch Woordenboek, 
Vroom, De telwoorden in het Balisch, | p.523f. l 
TBG.XXI, p.172. | 


SECTION 8 
SOME ABSTRACT TERMS 


No account of the réle played b 
can be complet 


ethical categories or spiritual life. Although it would be 


P of words, the present state of our know ledde 
Sus from doing so. Anyhow, even a short list 
tent of the Indian influence upo? 
oncerned; however, have an inter 
etymologi a moral or spiritual order, Va 
EI Sically speaking, Sanskrit, were expre du- 
standards A Dit 9 course of time Javanese, Or Hiv 

» qualificationg came to be olad in a second-hand 
ot with the Indian civilization did nob OD» 


936; it also Jod them to formulate thoir thoughts 
act way, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ing history, which 
denoted by words which were 
ìn a specifically J aVvanese ai 
Javanese, morals, 
Sanskrit dregs, 

enrich the yooah 
in & more subtl 


ny ideag of 


T m — 


e 


Digitized by Arya UTI Fuld tiaantepagigand eGangotri E 

. a 
= oso the most essential Javanese virtues for — 
tional circle 
hose ming is 
elative value of 


Instance is the 80 


: -called 
8, Impressed upon 


Young 
Completely unconcerned, - 


all things sublunary, of 
all expressions of exces- 
ality and anger. Under ` 
ese is a man of an even 


tosans the necessity of which is, in tradi 
kasan kasantosan is the quality of a man w 
c M he has repeatedly considered the r 
nega who endeavours to master all passions, to Süppresg 
aimar and sorrow, of friendship and enmity, of cordi 
BT ao of the kasantosan ideal the Cultivated Javan 
ips “a self-possessed, calm and bearing; 
Ears silent in the presence of strangers or people w 
^ 14 Such translations as ‘firmness, consistency of m 
ny v" in the dictionaries are, of course, not sufficient 
ations of this term, which is derived from the Sk 
tedness, gatisfaction'. 

Other so-called abstract nouns, formed by means of the Jav, affixes ka- 
and -an, are e.g. : kautaman ‘virtue’ and ‘superiority’ : Skt. ullama- SW ‘highest, 
excellent; the Jav. word applies to virtuousness, perfection’ in & rather general 
sense; kasudarman which not only expresses the idea of 'virtuousness' but also 
that of ‘humanity’ or ‘philanthropy’; Postponing an ample discussion of she 
semantic development of the Skt. dharma- tu norm, customary observance’ in 
Javanese to a later part of this volume, we only mention here that Skt. sudkarma- 
gan "good norm, duty' came to mean generous, magnanimous ate. in Javas 
kasarjanan "learning, erudition' from sarjana learned man’ < zi SGH GROSS 
‘virtuous, respectable; a wise man’; kasusilan decency, propriety < Skt. susla- 
guts 'good-tempered, well-conducted’; kaprabon ‘royal dignity < Skt. eee 
"lord, ruler’. The equivalent of our ‘manliness, bravery la kaprawiran : id 
pravira. wd ‘hero, chief among one's fellow-men’; thai ot ue e I 
kadurjanan : Skt. durjana- gūt ‘abad man’; of Our freedom xis eui ot 
maharddhika- Hates “very prosperous or powerful the semantic deve ae ae 
which will be dealt with in chapter V. The word kanistan may be rendere Y 

a , 1 istha- SASS ‘least, lowest. Some 
‘meanness’ : Jay. nista ‘mean, base’ < Skt. panes 3 tyranny’ also ‘ill-treat- 
Words contain the prefix ka- alone : kaniaya ‘arbitrariness, tyranny 
ment’ : Skt. anyaya- MET Bose. ino’ the Javanese resort to iti, our 

To express the idea of ‘understanding dri : cb Skt. artha- AÌ mean- 
‘comprehension, consciousness’ being rendered by marnie: E ‘knowing, observing, 
ing, Sense, notion’ which is discussed in other we. Skt. pariksa USI 'inves- 
Noticing’ can be translated (in krama inggil) by SE * derivative of Skt. grahita 
tigation’; our ‘(faculty of) cognition’ by mea also grhita- Weta ‘seized 
M ‘who takes or seizes, perceives, or observes 
ete. 


t. santosa. aFatq ‘conten. 


abio loan adil Arab. ‘adh — 
Whereas ‘justice’ in general is expressed by Hi a guidance by ue 
‘administering justice’) and ‘justice’ in T. authority”), "PO 
likewise Arabic hukum (Arab. hukm ‘Judgment, aed by the Skt. loan 
Justice, le. the justice of public authorities is e olioy, state nghi, 
M India Skt. rajaniti- tsaatla stands for roya political sense 
$ concept of ‘authority’, of ‘highest power (in ; : dd A 
? original Skt, wisesa : visesa- FANT be is sanae 
«The equivalent of our ‘well-proportioned " 7 
aa all; in ay respects, wholty aha 


KR XDONESIA 
904 Digitized by Arf SO Dula Ana and eGangotri 


y developed to ‘fit, suitablo, (well) proportioned’; for ‘asceticism’ the 
in Java develop cod < Skt. tapah au: ‘asceticism and vrata- Ha "observa 3 
tapa-brata can be B of power’ or ‘greed of conquest’ can be translated ye 
Tio ten A p ahamkara- Stj*W ‘egoism, arroganco’ and mùrkha- "5 ‘st 

asians pee sut and, in regional usage, ‘covetous’. à 
pid, EE ās for moral or intellectual qualities are, as to their orig 
krit Qum "The quality of "being eg or Ever A da By Jav. sēta, <Skt, 
M eee jo, alone, faithful, that of olore ; Ro 638 or pertidious by cidra- 
f¥z ‘pierced; fault, defect, imparfection’; the IDA NVO 18 cid @ as characterized 
by faithlessness, deceit, troacherousness ote. For Booguanerable (in war) the loan 
digdaya (digjaya) came to bə used < Skt. igaya Fera which refors to the con. 
quest of various countries in all directions. Oar illustrious, splendid, elevated, 
exalted’ is rondered by mulya <Skt. málya- HET value» worth’; our *fegtal, busy’ 
by rame <Skt. ramya- 3*4 ‘enjoyable, pleasing’ which will be dealt with in an- 
other chapter, the idea of ‘enthusiastic’ by gēmbira < Skt. gambhira- TF ‘gorious, 
gagacious’s that of ‘frivolous, flighty’ by sémbrana < Skt. sambhrama- AFAR agita. 
ted, excited’, that of ‘suspicious, distrustfully cautious’ by sujana <Skt. sujana. 
gTa ‘a virtuous, kind or benevolent person’ (it would be interesting to havea 
complete list of the passages in which this word occurs; in OJav. texts the origi- 
nal meaning is retained). The loan-word jétmika which represents the Skt. adhya- 
imika- aai ‘referring to the inner soul’ stands for “modest, unpretentious, 
retiring, virtuous and affablo’. ‘The Jay. term subasita is usually translated by 


[i . . . H 

courteousness, formality, ceremoniousness (esp. in welcoming guests etc.); the 
man who is subasita observes tha proper forms, 
and free of unceremoniousness. 


Dhragg 


in, Sans. 


is modest and unpretentious, polite 
X The Skt. prototype subhasita- gaīlūa, however, 
aa eloquent, speaking well’. The Jav. word is explainod by basakrama and 
tatakrama, basa (Skt. bhasa WA ‘language, tpeech') being also used to express the 


idea of "polite speech’, and krama (Skt. krama. $H ‘proceeding, manner, mothod’) 
to denote order, the proper course of things, correct manners, polite speech ate.’ 
tata is a vus for order, civilized, cultivated, proper: regularity’ : Skt, tata- dd 
mean i iti ; i 
S et amaisa Dea and in Javanese it is also used for forming a battle- 
array , spreading a table’, arranging letters otc,’ 
h . H . ed 
The word wiweka 18 used to express such ideas as ‘cautious, discroot, tactful, 
prudent, ote’; it applies to people w 


ho are accustomed to take pr tions. The 
xt. je i8 viveka. f33 : s ako precau 
Skt. prototype is viveka- fiim ‘consideration, the faculty of distinguishing. At 
other Skt. loan, prayalna or, y g gu 8 


meanings: ‘precaution =: bei usually, Prayitna, oxpresses the same and sipin 
VLA, beling cautious, w , ^ The Skt. 
pr à *; Wary, on Onos guard etc.. n 

ayatna- TA means ‘continuous endea y. i < 


; : | interesting 
subject for farther investigation ta acre) It would be an interes 
‘Indifferent gation to delineate the applications of these two words: 


(csp. to one’ : 
iy eat, a ee es fellow-men and their vicissitudes ) is expressed 


-Q i B ‘ ip: 
db n derivative of lega <Skt. tyūga- ATM abandoning 
The Javanese 


and oth 
storeotyped litotos, i er IN. peoples often prefer 


9. to use suc 


a 
to ‘paraphrase’ or to us? 
goodness’ i.e, ‘bad’, k 


"raj hati ‘I j Cautious negations as Mal, kurai baik dep 
the predilection of acking heart’, i.e. ‘spiritless’. Ono may 00MP* 


Indi 
anrlū- AAT ‘false; libr inn, for compounds with the privative G-* d 
lit. "the absence or kiotīgtija AAR manifold’: Pāļi appamado ar<garāt ‘vigilant? ) 
BBnegg" h 3 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat SRIAN lobihis device the Javanes? hav 


LL e a S 


SANSKRIT I M 
Digitized by Arya ‘Samaj Foundalē PENAS and eGangotri 


205 


od a number of hybrid phrases beginnin 
OER dorlys uneducated, ill-bred’ ( for tata feo 
a undesirable etc.', but also ‘objectionable’ ( 
fed, 


8 with kurai ‘lacking’ : kurai tata 


“unfit, unsuj- 
lice» applica- 
AI am) lacking 
ñ wiweka ‘imprudent’ (see 


above); kuraj Prayoga 


Skt. prayoga- Rītu * 

3 ` " ; Tl pr: 
tion’); Buran priksa ia a colloqnial phrase for T don't know’, lit Ge 
jon /; jas 


à vestigation’ (Skt. parilga ui ‘examination’ X kura 
boo: kurai sentosa indefensible’: Skt, santosa- art (see above) in the oth 
E Bs oeoo! ‘unyielding, buoyel up’. For "not without m A 
o dialēmbana lit. ‘it is appropriate to praise ( 
CUM the mental exorcise practised by a yogin, 
Jormula’, the last meaning seems to have developed to ‘praise’. 

The equivalent of the Engl. open-handed, munificent’ is rendered by the 
hybrid phraso bērbudi in which the Jav. ber means, inter alia, “magnanimous, 
generous’ and the loan-word budi (<Skt. buddhi- ate ‘intellectual faculty, intelli- 


gence’) in tho sense of ‘mind’. The same word budi is also used to denote thesen- 
tient and volitional aspect: of the haman psyche. 


ioni erit’ the Javanese say 
it): Skt. ülambana- ATA 
silent repetition of a prayer 


SECTION 9 
BOTANICAL NAMES 


Sanskrit botanical naass oscur in ancieat Javanese posms dealing with 
Indian mythology: OJav. priyaka: Skt. priyaka- IAE ‘name of several Plants 
(Nauclea cadamba; Terminalia tomentosa ete.)’; OF av. draksa : Skt. drāksā 8191 vine, 
grape’; the OJav. and lit. Jav. and Bal. kumuda Egyptian lotus (Nymphaea lotus): 
Skt. kumuda- E7 ‘tho esculent white water-lily’; in OJav. the Indian Meets 
“Poa cynosuroides, & grass with long pointed stalks gens alongside the welt- 
known Indonesian alaz-alaà or lalaù.! Words for the sacred lotus (Nelumbium 
speciosum)’, liko the OJav. Mal. and Sund. paima, the OJav. and p 
of course, Sanskrit: padma- TH and saroja- USG likewise rr dens = 
$87) in Balinese ‘Nymphaea lotus’. In a similar way: Skt. d P em it 
grain or seed corn’, which is the jawa of ancient Wo bs dua cei E 
jawa in Balinese, as jawe in parts of Borneo, M e asit ki al 
indicate tho ‘Sorghum vulgare’ or "Guinea corn . : MRS 
US) was woll-known to the ancient Javanese authors; 


aišoka occurs and the modern form is soka. m d. Thus the alābu or alütou 
Oihor plant or fruit names were also introduce : "pottle-gourd (Lagenaria 
(these two forms occur in Old-Javanese) : Skt. obi SE (the hollowed 
vulgaris)", cf. Mal. Min. Mad. Ach. etc. labu p Khmer botu 
àre sometimes used as bottles); Malay Peninsula ae leaf’ was noi 6 
tāmbīla. WAS ‘betel, especially iis pungent and oe name for the 
Unknown to the ancient Javanese authors." E: a 
treo (and its fruit)’, dadima. wifi, also dalima- dalima, 
already borrowed by ancient Javanese authors: A " 
ēlima, spread widely over the Arslilzelāšā NE 
granatum), in sevoral varieties’; Bal. Tās "ne Bi 
dalimo; Mad. dhalima; Kisar dilimene; Sas. g) 
tima Tho woll-knowrsit eni I PER oo 


06 Digitized by AryaNSKiEdnddlio ARENA Shs eGangotri 
2 = à 


repeatedly occurs in OJav. ca dt ri wn hag been 
d by the Javanese, Balinese, yaks, a? adjas, Malay 
borrowe and some Celebes peoples; in Javanese a krama-form jamp; 
Kia models as ambu : ambét (nasty) smell’); Madurese has ihambhuy eto; 
Des are also other species of the Eugenia which bear e iens c but distin. 
guished by additions : Bal. ambu rakta (Srt. rakta- T red’) “the Eugenia malaci. 
ensis; Mal. jambu bukit (Mal. bukit mountain ) Eugenia vieta ete.” In Ola 
and Modern Javanese we also find a jambu darsana or dérsana, Lega Eugenia 
jambos and a Hugenia malaccensis; the latter is also indicated by the single Word 
dérsana, darsana (cf. also Mad. dharsana);? this name is certainly Sanskrit, being 
an abbreviation of Sudarsana- ZNT, the name of tho famous Jambi tree on one of 
the four supporting mountains in the vicinity of the Meru.” This tree ig for 
instance mentioned in the cosmographic section of the OJav. Brahmandapurana, 
Pundarīka- guzia ‘whe white lotus’, was not altogether unknown to Indonesian 
authors.'° 
Other such botanical names which are incidentally found in OJav. texts are 
kusmāņda- EMS ‘gourd’; mudga- YZ ‘kidney bean (Phaseolus radiatus} otc. 
"The name of the ‘cotton tree (Gossypium obtusifolium) Mal. kapas (also 
denoting the ‘cotton-wool’) is often considered a Hindi-loan (Hindi kapas qt; 
cf. Pkt, kappasa ETA <Skt. karpūsa- 919). It is widely spread in Indonesia 
(cf. e.g. Min kapčh; Bat. hapas; Ach. gapes; Rot. abas: Mac. kapasa ete."), The Skt. 
karpüsa- 914 was also known to OJay. authors. 


ang, 
hag arisen 


The OJav, panasa ‘the bread-fruit or jaka tree (Ariocarpus integrifolia) is 
Skt. panasa- Ta. So also TBat. pinasa and Bug. panasa. 

In Sanskrit kusumbha- SEA is the name of the ‘safflower (Carthamus 
tinctorius)’ which is the source of the well-known reddish-yellow, orange or red 
dye. In OJav. poetry we find the form kasumbha, which is also modern Javanese; 
in Bali and the Lampong districts the plant is called kusumba, in Malay and 


Balinese kčsumba, in those languages of Celebes and the Moluccas which possess 
the word, and in Sundanese and Batak 
ed that the term is, 


red dyes: in Malaya 
same name'?, Thig f 
Occurs in those lang 
Sanskrit) lead us to 
term from India, 


occurring in Malay (pokok nila 
stem, tree-trunk’) tra 


Sas. and in the Moluccas, where it 
a fragrans)’ is called pala; as the "S 
Pahala, wbich poi um ng dialect in the Lampong digtriols 

gain! : Skt. phala. w) the oha Coal Phala- (in Malay pahala means rows 
6-8, BABAR te stint GAPTAtian word has spread alone 


Word is found in 


g 7 Eus 
Digitized by Ai a EH Gur MEER Ig and eGangotri a 


eties)” in Jay. 
an derivation ; 


* Word being mēlur etc. 


& very interesting botanical name, 


T fan-palm (Borassus Jlabeliformis)? 
Javanese name ofthe tree is ia], and its lea A 
The 


un à Ves are called lontar which for 
y centuries served as Writing-material (hence another Meaning of the word ig 
man 


af of the tal’ by way of meta. 
thesis, T) corresponds to Bal. dontal, 
e . 


The words for ‘sandalwood (Santalum album)’, Skt. candana- FH, are Jav. 
Bal. Sund. Lamp. Mac. Bug. candana; Min. candano; Mal. céndana, Mac. cinrang ete: 
i e loan-word is found in Cam: tandal. 
The 7 similar remark may be made with re 
tree (Zizyphus jujuba). We come across Mal. Sund. Bug. Mac. bidara, Jay, 
idara.'” Matters are complicated here because the same Sanskr 
gara 4 Todi given to ‘the cotton shrub’. Hence Bal. waduri, 
aly FA ri and saduri, Sund. badori, Mad. bidhuri ‘Calotropis gigantea’. 
RUM ome cases we may admit a shift of meaning. In Malay, for instance, 
"di (in Kedah) gégala (reduplicated form) denotes ‘a mixture of dammar 
per Ķ d for caulking boats’. In Old-Javanese the game doubled form means 
ia RK ^. The term he back to the Skt. gala- us ‘resin, oozing, esp. that of 
€ Pee robusta’. But in the Malay language of the men of E n 
i 2 ; ame of the ‘Sesbania grandiflora’ or ‘corkwood tree’, the bark "e wW F 
-— m which is used in glazing pans, eto.'* In the Batak Rer of ies z 
E. dam pem is applied to the Ficus retusa, the cooked i src ee 
llen parts of the body. —The Skt. word kazchapa- Taa aii 
in tic timber of which is used for making ee Mā KARA NU 
word kécapi denotes the Sandoricum indicum (ct. ka: eig nanan 
Day. kasapi: TBat. hdsapi), the timber of which is li | 
planks and large pieces of furniture. ide whether the IN. gandola ( Basella 
We must leave it to botanists to deci n and as gēndola in Bal.—can 
ta and Basella rubra) —the ps es av ‘raw sugar or gandholi 3F 
have anything to do with the Skt. gando MS 
‘Cyperus rotundus; Paederia foetida and other p fame’ often ocours in IN. flower 
The Sanskrit word gandha- 74 ‘odour, perfu for the Allium uliginosum or, 
S it is by itself a term Tor ' 1. Mac. Bal. 
names, In Minahasa (N. Celebes) it M melling leek’). In Ma 
to call it by its Dutch name 'reuklook' (lit. ‘a 


bich oil is 

rant seeds of which oU! 

Vūndapura is tho ‘Hibiscus abelmoschus’, n e in ri ay citā n 
a : rs 

ala aed Tho Flacourtia 72 ala rake in Tavanous ids an eil frui 

called ganda-rukam in Malay and ga yields 


F >. lant or tree iterature is - 
doubtless the borrowed word for ‘perfume’ : ee Javanese and eae 
and 2 ell-known in val". the fragran 
th agum used for soldering. W um), 

e 


ium. coronari to ber lover 

erb called ‘garland flower (Hedychium hen sent by 9 MĒS. e l 

OWers of Which are often worn in the heir: A In Bolaang Mongone 

; oY Büggogt infidelity or desertion on his C in Malay an 
18 kandasy, i, in Balinese mandasuli or man 


ci found in Malay. - 
Vūndasuļi, in Sundanese gdttādsbī?!: Satya Vbi Sese C am $ 


Gard to Skt. badari az ‘the jujube 


it name 
manduri, mandori. 


d Javanese however, « oe 


i 
| 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


= 908 : 


va sara) Foundation Shan BABS of spec 

Botanical names which may oad er or MIT Mc in 
connection with Ne Eur as ‘a tree, esp. any tres bearing ie ata 
fistula’ (in ed aser "Wrightia antidysenterica’; another meaning of the 
sue ae "i T benjamina ugually called bérinin in that language, wy; 
m Tn the former sense the word is also Macassar (birakasa) ana 

& b 
nese pa 4 ie). amrtavalli THAT or amrtavallarī AMIN is a Creepin 
plant, styled 'Oocculus cordifolius by the botanists; as the Mad. bhérta $ 
ambhērta, the Bal. antawali, the Sund. baratawali, the J avaneso bratawali or brēta. 
vali and the Lampong andawali pari stand for the Anamiria cocculus,? it ma 
seem plausible to consider these words as sprung from the above Sanskrit term by 
way of association and popular etymology. dA 

Similar variations are shown by the name of the Indigofera galegoides or ot 
the Sesbania aegyptiaca which are very like each other?" : in Sanskrit the latter iz 
called jayanti Sarat; hence OJav. and Bal. jayanti; Jav. Mal. janti; Jav. also 
giyanti; Sal. (courteous form) gayanti; Sas. jējanti; other Dal. forms are kajanti 
and kalyanti. 

The Javanese and other IN. peoples are fond of playing with their words, 
for instance by replacing part of a word or phrase by a synonym. Sometimes they 
gave in to this habit because, for some reason or other, definite words had to be 
disguised or avoided altogether, in other cases, however, poets availed themrelves 
of thia device in order to create new variants. No rigid line of demarcation can 
be drawn between the exigencies of magical danger, social tradition, poetical device 
and the tendency which may be called mere playfulness or fun.?' Thus the Skt 
nagapuspa- AWT94 which is a name of several plants, and especially of the ‘Mesua 
roxburghtt or Mesua ferrea’, has kept this form in Javanese : nagapuspa, where, 
however, nagapuspita (: Skt. puspita- Sfeva ‘bearing flowers’) and nagakusuma ( :Skt. 
kusuma- GGA ‘fower’) are also found. In Sundanese, Balinese» Malay and the 
idioms of 8. Celebes nagasari is the common form; itis not unknown to the Java- 
poer tue for flower’ in Java and in regions which borrowed from this 
P Ma sākā E er i a krama-form nagasantun, and, likewise Jav. 
i Though the Skt. word devadaru. Jazi Pie; "e 
trees, the Mal. and Bal. n "ht M ES eoa a wood i AN s 
sidered the identical name: of MEL cum album) may be M 

; of. also Mal. daru-daru, bēdaru, ēndaru, mēndārtt 


pēdarus yet, daru-daru is22 also i i 
a E à 3. mis 
deodara. - In courteous Balin entified with the Indian devadāru or Pi 


Alexandrian laurel’: the wo 


Werg 
Malay 
hin in 


Acheh. 


One of the « ri 
IN. names of the sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica), Mal. pull 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 
a s 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
-— ---pigitized by Arya Samaj Foundation. Channai and €Gangotri 909 


: CR i j Il c ea 

edu ‘the bashful princess’ (Skt. putrī Tat daughter’) E. gc 

clination of the common people to give significant names We MS 
man 


Y plants. In 
[n 

Xa jewel, gem’ 

lobosu, a variety 


Malay dic Pe er asa term of endear 
and pankaja- TES lotus ), but also 2a NU 
of amaranth with richly coloured flowers; 

The waterplant Nymphaea stellata ( 
mos, several Indian denominations : 


ment (Skt. ratna- 
i E the Gomphrena g 
À its Bal. name is ratng 
the blue lotus’) hag apart from native 


e : in Mal. sēroja biru IN. ‘blue’) : 
Nm ada ‘produced or found in lakes or ponds; lotus”; uo 4 a 
; Bal. - otus, 


esp. the flower of Nelumbium speciosum which closes towards evening’; nilotpala- 
Arata ‘blue lotus, Nymphaea cyanea’ and the clipped form lotpala Ia J a 
the word padma or paima stands for the Rafflesia paima : Mal. and m NEC 
Now and then we come across a botanical name which may be ee to 
have been. made UD. gn Indonesia [rom Sanskrit elements.” In the Javanese 
Principalities a definite tree is called jaya kusuma ‘the flower (Skt. kusuma. gga) 
of victory (Skt. jaya- 4)’; its Balinese name is wijaya kusuma 'idem (Skt. eigo: 
fas "victory ), a third name, apparently occuriing in both languages is vijaya 
mulya : Skt. mūlya- FT value, price' >Jav. etc. ‘lofty, august’; the flowers of this 
tree were credited with the power of being able to enhance the prosperity of a 
king’s rule. à 
In Macassar gala-dupa is the name of the Derris forsienianas a climbing 
shrub: the root of which is used as a means of drugsing fish: we cannot help 
supposing that the first member of this word is the Skt. gala- NE ‘resin’ and the 
second dhüpa 44 ‘incense, aromatic vapour or smoke proceeding from gum or 
resin. The Ambon Malay name of the Gynandropsia pentaphylla, gala-gansa, may 
also contain the same gala and gaisa ‘bell-metat’ <Skt. kamsa- $a id. (cf. also 
kamsya- €i" 'id.). We must, however, be aware that plant-names are often 
subjected to various kinds of transformations by way of popular etymology eu à 
A very interesting name is that of the Hlaeocarpus ganitrus Roxb.: jénitri 
or jinitri in Javanese; ganitri in Sundanese and Balinese; génitri or gënditéri 
gandatéri in Malav.?* The stones of the fruits are used in making sc hence 
in the OJav. Ram. (5, 66) ganitriku:dala ‘rosary’ : Skt. kuzdala- Ge ting: Ror 
in Sanskrit ganitrikā ulūfarī expresses the idea of rosary (cf. the = E e 
THAT i.e. ganayitrika anfas 'id.) 75, and gaņitrī must be considered as ay 
form in use in ancient Java or in the ancient Hinduized Archipelago in 8e $ 
Tha elaeocarpus, then, owes its name to the use made of its mee mere 
Although the Skt. mila: WW ‘root, origin, M ourselves whether 
‘Tadish or similar edible root of various other plants’ we e directly from 
Achehnese has borrowed mula ‘Raphanus caudatus or Nc. radis < Dutch radijs) 
Sanskrit : in other IN. languages other names (among ie in the sense of "root" 
Were introduced. It may be suggested that the Skt. mi a b wo oa the other 
Was applied to the radish in an IN. region. The We as ‘beginning, origin in 
and, nowadays only exprosses such secondary wean 

alay, Gayo and Achehnese. 4 j; “Alysia stellata’ 

. Å wide-spread plant name is palasar! : for dysentery: 
climber), the bark of which is used as a remedy £0 in Javanese, Buton 
Occurs in Sundanese pēlasari in Malay, P pa o island of Bu”, 

, 


f th 
; in tho language C other 
and Macassar, calapari in Buginese, e ‘a Acehnese There are also 


sar, R 
Pasare and polasare iocMadaresey Ud hastri Collection. 


(a yellow-flowered 
The form palosar 


NESIA s 
` 910 h Digitized by Ar ANSER ERG INDONES and eGangotri 


tons: mēmpēlēsari or mēmpēlas hari (by popular etymology : ‘the dAV. mēn; 
| dur being another plant, the Tetracera assa) in Malay, eto, ` The NCC 
rā ms to be made up from phala, pala (Skt. phala- me) “fruit” and sari 
Seg 


; ` Javanese 
te. word for ‘flower’ which may be explained as sprung from the Sky, sūra. qq 
etc. 


vari 


*energy, neobar - A 1s. pe 
E a is unnecessary to say that tho Skt. term piürvagni- Yall ‘original fire, i.o, 


the householder's sacred fire’ which occurs in the Satapathabrahmana and Similar 
texts has nothing to do with the iem QN GF the’ Rhododendron Tavanicum, 
purwa gēni: Skt. purva- TA and agni- «fa fire. . À 

Unfortunately we are very often in the dark as to in which country, India 
or Indonesia these names were first given. The Elaeocarpus grandiflorus, the flower 
of which was often compared to beautiful gume,** is called, in Old-Javanesg 
and Balinese, rajasa or rijusa. Kern?" who derived this name from the Skt, 
rajusa- UA presuming this to express the idea of rich in pollen’ may have been 
right, but when and where was the name given??? 

There can be hardly any doubt that a thorough investigation of all literary 
and oral sources bearing upon botanical names would bring to light many interest. 
ing partioulars. The ‘sunflower’ is, for instance; generally called by this same 
name: buna matahariin Malay, kémban srénene in Javanese otc. but in the last-men- 
tioned language the plant also bears the name of purba nēgara : Skt. pūrva- qi 
‘first, ancient’ and nagara- SW ‘town, city’. This name would be totally incom- 
prehensible but for a Javanese tradition informing us that the flower was first 
planted by a prince of that name. 

The ‘nymphaea lotus’, iunjun in many Indonesian tongues,?? is in Balinese 
also called sudamala or tunjui; sudamala. As the same name is also given toa pond 
or lake the water of which causes all defectg to disappear?" the most plausible 


explained as sula and stri, the former being Skt. sūla- 
atter corresponding to Skt. strī at 
ort dagger worn by women’ is concerned this ` 
à A y Y ask ourselves whether the plant does not owe 
its name to considerations other than an outward likeness oe dagger. In the 


Sund. Bat, ete 
efi ‘birth, rank; th 
ame to express such 


called jati : as Skt, jūti- 
true state of anything c 
Sang, essentially’, the name of 

f the t 
Although this Supposition cannot pu 


Spread of the word (Sumatr Ni b e exolusiv 
e a, Java, G eto.) and of the i 
called by thig name, lead ug fij Nr ee E ie eee 
ern 


i re - 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Sheet lee However, the words we 


the ‘teak tree (Tectona grandis ) is 
9 character of a species, genuine OF . 
ideas ag ‘genuine, really» true, PU" 
fton been supposed to be Sanskrit. 
as altogether untenable, the wide 


Digitized by Arya Santé PURA bri gheni ep eGangotri 


connected by secondary etymology. 
Among these plant-names we Ake s. 
Bal. kanigara Cochlospermum balicum”, which in Balin krit forms : the Jay, and 
a Pkt. name : cf. Pāli kanikara- aha and kannikarg 
a fimm ‘a garden tree, named kanera”. The te. 
cally taken as an emblem of yellow and of 
afas ‘Plerospermim acerifolium 33 


- ale 
flower of this tree 
brightness, The § 


NOTES 


1 Cf. F. S. A. de Clereq-A. A. Palle, 
Nieuw Plantkundig Woordenboek Yan 
Nederlandsch Indié (second ed., Amster- 


De Olercg-Polle,'n? 961, 
? De Clereq-Pulle, n? 9908. + 
2 
' See my paper The Javanese vocabu- 


dam 1927) n^ 2203. lary of courtesy, in Lingua I (1948), p. 
2 De Clercq-Pulle, first ed. n° 3193; cf. | 333, ana esp. p.358f. 
also 3113. ?* According to Wilkinson; MED. I, p. 


7 De Clereq-Pulle second ed. n? 1086; | 259. See also De Clercg-Pulle, n° 3545, 
see also the index of Indonesian plant | where & form dērdaru is mentioned in 
names in the same book. ^ | addition to the above. 

+ KBW. II, p.785. ^ Here again we have to be on our 
* Cf. De Clereq-Pulle’, o.c. n? 3408, and | guard against mistakes. In spite of the 
also A. Lafeber, Vergelijkende Klank- | likeness to a Ski. compound the Bal. 
leer van het Niasisch (The Hague 1929), | sladri and Djakarta Malay séladri have 


p.96. nothing to do with the word siadri 
* De Clereq-Pulle, n? 1559. (KBW. II, p.250) ‘rock-stone, a big rock” 
” See the long liat in the Index of the | (Skt. sila Ruel ‘stone, rock’ and adri- 
book by De Clercq-Pulle. alg 'id.) The plant name isa Dutch 
* De Clereq-Pulle n? 1587. ` loan <Du. selderie ‘celory’.—-It must, in 
* See W. Kirfel, Die Kosmographie der | general, be noticed that a complete col- 
Inder, (Bonn.Leipsic 1920), p.93. lection of all botanical names in Sans- 
" KBW. IV, p.23. krit (including the later stages of this 
" Of. De Olercq-Pulle, o.c. n? 1964. | language), Middle and New Indo-Aryan 


thor to add many 
'* See e.g. also De Clercq-Pulle, n° 5392. | enabled the present autho 


a à ? other particulars. 
De Clereq-Pulle, n° 4174. The same Wes um Eu 
name is also given to other plants, in 


SEE. |. cf laeocarpus angustifolia. 
Malay eg. to the Eurycoma latifolia "i Ke Submit, Naoblrāgo zum Šanē- 


Which is used in the treatment of snake- krit. Wörterbuch, (Leipsio 1928), p.165. 


bite 
' KBW. I, p.770f. 
RO also Gericke-Roorda, Handwoor- ie a Gerioke-Roorda, Handwoor- 


denboek, TT 
; Al, p.81. „355. 
K De Olercg-Pulle, second ed. n° 3642. MdL given on account of à 
See Wilkinson, MED. I, p.194; De ü 
Olereg.Pallo, n 806. This tree yields likenen ewe) n a sense of tin’. 
“niall berries, which are also used as a d De Clereq-Pulle, 00» 1 : 


Measure for golā I pl6s 22 
4 3 B Gig BW. LU: ; 
" Da Olerog-Pulle, ETTA Satya Vrat sh sth Gli 


| : 
'* See also De Clercq-Pulle, n? 792. and other Indian languages would have 


n-golder? ig m = 


Digitized by Arga SSK EDUN ati RS Aha eGangotri 


aon On Te — 
eee 7 A req-Pulle under n? 967 

à bgiven in Pet. De Clereq » the g 
31 The RI is nob glv karnikara- ft under n? 3394, 
Dict. and MYY. 


à "is, kanera mentioned as identical wi 
- name of this dagger 18 f : With the 
» zh D MM sourco of which is kaniyāra in the Illustrated Ārāha.Maga. 
jj ra ‘knife, dagger’. dhi Dictionary II,p.392, is the Nerium 
Sons Jav. kanigara is mentioned by! odorum. 


SECTION 10 
NAMES OF PERSONS 


Up to now the number of names of persons Which are Sanskrit or consist of 
Sanskrit elements, is, especially in Java, considerable. Among the oldest names 
of kings reigning over West-Java are Durnowarman (Skt. LOS a abundant, 
satiefied, strong, able and varman- ds defensive armour, 1 which 18 often 
found at the end of the names of princes) and Jayabhupati (Skt. jaya- IA ‘victory’ 
and bhùpati- quf ‘king’). The complete names and titles of the latter have come 
to us? : Sri (Skt. $rz At which is often prefixed to the names of deities, eminent 
persons etc. to express veneration) Jayabhupati Jayamanahën (Skt. jaya- and ?) 
Wisnumūrti (Skt. Visnu- AT and mūrti- afa ‘who embodies Visnu’) Samarawijaya 
(Skt. vijaya; fast ‘victory’ and samara- AHT ‘battle’: “victory in battle’) Sakala- 
bhuwanamandaleswaranindita (Skt. sakala- wm ‘whole’, bhuvana- Wat ‘earth’, 
mandala- AUZU ‘circle’, 2$vara- ZAT ‘lord’ and anindita afaleza ‘irreproachable’ : 
‘the lord of the whole ‘earth-circle’s the irreproachable one’) Haro Gowardhana 
(Skt. name of persons and of a celebrated hill near Mathura, lit. ‘granting prospe- 
rity to cows.) Wikramottungadewa (Skt. vikrama- Cmm ‘courage’, uliunga- IYF 
‘high’, deva- 4 "His Majesty’), Whereas most names of kings of ancient Central 
Java are Javanese, Saiijaya (Skt. saūjaya- AFRA ‘triumphant’) being an exception, 
the members of the well-known dynasties of East-Java often had or assumed 
Sanskrit names: Dewasinha (Skt. deva-simha- zalaz *God-lion'); Daksa (Skt. daksa- 
as able, adroit’); Toyabhaya (who is a terror by his victories’ : Skt. jaya- 14 
victory and bhaya- RA ‘fear, terror’) Sarweswara (Skt. sarveivara- RAFAT ‘the lord 

à of all, universal monarch’); Krtojaya (Skt. krtajaya. BAKA ‘who has gained 
viotory, pperouons ). The famous founder of a new dynasty Anrok assumed the 
throne-name Rajasa; though the exact connotation expressed by this name 99 s 


noun may be difficult to determine, it is S 4 P i E Posh 
ASEAN , anskrit : E relating to rM 
something like active, passionate Ag IS OMA 


E d '). An additional title of the same king was anf 
Amurwabhümi (‘who rules the earth”*). His successor prince Anénab, ascended 
the throne as Aniisapati or Anitsanatha the second ashes of these names at least 
are Sanskrit : paii qf, natha- MA ‘lor i 
middle of the XIII" centur w i o by 
Indian kings (Visnu. fatur ne 28 Wisnuwardhana, whose name was also bor? 
(Skt. krta. 
of the state’), who sas done something for the savin 

d ani (Skt. Jayavardhani- vu gus 
5 DALY. is an Indian man' d whose dat s. 
Gayatri (Skt, gāvatri MAN) who is ES ESSEN ee 8 name), an mmi T 
tbe king's consort’), Her husband (amm Bkt raian 


48 
O o wW 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vra sd Cea Jayawardhana, wh 


Digitized by Arya Save Pudndationnbenneiand eGangotri 


= 2: M, 213 
cm called Harsa Wijaya (Skt. harsa. gd ‘pleasure’ and vj jaya. frag ‘tri 
ee names of men belonging to this Same dynasty of Siāb ya- AIA triumph’), 


y 

~r yamawardhana (Skt. vikrama- and var A 
RO amiina: EN ER A "os p Param, 
(8 One names are, amongst others, Tribhuwang 
ys cf. in India Tribhuvana- as a prince’s nā 
ory fib or friendly’). 

It is a matter of general knowledge that 
royal dynasties gopsisted of compounds one member of 
thus, We gpeak of the Guptas, the Palas, the Senas ete. In a similar wa & 
Pürnawarman (see above), Dewawarman (Skt. deva. ža ‘Goa’) kami 
(Skt. dvara- € ‘door’). Many names of members of the Ma; 
in wardhana (see above) and those of the members of th i 
itwara (Skt. īsvara- $34X ‘lord’) A Kameswara (Skt. kā 
love’); Sarweswara (Skt. sarva- UÀ all); Aryeswara ( 
noble; Aryan’). Up till modern times many names o 
artha- HA ‘money, wealth’); such names are in all p 
the bearer rich. 

Other noble names were: Pirwawisesa (Skt. Dürva- Ta ‘first, ancient’ and 
visesa- fasi ‘eminence’); Agnibhaya (Skt. agni- afa ‘fire’, see also above); Nara. 
sinha (Skt. narasimha- atag *man-lion, great warrior, also a name of Visnu’); 
Wijaya (Skt. vijaya- fa ‘victory’); Tirthaja (Skt. tirtha- À and ja- 3 : ‘born at 
a place of pilgrimage’); . Wirabhimi (Skt. vīra- dX ‘hero’ and bhümi- "fa country’); 
Sinhapura (a woman's name, ‘lion’s town’: aago); Gajah Mada ‘excited like an 
elephant, ruttish or furious elephant’ (Skt. goja- aa ‘elephant’ and mada- 34 


‘rut etc). 
Names of authors, religious men etc. were Citragotra (Skt. citragotra- aanta 
"whose family is brilliant’); Kanva (Skt. kanva- Ya which was the name of a 
` famous ysi); Dharmaja (Skt. dharmaja- WAS ‘son of Dharma, born by dharma à 
Monaguņa (Skt. maunaguna- AAJN ‘characterized by silence); Prapanca (Skt. 
Prapanca- 8479 ‘appearance, phenomenon’). Many other names of learned people 
Were native. 
; Hybrid combinations in OJav. texts are: wékos it sukha (Skt. RUN 
Pleasure') ‘the height of happiness”; Tanjun-pura (a woman, RE a Š 
fragrant flower’ and Skt. pura- SX town'). In the Kadiri dynasty we ep Hd 
katwan (Skt. jaya. 44 ‘victory’ and OJav. kattcaiv ‘respect’ side by side with Jay 
sabha (Skt. sabha- axi ‘assembly ). Mee TES eric 
Sanskrit names are, further, by no:means wanting In 2 ira to HS. 
9 texts in which are handed down the Javanese traditions re an rs and nobles 
Of their dynasties after the XVI" century.* Thus Pa Ind 
Hrs 04. ddi-Wijaya (Skt. adi- m ‘the first’ and vijaya- ombat (the Skt. root 
9Xpressog the idea of ‘the foremost man (Skt. agra- sa) E e r the upper arm” OT 
h- ga); Bau-Réksa (Skt. bahuraksa- TEA protection 2 by (the prowess of) 
Tathor dūkurāksa- in the more apposite sense: queo Darma-Yuda (Skt. 
g arma’); Bumi-Nata (Skt. bhüminatha- «RETI am 


"Mayuddha. wae ‘honest-fght’). un follow eaoh other in pA 
Sometimes tho members of the combination gp in the sense of state 


Way: n. d j 
ay: Diva-Négara (Skt. dpa- qa dish atlesjīhgatiāc 


FA ‘the three 
me) and Suhitā (Skt Sulita- gfza 


the names Of members of' Indian 


which was invariable : 


* 


6), Agra-Yuda (which. 


; SANSERIT ĪN INDONESIA 
914 Digitized by Arya Samaj Fo S à 


(Skt. natha- TIA ‘prince’ and pura- gx "town 
, Palace 
1 


‘light of the state’; Nata-Pura 


„also state”). M 
Jav. als bers of the Javanese nobility and gentry m. 


The names of the mem c i 
t combinations of this type, the parts of which, however, da ar 


always suit each other from the semantical point of ue or, at least, express a 
curious sense. Thus we find Dipa-Taruna (Skt. dipa- «td light and (ortng. ae 
"juvenile, young, fresh’, in Java always of persons); Jaya-Puspita (Skt. es 
giva ‘in bloom’); Nāta-Kusuma (Skt. natha- WA ‘prince’ and kusuma- gm ‘fho. 


compounds 0 


' wer) Cipta-Kusuma (Skt. citta- fara 'thougbt, purpose’). Asa rule the initia] 


member of these compounds is dissyllabic, the last member trisyllabic. 

Hybrid combinations are not wanting : Jaya-nin-Rat (Skt. jaya- stq ‘Victory’ 
and Jav. nii-Rat ‘of the world’); Maitku-Nēgara (Jav. manku “taking care of); + 
Manku-Praja (Skt. praja AS ‘subjects’); Manku-Yuda (seo above). An interesting 


"instance is Wahu-Prāpta ‘the newly arrived, i.e. the immigrant’ (OJav. Bal. wahu 


‘newly’ and Skt. prapia- Aā ‘arrived’) : the other name of the poet Nirartha, the 
reputed ancestor of the Balinese brahmans, who came from Java to settle on Bali. 


. This name is also given in Javanese: Bahu-Rawuh.” Even Indian mythological 


names are interpreted as consisting of two shorter members? : Pari-Késit «kt. 
Pariksit RRT. 

Let us finally enumerate some modern names of Sanskrit origin. In Java- 
nese we find e.g. : Sukarna (Skt. sukarna- gioi ‘with beautiful eara )?; Sumitra (Skt. 
sumitra- JA ‘with good friends’ or ‘a good friend’), and other such compounds 
beginning with su-: Sujana (Skt. sujana- YTA ‘a good or virtuous person’ in Jay. 
‘intelligent, thinking’); Sumantri (Skt. sumantrin- Galraq, (having) a good minister). 

Most names are, in some way or other, compounds or combinations: 
Darmawijaya (Skt. dharmavijaya- fastu ‘the victory of the norm, virtue, ot 
justice’); Suryopranata (Skt. sūrya- QA ‘sun’ and pranata- AMA "humble, submis- 
sive to ); Budidarma ‘whose norm etc. is the intelligence’ (Skt. buddhi- alē)i 
a a-atmaja ton (Skt. atmaja- AKAS of a twice-born man (brahman, Skt. dei 
E. o ME To order of the components : Puspanégoro (o e. 
etc.’); Cokronégoro (Skt oe LE T ķā s Pod ME is io p 
dipa- Aq "lamp light? A ^ e DO, and nagara-)s Dua i ar, 
in Java ‘man’ cs uttam tita e kiemo (Bkt, priva- pn e (at. 
sundar grait lovely’); li p ). Women’s names S ec of à 
esl seats ; wati (Skt. su- | and &lavat; aiteacit possess? 

Names of peraons which consist of a single Sanskrit word are not wanting: 


Sundoro (0 representing 2 < q - ^ 
sana- GHA ‘seeing UM RS sundara- Bret handsome); Darsono e ith 
Sarjana or Sarjo ng}; Nimpuno (Skt. nipuna- fagn ‘clever, skilful, 9 5 


m : no Gt. sajjana- RSA ‘well-born, respectable, wise’, 12 3 
we eer) a DE ES) names are, or wn abbreviated formt 
- Amalgamations of H: sudarsana- 3313 ‘beautiful, handsome’): 

may be supposed to haye Various Sanskrit elements are far from being 7*"% 
(Skt. sūrya- Wd ‘sun’ RES in the course of Javanese history: Surv? pu. 
ds Eee A ur t luum Rr DOT a 
io i „et0.); S ; ; S 
fi lo bon wd pr par rai e Br mige S 
i Bnd vrata. aq observance’); E UNS T prote" 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. m ^ 


Thef. 


hes SANS ; 
Digitized by Ae aunt TN BANES And eGangotri 


215 


Dn M "- and suj na. 
EE od above) due piri (Skt. pravira. and jāja MM a virtuous 
astra and Gimaja- MEAT son; — Padmasusatra (Skt, eon aslra-atmaja (Skt. 
s. ra- BAA woll-provided with books); Tirtakusumo Ma- 4% lotus and 


ogo and kusuma-); Purbacaraka (Skt. purva- cre AUR 
; former, initial’ 
& proper noun); Wira- 


„ustaka (Skt. 917a Ate ‘hero! and pustaka- Yaaa book’); Sastrowirya (Skt šūst 
and viry 8 * sastra- 


A Skt. pūrva- and suvijū 
‘very intelligent’); Purwo-kusumo; Wirya-susastra (Skt. virya- and LT gir 
‘well possessed of books’); Prawira Sudirja (Skt. pravira- and niin et 


‘very composed’); puedo io a (Skt. praja me ‘offspring, subjects’), and 
other guch names ln high-flown Sanskrit terms, with which both the Javanes d 
the Sundanese in spite of their Muslim religion continue to adorn edem 
Many of these names were, indeed, chosen by the bearers themselves after they 
had reached maturity.'” 

One of the elements consists of a Javanized form in: Purwadarminto (Skt. 
pūrva- ‘first’ aud ef. kt. dharmistha- Wf ‘very virtuous’); Sasraprawira (Skt. 
sahasra- dau ‘thousand’ and pravira-); Sasra Sutiksna (Skt. sutiksna- gam 
‘very sharp, pungent or keen’); Darmasétiawan (Skt. dharma- and satyavan STAT, 
'eeracious, truthful’); Dirja-subrata (Skt. dhairya- āū ‘firmness, fortitude’ and 
suvrata- QAF ‘ruling well’); Sastra-amijaya (Skt. sastra- and a Jay. derivative of 
vijaya- fas ‘victory’). : 

As can be seen from the above instances the spelling is, quite naturally, 
liable to variation. Thus we come across Harya Hadiwijaya (Skt. arya- a ‘noble, 
respectable’ and adhi-vijaya- (‘supreme victory’) side by side with Adiwijaya, 
Ariyasutiria (Skt. arya- and sutiha- gata “a, good teacher’), Adi Negoro, Hadinoto 
(Skt. adhinatha- afar ‘supreme lord’), and Harjo Suprajnyo (Skt. drya- and «+ 
suprajiüa- QAT “very wise); Suryadi Raja (Skt. sürya- JÅ ‘sun’ and adhiraja- 
‘supreme king’); Sastra-amijaya beside Sastro-amijoyo. i 

Hybrid forms are: Budiarjo (Skt. buddhi- afa ‘intellect’ and Jav. arja 
‘prosperous’); Jakasusila (Jav. jaka ‘young unmarried man’ and Skt. susila- gite 
having an amiable disposition’, Jav- *modest'); Maiunkusuma (Jav. g Le 
fashion, model, build, lay out’). Such names 88 Jayenwijata (Skt. ele ag Ta E 
of, in’, Skt. eijata- frs ‘base-born, of mixed origin’) are likewise not Es 
Purwadininrat (Skt. pūrva- and the frequently | used adi (adhi), Jav. nif ot, In, 
Jav. rat world"); Wiryadininrat (Skt. virya- Ra e. name is Taranjana 

An interesting case of a common noun beoorin ea p d as a commander of 
or Taragnyana " who is considered as a king of evil spirits RR the shape of flies; 
an army which comes on like mist and consists of C and little books he 
millipedes, scorpions, snakes and tigers. In Mus E to follow the right 
comes on the scene to make people afraid s hoe "interpretations aro tënuñ the 
m In OJav. texts taraūjana means ‘magic ines tgluh ‘malicious sorcery; the 

ack art, black magic; fortune-telling» divination incantations the longer 
Phrase télutragnyana ‘malicious magio’ still p member of which means à 
ae tuju-tēluh-taranjana is often found, eb One might ide xs oh 
gioal device put into use against absent pe o *iarajnana- V Jess 


Word, whi ined, goes D8 
Which has not geb began Bioibhesrraduiano pne 


ound in the Sanskrit lexicons : 


D INDONESIA 
916 Digitized by Arya Samd ANKRI DD ON ERIA otri 


ledge’, of. such: terms as naksatravidyā- paanan cto. ion astrology’, dāivajs, x 
for Ga Perhaps Dr. Lokesh Chandra is right in connecting thig Lary F 
Tara the name of Daksayani or Durga who plays a prominent part in the p Mit 


meo v Ad z litri 
cult which as is well known, strongly inclined towards the MRSIC0-B0rcerigg| M 
à 


of religion. 


NOTES 
1 For particulars in connection with |° Sukarna which by itself can Um 
Javanese proper names see A.HJ.G. | ‘with beautiful ears’ admits of biti, 
Walbeehm, De woorden als zindeelen | explanation: To Prof. Raghu Vira I gm 
(Leyden 1897), $ 317ff.; 383tf. | indebted for the interpretation given by 
? For historical particulars the reader | the President of Indonesia himself : 
may be referred to N. J. Krom, Hindoe- | Karna refers to the famous hero in the 
Javaansche Geschiedenis,* (The Hague | Mahābhārata who fought on the side «f 


1931). Kauravas; su- was added to give dignity 
* Ihave emended the orthographical | to the name: ef. Su-yodhāna instead of 
deviations of the inscription. Dur-yodhana in Indian and Indonesian 


* The meaning of this amurwa (from Skt. texts. The forms beginning ‘with su. 
pürva- Ta) is discussed in another chap- | were apparently used in Indonesian 
ter. circles to show that though fighting on 
5 See eg. A. Teeuw, Register op de | the side of the Kauravas, these heroes 
tekst en vertaling van de Babad tanah | were not evil as they are represented in 
Djawi (edition 1941, The Hague). the Indian epic; they performed’ their 
* * The element Adi has also been Prefix- | dharma just as well. 

ed to second members of Javanese ori. | 10 Some other names aro given by 
gin: Adi-lanu etc, S.K. Chatterji, Indo-Aryan and Hindi 
” See'C. C. Berg, De Middeljavaanse his. (Ahmedabad 1949), p.69f. 

torische traditio (Santpoort 1927) p.208, | " See G.W.J. Drewes, Drie Javaansche 
* Bee chapter IV, section 1 Dissyllabigm. Goeroes (Leyden 1925)» p 175, n.1. 


————— e 


SECTION 11 
GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES 


48 been highly influential in the develoP- 


that India was the cradle of the gods and heroes whos 


lettered part of the Population hag long si 


rical reality, Ancient India, becoming l 


SANSERI EX eGangotri 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatldh Oran 


217 
and where other Sanskrit terms were no doubt used to indicato Bp 
i localities. 


Awa’ capital Ayodhyd 
senting the Skt. krég. ši feof‘ i i 
gata, karta repre ane “a E 5 wo mg eee 
good’ and hence, in Java, 500d order thriving, restful, cafe, — 
ser is imminent? Kaīci, 


gaumi pare entical With Raney BIEL or Kaaci. 
aA in South India, i.e. Conjeeveram. (Sk rlPāli) 
pura- = 


Neranjara AFS, a well-known river in Magadha cn the banks of which Buddha 
e 


9 8 sacred place in Java whe 


t.) Nūirašijanā cro 
re a dis- 


-mimba or 


Boddhi-wimba which occurs in an inscription, ist name: 


‘the orb (Skt. bimba- fata) of enlightenment (Skt. bodhi. alfa)» Bhānarasi, men- 
i aed in an inecription,* may perhaps be considered identical with the famous 
am n name of Benares < Varanasi "RI, Pāli Bürünasi TUT, ArdheMig, ete, 
m apura is referred to: there is 
Iso an Indian town of this name AMAT. —A curious instance concerns the word 
8 5 iri or Imagiri which originally is a name forthe Himalaya (Skt. Himālsya- 
zg tain’ ra ibi locality on a hill near Djokjakarta, 
REA ‘snow-mountain ) In Java it is a y 
di Imost all princes of Surakarta and Djokjakarta were Inierred. It should 
'e almos i 
i ed that the Indian Pāņdavas, the reputed ancestors at the Javanese 
M left earth and entered heaven after having reached the Himalaya moun- 
Oo” 
E ith thei re, in th tholo- 
: i j toge h their names were, in the my 
That geographical objects together wit th e BA Mea 
i h ient Javanese, transferred is fo 
epee, stora i tu Panggeleran.5 This text begins by 
such accounts as are found in the Tantu se or Maudie — c 
describing how the mountain Mahaner A osition and E s 
garded as identical, is removed from its origina p P o EM 
of Java because this was trembling and shaking. Two a NU o 
which tumbled lown when it was removed formed, acooraing osse RE 
de ai EAE Shaw lled by Sanskrit names: 
other mountains which were likewise e kt, pavitra: Tea ure IOS 
see at šī Ji top vas called Pawitra (S cayo, Nisadha the Skt Nisha 
name of the Mahameru is, the Tantu m Ne lying north of the 
"SW which is a mythical chain of mountains M odes fof are Javanese 
imālaya, The same work contains legends b as Wlahulu or Talaibaian. 
mountains, part of which have native p kā Ee Sion. 
e 
iem which proceeded from the ere. to remark that the pe: 
aN Mountain is unknown to us,” it aie he victorious one. Tho Tan 
Sanskrit VU, meaning ‘the victory’, or the 


: ignation, bear 
E 5 . pative designa 
akes mention of mountains which, in addition to ee because the Lord after . 


b E tair*: 
Anskrit names : thus the Kampud was called Sam that particular moun 


buried it in NE 
Aving cast g look at the head of Brahmā buried i her mountain W 


D , ot A R ra: Skt. 
Bkt, sambaddha. aag ‘fixed’ and agni- ala fire. A Uma united there: i 


; g ioh express tho 
a ‘agaman, because the Lord Guru and the and -an whio 

i e nobio 
*°8 or locality, There are some more aet 


: ņa in this text: — 
SFH (Sexual) union? motdsthe sake legends 1n ae 


IT IN. INDONES F 
218 Digitized by Arya «adatu Chennai and eia 


dala, i.e. ‘a settlement of persons devoting amelye: to spiritua life’ (g 
DUS A irole, district, territory, company’) is called Sarwasiddha, y kt, 
mandala- i UM there: Skt. sarva- @4 ‘in all respects” and siddha. pē 
oR nes, successful, perfect’. Another mandala bore the marmor Sukayajs 
m the Lord sacrificed there with joy: Skt. sukha- Fa glad; loy and Via. ug 
‘sacrifice. Sukawela, the name of a third settlement eh ge In the Samo Con. 
text, may be explained as Skt. sukha- and Skt. vela dw boundary, coast, time, 
season, opportunity, leisure, meal’ : the text only says that the gods rejoiced thers, 
As may be expeoted some of these explanations are rather distorted : Mayana, the 
name of a settlement, is said to owe its name to the fact that the Lord’s feet Were 
maya-maya : this word which may probably be connected with the Skt. maya mq 
‘illusion, phantom’, seems to express the idea of being indistinct or invisible’, Tn 
other cases, the meaning is, however, rendered in a corroot way: ‘the Mahamery 
is also called Trisriga (Skt, FAF) ‘because it has threo peaks’ : the word, indeed, 
means : ‘with three horns or peaks’ and occurs as a name of a mountain in Sans. 
krit literature,” 

Side by side with these Sanskrit and Javanese names this text also gives 
geographical names of a hybrid character : g, village is called Médan-kamulan, 
the second member of the name apparently containing tho Skt. müla- T ‘begin. 
ning’, and kamülan being an OJav. derivative for ‘origin’; a hermitage bears the 
name Ranubhawa, in connection with which the author informs us that the Lord 
Guru dima riù ranu bhawa nira which seems to mean ‘himself was in the condi. 
tion (Skt. bhava- Ata) of staying in a pond’ (Jav. ranu); another designation of 
the Mahāmeru is Kelasa bhumi sampùrnnīwan (sic), i.e. Kailāsa-bhūmi-sampīūrņā. 
van: Skt. Kailasa wd ‘the name of a mythol 


Himalaya range’, bhimi- WA ‘earth, soil 
«Plished”; a8 appears from the context the last member of the compound represents 
the native awan ‘high’, A mandala Tigapatra is literally called "Three-leaves', the 
first element being native, the second the Skt. patira- qeu. The name of the 


» and sampiirna- Aq ‘perfect, accom: 


ma ‘hermitage’ Skt. e 2% has, however, been tentatively identified with an asra- 
* STAR) of the same name mentioned in the Nāgarakytāgama whioh 


ētra.'? The hermitage Sagara, the name of which ig, inter alia, 


; likewise tentatively, been supposed 
garan, a lake in the neighbourhood of the Lamongan: 


agama (1365 A.D.) mention is made of many names bearing 


Tt is, ag f ; A oho Wo 
come across tho. , Ar a8 I know, the oldest text in which W 

name of the town Surabaya, spelled Pe ee 

the second me 1 to variati . Suraprings: 

8nd in OJav. LS, ch meang ‘danger, horrible’. gg ia tr ‘danger’ 

ki ication’ and not Skt. abhaya- rae ONSE connie DEO 

me o; Š - N j 

hese Tepregentg the Skt, ea locality) hag Combined with sura, which in lit. JaY* 


ra- XI ‘valiant ES : US 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat tiBernieichexo". In this conneotion 


Digitized by aryā Sa Ratnan agan eGangotri 


well to observe that such names arg often more or 
or characteristics the realization of whic 


219 


do lesg Vaguely 


» literal wat i 
net? : Skt. Jäla- SS and adhipa- AIT; Tal Y Meaning ‘lord of 


the palm or of the palmyra tree’ (Skt. tāla- WIS); Jayakrta * 
ofa victory’ in the Jav. sense of kēria<Skt. krta- Ex Bue 
rather than ‘made by (after) a victory (Skt. jaya- SR); Kufaraja 
the king’s (Skt. raja TST) stronghold or castle (Skt. kufa- gz) which " 
wards to be called Szzhasüári : Skt. simha- fae ‘lion’ and sari," EE Is NS hu 
in other names of places.!* The locality Samudravelā (Skt. samudra- agg de: 
and vela A1 ‘shore’) ‘the shore of the ocean’ must have been situated on the ae 
A Buddhist settlement founded by the prime minister Gūja Mada (Skt. gaja- - 
'elephant/ and mada- AZ excitement, rut’ was called after the name of its founder 
Madakaripura : Skt. madakarin- HIERT ‘an elephant in rut? and pura- S E 
town. A royal pleasure- or hunting-ground bore the name of Nandanawana, 
which is no doubt identical with the Skt. Nandanavana- stezst33 ‘the divine grove 
or paradise of Indra’. Bajralaksmi and Sürabhana (sic) are likewise among the 
localities referred to: Skt. vajra- TA ‘thunderbolt’, and laksmi- Sat ‘lustre, splen- 
dour’, and šūra- HX “brave; hero’ and bhana- WH (not bhaza- AW) ‘lustre’ res- 
pectively. Whereas we are ignorant of the circumstances to which these places 
owed their name, the sanctuary Prajnaparamitapurt was explicitly called after an 
image of Prajiaparamita Sai ‘(the Buddhist) perfection in wisdom’ (Skt. 
puri Jt ‘castle, town’). In a similar way Iswaragrha ‘the Lord's home’ (Skt. zs- 
varā. gay and grha- 33) was a suitable name for a Saiva foundation. Other such 
settlements were, for instance, called Uttamasuka ‘the highest joy or ease’ (Skt. 
uilama- STA and sukha-), Sukawijaya (Skt. sukha- and vijaya- victory”), Wipularama 
Probably instead of Skt. Vipulardma- (vipula- figs the largo Onispaclouaiiazaings 
AA private pleasure-sarden (given to the monks) ) ; Wanasrama the ads 
1n the forest? (Skt, UTR), Amrtawardhani ‘causing the increase of immortality (Skt. 
amrita. Sq and vardhani atāt), Pawitra ‘pure, or holy’ (Skt. pavitra-) eto. ge 
Among these names now and then & Javanized form can be e 
Wanagriya instead of the correct Skt. vanagrha- AE “habitation in the forest. 


h S E : of ‘a lake’ (Skt. 


aras- RT) in a forest (Sk a ET 

: t. aa ). Hybrid forms : BRE ad 
(Skt. 4) encampment (Jav. kuwu)’; Siddhahajon pertes Dee Se 
santiul (Jav, hajóiy; the curious Twas Wasistha Wasistha kā kit (Jav. 
Jav. twas)’; Juru siddha 'the perteot (Skt. RE) exper 


le. Kuta raja 


Varta which contains the Skt. toya- ata ‘water. me name ocours in two 
forma. 598 are not entirely wanting in which ES a town’ (Skt. visesa- 
and Ww) 9 sanctuary Wisesapura ‘the special e € in iteolf ‘town of 

sapura th 2 | 
or of V also called Wegapuri lih HP Sācis Paleciigbroviated. form. 
Thàment? (Skt, vesa- 48), may be considere 


f the town. h was apparently hoped for by the 


» good, Cultivated’ . 


d the Jav. bano "atork')s 


Digitized by Arya SSi&NSTEBAdadah GANRAN E éGangotri 


; : i arently was Parama-wises aa 
name, mentioned in the Pararaton, UR x uo a get Rl (: Skt, Parama, 
` quu highest). Ina comparable way the hy Vālait in vU “ 


Skt. bhava- 33 ‘danger’ in the OJav. sense of ‘fortifications’ or Skt. abhaya. wie 
‘secure’ (also in OJav. documents) and the Jav. alan “ravishing, charmin 
Lalaiton (a reduplicated derivative of Jav. land wh 


220 


g 00m. 
bined, waa also called ich algo 


underlies alañö). ; i 
The author of the Nāgarakrtāgama also concerned himself with religious 


settlements in the island of Bali. There tho Buddhists porsossed sanctuaries ang 
monasterios called, inter alia, Wikara baku '(the) New Monastery’ (‘New-minater) 
Skt. vihara- fag and Bal. baku ‘newly (founded ete.)'; Kuti haūar ' the Ney 
Cottage’: Skt. kuji and a native word for ‘new’; Kādhikaranan, an IN. derivative ` 
of Skt. adhikarana- afas ‘magistracy, court of justice’ and no doubt expressing 
a similar meaning, or situated in localities bearing such names as Pirwanagarg 
‘the eastern town’ : Skt. qdam. : 

In the 13 and 14'P cantos of the Nūgarakrtāgama the dependencies of 
Majapahit are enumerated.? A minority of them bear Sanskrit namos: Dhar. 
müsraya, lit. “dwelling (Skt. a$raya- MIAA) of the norm (virtue, right, justice: 
dharma- 34)’, i.e. Upper Batahhari (Sumatra); Kuta Linga, lit. Lihga-stronghold' 
(Skt. kuta- G2, Borneo); hybrid names are Kuta Warinin (Jav. ‘fig-tree’); Tanjuii- 
puri (IN. tanjui “cape, promontory’ and Skt. puri- git "town, fortress’), the capital 
of Borneo (or Kalimantan) which bears the same name (Tanjui-nagara);: Hujui- 
medini, lit. ‘the extreme point (IN. hujun) of the earth (Skt. medini Wf), i.e. 
Johor, the Land’s End of the Asiatic continent, and, perhaps, Udamakatraya ‘the 
triad (Skt. traya- X2) of the Udamakaa (a corrupt Skt. word ? )', i.e. the Talaud 
islands. : 
E Side by side with a multitude of native goographical names of the Indo- 
nesian inscriptions also refer to topographical names which are Sanskrit. The 


ancient Malay inscription at Gandasuli e.g. contains many IN. names and only 


one derivative of a Sanskrit word : partapan (Skt. tapas AT: 'asoeticism'), in a 


title,“ but other documents give more ample evidence of the fact that not only 
persons but also towns, settlements, rivərs and mountains were repeatedly given 
Indian names. Let it suffice to enumerate such words as Kasucen ‘place of purity’; 
Jay. ka- and -an, and Skt. suci- afa ‘pure’; Kañcana ‘Gold (land) : Skt. kañcana 


TR UM golden'; the park Sriksetra'* : (Skt. tīra ‘tho land of Sri. Names 
of sanctuaries were: Narasishanagara ‘N arasinha's (Skt. aafag) town (Skt. nagara-)': 


Krsnapura ‘Krena’s (Skt, P inscripti i 

Za placed at tīra. er Gu. g). In an inscription which ii 
made of asima ‘a privil itory’ i ; i 
SOR Lm bem, ente ka a y Tomes, torti 
or Bhümisambhára which hag tentative] 
special Sanctuary)? of the Acquisition of 
which referred to the Barabudor,? ķi 
is, for instance, Trigrūmvyama (2) 
grama- MA "village. TIn Bali » 
pura (St, fanu "vietory"), Wija 


e inscriptions we come upon Indrapura, Filke) 
(Skt. S27 ‘rise (of th 


vamandala, Wrsabha (Skt. aga ‘bull’), Udayaiavi 


, p! Li a” 
CC-0. Prof. Sai Viele nsamesods formed by those desig? 


Digitized by Arya So RAP NEER ENCI eGangotri 


lso called Jiwana (Skt. ji 
(0<au) was a : JU. JUUGng- Taq (vos A 
of the equalization of the Jav. hurip m a Stving life; life IM Geen 


live’. The famous capital and kingdom of Majapahit, whine Tool fig MR ‘to 
bitter Aegle marmelos’, was in & similar way, tr de i ee means) ithe 
d in 


wilwa (Skt. tikta. CUm ‘bitter’ and bilva- f323) * © Sanskrit by Tikta- 
marmelos or wood-apple', Wilwa-Tikta or Tikto.mālīra (Sı nd fruit called) Aegle 
is another name for the same plant); besides, we fing th we malin WT? which 
cal forms Sriphalatikta and Tiktasrīphala (Skt. sriphala. E: Apparently more poeti- 
The Skt. name of E mountain which in Javanese ise cal 
ūgawat (Jav. pucaz the pinang or 5 De 
ym E E or betel-nutitres in Skt. piga- qm) ‘rich in betel- 

The ša TM which occurs in an inscription may, like otlier h 
terms formed by means of a Sansknt numeral, represent a ae 
Indonesian name: Skt. tri- fA ‘three’ and Jav. haji ‘king NA 
Balinese family of rank and the territory ruled by it wag) onto ve 
lit. 'the garden of coconut.palnis. The name is, however, also EE ud 
partly Sanskritized form: Klapodyana : Skt. udyūna- Sata "alā royal n à 

penne northern part of Bali was called ‘north of the mountains’ Ton Gun 
etc ; this name also occurs as Lor-Giri or Lor in Parwaia, in which a Sanskrit 
word for mountain (giri- fai and parvaia- THA respectively) was substituted. 
(tt, mite anges eter) belle aaa ate of sh names as Galla 
i mber of which is the 
OJay. lwah ‘river, water: a locality in Bali mentioned in ancient texts. 

In the Tantu Panggelaran (p.114) mention is made of a founder of settle- 
ments who came across a book and a jacket in a saagar, i.e. ‘a place (in or outsidē 
of à house) destined for meditation, for keeping religious objects etc.); hence this 
Particular settloment was called Sangara (part of the mss. have Samgar) The 
form in -a may be held to be a ‘sanskritized’ word. 

Up to modern times many Sanskrit names of towns, villages, mountains 
eR have been preserved. Let it suffice to mention Sukabumi (Skt. sukha- ga "easy; 
loy and bhūmi- afi ‘earth, place’); Sukadana (Skt. dkāna- ata ‘containing, ceat]; 
Martapura (the first member of which may represent the Skt. amria- AFT immorta- 
lity’,?? and Kértamulia (Skt. mülya- 3g" ‘worth’ etc.) in the island of Kalimantan 
MAD ne Sukadana, Indrapura and such hybrid es in ae ens ee 
Ge xd i Kola tanah (Mal. tanah sadi is ie e ‘where it is a pleasure 
; er section) and Sukadatai (Mal. datas ‘to come, ir kadona, Kuta, Nigara; 

come’) in Sumatra; tho towns and villages Bisardja, £ FC ‘th name of & 
aga eto. in Bali, where Silanjana (cf. Skt. Silaüjam fasi a 


i ; the 
Darticul > E . ataq ‘chowrie, a plume on 
cade ve Plant’) and Cémara (of. Skt. camara- SI E Kitaroja and Cakra- 


8 of horses etc,’) are names of mountains; the : 
é » 3 P ^; H d of Lombok; 
ira (Skt. cakra- as% ‘wheel, district, sovereignty) a ern DS aa 
When (of. Skt. gopura- Wg ‘a town-gate') and Skate em geographical names 
SS) Jonesia asoka’) in Madura. The number of Sa Jakarta which, as is 


In J; : i Indonesia 
ava is almost legion : the name of the oe NEC E n Dutch, who 


a OWN: was already. ib the This form is, bow- 
called ; PT HODY Sg PRESS, ofakatra. 
lleg It Batavia, usually ronaned tho mee nate ae 


- 
RN va 


995 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
222 Digitized by Arya Samaj i i 


; in IN. doeumente;?? it has been various] 
ever (as e ri ch presumably represents a longer p A MR 
ST efter & successful conquest, Hoesein Djajadiningrat translated it by 
E zi mm taking kéria in its Sanskrit sense (kria- Ha).24 We Might, ho 
COLE ting the second member in the Javanese sense, alread k e 
ever, prefer interpreting À 's invincibility (Skt. 7 Y known 
to us. Then jaya is suggestive of the town s remix, 
tory’), #éréa of its prosperity. Another ancient namo of this place Was Surakšrig( 
Sulakérta) in which the same kērta combined with sura “heroic, hero (<Skt, šina. 
30.** Surakarta is also the well-known capital of one of the Javanese Principalitigs, 
As such it is the successor to Kartasura. 

In the east of the island we find e.g. the places Sukawana, Wonokramo (Skt. 
vana- a4 forest’), Sukolilo (in Jav. lila or suka-lila means to be content with’ 
<Skt. sukha- JA and Skt. dia Ute ‘play, pastime’, in OJav. also “glad, content’), 
Sukodono, Sukosari, Tēlogosāri (Skt. tadaga- AEII ‘pond’ and sari)?s, Purwosari (Skt, 
pürva- TÀ ‘former, first, eastern’), Poncokusumo (Skt. pañca T= ‘five’ and kusuma. 
PIA flower’), Probolingo (Skt. prabha wt light, radiance, splendour’ and liiga- fox 
‘emblem, the sign of sex, male organ, esp. that of the god Siva worshipped in the 
form of a column or stone and set up in temples dedicated to the god’)?7, Pronojiwo 
(Skt. prana- St" ‘breath, principle of life’ and jiva- sita "lifo'), Bésuki (of. the Skt. 
Vasuki- ama ‘the name of a serpent-king used by the gods and demons &8 & rope 
for twisting round the mountain Mandara when they churned the ocean’). The 
name Kanigoro is, as to its origin, Prakrit : the kanera ÙT or Skt. karņikāra- afi. 
SR ‘the flower Pterospermum acerifolium". Hybrid names are far from wanting: 
Wonsayu (Jav. ayu ‘beautiful, in good condition, well’), Wonoréjo (Jav. réjo, arjo 
‘prosperous, in good condition’), Sitiarjo ( siti ‘earth, territory’<Skt. ksiti- fafa 
"earth, habitation’), Drioréjo (lit. driya ‘mind, heart’ < Skt. indriya- Zea ‘power 
of the senses’), Sukapasár (the originally Persian pasar means ‘market, bazaar, mar- 


ket-town’). Among the names of localities in other parts of Java we find Gopuro, 
Léksono (Skt. laksana- wan ‘mark, attribute, 


also (beautiful) outward appearance 


Or 


designation, form, species’, in OJav. 
; beauty,’ in lit. Jav. ‘luck, luoky star; lucky, 
- Sense of ‘in good order, prosperous, thri- 
Wonosari, Sukabumi. Hybrid names are: Sukoréjo, 
combining’). Some of these names aro to be found 


bhoga- Ata enjoyment, food ? ; 
D wealth z í i e 
(also the name of a divine "or ?). US ji kkur. Ct 


zr However, beforg We passon to an 
origin of some of the ost outstandin 
been & subject for discussion, Whereag 
Instance, be regarded 88 easily t 
into account, Skt. madhura. q 
time when, thig adjective camo int 
are unknown to ug, (It may be p 
same state of unceríai 


other subject, it is to be noted that the 
8 geographical names of Indonesia bss 
the name of the island Madura may; fot 
lained if the usual orthography is taken 
meaning ‘charming’, the reasons why, and n 
9 use to denote the smaller island east of JAY 
atenthetically remarked that we are often in the 


i ra” ' 
9 particular circumstances under which a 600% 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya E Rand eGangotri 


ical name was first given).?' In India pro 
phic plications : the king of the Sürasen 
cal a personage and the town js rep 
Di there, though it had also been a Jai 
ja the supposition that the name of the modern district of Madura ; 
India and the famous town of Madura, the ancient is 
their name to the island. Aa to the small island o; 
ther it owes its name fo its emblem or token’ (Skt, 7; 
raoterized, to wit by M ME o whi 

have been regarded as an enormous liga, The ; i 

e part of Java, has likewise been connected with a Eur $ 
mountain*” : according to this supposition the gunuj, (IN. ‘ounéain’) Sande : 
voleano of the height of 1850 meters was, because of its whitish eese is 
covered by ashes—, called šuddha- (Skt. suddha- Ue) ‘white, bright; as this =~ 
may have been an object of religious Veneration = 


Or a central cult Place the name 
may have been transferred to the whole of the area and its inhabitants, According 


to an older supposition??, the Indian principality Sunda (situated in the neighbour- 
hood of Goa) has stood godfather to the Indonesian territory. Van der Touk— 
who suggested deriving the name of the island of Bali from that of the Indian 
demon of the same name Bali af who was restrained by Visņu in his Dwarf ava- 
tāra—apparently tried to connect the geographical term Sunda with the name of the 
daitya Sunda in the Mahābhārata.: 

According to a hypothesis ventured by the same scholar,*5 but ealled in 
question by other authors,?* one of the ancient names of the island Sumatra, 
Pulau (‘island’) Pērca in Malay and Pulo Morsa in Toba-Batak was Sanskrit, to 
wit mariya- TR ‘a mortal, man’. There are, indeed, strong arguments in fayour 
of this supposition : the Nias people call their island and themselves as well ag 
human beings in general by the same term niha, the ancient Minangkabaus consi- 
dered their own country as ‘the world Minangkabau', and other peoples, too, 
tended to similar conceptions. The Malay form with an initial p can easily be 
understood : ef. Jav. péndapa <Skt. mandapa- ATST ‘an open hall’. 

The name of the district —and former kingdom —of Mataram in Java has 
rightly or Wrongly, been connected with the Skt. manthara- A-ax fortress, strong- 
hold’, The same word survives in the title of the crown-prince of Gowa with the 
Buginese: patimátaraj; this term has been explained as pati (Skt. pati- vfi ‘lord’) 
and Mataram (from Javanese).?? =, +" 

The name Malayu has been repeatedly discussed. It it rh B be Sc 
«i always applied to the whole Malay world. As cal p F n K eastern coast 

hinese record, in all probability referring to those 7. it was in later 
of Sumatra Which are now usually known as Tete. A Es the peoples and 
més transferred to a wider area and became associate s by them, a dis- 
+098 On either side of the Straits and with the language pēdu drawn. In 
ietion between the peninsular Malaca and Malayu YA: their name in various 
P course of time the Malays themselves tried to explain 


lar etymology. On 
ine at their suggestions are, on the whole, pode i ma milarity. of the 
T hand attention was, already in 1886, tains whioh form the 


moun ne 
‘an name Malaya HSA, the well-known m io name. Are they - 
"tēta part of the Nastocc Cati E RPG 


Der, it ig true, madhu 
as af Madhura, i 


eatedly referred t 
0: 
n centre, pes 


i © asked whe- 
iga- fig), by which it is cha- 
eters high and which 


Re 
3 


ur 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


identical? Afterwards, Krom*" suggested deriving an argument in favour ot 
loses from the fact that the Chinese. Kw'un-lun applied ag W 
Mod and languages as to an Indian mountain. It is, however, as fap 

Diēta certain that the Malaya is mean$.in the Chinese record, Ty an M 
discussion Majumdar*' tried to show that there is room for Presuming that the 
‘ancestors’ of the Malays who originally bore that name formed Part of an Austro. 
Asiatic people which from a centre in India proceeded both towards the east (the 
Arobipelago and the Malayan Peninsula) and towards the west (Madagascar), ang 
which in India proper left many traces. From very ancient times, he argues, the 
Malava, Malava, Malaya or Malaya was an Indian tribo. Tho oldeat form of their 
name must have been Malaya or Malaya because the Greeks made reference to the 
Malloi.‘? These Malayas or Malavas who are often referred to in Indian docu. 
ments were no doubt widely spread in various parts of India.. Their emigration 
across the sea was no less conspicuous : ‘On the east, the faraous Malays ot Malay. 
sia, the place names Malay and Malacca in the Peninsula, Malayu in Sumatra, 
Mala or Malava for Laos and perhaps even the Molucca islands in the eastern ey. 
tremity of the Arcbipelago, and.on tho west Maldives (Maladvipa) and Malay, the 
ancient name of Madagascar, testify to the spread of the. name...’. However in- 
teresting they may be, Majumdar's combinations and presumptions are for the 
time being far from Proved and the possibility of historical contact betweeh South- 
India and the Western parts of the Archipelago may not yet be precluded. There 


and Sumatra 
the name Malayu from India by 
But we are not yet in a position to be 
origin of the name of the Malay. 

A disputed question which ig nowad 


tion concerns the name of the island Sumatra. Tho first scholar who expatiated on 


who observed that side by side with the now 
usual form of the name such forms 88 Samoterra; Samotra, Camatra, Zamutra, 
Zamara, Šumolra, Somaira, by the Portuguese 'and the voyagers 
of other nations”, But long before him** an etymology of the name had! already, 
been proposed which afterwards met with almost universal acceptance: the 


i Samudra in the north of the island must have boen ap- 

«S about A.D, 1400. But should we not conour with 
be it Word fot ‘seq? (Skt. samudra- UWHX) isa rather strange 
9 16 an island 24s As Samudra on the Achehnese coast, 
inues to exigt up till now —, it may be 


a, Sūmītra, Sumutra. Afterwards, the 


ina doubt Corresponds to Sumatra. The form 
ries situated in a ld-Javaneso Nagarakrtigama (A.D. 1865): it wae 
i is Bey of Malayu' which must; bo identified 
ra was, however, in a the name Survived in the Malay tradition. 


century algo given to the island in 


9 be called Page the name Sumatrā, 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ays probably brought nearer to a solu- - 


Digitized by Arya saka Namatay Chg ue ee 


= S s 295: 
ousting all by-forms, was only applied to tbe island, Bat thi 
argues, must not be regarded GE Bprung from Sumutry ci form Sunatra, Krom 
ready occurs in a Chinese text dating from 1017 AD 9 b 


. » Decauge it g]. 
must be transcribed by Sumatrabhūmi and this nam 9 Chinese form given 
contained in that text,*” have applied to the w 
southern part ofit. So, Sumatra appears to be th Me n least to the 
Aohehnese state of Sumutra-Samudra did in all Probability ud T andin 1017 the 
it can not bo proved jiet the forms occurring in the oldest Moca d Although 
speaking, the most original, we shall do Wisely to try to expla, op. Yaologically 
or Sumatra without taking for granted & 
original name. Whether Krom ig right in concluding t 
be considered a synonym of suvarna- āū ‘gola’ 
Suvar nabhümi- Gamay or Swvarnadvipa- ania ‘Gold-land or Gold 
be left undecided. His hypothesis that the other names ( 
bave cooperated in ousting other designations in favour of S 
unconvincing. 
The name of the island of Java forms a vexsd question, 
ence to it by an authority ef known date is that by the Greak geographer Piolemy. 
He makes mention of au island labadiou, ‘it is said”, he adds, ‘to ba of extraordi- 
nary fertility and to produce very much gold, and to haya its capital called Argyrà 
(‘Silvertown’) in the extreme west of it’? According to the same author the 
name Jabadiou means Island of Barley’. As the Skt. yawa- 3 actually means 
*barley'—it should, however, be added that in the earliest times the word could 
probably stand for any grain or corn yielling flour or meal5? —and diow represents 
a MIA. form for ‘island? corresponding to the synonymous Skt. dvipa- iq, Pkt, 
diva- ÑA, etc. the word is clearly Indian and the interpretation given by the 
Greek author correct. Yet the identification Tabadiou = Yavadvipa- 4agtq in 
Sanskrit with the island of Java has been called in question, mainly because it is 
an established fast that Sumatra, or at least a part of it, was known as Jawa (with 
j corresponding to a Skt. x). The Arab authors and navigators applied the name 
Jawa to both Sumatra and Java, and the adjective Jawi to products of the Mala- 
Yan world a3 well as to Muslim Indonesians, especially to the natives of Malaysia 
Proper; the Malay script, ie. the Malayo-Arabic characters are Ka e. 
meets’; and the Mal.. derivative ménfawi-kan means ‘to pr ES 
This being 80, Ferrand?! referred to the name Suvarsadoipa- gs : ES mec 
Which was later on given to Sumatra—where gold is won pr ik show that 
century — Whereas Java does not produce that metal, and Mer used 
Sumatra was meant by Ptolemy. But neither the Hr jio eI 
DO Greek geographer nor later authors. of Es wealth of gold, were 
calling it (already in the VIII century) Yawadwipa, Ce of being rich in 
Minera logistg : Java rightly or wrongly enjoyed ES Ls to neither island. 
me ER "attlier beon arau SAA per tbis point s e ; Es 
round ees Krom and other be vi ava- AA could also apply to Xi a 
or p _the difficulty by pointing out that Skt. y f Rice’, or Island of Jat 
9 cereal Products in general, so that Island 


to yal. word for ‘millet’)—these two partiou 


E. ay, AV&—mugt have boeudibeeeriéiulv mee Conecigsn etr, whereas aft 
1 ed th i uged for I 
8 fact; that the form Yawa is nevat 


-islang" +e must 
Sumutra and Sanudra) 
umatra is, however, no’ 


The earliest refer. 


226 


- 'and before that Period t 
lied to both islands, an 
Xt? century Jawa app 


Digitized by Ary S4 NSE PGES Mion ROME SHA eGangotri 


9 Sumatra 


Suppos ng he later form ral r 8 ndonesiang : “0 
: form to have been & gene al name for the I ES 
ae ES GA that originally Yawa stood for Java, 1 p 
inelin [e] f h 


Sumatra or-for a part of this greater island. I would for the time 
uma ek 


being Prefer 


‘ à RU 
the following hypothesis : jawa originally was a word for Indonesian, Indigenoug’ 
e 


i ‘nati indigenous 
in colloquial Javanese it means native, indig F 


common, of little Value 
U 


eanings of jawa and jawi referred to_; 
natural’, and compare also the Malay m : 


ly to both Java and Sumatra, to their inhabitants, products, 
iu, ku navigators and colonizers interpreted the word, by way of 
etc. 


language 
Popular 


tymology, 28 yava- 44, abundance of corn as well as the Correspondence Pkt. in 
etymology, 


general); 3=Skt. y 3 having induced them to do so. 


Later on, Arab and other 


vigators, basing themselves on the usage of the Indonesians, at first applied the 
na h 


word jawa to tha island which was nearer to their own country, 


Sumatra (but 


here we must reckon with the scarcity of our sources of information), later on to 
Sumatra and Java, and finally especially to the Muslim Indonesiang of Malaysia, 
Under the influence of the Sanskritizing tradition on the smaller island the form 


Yawa came into use for Jawa alone. 


NOTES 


1 The word is repeatedly used in con- 
nection with a town or locality which 
after having been in a state of insecurity 
and disturbance was brought to a condi- 

_ tion of rest and prosperity. 
? See Kern, VG. VIII, p.85f, 
* If Kern (VG. VII, p42) to whom I 
refer, is right in supposing that the 
wotd is a synonym of Bodhimanda- ‘the 
ground round the Bodhi-tree’, 
* 846 F.H. van Naerssen, Oudjavaansche 
Oorkondea in Duitsche en Deensche ver. 
zamelingen,í Thesis Layden 1941), p.40ff, 
* Bee Vēn Naerssen, 0.0., p.66. ` 
© -Edited by Th. Pigeaud (The Hague 
1924). 

o.c., p.919, 

> 0.C., p.931 


tain was šūnyg 'emrty, 
ing to the text it 
which no ‘etymology’ į 
thor: perhape Sixt, Panka- qg mua mora] 
"impurity” ang certainly Bkt. aa iw 


‘lord’, combined for reasons unknown 
to me; Panasagiri 'the mountain (Skt. 
giri) of the bread-fruits (Skt. panasa- 
Ta), because there were many panasae; 
Labdhavara, because a reverend man ‘had 
obtained a favour’ (Skt. Szqaq) in that 
Particular place; Sarjawa-Jambudwipa 
where a person lived who had an upright 
Walk: Skt. arjava- īšra ‘straightness, 
Propriety of observance’, sūrjava- «IS 
‘honest’ and Jambudvipa. Sg ithe 
central continent in Indian geography. 
A mountain is called wihangamayd, 1n 
reference to which Pigeaud (o.c., p.268) 
ie in doubt: Skt. viharga- fax ‘bird’ or 
Vaiga. ST which may mean either 
"blot, stain; frog; steel? or ‘without 
limbs, bodiless’, further the word 002 
tains the Skt. sufix -maya- ^W" con- 
sisting of. *. Pūrņajīwa is the name of 
& Village; Bkt. purna- qi ‘complete, 
entire’ ang Jiva- Sita ‘life’: ‘of a com- 
Plete life, where life is complete’. 

'" Bee Pigeaud, 0.0., p-256. 4 
" The history of this word (which 12 
vanese preserved or assumed the 


A al 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat $184P68nceloossonce, the fundamental, 


which must be connected with tho Skt. 
sūra- AT ‘etrength, energy, best or essen- | 
tial part of anything, quintessence’) i | 
deal& with in another section of this | 
book. | 
12 It may be mentioned in passing that | 
in thia poem (15, 1) the first town of 
Sinapura (Singapore) occurs as Siñhana- 
gari ‘Lionstown’ (Skt. fagantt), 

'" See also Kern, VG. VII, p.940ff., and 
Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis?, 
p.416f. A new edition and tradition 
of the poem by-Dr. Pigeaud is in 
course of preparation, 

'4 See J. G. de Casparis, Inscripties uib 
de Cailendra-tijd, (Bandung 1950), p.70. 


'"* Mentioned in a Palembang inserip- | 
tion (684 A.D.). It is also the name of a | 
country in Buddhist texts, being the 
ancient name of Prome (see also G. | 
Coedés, Les états hindouisós d'Indochine | 
et d'Indonésie (Paris 1948) p.132f. 
M Tha so-called second inscription of | 
Sri Kahulunan, seo De Casparis, o.c., 
p.79ff. 

" By De Casparis, o.c., p.160ff. 


budur ag having arisen from 


i t of this long compound 
A kārašhudor(a); see his book at p. 


169.—Balinerg inseriptional terms : geg 
2 Goris, Djawa XVI (1936), p.94 f. 

his mountain bas been identified with 
the Penanggungan (I refer to Krom, Hin. 
doe-Javaansche Geschiedenis?, p 259). 
?! See Kidung Pamancangah, ed. by 0.0, 
Barg (Santpoort 1929), p.103. 
*2 Though lit. Jay. marta also stands for 
Paramaria in the sense of ‘gentle, gen- 
tleness’< Skt. paramartha- Wary "highest 
trutb, spiritual knowledge’. 
23 See Hoesein Djajadiningrat, Critische 
beschouwing van de Sadjarah Bantēn, 
(Thesis Leyden 1913), p.6, n.2. 
24 Hoesein,0.c., p.76, n.l. G. Rouffaer in 


. Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch-Iudié, 


IV, p.38 subscribed to this view. The 
interpretation "Town of victory’ givere 


i in thesame work, I, p.187 is nof olear 
| to me. 


© There were various names to desig- | ** Hoesein, 0.¢., and Rouffaer, 0.0, gave 
nate such monuments as tho famous | the interpretation : eee 

, (6 is 
Javanese Barabudur : stūpa (Skt. stūpa- | hero’ (‘geslaagde durt of he 


ETN) ‘the Well-known Buddhist dome- | 


26 Seo above. 


i oe . d 
like or pyramidal monument, erected | *” The oult of the linga was widesprea 


see Ph. van Akkeren, 


over sacred relics oto; prasada (Skt. | in ancient Java, : 


Prüsdda- sara) ‘a lofty mansion, temple 
ot palace’; mandala (Skt. mandala- ATES) 


Een gedrocht en toch de volmaakte mens 


sis Utrecht 1951), ch-IT. g , 
e ux Dumont, Aardrijkskundig 


| 
Anything round, consecrated ground’, | andsch Oost- 
Dadmūsana (Skt. padmiusana- aa) Os | Woordenboek van: eM = 
lotus-seat (for the future Buddha), and | Indië uee beginning with sukas; 
milan. See p. Mus, Barabudur BEFEO | less than it wx ocours 6 tinies, 
XXXII (1982), p.278f.— A kamülan among them es and its synonym Suka- — 
literally Gas & place where a müla Sukarējā 1 ei ( Skt. orama: 3 
kt. mila. RS) ‘root, origin’ is, ie. ‘a | 76/0 pu pleasure, garden’) S times 2 
PADO bügry in which an object was erected | AUA um farther, more than 60 geo: 
St Veneration which represented or | eios thers Mies beginning with ursis g 
the nized the origin, om À n gonor eto, $ aa bt: also be referred tates 1 
under of the roya lynasty ^ ^ 


998 Digitized by ane 


SKRIT IN INDONESIA 
amaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


. van Tropisch Nederland (1938). 
29 See above. 
30This name and its connection with 
fire are discussed in another section of 
this volume. 

* 31 ft would be worth while to collect 
and to study all the data obtainable in 
the Indonesian and Western documents 
in connection with IN. name-giving. 
32 (.C. Berg, quoted by F.S. Eringa, 
Loetoeng Kasaroeng (The Hague 1949) 
p289. — 
33 See G. Rouffaer, in Encyclopacdie 
van Nederl. Oost-Indië, IV, p.14. 
34 KBW. IV, p.978. 
3 Van der Tuuk, Bat. Ned. Woorden- 
boek, p.494. 
36 Wilkinson MED. II, p.285. 
37 Seo Matthes, Boegineesch-Hollandsch 
Woordenboek, p.107. 
?* For the sake of brevity Irefer to 
Krom, o.c., p.98 etc. (see p.490). 
39 See — Yule-Burnell, baon- 
(1886), p.418. Hobson-Jobson 
40 Krom, o.c., p.110. 
41 : f 

; ns os Cu Indian Colo. 

š ast II, Suvarna- 
ue I (Dacca 1937), p.19ff. : 
* Bee also E. R. Bevan, i 

bridge History E e Gam. 
1999), p.375. Miss mbridge 
?^ W. Marsden, 


Histor 
(1783); p.4tr, istory of Sumatra 


| 
| 


44 According to Krom, Den 

in BKL., C. (1941), p.5fr. (oan ou āū 
quotes Gubernatis, Storia dei M E Who 
italiani (1875), p.371, the opinio aie 
already advanced by Valentino Monon 
in 1515. p 
** Hence Rouffaer's suggestion toexplai 
Samudra-Sumatra as ‘Sealand’ (BEL 
LXXVII (1921), p.73 and 76), but the 
name Samudrabhūmi or Samudradvipa 
occurs nowhere. , 

*5 Rouffaer, quoted by Krom, 0.¢., p.11ff 
* I refer to Krom, o.c., D22. a ; 
4 See Krom, Hindoo-Jayaansche Ge- 
schiedenis?, p.500. : i 
^^ Claudius Ptolemereus, Grographiké 
Hyphégésis 7,2,29. f 
5° O, Schrader-A. Nēhring, Reallexikon 
der indogermanischen Altertumskunde 
(Berlin-Leipsic 1917-1929) I, p.889 and 
II, p.648. 

?' G. Ferrand in Journal asiatique XI: 
19 (1929), p.175ff. 

** See also Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche 
Geschiedenis?, p.58 and Majumdar, o.c. 
II, Lp.98ff. + 

** Seo Kern, VG. V, p.816ff. (written in 
1871); Rouffaer, Encyelopaedio van 
Nederlandech-Indié! IV (1905), p.364; 
BKI. LXXIV (1918), p.138; C. Lekker- : 
kerker, Koloniaal Tijdschrift XVI (1927), 
P.607 and 621ff.; Krom o.c., p.59; BEL, 
C (1941), p.5. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


| E CHAPTER ry 
Gu RD APPEARANCE OF THE BORROWED WORDS 


SECTION 1 


PHONETIC HISTORY OF THE SANSKR 
I Y 
IN INDONESIAN LANGUAGES E 


In this section I shall not endeavour to exbaust the subject, but 
give the main poculiarities of form in the borrowed words. arca 
correct form and the correct spelling is often found, especial 
or if we look askance at any chronological determination, 
have been: translated or adapted from a Sanskrit model, such as the (parwans' of 
the great epic, the Brahmandapurana, the San hyan Kamahāyānikan, in M 
poems written in Indian stanzas and so on. The spelling of the manuscripts of 
these texts—even of those of the same text—, however, lacks uniformity. Some 
copyists seem to have tried scrupulously t6 follow their models, others have ir- 
dulged in all sorts of orthographical inconsistencies. In some cases all the 
manuscripts of a text agree in many particulars and minor orthographic habits; 
then we may conclude that the copyists have, in ġeneral, been comparatively 
accurate and that the text handed down by them to a certain degree, represents a 
tradition, which may have reacbed back to people who possessed a personal expe- 
riencg of reading Sanskrit books and a familiarity with grammatically correct 
forms. 


all only 
In Old-Javanese, the 


ly in the older texts, 
in those texts which 


As a rule, we must distinguish between Javanese manuscripts and texts " 


of Old-Javanese works handed down and copied in the isle of Bali. On the whole 
the manuscripts of Balinese origin are more faithful copies of the original works 
than the transcripts written in Java, which often exhibit a highly corrupted spell- 
ing and text. Thus, the text presented by the Javanese maauscripts of the Old- 
Javanese Rāmāyaņa is a ‘continuous cacography’.' In the course of time the 
Javanese copyists lost all knowledga of the ociginal quantity of syllables in the 
so-called ‘great metres’ which have been borrowed from India. So they sa 
ly spoilt stanzas by putting in the place of original Sanskrit words NE à 
the author in accordance with Indian rules of prosody, other Ms = E 
Sean. They also often set the rules of Old-Javanese grammar at defiance. 


i d t 
A i inese copyists, foo, are no 
Bai Meade cL a a of corruptions in Balinese 


entirely blameless i Curious insta j 
88 in these respects. Outi PES ; ce, all Bali- 
texts can bo quoted: instead of Jemini (< Jaimim- afa), for instan 


ies of Javanese 
Nese E A jini, whereas the copies 0 
Origi ; js Of tbe Ramayana {give Go E instead of the well-known name 


n have kept the more correct form, 26,5). But many 
AMDA. TETT th Tampa (in the same poem Anoe 
AYanog ey all hand down D SE da mu ds 

few ; *h: might be q 
ew ing hich meses confounded; 


&000 1 , , * 'pure E . i ii 
nairrta, Suplished’ and suddha- Be pure, gsava- MAT spit 


liquor’ WHET ‘south-weskerg’ poc emo. rt Saski Qgieckapatha 


We incidentally find mastatva; instes 


tting inacouraoies. A i 


ted : Skt. siddha- . 


ga (baving) a good 2 


ey 


aihya and sapatya. In other manusoripta, Atharvaveda. wags 
road'.: sap 


4 ʻi d of Skt. anekasay, AFN: * 3 bag 

a tten Arthaweda; instea d A £ "frequenta 
consistently been pr srutarsayah JAJA: ‘celebrat TOR ug 
anaišakaļ is written, instead of Skt. srutarsavaļi ated reig ` Suta, 


šrayak, instead of Skt. nidhanam fs, aon E Tee 80 a 
It is, however, important to remin EO i Rs Me erable part ol 
these and similar forms &re not merely occasional corruptions but represent na 
d other words whioh have been adopted into phe later Javanese 
c i of proper names have already been given?, other words 
1 i S. 
ed in 2 AE o. above remarks merely orthographical habits deserve a 
passing notice. Instead of Skt. mrdw- HZ ' soft, gentle’ Wo sometimes como Boross 
mrdhw and so on. In rare proper nouns letters which because of a similar ont. 
ward form are liable to be confounded are, of course, repeatedly used Promigey. 
ously. In a similar way the three Sanskrit sibilants, which are not -distinguished 
in Javanese pronunciation, soon tended to be mistaken for one another, However, 
some manuscripts obstinately prefer rasa to the correct Skt. rasa- qd ‘cap, taste’ 
and similar forms. Further, the exact orthography of other sounds which did not 
fit in the IN. patterns (e.g. the aspirate consonants) was 8000 neglēcted. 
The discussion of these errors is, however, complicated by the presence of a 
number of words the orthography of which has, or may have, been modelled upon 
Prākrit vocábles, Thus the Balinese manuscripts of such texts ag the OJay, 


tradition, Bom, 
will ba Mention. 


Indo-Aryan dialects? and in Bengali 


ded.‘ Yet, the invorgg order of change ig more likely to have been borrowed from 

Indian models: thus, Skt, danda. qug ‘staff, authority, punishment’ is regularly 

* written danda (or dénda) in many Balinese msg. of OJay. texts, an orthography 
found in Jaina-Mahàürágtri beside danda. in the other MIA. dialecta.5 

Especially frequent are erroneous indications of the quantity of the vowels. 

As IN, idioms, in general, do not distinguish between long and short vowels in 

the Sanskrit sense of the term, it soon became impossible for the copyists to re- 


member well when 8, i or u and when Z, i or à; ho si "thography. Yet, 
the Middle-Indian ie 2 © OF & was the right orthog 


Maes ME. nonciation and other Middle-Indian influences may bave 
een influential in pro t, and sometimes oven usual» T 
1 . a- RUITES 537.6 ibra instead of Skt. 
fivra- ta ‘violent, intense’, gana- FA 'jd.6 tibra ins 
4% ‘sun’. sūksa 
however, such interesting for 
- WA ja 
Bo we have, in general, to distinguish between tatsamas, borrowed forms 
angkrit, which, ot Course are now and then misspelled, and 
; or 
ira tās 49 One. Or more alterations, which are more 
ae members of the Bars ed to the pattern of other IN, languages. But numerous 
+ RR mer group were in the course of time naturalized as well. re 
latter class to be found especially [n tL. tau (ethe Words, belonging satire 
€h contain offsets ang = Works which deal mainly with n aD 
ģ reminig i ioug lore f 
literature ; 9ences of Indian religious 


gn in all 
n 8 much Jay, T h were, in al 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri nized, form, whio 


Digitized by Arya BANEBITadtod Rbennsigaka NI 


281 


sorin & period afte 

Í r that 
with Teasonable antioipa. 
e: this clasg of literature 
rthy of attention here.” 


ty; written outside the centres of Hindu ings 

had culminated. It is, likewise, in accords 

t the spelling of Sanskrit Words in UM ce 
le, highly inconsistent. Particulars a ae 


probabili 
influence 
tion tha 


s u 
jg, 88 & T 


T shall now give some illustrations of the main linguis 
od by Sanskrit words on being naturalized in Javaneze a 
guages, repeating once more that, especially in the ancie 
outward appearance of many words has not changed at all. 
Anaptyxis or Svarabhakti. 

Bush comparatively minor changes as the Appearance of an anaptyotio or 
svarabbakti vowel; turning up beside a non-syllabio sonant, are often to b 
ved in loan-words. Thus, the Sk*. sloka @t became silok ‘a verge’ in N s obser 
Engl. Frenchman became Pérasman in Malay, and French> Pérancis p Us 
As a rule the svarabhakti vowel is an ë, in Toba Batak (where any original pinnes 
to become o ) o; before a w, however, wis usual: Sind, duruwiksa “the ee 
an (evil)spirit in the forest, a kind of gnome or goblin’ « Skt. durbhiksa. afire “tami. 
ne, dearth’; Bal. suweda beside sweda 'sweat' <Skt. sveda- Bz, and fory ani: 
Bal. dibiya "very able or excellent’ < Skt. divya- f= ‘divine, wonderful’; detiya 
‘an evil epirit or being < Skt. daitya- 481 ‘a class of demons’. Thia phenomenon 
mostly appears before r or l, sometimes also before W, Y, R, after r or leote. Java- 
nese instances are OJav. maleca ( maleccha ) by the side of mleccha (Skt. mleccha- 
F7 ) ‘foreigner who does not speak the correct languago, barbarian ete.'; sanas- 
kora which is, already in the Adiparwa, rather frequent to express the idea of ‘for- 
tifying by means of sacraments and consecrating’ etc.*, sanskara, the more original 


form of the Skt. word Htēl occurring by the side of it. In s comparable way ' 


Old-Javanese has glēna (Skt. glāna- 8T ‘exhausted’) and gélana ‘id.’, but Malay 
which is for this word indebted to ancient Javanese texts, has gélana, gulana, and 
even gaulana ‘brooding, despondent. In Malay we find for instance sēžu "beast" 
<Skt. sativa- Ata 'id”; putēri (royal) daughter, princess «Skt. puirt gat '"daugh- 
ter’ and putēra (royal) son'<Skt. putra- JA son; in Tag. halaga (beside halga) 
Yalu, price’<Skt. argha- std ‘id’. Other instances are: Gayo harētā, Ach. arola 
Property, goods” < Skt. artha- AÀ ‘id.’; TBat. bajora ‘panic in a battling erowd 3 
Skt. vajra- TA 'thūnderbolt'; agoni ‘the south-eastern quarter S. = 
dire, and the god Agni who presides over that quarter ; et. also io AE m 
he namo ofthe animal which swallows up the moon when it is eolipsed : Skt. 
ala. QMS, $rgala- AMS ‘jackal’, OJav. srégala ‘dog’ (the Karo form presupposes 
S 


4 
" ; -~ hea- 
sērgala): NE UNE e onn aradiso' < Mal. surga etc. -hes 
bi la); Gayo sērēgā, sérugé beside sérgo heaven, pare à formula eto.’ occurs 


Yen < kt. svarga. eae Ga The Skt. manira- AA ‘sacro CREE 
88 mantéra ‘ma Wu wk Se i Mali as mintora "formula aged in pe à 
Th gical formula in | , aya; Skt. süira- qa threa 


at. as mantala ‘magical formula’ in Tagalog and Bisay: 

Satire ‘silk, Max silken’ in Malay, suttora, sintora 

"lera, Soléra in KBatak." de that all these and other 

si y, ut Would, however, bea rash assumption to conelu id svarabhakti formē 88 

ās formg have necessarily arisen in Indonesia. deo and candira- 

Mg, i TU instond of gaghha; S ombryo' (ivon by E ator and socalled 
f 70. Prof. Satya Viel Saggyaret¥ticand in 


Or candra. «ez ‘moon’ are alres 


^id. in TBatak, as 


39 Digitized by Arya SS ERU Ral BORN EA 4 Gangotri 
989° 


: ieties of Prākrit the phenomenon ig far 
hybridi ji T E = a lina Sanskrit, Pāli, etc , Skt..raina. TTT); ae 
zare: ralang SEE turiya for tūrya- (Skt. qi ʻa musical instrument”. 
‘fire’ (Skt. Cae Kharosthi documents svarabhakti is regular between 7 
ROGO pis! Wem 13 So, the occurrence of svarabhakti is not Peculiar to g 
garahatt comp ein It is always highly probable that in some cage o 
panai: in ronunciation has been introduced into the Archipelago from the 
an popen p: Malay padëma ‘lotus’ ( beside paima, and even pakma ‘ia,’ ) may 
RE, been influenced by the Tamil pronunciation (padumam) of the Sanskrit 
a The Bal. supéna ‘dream’ may perhaps be connected with such MIA, formg 
as the Pāli supino g, Pkt. suvina gan dream’, etc. soo 

Special attention may be drawn to such cases ag the Jay. gēni fire « (a) 
<Skt. agni- ‘fire’ (cf. the above-mentioned TBat. agoni); the Mal. sëraya 
for help, favour or assi:tance’, (ii) ‘with, along with, E 
ūsraya- MAT having recourse to; assistance; Joining; connection’. 
way Mal. lépa beside alpa ‘careless, negligent’ which may probably 
with the Skt. alpa aeq "(very) little, insignificant’; in Old-Javanese this word 
conveys the meaning of ‘depreciating, having a low opinion of...'. In these and 


other words an initial vowel (a) has been dropped, a phenomenon to which we 
shall have to recur. 


Dissimilation. 
Such cases of dissimilatio 


being Ļ 
agani 


and h; 
&ngkrit 


(i) ‘asking 


Iu a similar 
be connected 


n a8 are familiar t6 all readers of etymological 
dictionaries and historical grammars are far from absent in the lists of Sanskrit 
loans ir the IN. languages. A recurring phoneme was changed into a more or less 
similar phoneme in one of its occurrences, In these loan-words the 7 ie, in, this 
way, very often replaced by the l: lit, Jav, and Sund. (also Bal.) nalendra ‘king’ 
“<Skt. narendra- Wz ‘id’; palamarta Jav. ‘gentle, mild-tempered’, Sund. ‘good: 
natured, merciful; mercy’< Skt, paramartha- Wars ‘the highest truth, any exoel- 
lent object’, in OJav. also ‘excellent, good-natured, altruist’;'* palastra ‘to die, 


deceased’ <Skt. paratra qA ‘hereafter’; palacidra ‘perfidy, falseness, treachery, 
deceit < Skt. parachidra. qlz in the OJ 


person’ (in Petb, Diet. ana MW. 'anothe 


tion); reg. Jav. plikara, plakara= Prakara ‘lawsuit, business’ < Skt. prakara- EUM 
specios, class, manner eto? Indira (also Bal.) ‘blood’< Skt. rudhira- «f ‘id 
latri (also Bal.) ‘night? < git rātri- ; Sund. (courteous term) salira lo 
. rms 0 

relationship, Jav. (kr, i.) slira (Do as (dā isos jas, GR pula- 
(invalide, a dead person elc.) "in Toe nal Jav. usage aleo 
pen in a metaphorical Way, ‘thrash’ and ‘to sleep with ‘A 


; 5 b 
SCR ‘going before; harbinger, attendant’, as the l4 
ttended by’. $ C 


al. génda = 
<Bkt. danda. vg ‘fng and gumi 


country” (b and m being labia} pho 


"T é : jated « 
Bkt. gadgada. ngg ‘stammering’ nomes); lit, Jay, kadgada ‘speedily, infuürl 
mayed, moved eta. 


x i Be- 
: Which in OJav, also denotes the idea of el 
“forest? 73]; so: ; Mal. bčlantara ‘tree-co d y antara- 
orest ; jēlitā or julita ‘fair, graceful’ eed Wasto'«Skt. van 
and Bund, tarapti 'y i 


4 
P ‘ t 6.. 
dénda fault, mistake’ and, asa base, to fin 


icin the 


r Other : 


during! < "aséraya « gut, T 


ly 
World, kingdom' < Skt. bhūmi- fW ‘earths 


a É tle; 3 
*t is tho Skt, lalita. fara ‘charming, E6079! ” 
eady, Nom » lalita do £ ho 

cC D PRI Sdyb9siderparGedetie" (regional distribution of t 


s 


gēni . 


Digitized by AryS SEEIDnERUeR BORS eng eGangotri . 


i 393 
; prüpti- SIfū ‘reaching, attaining’ ; : - 
> a is be asoribed to processes of dcs Jav. tumrapta (infix ty: 
Fu i5 C NE D recasting phoneme gets lost in ond of it 
‘disposition, feeling < Bkt. prakrti- netā "natural form e Mal. 
kara ‘lawsuit, business’ beside prakara< Skt, prakara- ie aracter, 
inā, species’ (cf. alto prakarana- seam ‘subject, topic = 
i ‘supreme ruler’ < Stt. cakravartī. asadi id eE aleo OJav a 
e. es back to Skt. grdhra- "JA ‘desirous’, -gi 
it g0 In other words one of two consonants which 
phonemes has EIAS Sundi Jarm ‘man, men’; TBaf, jolma man; housewife’ < 
iaa TT hireh, existence in this world’; Sund. cipta "iImagipation, t E 
gine’, Jav. cipla Whought, imagination, wish’<Skt, citta- fiat ‘ming aN red 
thought.’ 1 Bining, 
Cases due to the reverse process 


škērtt 
Jav. pé 
cla88; k 


temper’. 
„node, manner, 
); Sund. cakra. 
arddha ‘desire’ it 


ars not separated by other 


(assimilation) are nos wanti 
d 5 s Wanting: Jay, dé 
‘fne’ and ‘cudgel’ (already OJav. danda, désda) <Skt. darla. JUZ ‘id’; lib. ue 


beside dusta ‘a base artifice’ « Skt. duşta- ZE ‘wicked’: lit. Jav. bragalba (kas 
pragalba ‘wild (<Skt. pragalbha- 8782 'bold'); tiger’: digdaya=digjaya ‘invinci- 
ble’ « Skt. digjaya- Raa “conquest of various countries”. 
Spontaneous Nasalization etc. : 

A very wide-spread phenomenon for which a suitable technical term kay 
nob yet been received into common use, the names ‘epenthesis’ and ‘anorganic 
sounds’ easily leading to misunderstanding, consists in the ‘insertion’ of a conso- 
nant, and especially of a nasal or also aliquid (brill) between a vowel and a con. - 
sonantal element. As Grierson, when writing on Indo-Aryan," rightly observes— 
and his words are relevant to other areas as well—this nasslization is especially 
frequent in rural dialects, where many instances can be heard of which no trace 
will be found in the dictionaries. The phenomenon, which is often limited to 
more or less solitary instances or to individual speech-habits, was already known 
in early periods, as appears from variants in manuscripts of classical Greek texta 
and from such pairs as Skt. vakra- a% ‘crooked, curved’ and Prākrit vaika- 
dē (and not vakka- Wü), Skt. gambhira- WHT ‘deep’ beside gabhira- mit; the 
Sanskrit numeral vimšati fate ‘twenty’ beside the Latin viginti, etc. Io Indo- l 
Desian languages it is, on the whole, highly frequent. Although a thorough e 
gation into this subject is still wanting, we can, for the time being, sayi i Q 
9'eurrenco of such an ‘inserted’ consonantal element may be due to iic 
Inverge analogy (a tendeney to hypercorrectness) in dialects and ee 
Which the sound or sounds concerned have ofteu aropa basses 
Biienire or emotive tendencies; blending E. pecu of. such 

"Imilation: dissimilation (arising when coason 


Hen . Fan beside 

"Min pairs as blatta : blanta ‘moth; book-worm’s Diks dani a with the’ 
_ SKS arsana- za ‘seeing’, in which words the nasalization is EAS SN 
Simplifiegtion of conjunct consonants; Skt. marara- ch phonetical causes as: 
MiiOra. REN, Mahar. mamjūra- Hae! Farther, to ae Fired, which resulta 
“tendency to DID worda with the velum incomple E without any 
Mithe vowel becoming nasalized'.' But often the soun Hence the techni- 


T6RSOn g : ing lingaistio change insertion'in 
Ppar observing ? ‘ eous insert! 
cal ter Parent to our capacity of A or spontan 


gone, Ded by Griersau -spon tenp Yak Shastri Coleciefeats loan words in-various 
ral. It isa remarkable fact that this epen Ec V 
e 


; m 
' karnalje ‘rabble’ < Fr. canaille; further, Engl. (dial.) milin(g)(a)ry = 


Digitized by Arya Samant SHREONCTENBONB SDengotri 
934 


: hat it has already struck many an author 1a 
ges to such a degree t : f 4 ; 
um will suffice (French words in Dutch on German) : Dutch komfoor ‘hatin 
ean chauffoir; (low colloquial) ampart ‘apart’< Fr. à part: Ger LE 
i . D | 
Military. 
establish 


Y in the 
Uffored a 


carnardine is ‘incorrect for carnadine’ etc. It is sometimes not easy to 
whether the ‘insortion’ originated in the borrowing language or alreaģ 
idiom lending. Sanskrit words adopted by IN. languages have often g 
change of this desoription. It must be loft undecided how far they were adopted 
in a nacalized Indian form.'? Thus we find: OJav. Pariniosa and parintusa beside 
paritosa (Skt. paritosa- TRata) (completo) satisfaction’ (in metrical texts like m 
Ramayanal): Aigastya beside Agastya (Skt. ANI); the katanka (a tree, mentioned 
Ram. 25,88) may, perhaps, be identified with the Skt. kataka- eax ‘clearing mae 
plant; we come across prasanka, prasaika beside prasatka ‘arrow? (Skt. prsatka. 
Zs). In Javanese sumpéna meant ‘dream’: < supzna (goo above, cf. Skt, svapna. tara 
‘sleep, dream’); Bal. mintuna ‘the Gemini’, and lit. Jav. mintuna ‘inseparably con- 
nected’ <Skt. mithuna- faga (torming) a pair (male and female); complement; the 
Gemini’. The form antyanta ‘highly, very’, found in so-called Middle-Javanese 
texts, is (to cite Juynboll's dictionary) a ‘corruption’ of atyanta (Skt. atyanta- era) 


- which also occurs; the group -ant- in the word and the frequent occurrence of 


words beginning with an- (which has also given rige to the shortened form tyanta)?° 
may have played a part in this change. In a porfectly similar way Dutch compo. 
sitors often set up indentiteit for identiteit ‘idontity’, foreign words beginning with 
in- being numerous in that language. In Modern Javanese mansa means ‘season, 
time’, and also ‘a month of the Javanese solar year’; itis the Skt. māsa- WW 
‘month’. Bal. raja ‘melody, song’ must bo connected with the Skt. raga- 7 
‘melody’. In alike manner Malay has jēntayu as the namo of a legendary winged 
monster who figures as Yama’s mount (cēntayu) <Skt. jaļāyu- Hey the king of 
vultures; aikasa ‘sky, region of the air; heaven'<Skt. akasa- MIFIT ‘free or open 
Space, sky’, Žēntala ‘the earth” (beside butala), Sund. buntala<Skt. bhütala- TS 
„a. The Bimanese sampana is, by the way of Mal. supana, the Skt. sopana- Aa 
stairs, ladder’; in Balinese the same word (sampana) denotes ‘a high wall, barti- 
cade, entrenchment’, To Bisayan Mantili is tho name of an unfortunate but virtu: 
Rete ia p e ilt tā i sir wna om Beal 
same form hag come to denote Mithila the king 
In view of these facts it is not ill-considered to inter 
» misfortune’, like the Middle-Javanese ka-jantokā 


i y lexicographora, 
déra, cēndēra ‘sound a 


the Ja 
ı 8 Muslim 


š refix pë- 
3 Place, Ped kevctarang pect oS pésantren (pre elves 


z - 61 
aniri) We may ask OUT 
* 


nigiri by arya Samaj Roko RON mid eGangotri 
235 
i y be connected ith 
ther the word may cesed with a MTA, 
UM anféag ‘versed in the scientific o x ea diam form of the Skt 
8, learned’: of, : 


science” <Skt. Sastra- IEA ‘scientific or religi knowledge; 


‘ bach or farmhand living in 
master’ and this meaning is expressed by the v 


This meaning might induce us to regard the Skt, Satirin. afay 

origin of the Jav. word : the former means, it is true, ‘the eti E 88 the 
of a great sacrifice or any person whose merits are equal to ues " ce 
such a sacrifice’, and, further ‘an ambassador or comp per 


the latter: ‘a person who is aceustomed to perform sacri 


Great saorifice”, 


| is given to brahmans, travel- 
lers, mendicants etc.’ Hence, the word sattri(n). may be supposed to have also 


denoted ‘a person who lives in such a house or in a religious building in genera] zs 

As is often the case when tendeneies of this description are Prevalent g 
minority of cases show a change in the Opposite direction. Thus lit, Jay. kadarpa 
‘god of love, desire” is the Skt. and OJav. kandarpa- &ez$ jā >8 

Some instances of the Spontaneous appearances cf an r are: Mal, Sérpa 
"blessing or cursing’ from the Skt. sāpa- MT ‘curse’; lit. Jav. and Mal. kunarpa 
beside kunapa < Skt. kunapa- ENT ‘dead body’; bérduri (also béduri) from baiduri 
‘beryl, opal’, which is the Skt. vaidūrya- aga ‘a cat's-eye gem’, The Skt. aišānī 
tart or a form closely related to it (aišānya- tea?) ‘north-eastern’>OJay, 
esdnya has been the starting-point for the lit. Mod. Jav, irsanya and Bal. ersania. 
Instead of usiwisa (Skt. āšīvisa- AAG) we occasionally find (older Jav.) asirwisa 
‘a kind of Venomous snake”, and the lit. Jav. pērdapa ‘young foliage’ represents the 
Skt. padapa- urga ‘tree, plant’. The phenomenon is sometimes associated with the 
simplification of a ‘double consonant’, however this was pronounced?’ : Skt. OJav. 
Sajjana. RFRA ‘a good or noble man’ has resultad in Mod. Jav. SHOES echolazi 
Kāma's name Manmatha- AFAA has been borrowed in Old-Javanese in its a 
form, but has, (after being something lika “Mammatha ? ; cf. Fur Maud elo. 
becomo Mérmata in Modern Javanese, and even Mérpata in LUN E: poe 
in the Karo-Bat. kulcapi (beside kucapi) ‘a kind of mandolin : " helped in 
MR ‘a similar musical instrument. Dissimilation m taak IW. cha 
sing abont Middle andino mud d ae d ‘thought, intellect, 
i Ought’) which by the way of the correctly spelle faa: the word is, however, 
, Position, mind, inmost soul, heart’ is the Skt. epu S Sy cu (ride 
AS R rule Pronounced cia? In a similar way lit. Jav. wP 


"péti) < Skt, Utpatti- SĒR ‘produotion, profit WS wf. A curious 
n lit. Javanese lastri ocours beside latri nig o be a talisman’ (also 


k ieved t manika 
9 18 the Mal. mēstika ‘a bezoar, eap. when puc. mantika, muntika 
? which is also the Javanese form) beside Min: 


ing the Skt. mubtika- fiet 
oth forms go back to a form *mu((Jtika rese d At "hereafter « 
ET T av. and S&rfdP "pālīātva Veo Ano co RR 


Inetano 
Mustig 
ay 

E 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


936 — A 
PE isitizedby Ai - ja Samaj Foundation, Chennai and eGan i = 
nOD anos of ^d ange in the raveraa "direction. This ya 
"eng for the medial group of mutes after a nasal of the same olas ig ķi 
PIN languages, far from being EISE Ay: : Sai a instanoe n 
oe p is still writton, but has mee ae ru 3 become k 80 that ‘hy 
Skt. masi- aff ‘ink’, which in Old-Javaneso an = a 18 he appears ag Maks; 
and upama $381 ‘comparison, rosomblance „by t o way o al. umpama Br 
instance’, has resulted in wppama & stanza consisting ot four lines and Wording 
an aphorism etc, The language of the Isle of Sawa, which has only Open syll. 
bles, bas borrowed tho Skt. danda punishment , Mal. dénda fine as deda, Ta 
moro thaa one IN. idiom the pronunciation of thess groups varies, or one of their 


. elements ìs rather weak.'* Thus we find in Old-Javanese pakaja "lotus" beside 


« 


` utpatli- Tala ‘produce’, 


tho original paùkaja (Skt. paiikja- Vw; in lit. Mal. tho form of this word is 
pékaja. Another instance in OJav. talawrlia a palm-leaf used as a fan’: Skt. 
talavrnta- SEI. We must, however, remember that the manuscripts often omit 
writing a nasal before a stop (mute consonant), an orthographical habit algo 
known in other parts of the Indian world: in the Kharosthi documents we come 
across many instances, such as šighavera ‘ginger’: Skt. srūgavera- URAL 
Otker Consonantal Epenthesis. - z 
In one of the following paragraphs. we shall see that many foreigu olusters 

were reduced in Indonesia. However, a number of worda were, in some parts of 
the area or in the language of special or more or less limited circles treated in 
sucha way that new clusters came into existence. In literary Javanese, for in- 
stanse, a k—which was, it is true, not pronounced as such, but rather represented 
a glottal stop—was insorted in writing: tikbra ‘bitter; bitterness) sorrow’ beside 
tibra ‘id? <Skt. fivra- ÑT "fierce, intense, pungent’; bikseka=biseka ‘name’ (esp. 
of princes) <Skt. abhiseka. afakē ‘royal consecration’; yēktiwara ‘a great sago’ 
<Skt. yativara. AAST "best of ascetics’, This insertion doubtless added to the 
learned character of the words concerned. 

Sometimes k or g are inserted in literary or regional Juvanose : reg. rigma 
x ua hair of the head’ beside kr. i. rema ʻid.’, which is a finer or more aristo- 
cratic by-form of reg. kr. roma ‘id? «kt, roma WA ‘hair on the body’; lit. digtyo 
or diktya ‘demon’ < Skt. daitya- 337 ‘ia, 
Kb: puce soba no connection between the k which sometimes appears 

e lit. Jav. upēkli ‘tribute-money’ (beside upēti) and the original tt in Skt. 
ment : lit. Jay. utara HUM consonants are, as a rule, reduced to & single ele: 

rn)’ «Skt. uttara- St ‘id.’ 


In literary Javanese some clusters were introduced by the ‘insertion’ of w 
or y after a consonant, especial] 


) 5 M : ‘blood’ in- 
- stead of Bit. OJav. topita- erf ^ s. Not only in such casos as swanita 


Ā id” which will be discussed in one of the followio8 
Paragraphs, or in tarwa ‘treo’ beside taru < Skt. din ja”, but also in keswa 


Oy ani | , d € H , ‘secret besid 
hair instead of 8 t OJav kesa- a Taswa 
L . 

hair of the head , 


which apparentl WW ‘quintessence’ wo come across a secondat it 
y resulted from various analogical processes. It is worth while 


Vāsa and uswasa ‘sigh, sighing’ <Skt.ucchvūs0- * g 


ad of Skt. 8yandana- erga d/. At times the 00%16: 
ig 7 CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


as Uu 
id^; swandana ‘vehicle’ inate 


SANSKRIT in INDONESIA 


crm iaiiz iF dsigpChemwramteGengar + 487 
tenoe of two 1odigiret às MEP ARIE Fine la model for suc | . 


80, this word.eng 
-end was felt 
, 8ven when the underlying form 


Mio words as mi € : ķi 
gide with mirén id”. UUTUG hearing’ side by 


Quid : Bal, sambirama ‘wind’ (be- 
irana- adt ‘breeze, wind’; 
a- AMT monkey’, Compare 


amba ‘ £ 
bra< OIA. tūmra-. a copper < tam- 


Spontaneous or unconditioned insertion of r after a consonant m some- 
times occurred : Mal. jēladri, jéladéri beside jéladi ‘sea, ocean! « Skt. jaladhi- sēta 
a.’ (likewise in lit. Jav. and Sund.); Sund. galudra beside garuda ‘eagle, griffin’ 
<Skt. Garuda- NEI “Visnu’s bird’. Obscure analogical processes may bens exor- 
ted influence. According to Prakrit grammarians the spontaneous and secondary 
insertion of 7 as a second member of a consonant group is one of the characteris- 
ties of Apabhraméa.?* s 
Haplology. 

Changes quits different from those covered by the assumption of sound- 
“change are also efiected by the processcalled haplology, or anticipatory loss. Indian 
instances are, of courses not wanting: Pali addhattya- «efe « *addhatatiya- ‘two 


and a half’; Mar. gurākkyā ‘herdsman’ < gurem ‘cattle and rakhya ‘keeper, and, 
in Sanskrit udyamünani Ja mal for udyamamanani saaaraita (Matsya Pur. 
936,1).2° In an ancient Javanese law-text the next in guecession' is called pra- 
tyantara; the Sanskrit term is, however, pratyananiara- sera OJav. samantara 
‘shortly after’ < Skt. samanantara- &W4*Wt ‘immediately after’. Mod. Jav. (tit) 
budaya ‘reason, intellect; gifted’ must be explained as having arisen bs 
daya ‘contriving plans, endeavouring’ which contains the Skt.buddhi- gf ins an 
Jav. séikala ‘chronogram’ is—not convincingly, it is true—held to hare roe 
OJav. sakakala ‘Saka-year, date’, Skt. Sakakala- amalg the Saka-era. sig 
The same phenomenon is now and then found when a D. group of 
of phonemes do not recur within the same word bul in & phrase KE in AGRUM 
Words in a sentence; then also one ocourrenoe (together with * 2 may lead to 
sounds, if such should be the case) may drop. In gu es n of various “parts 
change of word-form. ‘The Skt, iügila- ¿Rta ‘gestures and PP by tho Java: 
of the body as indicating a person's intentions „has UC form, whish on ao 
neso (OJav.), but beside the full form we fod Que. Mee OJav. gita ‘sang’, Mod. 
Count of its meaning cannot be connected wiih Skt. gè wruh iù gita oF sri (< 
Jav. (lit.) gita ‘poom’, not seldom occurs in the phrase orson), the form gita may x 
iù) gita ‘to understand the motions and gestures b ‘to know, to understand 
explained as due to haplology (< wruh in igit 0 
Ti ‘preposition’). PC 
etathesis, BET e sporadioall cours is dike- i 
oc, , the process often called metathesis T degree) payahologioā! P! Ej K 
Wise indiontive of theme oner RALA, (onm Collection. ast 


. SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
988 Digitized b j i iand'eGangotri— 
ted by the necessity to assimilate foreign or native sound groups 
presen 


p ? and to 
them in the definite system of the borrowing language. Th, 


ii to : 3 ver 
Be isi il term embraces various, bul related, phenomena Which oan partly 
aa under the heading ‘dissimilation’. Like this and like haplology, Whioh 


„is also a kind of dissimilation, so-called metathesis is often due to & difficulty in 
` realizing a recurring or a similar sound QUOLOUD cusounda, Tt 18 not surprising 
that it often affects borrowed elementa ina language. In doing 80 variable fac- 
tors, including adaptations based on individual speech-babits play & part, Whereas 
part of the speakers, and especially those who are familiar with foreign and semi- 
foreiga elements, tolerate the structure of borrowed elements being unintelligible, 
difficult or foreign, others, who often win when counteracting forces (literary or 
` written language, school-teaching, etc.) are wanting, indulge in a tendency to 
further adaptation?" When a phoneme or group of phonemes is anticipated it ig 
sometimes difficult to pronounce it a second time in its proper place. The change 
of position of the anticipated element resulting from this is one kind of meta- 
thesis. Thus OJav. ¿riyak ‘animal’ has, beside the original form, arisen from Skt. 
tiryak- fādā id”; Jav. reg. pruwa=purwa ‘formerly’<Skt. pürva- TÀ ‘former’; 
lit. Jav. prawata ‘mountain’ beside parwata <Skt. parvata- Wad ‘id’; in Bali- 
nese grémbini is a courtly term for ‘craving for some special food (of a pregnant 
woman); the more original lit. garbini means ‘pregnant’: Skt. garbhini nfa ‘a 
pregnant woman. In Malay as itis spoken in the island of Timor laska is used 
instead of laksa ‘a myriad’<Skt. laksa- SA ‘a hundred thousand’: in the same 
language the well-known epic hero Arjuna- aaa is called Ranjuna. The Skt. 
ambhodhara- AFatat ‘cloud is, in all probability, the source of OJav. bhamodara 
which according to the author of the Nawaruci, who uses it in ambhamodara, 
, means "walk on clouds’, i 
3 „The reverse process, which has of late been called '1ag',”* consists in pro* 
nouncing a phoneme or a group of phonemes later than the person's speaking 
originally intended, or, at least, later than the originally correct form had it. 


2 is ae dei dae by loss of the element affected in its proper place. It 
en results in metathesis. Thus not only th : 3 x ‘ship’ 
occurs in OJay. (plawa), but y the correct Skt. form plava- 44 


4 also palwa (palwa is also lit. Balinese). This form is 
PD in the poem of such a learned author as pee ae 66,1); the 
aa do M peen early utilized for metrical convenienoe. Further: Dal. 
liquefied’; OJav. etc, n „Stretohed out, long’<Skt. drava- ga ‘flowing, fluid, 
widra, widrah ‘old? e upg | D. Bi sphajika- FUERA 'orystal, quartz’, reg. Jav 

, old <wērda (still in literary usage) < Skt. orddha- qu "jd.; lit. Jav. 
Skt. upadrava- Sq 'id.'; coll. kr. i. pir$6 


rbiya ‘a domesticated quadruped 
vya- RH ‘object of possession OJav. 
* dērbē eto.). Further, OJav. parcaya 
nese (where the ram ARKA , confidence’, Which in colloquial Modern Java- 

So Pitaya < pK(r)caya), in Malay and the Behas& 
ly naturalized (trust, belief’), For 'cow-Pe? 


aside gobraj a 
a (Skt. govraja- qas), OJav. dorY 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. za ata ) 


SANSKRIT IN INDONES E a 
] i i and eGangotri 
Digitized by Arya Samajik OUS OS IETEK 239 
0751 hrdaya- EI D 5 


aha < Skt. anugraha- AJAZ favour’: Mo 
*gugT í i 
IELA. ad"; Ach. atra (and ata) beside aróta, fp 


e. 23 property; 
X4 property ete.. 


likewise Well-known, This pheno- 
anticipation and lag. 


$; Tesulting in 
revelant which ig Sometimes heard 
toad of relevant; AMag. eto. Vá'arasi < Varanasi "Banarey, 

inglea 


Thus we find Oday. 
Mavarata- AAA ‘id’; Bal. Pirata ‘the 


emancipated soals of the deceased’ <$kt, pitarah Wax: ‘the manes’; TBa(, 
non- 


abe ‘to be ble:sed or rich’ may be considered a transformation of bage which may 
gabe to t the Skt. bhagya- WF" ‘lucky, fortunate; fortune’; Mal, résaksa ‘ogre? 
CO ksasa ‘id,’ : Skt. raksasa- UTA ‘a kind of evil demon’; Mal. kšluaisa ‘noble 
25 az, aa ieee ‘id.’, which also occurs : Skt. kula. $9 ‘family’ and vam$a- 337 
fey '.. The TBat. hinsw (pron. : hitsii) ‘shut, locked" can be regarded as arisen 
lineage : ange in the relative position of the vowels, hunsi which occurs in the 
from & o (esp. of a trap-door); the latter word can be connected with Mal. 
X na 5 bolt’ to which the Hindi kuñji ‘key’ ete. must be compared.“ Qf, 
pe Simbusno ‘gold-coloured’ < Skt. suvarna- avi ‘gold’. 
also Mal. 
els. 4 dA 
Treatment of Ye tendency in Old-Javanese for Skt. ai to be represented bye: enya 
Tha now ‘th-east(ern)’ (cf. Skt. aisani Gard); kewalya ‘mere(ly)’: Skt. 
sak m ‘solution’ Aiswarya ‘sovereignty’ and other words, cad ES 
awaya- " hy is no absolute warrant fo as 
; ged, although the orthography 6, 88 à 
the a; SĀRA, bens naturalized in Javanese and other IN. prc. 4 
M 1 of à Skt. ai. But here we meet witha di Iam md 
rule, took the place : lly speaking, became e (AMg. esajfa=Skt. Ls 
peed Sino: Aryan Giga a died hand, diphthongs.are not unknown: in 
S o , i 
(X44). In IN. languages, on t 'G ig. IN. they are supposed. The RUM 
Old-Javanese they existed and for Orig. nd they mostly arnes aed 
; ,& a : thus, 
most commonly met with are aw, ay, uy cases changed into a simple |o i us 
ble of 'd-base.*? They have in many i> rare ‘boy’; gaws («gau 
ot a word-base. become 6: rarai son es totke 
ai has, already in OJav., tended to bec n. Apart from tbe EDUC um 
‘work’ by the side of the derivative rr with the e in Indian Marr Indian 
, t mpare ; hat the 
®xact phonetioal value of this e as co Wer with the difficulty t 
need not concern us here, we ate 


itten e. 
Ited in a sound wri 

d i lopment ran parallel and es also find the change Skt. 
and the native deve ont Sanskrit loans in Indones!a, p» lit. Mod. Jav. birawa 
R des lai pe mori bhairava- WA awfu "t 
ha » ` AY. ai, e> Mod. Jav. ; Old.Javanese instead 0 Pa 
id”, already in dq goh cow : 
e aurasapuira- gi kaupīnā» Š H 
i the pudenda a The original IN. 


In a far more general way o appear 

A4: OJav. orasāputra ‘a legitimate son over 

kt. gauh d; kopina ‘piece of deun ber bauddha- : Malay, Tagalog and 

Jav. boddha, Bal. boda ‘eat still survives end pronunoiation* In 
75 whioh ig supposed to have exis 


ipt an P aoka 

: Javanese S0TĪP a : Skt. kau: 

ben IN. languages, does not appear in o Pali orasa; Pkt. kosi 3 
idāle T 


ikewise become 0 i 
ndo-Aryan auc hadp] ikea rat Shastri Collection. 


940 Digitized by ARANBEBIT IN INDONESIA y eGangotri 
COST instance of the change ao eius ata E Stand, 
me ka grandson’ < Skt. pautraka- 2 on may haya: 
child’ « OJav. potra a Sund. kastuba ‘an ornament of the crupper of a hor 
exerted tī a RES a. diequ ‘Vienu’s celebrated breast-jewel’ (the Olay, 
repre:ents the 55. A ; 
form is kostubha im doc M Javanese texts where Sanskrit hase; nali. 
Sometimes tis likera- wf; awisa beside Awesa "entrance, taking 
kira ‘cocoa-nut’ : Skt. nali )» in a metrical text (Rām.); lit. Jav. wisma "building, 
possession of” (Skt. avesa- NA ' his change e? 3 is, under certain conditions, 
ho Dam re E 3 ears elsewhere in Greater India; the e, when 
well-known in Prākrit** and ae Par decide how far this Jav.i<e was influen- 
short, is often written as i We OAA AUI C olizesa short dg s 
ced by an Indian pronunciation, em ‘key (of a guitar) : Skt. vedhya- Ñ% 'a kina 
texis.** Compare, further, Tag. bidya ey E «Bk, Dhanáivata OE 
ical instr V: Mal. Danisuara, Daniswara it. Dhanešva 
si C E Bal. sisa ‘remainder, rest’ « Sb. sesa- «I "id. + 80, Mal. 
Po hon, SR Day be considered identical with Skt. OJav. vela 471 ‘time 
j Ee in OJav. dharmmesļa ‘most pinos w here € y : 
dharmisļha- MR; '* also gandewa ‘bow’ ( Ram. 9, 24 ) :Skt. gāndiva- or g er 
afea, modta; cf. also Jav. máesa, Mal. mahesa beside Jav. maisi, marisa, a 
mahisa ‘buffalo’ <Skt. mahisa- ARA 'id.;?? Mal. lena ‘fast asleep’ < Skt. lna- 
“absorbed, merged in, lying or resting’, if these words may be connected (in OJav. 
lina means ‘disappeared, dead’); lit. Bal. dewasa, beside diwasa day <Skt. divasa- 
Raa ‘id.’; Bal. eudriya ‘illicit desire’ <Skt. indriya- zfez (faculty of) sense, es 
The treatment of o in Old-Javaneseis parallel to that of e. It is ber 
with such exceptions as dusa (beside dosa which survives in Mod. Jav.) guilt’ : Skt. 
dosa- 418; gupura (Rām.; beside gopura which is also Mod. Jav.) 'gate (Skt. gopura- 
ag); A (Ram. etc.) beside drohaka (Rām.) ‘treacherous, crafty’ : Skt. dro- 
haka- 


* which is not given in Pet. Diot. and MW. (Mod. Jav. has druhaka, dura- 
ka, Mal. durhaka, dérhaka ‘disobedience or disloyalty to lawful authorities, ingubor- 
dination’); Skt. OJav. bhoga. dtu ‘use, any object of enjoyment’ > lit. Mod. Jav. 
buga (beside boga which in regional usago also means 'maize') ‘food’. This change 


is not specifically Old-Javanese. Before consonant clusters and under other oir- 
cumstances it also appears in Pra) 


krits; it is sporadically found in the Kharostbi 
documenta, 


Yet there is an u 
Old-Jay. pair moksa : mu, 


ve away, fail (heart), et; 


of & god who aft i 
appears. Iam under the imp um. 
quial parlance, 


belonged to Skt. mukta- 


i V E m o that 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat 180 tenoitods interesting to notio 


has remained "unchanged to this day: (lit. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


he ogul B Ferthu va Cong fiqundeton SEMT i S 


SCuve mukia- a7 
Raip- p.00 etc.), other OJav. forme, mokta ang es EE 


‘qea (Nag: 27.1 mokta tt lesa "the k. had vanisheg’ 
1 


(in muktavles 
a 
; &ppear 9Xpressing the ‘same 
A cf. 32.6), but also that of «Pass» 
en Ae 43:5 sa moklen Siwa. 
> Th ivative ka: l 
y, liko the Skt. compound moksapada,** applies to Bree "es 


tho reside à 
E in lit. Modern Javanese mukta means ‘dead’, Has the Ee ši ee 
e wor 


moktal 1) changed under tho lies of moksa ? Or is it a Prakritism, like Mah 
o tt: Bit. muktā- gui ? i The text of the OJav. Ri, (579 oros bas 
COE for nüpura anklet’ (Skt. nupura- 33I) in an open syllable. We should, 
therefore; remind ourselves that the orth A 


t ography Waa not perfect, that in Modern 
Ba lose tho difference between 0 (o sound with lowes; sonority) and ù (x sound 
with highest gonority) is small, and, finally, that sı 


ye uch variations in loan-words, 
which often maintain a separate position in the structural syetem ofa language, 
are far from being uncommon. We may, further, adduce such instances as Mal. 
ruma beside roma ‘hair on the body’ (Min. roma ‘hair on the pudenda’): Skt. roma 
Xa id”; Mel. Sund. kuta ‘stronghold, fortified place’ ete. beside kota : Skt. kota- 
az ‘id.’. On the other hand Javanese bas sonya (lit.) ‘void’ < Skt. Sünya- IT ‘idi, 
and Sundanese and Malay have bopati beside bupali ‘a high title (given to princes, 
vassals, administrators) : Skt. bhūpati- aaf ‘lord, prizes’; and in Sand. porgawa= 
puigawa ‘a high official or courtier’ : Skt. puigava- Yaa ‘a cbiaf or eminent person’; 
Bal, gowa > guwa ‘cave, cavern’ < Skt. guh@ Jat id”; Min. samporono complete, per- 
fect’ < Skt. sampūrza- BTN 'id.. 
The Vowel of the Penult. à 
In the penult of a considerable number of OJav. words an a can be replaced 
by 8 (the so-called pēpēi, i.e. '"indetermined'ss vowel, which bas probably been 
approximately like the Hindi a or the Engiish @ in the word arise or L in pies 
suggest). Instances are OJav. ūrčmbha or arímba undertaking E Gra ES 
(Skt. arambha- ara); alinkara ‘ornament’ beside alamkara (Skt. cue m). 
F); alēmbana ‘holding fast beside Wambhana EL me = 
MIWA; utpēti ‘scion, child” (kotpētti (prefix ka-) birth") pee D Ši ee 
duce, revenuo' (Skt. uipatti- safı); upina Bu ora = excited eto. (Stt. 
beside utpanna (Skt. utpanna- SAT); mēltā beside mata p i pe 
matta- WX). As far as I seo, this option is peculiar to pes MES con 
in a vowel?" In my opinion this phenomenon must, on kā e 
neoted with the well known fact that the so-called p "eh bas already 
as the ‘neutral vocal’ or, at least, not as thon ae (yee. 1,13; APr.1,38), 
been acknowledged by Panini 8,4,63. 1 Two Praia Tamed" The interchange ~ 
Moreover, call this utterance samurta- dā covered D 
Of 4 and Zin ancient Javanese orthography; nod e real pronun 
of the traditional spelling of Sanskrit wore 
Was like tho native č. In the courseof ti 
AV. réiga ‘to adorn’ <Skt. range. Tā solos y: sida pesi 
méta ‘in rut (elephant); rētna beside raia ena 


i 8 
the incongruousDes 
ds ciation which 


- 3 al 
av. saksi, Skt, sakes ardt ‘ia’. Before a me 
- ot j 
moon’: Skt, tasi etait (lit.) tanu ‘body’: Skt. fan 
san esit; cits Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitize j ndation Chennai and ecd 
ns.-vowel-cons.-vowel is quite com $ 
‘gon’, i.e. the UO ARMIA A Be A Nor O bo more. sestrato, ES Tam. 
zo DM : to the 8'8 being foreign, in the open penult, to thee 
Sanskrit a, can nob be due to MED M Found i - 9 strug. 
f that language. Tho a is, likewise, found in native words 
tural system © ic. Portuguese, Dutch etc. before a group of: And 
ts borrowed from Arabic, Fo 8 4 ro à Group of congo. 
poon however, in the latter group it sometimes becomes ë : tēksir, beside tas; 
PEE UN eran tto A e mate. Although the structure of the Javanese a 
does not impose the apparition of an ¢1n words of this outward appearance, it jg 
rather common. We may perhaps suppose that in the beginning the Skt, wordg o 
the type dana- qi ‘gift’; natha- API protector (a in open penult) have exerted 
influence on the pronunciation of the words of the radi typo in Old-Javanese, ify. 
the words in which two intervocalic consonants appeared an ü did not exist i 
the Middle Indian pronunciation. These facts may have stimulated a tendency 
to pronounce é before more than one consonant, and to prefer a before one congo: 
" 3 
= Tt is convenient here to remark that Mod. Jav. (and. beside koļi also OJay,). 
Mal. etc. kēti ‘hundred thousand’ corresponds to Skt. koti- a@tf ‘ten millions’. Van 
Ronkel*' tried to show that a following cerebral was influential in changing an 
original a or e at the end of a penult to ë in Malay, these sounds otherwise develop. 
ing into a: Mal. pēta ‘design, sketch-plan, portrait? <Skt. pata- YZ ‘picture’; but 
both Mal. lēta ‘base, mean, damaged’ and latah ‘paroxysmal neurosis (accompa- 
nied by obscene language) remind us of Skt. laļa- Gz ‘defect; one who speaks like 
a fool, fool’; the mutual relation of these words is, however, not yet established.® 
In later Javanese warna ‘colour’ (Skt. varņa- AUi) also appears as wérna 
(also written wrna ); in Jav. (and Sund.) wérga=warga '(obs.) relatives’, and 
“nowadays ‘member of a society’; darma ‘contribution to social or humane ends or 
e institutions’ (Skt. dharma- WW) as dērma etc. (Sund. also darma and dérma); in 
Malay Bērma (instead of *Barma) is a by-form of Bérahma (Skt. Brahma 98). 
The history of a before and after r + consonant deserves special attention. 
Deride óradaha ‘goodwill ote,’ (Skt. sraddha 31) we find OJav. $rddha; instead of 
Skt. prasna- A37 ‘question’ we often find prsna. The risg written with the same 
sign as r in OJav. prsta (Skt. prstha- T3 buck"), Although these Indian and Java- 
nese 7 sounds were, in all probability, not identical, the chances are that ër 7 in 
CAIR des in is structural system of the language, treated as a vowel." at 
„_s 8 not surprising to come across 'hypercorrect' forms: lit. trapti Batis 
faction’ <Skt. trpti- qfi ‘id’; narpa ‘king’ beside nrpa, nérpa (Skt. nrpa- Zi! 


they or part of them are h percorr t T etc. was ono 
3 , y ect & : 
] all, for ar etc . 


a 
T In this connection it is worth while to dwell for a moment upon the Indian 
S IR of r in the period of borrowing. The OIA. r probably was ** in 
AT ui ly zolled) alveolar sound, Produced by flapping the tongue twice 
a TAE Bo : the prātišākhyas describe it as being made UP 0 " 3 
, 10 a u 
had developed, at least i 8 ono mora (thus r—5,3) Ag ig well known this 5 ʻi 


. Erin a r 
ir, ru ur. In MIA. r , ronunciations» to wit ra ar, 7e 4 


99 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


: SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
As appusiee dirán Bari Eopndation Chennai ngotri 243 


eto. nterch: 
falaikrētā being written instead of alamkrta dā ki 
which is still found over Northern India, was retained in 
Upper India de G jel Dy metathesis) Was the usual sss hi the meantime. In 
tatsamas in Hindi as trisnū i.e. Skt. trena- IM. The Oli es : cf. such semi. 
ri ig held to have served as » model for the Tibetan RT engali pronunciation 
The above facts may lead us to the conclusion thet NEC cc. = 
of an original ts e.g. in Jav. kr. griya ‘house’ instead of ane REMO fg instead 
OJav:; Jav. trisna love, to love <Skt, UMAT “desing a which is Skt. and 
represent an IN. treatment. Usually, Skt. a is S Er necessarily 
irésna; lit. nes or rēksi sage < Skt. rsi- ufq id”; tērna io A my 
Skt. irua- GM berb» grass; kērta ‘prosperous etc. «gkt. T e ane = 
good’; bériya ‘servant’ <Skt. bhriya- TFT ‘id’; mérdu ‘sott!<Ske mar oe nt 
wréksa ‘tree’ <Skt. vrksa- T "id". It depends on the structure of the s a a 
cluster ks, sna ete.), which group, ré or ër, &ppearg." o aci 
In Javanese a number of words show another treatment of a in the lt 
In Mod. Jav. the krama form siu ‘to happen actually, take place’, the ee 
esti ‘elephant’, the lit. èksi ‘eye’ represent the Skt. astu A ‘be it kai pt edi 
‘elephant’ and aksi af ‘eye’ respectively. As, k 


j ; on the other hand, we have the lit. 
léksana ‘lucky star; successful(ly) lucky’ in which the Skt. laksana- SAH lucky 


mark, favourable sign' is precerved; and léksa ‘a myriad, ten thousand’ <Skt. laksa. 
æq one hundred thousand’ and similar instances, (a> 2), the above words form 
a limited group of words in which the original a, under special circumstances 
was treated differently. Yet, aksi and ast? occur also (in literary usage). 
The Vowel of the Antepenult. 

` There is a pronounced tendency in many IN. idioms for the vowel of 
the antepenult to become ‘neutral’ or ‘undetermined’, i.e. in Jav. and Mal. č.** Ins 
Javanese borrowings from other languages ¢ corresponding to a determined vowel 
in the lending idiom is, however, only found in words beginning witha consonant 
ta. Skt. nagara- ANT is in Mod. Jav. nágara "residence ofa prince etc. whereas 
nagara, which follows the ancient traditional orthography, is used in literary style. 
The form bégawan ‘spiritual gentleman of noble blood’ <Skt. bhagavan sara, illus- 
trious, reverend, divine’ is» however, found in that class ‘of works. Skt. apsaras 
MAT, apsard AAU, on the other hand has, in Mod. Jav. apsari, the vowela. We 
should, however, remind ourselves once more that at the moment b A 
the à was pronounced ‘samvrta’ and probably like the a nm ‘to investi- 

, In the samo way we come across: in Malay sitom s Ter 
gate’ Skt. pariksa Veal ‘investigation’; pētērana dais WS a ‘couch, saat” (of. 
m on which the newly-married pair ait ete. it a pataka- ss 
CU Prastarana- sequ 'id.); pētaka beside P f the sky and the earth’ < 
crime, sin’; pétala ‘stratum (esp. of the seven strata o der the earth’;** 
Patala- Was ‘the lower world, i.e. one of the ri 
im ‘all, entire" < Skt. samasta- He M at! «Sb. sampürna- 9 inc 

: "SHE ‘arranging’; sémpurna comple ns irkara matter, concern, AAAI, 

‘mpana, sémpéna ‘luck-bringing, lucky marks 27 other words beginning with 
Usiness’ < Skt, prakāra- AFI ‘kind, manner’ ang Fy g." Some instances: a 
a R correspond to Skt. words E M sane) other 

81n which the antepenult originally 28 

mE CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


en 7 iini 
a and ri in Inscriptiong 
ri Pronunciation of r, 
a? 


regions Un 


id.; 


E) 


than a may be added: 


i ion'<Skt. - 
yencana narration < B ; 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
__Digitized by-Arya-Sanraj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri — 
an ‘full (of the moon? <Skt- pūrņamūs- TAT the full moon’; 
ES oo or divination, fortune 88 peaa d da D ca Buoh a book, 
black arī «S ib. pustaka- JAF booi ; Mal. ségéra sp y beside sigëra (and Mis! 
? Ws. Separate ‘quick . 3 

RU ai c ki the vowel of the antepenult tends to become y: Mal 
Masa i. "um Jav. Sund. puwasa ‘fast, fasting <Skt. Upavūsa: SU 
q^. lit. Jav. and Mal. suwita, suita gerviceable, to serve <Skt. sevita. laa, 
a a servant’; lit. Jav. kuwanda ‘body, corpse <Skt. kavandha. aeq ‘a head. 
ate Before y an i appears in lit. Bal. miyura <Skt. mayūra- RFT ‘a pen. 
m ee (or yusa) ‘lifetime’ < Skt. yusa- aga id. reg. Jav. niyaka ‘counciltoy’ 
<Skt. nūyaka WAS ‘principal, leador’; obs. Jav. iyasa to bo able, to manufacture’ 
and Sand. iyasa ‘able, expert’ may reprorent the Skt. dyasa- AANA effort, exertion’; 
Jav. priyoga ‘tit, proper <$kt. prayoga- satz use, dovico . 

Cases are, however, not wanting in which a «& appears before another con. 
sonant: Jav. (>Mal.) Sund. supata ‘oath, imprecation' < Skt. tapatha- sw id 
Jav. utawa or; and’ (Mal. utawa besido atawa; Bund. utawi beside atawa)< Skt. 
atha va WF Al ‘or, however’; Jav. (lit.) duksina *eouth' < Stt. daksina- qfayn jā 
An i occurs in Sand. igama beside agama "religion'< Skt. agama- ATA ‘doctrine’, 
and in Mal. sipana, supana ‘stairs’, Skt. sopūna- gtam ‘id... 

However, lit. Jav. ardaya ‘heart’ repre:ents Skt. OJav. hrdaya- E71 'id.. 
More Incidental Vocalic Change. 


98 


7 
Destaka 


Other changes in the voealism ceem to occur only more or less incidentally: 

Sand. (dial) pūtri beside putri "princess! < Skt, putrī AY ‘daughter’ (the 3, the 
so-called ‘long 2’, is frequent in Sundatese). 

The Mal. sakara "wild boar’ which in ancient texts appeared side by side 

with ths more original swkara-(<Skt. sükara- JET) ‘hog’ seems to be due either to 

* og tendency to "hyporcorroetness or to the influence of the honorific personal arti- 

cle sav whish is not only attached to the names of divinities, heroes and ancient 

kings, but al-o to animal-namoe in fables (even to those of the sandfly and the 


mosquito) and to such descriptive names of animals as saù sé&at "Mr. Stingor’ (a 
variety of wasp). 


The first vowel of the lis. Jav. lukita ‘choaght oxpressed in words, literary 


composition’, Which no doubt results from the Skt. likhita. fefaa ‘written, sketch- 
ed’, may be duo to tha infi 


uence of tl ti is 3 1 , written 
deserved}: 10 native lukis ‘drawn (with a pen) 4 
twi F Band. mudabile, explained as "handsomo ycung men’ way be considered 
Mal.» aii containing the Sit. bala. az ‘boy’ or balya- aem ‘boyhood’ i: 
? bs TE tis bloom of youth’ (the native muda means ‘young’). 
ment, love with ka F frisna, tisna (beside tho standard trēsna) ‘affection, altaob- 
ru FETI ‘desi "t Passion we have a cate of change of r, rë to ri, t «B 
' both Es Sit. e. Theiin lit. Jav. jilma ‘man’ (cf. Sund. iēlimā 
„jan z f ‘ae 
^ lization... ma SFR mundane existence’) seems to be due to palate 
Some cases o i 


; fan excepti 5 
. mariang or loxicographorg ie treatment of Skt. vowels assumed by gram 
are wrong. Thug, 


rectified, beca A etymologies 
H the Mal, p y , because. the underlying di 
it is an IN, wor, . 7^" “fall” has nothing to do with Skt. pürza- Wie} 


CC-0, Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. j 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA ~ TES 


p—- o ze By FSASAMIG)FFounpgjion Chennaramrecangori— AB EE. 
ra Groups Con EIU RF erm AE 
In Javanese Skt. ya or yd after a consonant + 


s, liko core: Skt. caurya- tā ‘thievery, Poradically becomes e, 


4 i , Some 
instanc Ker. s triokery’, can a A 
Old-Javanese Proper, but most of them seem to appear for -— bel founds ium 
Javanese OT later texts: tega hermit, recluse rst time in Middle- 


Skt. ‘ 

Jes tu welcome": Skt. bägge: SR "lut, it, Mol, toy ons, am 
aditya- aiza id.. ta some cases the original form has algo sie “Ng <Skt, 
jit. bagya prosperous beside bage thank goodness? Tn m ne od. Jay, 
apparently failed to turn up or to survive: OJav. veiya ‘a em s MD 
class’: Skt. vaisya- "M OJav. kyati "reputo, famous’, Mod. Jay mee 
‘famous’ : Skt. khyati- «mf; Oday. karya ‘work "gav. (it) kyati 


de: : etc, , Mod. (lit.) karya ‘ia: 
karya- «Ti; kare which in ancient texts meant eene eta cnt acs 
know, disappeared. Here, too, a strong counteracting tendenoy MEN Wen 


felt : the forms with a -— which, by the side of their by-forms often be- 
came archaisms, were, in general, taken as more dignified, more poetical, proper to 
the kakawin-style, and, hence, appreciated. They could even Serve as a model 
for hyper-archaic or hyper-literary forms: dyawata beside detvata<Skt. devaia 
Zaal ‘divinity’. The coexistence of e and ya has even produced such variants of 
native words as mankya beside manke next, presently’. A 

Altbough comparable changes are not wanting in India,” and althougb it 
is difficult to decide how far these have played a part in the process going on in 
Java, the starting-point of this change seems to have been native : such Old-Jav. 
words as ka-gyat 'surprieed', a-gya “quick(ly)’ etc. become kagèt, age (in age-age); 
in Modern Javanese y after a consonant is, apart from the cluster labial +y, prac- 
tically wanting in ‘normal words,” in which the Indonesian word-structure in 
general prefers a regular alternation of vocalic and consonantal elements to cons., * 
+ y clustere.7? 

In the main, the treatment of Skt. va or od runs parallel to that of ya, ya.* 
Thus, we find doja ‘banner’ (in an inscription, for instance) beside dhvaja : Skt. 
diwaja- X&3i (not in Mod. Jav; Jav. (> Mal.) sato ‘animal, beast” « Slt, sativa- QF 
‘id’; dopara ‘absurd, unveracious (mod. dial. ndupara) beside dwapara tell lies : 
Skt. dvāpara- 197, which also means ‘uncertainty, doubt’ (lezicographers); Middle 
and lit. Mod. Jav. sori (also swari) ‘queen, first contort ofa king <Skt. parame: 
svari WRAY, But apart from an incidental sorgi, serge Skt. svarga- «ast w 
has remained swarga till the present day;"* in Malay wo find. sora 


i . ctbalika ‘a Coroman- 
shurga, The rovorso change has analogously occurred in OJav. cto 


t fa i i J). In native words the 
del woman” <Skt. colika site (not in Pet. Dict. and MW.) eer s 


change under discussion is common : OJav. twas ‘bard > tos. time being, be made. 
spread remarks of the same kind as the above MAY, tentis Y have Rcs influ- 
Such MIA, forms as soppa ‘sleep’ (Skt. suapna- aa) = ; i *_, but the native 
enee-—lit. Mod. Jav. sona ‘dog’ recalls to mind bcn (ua) are so numerous in all 
Words, with o instead of an etymologically oldan s cluster consonant) — 
Kinds of ancient literature and 80 frequently zari Werk of ‘inverse analogy’? 
i8— apart from a comparatively large number of proc from the native 
lt. raswa ‘taste, sonsation etc. <Skt. rasa- S E that bere, t00, the hypothesis 

ntsa—even considerably more rate” than cong." V» : : ns 


pr 
A s 1 i ied. 
Ot à native origin of the ohange seems justif 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


> SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
ELE ss samsrrouiatos Chennai and eGangotri 


ego our attention to the consonants, we first discuss the aspirat 
84 


he h. i 
and b i IN. idioms, as a rule, have no aspirates, they neglected them in bo 
Indian words? Thus we find : Jav. basa speech, correct and polite spee 


Skt. bhasa AIT; lit. kyati ‘famous’ from Skt. khyati- atta ‘renown’; bégawan from 


TrOWing 


Skt. bhagavan HATH; Jav. Bal. Mal. bumi ‘the earth, land” <Skt. bhümi. EU fd 


Bis. bala (base for) ‘carrying’ : Skt. bhara- WW. "load, burden; Tag. buti ‘decors, 
tion(s)': Stt. bhidi- fa id..”* In Old-Javanose many Sanskrit words are, however, 
correctly written : bhara- ‘load’ (Skt. bhara- a); phala fruit (Skt. phala. Fe), 
buddhi ‘insight? (Mal. budi : Skt. buddhi- alā); but in tho manuseripte, in more ‘po. 
palar’ and younger texts innumerable mistakes were made, and in the course of 
time the originally aspirated stops and their unaspirated counterparts became Writ. 


ten in the same manner." It is worthy of mention that already in Old-Javanego 


tanā fh, and likewise d and dh were symbolized by the same sign. — Tt is not bo. - 


yond the bounds of possibility that some words of Indian origin were already intro. 
duced into the Archipelago ina desaspirated form: loss of aspiration was not 
unknown in Middle Indo-Aryan and in the course of time the aspirates as well ag 


h grew rather feeble in an intervocal position in the New Indo-Aryan of Bengal and ^ 


Gujarāt.** Where aspiration is found in ancient IN. writing it is not necessarily 
always faithfully representative of the actual pronunciation. 

Sometimes a superfluous h is, by way of hyper-correct orthography, added: 
thus in the Tag. sitha ‘multicoloured pieces of cloth’ when it has been correctly 
connected with Skt. citra. faa 'variegated';! Tag. muthala ‘cataract’ as comparod 
with Skt. pafala- (2% ‘id.’, Beside Mal. surga ‘heaven’ (Skt. svarga- «al 'id') we 
also find shurga. As the sh is an Arabic sound and letter this orthography lends‘a 
* olearned and dignified character to the word. 

Motathesis of the aspiration is, further, well known. The Indian bhatara- 


ZR ‘lord’ appears in Tagalog as bathéla ‘god’; the Skt. argha- «a ‘worth, price’ 


` as halaga hid? (and halga).*? Both Mal. bēndahari ‘treasurer, treasury officer’ and 
Tag. bandahāli ‘major domo’ re 


dahali "major present a younger form (Hindi bhandari Avett Or. 

aude S OR ai! also oceurs in Sanskrit writings: bhandari me 
"lndo-Āryan bhaundagarika. 3 4d p i rd ma 

however, have influenced dūgūrika. astm ‘treasurer’. This word may: 


the IN. forms, because Malay has another form, bēnda- 


kura ‘royal treasurer’ and ‘ ri ini 
i : 3 1 
ubi er eee me minister (in an old Malay state) which strongly 


also bhandara- 19212) gno: WITSWTR ‘storehouse; treasury’ (beside whioh 
used to open a new section. Malay conjunctive term which in tho old style was 


a = cis hata ‘well then, next’ may be regarded 88 iden- 
Fa ia PE z er, now (also often at the beginning of a new para: 
ANA dE in Mal. dadeh ‘sour thick milk’ (dadi is also ws 
in the same language vs Šā MUN dhe: Skt, dadhi: ahn ia- V) lov 
lived" (see further aa gahayu "live for: ever « Skt, dirghayu(s) diia) aed 

Yet there are ing | | 
plosives. The Skt. bha 


nounced by the Malays 


tanceg showing ano 
ra- ATT ‘load 


in two ways: bahara (‘load, a rather indefinite measure = 
1b), and bara (esp. ‘ballast’); bhasa 4 


a B: 
Vernacular speech’ likewise in two WAY 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ther development of the aspirated eX 


ch’ from E 


» Weight’, and also ‘a particular weight” is PT, 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


pahasa, bëhasa ('Gisiizeli pyra iiie) Caa gaand eGangoti 
peril bas become Mal. bahaya, béhaya ‘peril’, bahya, ba 
in thie game Way, Skt. chaya arm Bicis NL 
colours etc’: cahaya (lustre, brightness, glow’), cahy 


a, 
In Maley and Javanese Skt. phala- Ge not ae caya (Sund. cahaya, cahya). 


CORE 3 Survy 
pahala, (pēhala) ‘gain, reward ote"; ot. also Bug RR pala, but also in 
PE Compare also Mal, bahagi, béhagi : bagi "portion » paa meritorious; re. 


atc.), TBat. bagi ‘portion, lot'.** The blessing courtly styl ; 
homage) dirgahayw ‘live for ever!’ (or something like that; Fn SA doing 
meaning is, however, not known by ell persons using the emet -— 
the Skt. darghayus- AIZA or dirghayu- daig ‘long-lived’, and, like à m ae 
«md, wished to be long-lived’. : Vuoi NET. 
In these cases the Indian so called aspirates which actually are gemi-ocolu 
gives consisting of an occlusive (explosive) and an aspiration or blowing mee 
ced in close conjunction with each other* have suffered a special treatment. Not 
knowing these sounds in their own speech Indonesians who aimed at a correct 
pronunciation and wished to do full justice to the traditional orthography dissolved 
them by ‘inserting’ a svarabhakti-vowel and in doing so created words which 
by their very outward form (trisyllables) stood out from the greater part of speech- 
unitg.5$ Common or colloquial usage often preferred the dissyllabic by-forms.— 
In this same way Malay has tahana ‘state, dignity’ (bér-tahana ‘to sit in state’)< 
Pkt. thāņa- 417b ‘place; dignity’. Karo-Batak has dahupa 'incense : Skt. dhupa- 
Yq ‘id.’, and budaha ‘the fourth day of the month’: Skt. Budha- JT ‘the planet 
Mercury who presides over the fourth day of the week’; TBat. dakoli ‘man (as oppo- 
sed to woman)’ is according to Van der Tuuk, Skt. dhūli, dhūli afe, FRX dust(> 
Mal. duli ‘dust under the feet of a royal person’ > ‘a royal title, His Majesty)? 3 
We even find Mal. céhari beside cari ‘to go in search of (esp. in connection with» 
the quest of livelihood’ < Skt. cari tit ‘walking about, living’. Tt may Re observed 
ords came to display aspiration, though their 
Skt. counterparts were unaspirated. Contamination in anal Mir 
early influential in producing aspirated forms. It ME LO is found 
that the game treatment of aspirates (0-8. dahare religion a! 
F Mos hee aeons instances the aspirated explosives are Ha B 5 
hayw is a case by itself. In medial position the MV eret Es 
could lead to a special case of dissimilation ME. argha- aŭ ‘worth, price’ 
word originally began with a vowel.'* In Ganda ^b qwe haria, though arta 
survives in harga ‘id.’ ; and artha- aa ‘money; wealt a h is only exceptionally 
‘treasure eto.” is the common form. Al of eee old forms harga, harto: 
heard, the Malayan orthography bas likewis® b tee A ourious word is the Mal. 
cf. also Jav. pahargyan ‘homage, honouring, 1 i find the by-forms sigérah and 
sigéra or sēgēra ‘speadily, readily’ because nS s b 
4 sigēraha : Skt. Sighra- WH ‘quick, speedy - eed occasional mistakes, been 
An initial or medial A has, with the pipe find & hyperootredt Mes 
Preserved in Old-Javanese orthography: We: : 'jll-luok, pres 
exterminate, make away with ^ Bis in the written initial A ‘actions 
Similar forms. In Modern Javanese bon only ogous in interjec 0 
sistently disappeared; in that position, theca 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


that already in India proper some W 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
f On a and EEUU 
ind lit. 27 e, cloud : Skt. OJ S 
„words. So we find lit. ema haze, ¢ l av. himaa 
nd younger loan-WO 5. "i. e igo; blind: bo in want’: Skt. Oday, po Ñ 


: «haze, Snow ; 1 iration i tina. 
pono bereft’. In Sandanese, vag en M epe Spoken, wg ti 
kā kis ji hand’ <Stt. hasta- Bet īd.. Malay orthography hag Petr 
ina, bu 


Raisa beside asa ‘goose’ (other forms are UC arent mateak Skt. hamsa ¢ 
D Dai 7 inga and aquatic birds’; hasta beside asta cubit’: Skt. hasta. pea d 
BER e cio as a measuro of length’. Bet the frequent hina and the income 
i 'barnt offering" (Skt. homa- ath) bavo always h. 
A medial h bas disappeared in Javanese orthography : lit. baitra, kr. baita 
‘vessel, ship <Skt. vahitra- afga 'id”. In Malay the same word has survived in 


Digitized b: 


- Bahtéra ‘a stately ship, yacht, argosy’ (in courtly usage only). The Skt. Braker 


ARI, the name of the well-known god, has become Bérma in Malay, though the 
forms Bérahma (svarabhakti-vowel) and Bérhamma (svarabhakti and metathesis) 
also occur. 
Contraction. 

Returning, for a moment, to a subject which is usually treated of under 
the heading ‘vocalism’ we draw attention to the fact that the loss of intervocalio 
h has often resulted in vowel-contraction. The Skt. and OJav. mahisa. altu 
‘buffalo’ e.g. became the reg. kr. mesa ‘id in Modern Javanese; reg. Jav. piyara 
‘tending, attending etc.’ and Mal. piara ‘nurturing, bringing up’ (beside pilihara 
ooking after, bringing up’, also Sund. piyara ‘tending’) represent an older pélihara, 
-the etymology of which is discussed elsewhere; in Jav (lit.) aùkara ‘egoism, selfish’, 
Mal. atkara ‘brutal violence, gross offence against morals or propriety’ the Skt. 
ohamkūra- AEN ‘self-consciousness, haughtinces’ has survived, and in Mal. says, 
beside sahaya ‘I, myself (in polite but not excessively submissive language)’ Skt. 
sahaya- SETA ‘companion assistant, helper’; formerly the more original sense of 


* ‘slave (household worker), servent! was also current in Malay. Sund. rasiyah 


-a 


‘secret’ <Skt. rahasya- (= ‘id.’; Bal. wiyawara boside wyawahara, a courteous 
word for ‘lawsuit’<Skt. vyavakāra- saag ‘id’; probably also the curious Bal. 
wiwa=wiwaha "wedding « Skt. vivdha- fata ‘id. 
Treatment of Other Consonants. 

In some cases an originally unvoiced stop is represented by a voiced : beside 
Oday. kañsa "brass, bell-motal’ (and kaiisi ‘a kind of musical instrument"? we find 
(Ram. 26,13 etc.) gañsa ‘brass etc.’ (Skt. kamsa. && ‘brass etc.’). Osher IN. idioms 
haye borrowed this word either with g (Mal gansa, Mac. gassa, Bug. géssa) or with 
k (Min. koisa, TBat. haksa< kaiisa). Further, OJav. guruwinda in g-in-toruinds 
„zdāy, reddish’ : Skt. kurwvinda. gafar ruby’; tho OJav. bird’s name gurundele 
swallow may- perhaps be compared to Skt. guruntaka- qRv2z% which, according 
to lexicographers, is a kind of peacock; if 80, it remains doubtful whether the Java: 
nese form comes from Sanskrit. Other instances are : Mal. gémpita *thunderout 


etic ous «BE kampita- ēftga ‘trembling’ (in lit. Jav. kampita means 25 
mn» n 5 ae gondala (also kēndala Sobstacle’ < Skt. kandala- vs 

|: ! H 1%. iv i . " 
ta- ağa ‘agreement, oreboding evil); séigeta beside sénketa ‘contost? <Skt- 5%. 


i con: ; d | GOD LO AEGRIS 
: tive’ <Skt, cancala- E inet Mal. jēnjala beside cēncala ove talker 
of, MIA. tamb, y; 


3 + bogs: 
ta reg. Jav. démbaga ' er’ besido im^ e 
a oto. — aga ‘copp M 

‘digested’, y the other hand : Mal, céréna ‘digestion’ <Skt. 717%? 


Although Tr - ; 

In considerin at m 
8 such forms we must bear in mind the faot th 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSER 
a Samaj Fama nī AGA Sand eGangotri 


and other IN. idioms the degree of 
Ed voiced stops differs from that of tho e 


gelve ‘ 
panduka- BZF a ball of wood ete.’); 


fairly frequent"? — 
Besides a voiced consonant is also found in the cas 

TUR , ase of 
in all probability been borrowed from a MIA. or NIA. 
including the Dravidian languages from which it gee 
. has a voiceless consonant, I mean the Mal. géta ‘dais 
(beside ies kéta, how ever, appeare) : ef. Pit. Khattd, Or. khata ete. (Skt. Fide 
agal) ‘bed, bedstead’, Tam. kattil ‘cot, bedstead -"'—The wide-spread éndi or kšndi 
(thus in Malay) “goglet’ is interesting in so far Mn; rk: K këndi 
Sund. këndi, TBat. hondi <*kondi and gëndi, Ach. köndi, ee d S ss 
gandi etc. Whereas in the Bal. kundi the Skt. form kundi FIS ‘bowl be E 
apparently been preserved, the other forms seem to have been tomoned from “ne 
than one Indian language : et. Kanarese gundi, Telugu gindi; Mar. gindi, Hindi 
kundi FIA otc. It is not possible to trace the travellings of this word which is 
Dravidian in origin.*? 

As is well known original y in the initial position has, in general, become 7 
in Middle Indo-Aryan. From inscriptional evidence we know that this change, 
which appears in the 2"% century A.D. in the Southern documents, seems to have 
spread from the South towards the West of India.” Such forms as found in 
Malay : jantēra, jēntēra ‘wheel’ (Skt. yantra- 3*4 ‘machine, apparatus); jogi ‘who 
practises yoga, Hindu ascetic’ (Skt. yogi ati id”); juta ‘million’ (cf. the Skt. 
numērals in -yuta- -Yā) etc. and corresponding or similar forms elsewhere (Jav. 
jantra 'spinning-wheel' may, therefore, be due to direct Indian influence : cf.» 
Pkt. janta- SFA ‘machine’; Apabhr. joi ‘yogin’ etc. Yet, such Dutch words asas. 
‘overcoat’, Juli ‘July’ were treated in the same way when they were admitted to 
Malay and Javanese, and the Arab. Yahudi Jewish’ became Jaudi in the former 
language. P 

A very difficult problem relates to the distribution of 5 and z As is is 
known these sounds must early have alternated in the earlier vidi s e 
Aryan, because we find a-brh- sgg ‘to tear up’ beside a-orh- aR xd = 
and other ancient variants like bana- AT ‘a reed-shaft, cane ea pre- 
'reed'?* Although in the Kharosthi documents intervocalic b ķi pipe 
Served, they may have been pronounced v, because this soun 


m p Z instead of -prabha; 
Occasionally in the written text: Silaprava (a proper novn) came v 4 in 


ie à word which hag 
idiom and which in India— 


ms to haye come—regularly 
„divan, esp. the royal divan’ 


, : be 
dvalasa instead of abalāšva- aaeta.*5 Intervocalic b 4 "i MS Mises. 
the Prākrit idioms: kalevara=kalebara?* At present 2 anced in the North 


b being prono 


oh were written with %, and 


p by this 

dy clearly borne out by | 

sr dansk word swine s 
i when 

with this orthography à 


ords 88 


between b and v in the greater part of India, 9 
Kashmir excopted) also in those words whi 
" FéDresenting both sounds in the South. As isa 
Very brief exposition it is far from certain that 


Written b 5 a rdance 
a d in acco 
8 actually pronounce Although such W 


Was introduced into the Archipelago. in good Old-Javanese ieri 1 


lled, 1 


guileful d although many words wal 


(Skt. vakrabuddhi- amga ‘id.’) are SP? 
Accordance with their usual Indian orthography: 82 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


c SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
f AS. y-Arya-Sarriaj Foundation Chennai e 
contain ab are likewise correctly written (e.g. bad pai dS kt 
pala ‘force’ : Skt. bala- 83 5i; bālaka "boy : Skt. bálaka- MSF ʻi : baddha. sg Ga: 
large; numerous : Skt. bahula: 8g* id’; buddhi ‘mind, i id. bahuta ' zn 
5 $ ; i ‘mind, intellect, thought? la ‘dens 
ate id.’ eto. ete.), we also come across OJav. wandhu ‘rel m ught': Skt. budd ķi 
pandhu id. : Skt. bandhu- 33 Ga? and wandhawa ‘id.’ : Se te Kinsman’ be s 
wala instead of the above bala; wala and walaka AON of Sk andhava- qaa n 
the above bālaka- ATS F; wahya ‘external, foreign public i bale US ‘hoy’ $ 
Skt. is bahya ara ‘exterior, external, foreign’; Ihan 3 FUNEM though the = 
Skt. bodhana- ahaa ‘ia’, ete. The akt. ns d s causing to awake UM 
is, on the other hand, regularly written bajra i underbolt (esp that of i 
cheating: bancana iq ^; bama appears side by n Class texts, vaicana a 
bay ‘wind’ instead of Sst. oye ary ‘id.’ (but wa ith wama ‘left’: Skt. eundem , 
each other: Skt. edyatya- TCT ‘the north E : ci d bayabya side by side $t 
vrata- Aa ‘id’; Baruna 1 ae st’); braia ‘vow’ i EN 
AME ed the god of the gea instead of Skt. ^ usted of Bkt. 
forms as wikw monk, ascetic sh Varuna- 4m ‘id. 
slements their MIA. origin. ow by the treatment of their us 
Now, matters are CO i i i 
2 ] mplicated bec Ga 
win many EEE vcs mot yet b auge the distribution of the native b 
pee aa origa IN PET 2 established in a satisfactor vo b and 
A rig . rightly bee $ y way. It 
in many of the living IN. languages: In. SUppo ed, which persists unoh 
Qus Caf CRUCE rw ; oe Orig. IN. bahaw ‘heron’ > Mal i : m 
cases a Javanese w corre pounds denoting & kind of stork = Oe 
imos sponds to a Mal : 5 ork. But in oth 
"bind ome Jav. worois ‘booth, stall M = kkā 4 shadow oy: 
: Mal. buta ‘id.’ ete. et i shop’: Mal. baron tid; li ss 
doublets : OJav. balik “ . eic. Add to this th AM lit. Sai 
: ink anās at Javanese is rioh i ; 
ih Pur ‘on the contrary, : ich in etymological 
. Mod. Jav. ‘th asd zeg, galne) baok”: Olav. ions go back, repel’, Mod. Tar. on 
zu e uae other way round, insid E i ‘nevertheless, to turn baok, ret i 
etra: borat. , inside out’. In S8 , return, 
: borat "heavy. M undaneso, too, such 
= ee y. Mutual borrowi Bei N00: oh doublets are 
beside the nati ying these facts : thus wisi ‘i wing may m mauy oae s consy 
gente Brive būsi, but it cannot be iron’ is a Javanese loan in Sundanese 
etors in this puzzling distri a sound method to excl ssibili 
VUE, HE uzz eotribution-of clude the possibility of 
EE ID iof e is hardly more than sounds. We do well to remember 
ons) Tp which, though urgentl a conglomerate of dialects, & scientific 
_ In many cases th y needed, still ita t à 
question of geographi 9 alternation b:wm awaits tho very fire prepa 
Be this as ^ ical differentiation in th a pyiceeney have ong oir 
cussing the way in d , We must take full 4 Riesen dina 
guages. By the side s Sanskrit loans cm otthese native ie Yin 
aT ‘reciting eto?) Mal OJav. Mod.Jav. vaca ies preserved in various IN. lan 
race, family, offsprin "( has baca ‘recitation, r reading, reciting’ (of. Skt. vacant 
dev: p ansa "race, Ses ae vamsa- 47 ‘id.’) „reading out’; of. alo: OJav. ward 
also ‘nation’; the f Malay influence), M reg. Mod. Jay. wansa “id.’, bub Mod. 
las may b € orm wans co), Mal. baisa “ ily’ 
dzīt f ybe considered a J a when occurring i sa ‘race, family’, and powadas? 
Skt EM flute), but Mal fee ge loan; OJ ne " Malay honorifics and 60 fora 
' ^id ») yu- TF ‘id’; but te, or bansi "perii ios bamboo-flute’ ēdis; am 
(x8. against Mal, Bd, vidadari idR Mal, and lit. Jav te vat 
ee or saree rior bidiadari ia^ nymph’ (Bt, vidyadhar es 
ete, eto. From Is of a) forest’); “ree wanantar à ‘jungle Ose 
cc ndbother examples it. Mal. bélantara- “broo-007 a, 
-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri ae must conclude phat tbe P" 
Jon. 


950 


Digitized by Arya Sgaaidrekīmlatign sonar eGangotri 
- d TA 


——— 
jection shown by Malay for b in Indian loans largely de : m 
that it has consistently preserved the original IN. b kājās, the circumstance 
Joans with w nee ocourring in Malay were introduced i: native words. Sanskrit 
2 ‘victorious’ (as an honorific in Dames and titles)’ — lit EAS ot Javanese : wija- 
vijaya- Aaa id.; wédana & high native officer, y SOT ‘victory’ «Skt. 
Okt. vadana- AGA face} front, first term”; wirama ‘time (i gcu <Jav. idem< 
<Skt. virama- fu pause’; përwira ‘hero, Courageous’ <lit ML idem 
pravira- Brits ‘hero ; wisa venom’ <$kt. visa. fiw ‘ia? (Mal. Mir id? «gkt. 
warna colour (< Skt. varna- att 'id') is no exception, it hag E es s 
finities : it is totall ; heat ; nob man 
e af y naturalized and a b-variant does not exist. Y 
irem fien av t amet ien fr de 
many RIS changes in their consonants. In the in- 
terior one consonant, a combination of nasal or trill (liquid) and cognate explosi 
are, in general, preferred to other possibilities; in Javanese, to mention thi AE 
guage individually, explosive and trill is also a rather frequent so TEES. 
Whereas in anoient texts medial clusters in Sanskrit words are, as a rule, ins 
simplifications due to the real pronunciation of those words which came to is 
naturalized, occur often and early: OJav. pantikrama ‘order, succession’ beside 
paikti ‘row, collection, ses and panktikrama (Skt. pankti- fm); pragiwaka (‘al- 
ready’ in kakawins) ‘arbiter etc. beside pragwiwaka< Skt. pradvivaka- MAIA 
‘hief judge’; Jav. Sund. sasat ‘as if, as good as’ «kt. sūksūt WISI, ‘actually, 
exactly etc.’, in Old-Jav. also = Skt. tulya- ge1 “equal, resembling, like’; OJav. 
walakara (sic), beside walatkara ‘act of violence’ <Skt. balatkara- TURAN ‘acting 
by force’; saizsipta ‘in short’ beside sanksipia, sanksepa (Skt. samksipta- AE 
‘abridged, short’); palanka ‘couch’ beside paryanka (Skt. paryanka- wig) wile 
beside wilwa ‘Aegle marmelos’ (Skt. bilva- fet ‘the bilva tree and its fruit’). In 
Bal. and Jav. sémita occurs side by side with sasmita (Skt. sasmita- RR 
‘smiling’), the Bal. meaning being ‘smiling’; the Jav. token, wink, hint’. Lit. Jav. 
sikara ‘injuring’ represents ‘Skt. OJav. svikara- TF ‘appropriation’ OJav. also 
‘forcing’; cf. also jumantara ‘in the air’: cf. Skt. vyoman- sat air" 

Some instances of clusters originally consisting of three elements may fie 
added : lit. Jav. uswasa ‘sighing, breatbing <Skt. Oday. ucchvasa- 5 ets s 
accordance with the treatment in MTA.: Sauras. ussdsa, Matan MN E 3 
beside nyuksma ‘to penetrate mentally into. (Jav. prenusolization NC. m 
AA ‘subtle, inconceivable’; lësmi and résmi beauty <a at à p That 

In modern Javanese a number of olusters are podes oan 
is to say they are, in many or several words, still written DU 


i i lance they have disappear- 
People who in speaking ‘stick to the lotter- In tip rk, dee 


chief of a. dist 


ed. Thus, sēsi "witness! beside sēksi (Skt. sūksi t 1 (Skt. 
D < : hand, arm, e 

Priksa (Skt. pariksa vite); sita ell (« (Masi) bere bred, molar and jēsā 

hasta- Kā ‘hand’). Such simplified forms as jēmā whereas jatmika (< Skt. 


ar conversation, 


1 or spirit’) is8 literary and Jā 


public Prosecutor’ are current in famili 
adhyatm ika. Atika ‘relating to the sou 


Adhyaksa. seat ‘superintendent’) a regional term» qi ‘onge’); kēriā 


- (Ski: ganjara- A 
( Such words as panjara ‘to keep 1n c inconsiderate, not serious be 
to) work’ (Skt. karya- i work; seme however, remained unchangod 


3 
sa 2 z i elc» 
mbhrama- AIA ‘mistake; agitated, excited’ 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


only pronounced by ` 


ksa (<Skt. 


; m KRIT IN INDONESIA 
959 Digitīzed by Aryf ANSE Rhianon C i 


In Javanese Skt. dusļa- ZE prcious: ds E in literary usa 
"M dusa ‘a base artifice, but Balinese has duta beside the origi 
served : dusta oF. aa U brigand’. In Javanese baita ‘boat’ is a k Binal 
pe: S tora: in Balinese, too, both forms exist: Skt. vahitra- alga qun 
ye Tae an IN. language an initial formed of two consonants is admitted S 
commonest Cases are explosive + trill and nasal+ cognate explosive; s+ trill, Pe 
give-t y Or W, WY, WT, etc. can also be found. Yet, in Javanese the initial clusters 
wr and wl are, in pative and borrowed words; often reduced to r and l; ef, Sk, 
OJav. vyakti- afi "the becoming evident 7 Mod. Jav. yēkti true, real; truth — 
although the obs. Jav. wrana screen must be considered ag coming from Skt, 
varana- ARN ‘warding off’ etc.; br etc., however, have continued to exist: Skt, 
bhrasta- XX ‘fallen, ruined’ : lit. Mod. Jav. brasta destroyed’. 
The frequent initial cluster ks—which was changed into kh, cch eto. in the 
Prakrits—has been reduced : lit. Mod, Jav. sétriya ‘nobleman’ : Skt. ksatriya- sa; 
in Mal we also find cētēria *d.. Instead of Skt. ksetra- XA ‘piece of ground, 
field’ Mod. Jav. has the word-base setra ‘to lie abandoned, uncared for (of a corpse 
in the wilderness eic.); instead of ksiti- fafa "the earth’ : siti ‘id.’. Hence, no 
doubt, the use of Skt. ksudra. FJA ‘low, mean’ instead of Skt, sūdra- A ‘a man of 
the fourth class’ in an ancient Javanese inscription (by way of so-called inverse ans- 
logy). Cf. also the Min. pareso=Mal. périksa ‘to investigate < Skt. pariksa qii 
‘examination’. The Malay cura and cur? in names of swords are of special interest, 
because they, though corresponding to the Skt. ksura- Bt ‘razor etc., show & 
different treatment. In Prakrit and New Indo-Aryan chura 7, churi gR, chura 
BU, churi GX ‘knife, dagger' etc. are usual, the cluster ks being often represented 
| „as cch.** The Malay words are without doubt no Sanskrit loans. ; 
| : The cluster dv was likewise reduced to d: Skt. dvirada- FZU ‘elephant 7 
‘Sund. diroda ‘id’; lit. Jav. dipanga ‘id.’ : OJav. dvipāiga 'id.': of. Skt. dvipa- fa 
“a? and dvipangana Īzagai= hastinā gait. The group ty repeatedly became 6: 
Skt. pratyeka- MX ‘singly, single one, one at a time > OJav. ‘specification’ > Bal. 
pratiyeka, praceka or prateka ‘requisites, ingredients, specified or detailed stato: 
ment’, Mod. Jav. (lit.) praceka ‘contrived’; Mod. Jav. pracaya, Mal. pércaya “faith 
<Skt. pratyaya- TAA ‘idem’, In Jay. Sund. tega ‘insensible of other people's dis- 
tress; uncharitable’ the original ty was eliminated in another way, ya becoming °: 


e hioa a “forsaking, resigning’; in OJav. tega is used in the sense of ‘ancho- 
rite. : 


&e, Dre. 


um EN E Before ré, has been preserved in literary J AD : des 
3 Rouge S +; wrest rain? <$kt. vrsti- alt id” In lit. Jav. 

an old Biden (cf. Jay. randa ‘widow or divorcee with children’), whioh corel 
- ponds to Skt. ranga- (31 ‘slut, widow’; Pkt. randa ‘widow’ etcs We even fo 
„an initial wr which is missing in the etymologically P Mein e 


Sometimes nasalizatio i 
Sometim n goes with the simpli i i 
in Balinese ransasa is the usual das DA 


a literary form: Skt. raksasa. 
: Treatment of Initial Nasals. be 
Inst initial nasal in t 
but not Mia asal in the lending language the IN. loan-Y0" 
r i i 
called prenasalised verbal AE S Menge Ane ar 


"in Indonesia, Skt, mandapa UT vos TE aniinitial nosal Ee 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Spon ball pavilion’ (also in OJav. 7M 


a consonant En 
pronunciation of raksasa ‘ogre, demon’, whie 
AIN id.. 


d otten; 


Digitized by Arya SERSERI IN IND err eGangotri 
IA 


- " ‘open hall a the front of a Javanese house’, The = 
poours in Middle-Jav gro texts ( to devour, Swallow ap’) am tramansa which 
the syncopated OJav. naramümsa “human flesh” (Skt, i A 0 explained from 
mancaka- „su a stage or platform, raised seat amsa- 


3 3 ed . 
concealed itself in pancaka which in Jav., Sund. pedestal, couch, frame, ete? hice 


gerving 89 funeral pyre’ and, in all Me pe i ur gai 
pañcaka- qeu (lexicographers) field of battle; Skt. ust pēs d mms 
drum’ > Mod. Jav. (lit.) pradanga ‘the gamēlan or set of SURE a kind of 
d ing up a Javanese orchestra j musical instruments 

However, lit. Jav. miyakga ‘serpent’ <Skt, vyanga- sq 
initial m instead of an older v. 

Alternating Nasals. 

In & number of cases an etymologically correct nasal alternat ith 
another nasal :Sund. déinda=dénda ‘fine’ <Skt. danda- quz er n: M 
Bal. raida beside randa ‘widow’ : ef. Skt. eto, randa RUS] ‘slut Ed p 
preceding paragraph; this word is also discussed in another section abd 
Dissyllabism and Aphaeresis. 


We have already observed?? that the IN, languages have a strong predilec- 
tion for a dissyllabic form of underived words. As Sanskrit has many long 
words,it is, therefore, not surprising that in being naturalized in an IN. idiom 
a considerable number of them have suffered shortenings. The result of this 
process is, as a rule, a dissyllabic speech-element. Not infrequently, a quadri- 
syllable is, in par& of the cases, interpreted as a combination of two dissyllables : 
Bal. alpa yusa ‘a short life; short-lived’ < Skt. alpūyusa- %HI4S ‘short-lived’ 
(MW.. only gives alpūyus); Mal. (reg.) juru-jana ‘treacherous <Skt. durjana- Sat 
'a bad man”; such compounds as the Skt. upadrava- STZA calamity, plague etc." 
are, in the same language, often analysed as wpa-drawa "disaster, curse (in conse- * 
quence of the wrath of the gods)’. 

Thus, we come across in Old-Javanese: daya ‘heart’ < Skt. hrdaya- ēd; 
mila ‘causes reason! < Skt. nimitta- fafira; juùka ‘base, villain’ < Skt. kaļuka- de 
‘fierce, impetuous, bad’; but the original forms of these three words are also found: 
Mod. Jav. (reg.) saya ‘mutual aid’ stands for sraya or résaya aid SERE 
MAI "help, refuge’. Beside Jav. saisaya ‘always or each pate duis 
eto? (<Skt. samšaya- WAA ‘doubt, danger) we often aa m ET 

-Upaya ‘means, expedient’ (< Skt. upaya- ITA id. ) lit. ra ai eee: ES 
gama ‘religion’ ropresents im lit. Bal. and be e ES correct birahi 
religious doctrine’. In Malay we come across ee d : arated (from a beloved 
(also bēraki) ‘passionately in love” < Skt. viral ate a < Skt. tathapi 
Person), lonely’; tapi (colloquial) instead of tētūpi b" rose from pariksa ivesti- 
TANG ‘id’; Sund. riksa ‘to look after ina careful hr alas (hantaka ‘death’ : 
gation, to investigate’ <Skt. parīksā- attur id.; Pal 


6:1. 
> <Skt. sakas aadli id.; 
Skt. antaka- azas ‘id’; hasa= sahasa ‘violently, suddenly akara- ER ‘manner eto." 


! EE 

Gra instead of pērkara ‘lawsuit, business sf Bee bee 
and prakarana- IPU ‘question, topic, subject « llable of à trigyllabio word. 18. 
It is obvious that, in general, the first 8Y ive words to be 


[nm 
limbless’ has an 


^ enoy for nati 
dropped, This is in perfect harmony with ee of 
pe crabily shortened through apbaeresiē» onsists in & 81> 


trisyllabic i i frequent when it e 
word is especially. šā Vrat Shastri Collection. 


F SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
954 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


have arisen from Skt. à : Skt. anala- AAG ‘fire’ : OJav. and lit, Mod. 
aluo ae nala; Skt. adhama- RAA ‘lowest, worst of...', OJav. ‘worthless 
A Jav. dama ‘worthless, unfit, stupid’; Skt. atyanta- maa ‘thorough(, N 
OJav. atyanta, tyanta; Skt. aniccha- lets 'averee, unwilling’ or anic yl 


Jay, Analg 
1 Contem k. 


- ‘ cha af t 
* absence of wish’ > OJav. niccha; Skt. OJav. atita- erdta ‘gone away, Passed!» Moi 
Jav. tita ‘long enough’ (as an utterance of impatience); Skt. OJav. adity | 


a- 
‘sun’: Mod. Jav. dite ‘Sunday’; Skt. OJav. acara- WITT ‘(good) behaviour 


»cara ‘id. (in Malay also cara way, manner); OJav. rabdha ‘begun, rep 
arabdha- AREI ‘begun, undertaken';'?* Mal. neka beside aneka ‘vario 
aneka- AAF ‘many-manifold’; soka beside ansoka the tree Pavetia in 
atoka- AATE ‘the asoka tree’. 

These and similar cases of aphaeresis must, of course, also be studied in 
connection with the above-mentioned trend ofthe vowels of open antepenultg 
to become undetermined. The Javanese prefix a- has, except for dissyllabic words 
containing it, disappeared in the same way. As already. appears from the above 
instances the shortening of loan-words has often occurred in & mechanical WAY, 
Skt. adhyaksa- A448 ‘exercising supervision, OJay. ‘superintendent ete.’ becoming 
OJav. dhyaksa, Mod. Jav. jaksa, jēksa ‘public prosecutor’; Skt. apadgata- aga 
‘fallen into misfortune’ becoming OJav. padgata ‘id.’; Skt. OJav. padartha. Tar 
‘meaning, object’ became darta in courtly Balinese (‘olear; to understand’) and in 
Sasak (‘meaning’). Instead of Hemakiija- AEZ ‘the gold-peaked (mountain)' (name 
of a great mountain in Indian geography) an OJav. text'°? giver Makuta. The word 


pastha, pasta ‘penis’ in Javanese texts'®4 is the Skt. OJav. «pastha- STEA ‘the 
sexual organs’. ; 


, custom’ 
dy’ < Skt, 
us < Sht, 
dica' : gy. 


oe appears from the synonymous Mal. sahaja ‘intentionally’ but also ‘on 
one s own the reg. and coll. Jav. and Mal. ‘intentionally’ represents Skt. sahaja 
G&A innate, by nature’ which in Old-Javanese also means ‘intending to; in 
Sundanese the clipped form hajä ‘to intend” is used. 


It ie, further, worth mentioning that not & few loan-words underwent aphae- 
resis after they had become trisyllabic by way of svarabhakti : Mal. réca Lg. 
dx = other object of special sanctity’ (also arca) <OJav. lit.Jav. arca image ^ 

mt T4l image destined to be worshipped’; Mal. Sund. rëga beside harga haré- 
ga price <Bkt. argha. AÑ ‘iq’, Other instances have already been mentioned in 
the paragraph on svarabhakti. 

We are, however, not in want of instances to show that longer Skt. words! 


Eri hon In Middle-Jav. we find wipraya beside the much more u 
praya, lit. Mod. Jav. praya ‘intention’ < : . jaim 
"retiri kt. O .wfamm J 
retiring, modest” Moa. jas Ant Skt Jav. abhipraya Bund: 


iatnika * a modest, retiring and well-conducted"; R 
ji arorik, Well supplied with’ < Skt. adhyatmika- ataikas ‘relating 1o 
atayin- ws : He AS: Sic » tatayi ‘menacing’ beside the longer form< q 
P a WH endeavouring to kill someone’. The Skt. lrtayašas» gaad 
amous, in good repute’ (> Ga» mo AN ila Leti = (nja 
- superior’ and reg, tiyasa * OJav. ʻia.) survives in lit. Mod. Jav. kērtiyas? * a 
further stage 4 JE CH used to’, Such forms, which olearly reo 
wasana beside awasūnu * ich’, 2180 ocour in texts written in Old-Javanes® Ponit 
2 4 
$ ¿dara * 
sylph’ and dédari ‘a heaven] fes afar ‘consecrating (& king); dida , 
y SER (beside widadari) represent; the Ls) 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat shal #14 adn female heavenly bein 


gylp^ 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chenna and eGangoti 
Mal. dikara ‘dignified, august’ beside adikar 
afa ‘authority, dignity’; nugraha or nugč 
cg? <Skb. anugraha- AJAR ‘favour’; 


v 1 " 
qo E insignia of a native ruler’ 


265 


dem t 
fairy 3 a aut 


€ 
rah “grace, 


ciet” m 5 d CIM g that 

It may ng that an initial vowel g ; 
times lost in the MIA. idioms. The number of oases is ep s some- 
may therefore have existed in the Indian losn-words from the beginning, rt 
known instance of a perfectly naturalized word is Skt. upavasa. STATA. ‘fast fast 
ing» which in this form occurs in OJav., as puwasa in modern Jav. dialects i 
puasa in Malay, Sasak, Achehnese, otc., as pasa in Mod. Jav., Gayo, now Ga: 
to the Muslim fast. As far as may be judged from appearances the initial u wag al- 
ready lost before this word was introduced into the Archipelago. 

A dissyllabic word was rarely clipped: the Malay honorific prefix di can 
be found beside the more usual adi ‘pre-eminent, paramount’, which is often ured 
in suoh expressions as adi-raja "very royal’ (or diraja) eto. (Skt. adi- sf 'be- 
ginning’). 

Instances are, however, not entirely wanting of Indian loans undergoing 
another process of clipping: the above Mal. nugérah (beside dnugērahā, nugéra); 
Mal. bijak ‘capable, sensible’ is rightly considered a short form of bijaksana 'prac- 
tical wisdom, skill; skilled' « Skt. vicaksana- faxit ‘intelligent; wise’. 

In Old-Javanese the word sajji is denotative of ‘the requisites for a sacri- 
fice such as fuel, flowers, perfumes, fruits, butter, honey, sesam ete." (eee e.g. OJav. 
Rām. 1,24); *the offerings themselves when pūt in readiness, the preparativos 
could also be called sajji. The derivative sasajen (ie. sa-saji-an) means offerings 
(Tantu Panggdlaran); it survives in the modern (s£)sajén flowers, eatables offered 
to spirits placed ready or set out for them in & sacred place where they are 
supposed to come’. The word sajt, sē-saji itself, which is now out n use ki 
karta, means ‘to place ready, to set out (of food). There are many md x 
tives expressing such ideas as ‘putting ready, offering (food, me: a vari 
to or regaling with’, sometimes also ina metaphorical kā "e d the celestial 
which the stout-hearted meet with a kind Me o their unos TE 
damsels are called pa-saji’s ‘objects Pūt ready for y va now on fac RUE 
Sundanese the sense 'offering (consisting in EET he. oade iraani 
another meaning occurs in addition to this, viz. m. be: Ame m 
Put over the present offered to somebody » an prepared for a journey". 
sisting of eatables), (ii) feast, entertain 23 word denoting ‘the presentation, 
In regional usage panajen (i.e. pa-naji-an) i8 


j io. a charm for warding of ill- 
offering or payment given in exchange for Pen x s ji RR 
ness or medicaments’. "The Bal. meaning of oe 

s i ja 
Punjus) is ‘the prepared foods which on New en edo 
of the deceased’. In this connection Gas. p6-sajt e rh Sit a 
Of notice. Now this word saji bas no do pP E Rt aj > 
epared, make ready elo. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


f SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
956 


i amaj Foundation Chennai e trig, 7, as E 
*.educed to ashes), and has MAA (38% "Dhasmīdhūta. RRR 


a “re : - x 
n RR are repeatedly found. It is worthy of attention that i 
ecome 


$ - Hindi bhasmi AHU ‘ashes, ashos o 2 NIA, 
— bhasmā ie likowisē 4 Ri ares ‘ashes’ as well as ‘sale nate 
HOS dm à ". The derivative bhasmy-an is equivalent to th he 
troyed” (<‘reduced to ashes }. í Ae ue : e Engl, 
trovei (by fire or other causes). In modern usage bēsmi is a krama term fo 
ER eren basmi, however, Serves as a base for verbal forms Sīļi 
ARI WES of ‘destroying or exterminating in general”. | f 
Jav. nispra 'ingignifiant" (in a Muslim text) has tentatively po explained 
as arisen from Skt. OJav. nisprabha- RERI au + € obscure ;'** Jay Ba, 
dora ‘tell lies, deceive: fraud’ is in all probability an raj form of doracarg 
(which is now literary) <Skt. duracara- guan ~ conduct; ill-behaved’; Mal, 
bida stands for bidadari < Skt. vidyadhari AIÑ; catur for the Skt. ete, catur. 
anga- AG game of chess’. ; i : j 
An interesting word, from the etymological point of view, is Jav. eto. purus: 
in Jav. it means ‘ureter’ and as & vulgar term the privy parts ; in Bal. and Sas, it 
is a ‘high term’ in the latter sense; in Sund. a pu-purus (reduplication, which can 
express likeness etc.) is ‘a thin end of a piece of wood, destined to be fixed in 
another piece of wood', and a baga-purus is an ‘hermaphrodite’. In the last-men. 
tioned term baga, which is still literary Javanese (‘womb’), is the Skt. bhaga- wl 
‘the female privy parts. As an ‘hermaphrodite’ is designated in Skt. by stri 
pumsa- XANGA and, further, Skt. purusa- JET ‘man, male’ can, in OJav., also denote 
the ‘penis’, purus may have arisen from the last-mentioned word when the native 
suffix -an (e.g. in ka-purusa-(a)n ‘virile strength’) was added, purws may have been 
considered the base. Y 
Now and then complications are» or may be, recorded. The OJav, nia 
‘stake, play’ can be undersiood as a mechanical shortening of Skt. panita- va 
‘bet, stake’, but pa- is also a native prefix which forms nouns that are sometimes 
synonymous with the word-base (e.g. takon, pa-takon ‘question’), and 60 nita can 
have been analogically abstracted as a base (from which menita ‘playing’ ete. 
were derived). If the word pranita which occurs only once is really 8 synonym 
and, as to its etymology, identical, it is an argument in favour of the latter assump- 
tion: then, pra-, the prefix, is a hyper-sanskritism, substituted for pa" In 
some OJav. texts the syllable ma in Skt. manasiüpa- RANT ‘mental pain, repen- 
tance , which is also OJay., has dropped : >nastapa (ma- is a native prefix, syno 
EET with -a-, hence also a-nastapa "worried'), which as nastapa, nistapo 
TM Ten mc Malay, and in lit. Mod. Jav. not only means ‘sorrow’ and ie 
plying oneself to asceticism’ (no doubt under influence of tapa agoell 


cism”<Skt. tapas- I9: “id’). Skt. kani ‘ lowest 
. least’, borrowed in OJav. . kanistha- Fg “the youngest, smallest, t0% 


Mod. Jav., and a base for 


[n a 5 z à 
Tn vile" became nista ‘vile, low, morally deficient 1? 
erivatives meaning ‘t A āda? 
Fr 4 É g to consider vile etc. c 
om the way in which the Malay numeral pērtama ‘the frst? whioh i8 the 


Skt. prathama- 4% is doubl p 
ed : É : bs 
first syllable was identified UM E m E zr 


j5 pably 
am UN : 1 the Malay element pēr-. In Malay the pro” sy- 
duta, uf wu bordinate ambassador'?? became paduta” P ae " 2 
a * . A i i ; 
nde: = ay standpoint can be interpreted as & pē-derivati Vē. 


In Old-Jay, i 
&nese sucāra and nicūra once occur to signify the ideas expres 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Ary Saree) ReneR PĒRS ang eGangotri 


; Sanskrit by svácüra- TATA "well-conducted! ana 
P duot”. As Vau der Tuuk rightly suggested,'» 
sight will be regarded as resulting from elision 


nirücürq- 
* these 
i : » are, i 
once of the Sanskrit couple, derived from OJay 
above). ^" 
‘prothetic’ Vowels. 
Thero is, however, sufficient evidence of adie 
times thwarts the tendency to dissyilabiem. In Sundaness raj, nt some- 


‘ ious <Skt. yatna- YA ‘end , nesa iyatna occurs besid 
aina cautious endeavour; the Karo. e eside 
y 3 Karo-Batak iyoga ‘yoke of the 


plough’ represents the Skt. pup att ‘yoke, or (and) yuga- 41 ‘id’; lit. Bal. iyali 
‘correct, true <Skt. yukti- dl ‘fitness, correctness’. Bal. asjuti D s Dur 
may be regarded as eprung from the Skt. stuti- «afa ‘prai omage, honour 


p fron i se, eulogy’; astiti ‘hol 
faithful, intimately connected from the Skt. sthiti- Rufa ‘virtuous canivet M 


stancy; in lit. Jav. (and hence in Malay) and Bal. we find asmara “lov 

love’ from the Skt. smara- TAT "love"? Tt is important to note that the N 
ance of these ‘prothetic’ vowels is due to different causes. Tho develope 
secondary 4 before y (and of u before w) occurs in various languages and ir 
regarded as a special ONES of svarabhakti or anaptyxis, because it seems to me E 
origin in those cases in which the word concerned was preceded by a consonant. 
In the above three words with a- prothesis', however, metanalytical and other 
processes have perhaps also played a part : Jav. kasmaran ‘in love’ (ka-smara-(a)n) 
may have been interproted like the liks Jav. kascaryan ‘surprised’ from (lit.) ascarya 
admiration <Skt. ascarya- SIJAA strange; wonder. OJav. astuti ‘praise’ was 
perhaps connected with the synonymous asivikara, i.e. Skt. astumkara- TEN 
‘saying : be it so’. Van der Tuuk"' proposed to derive this OJav. astute ‘praise’ 
from Skt. samstuti- 8xgfa ‘id’, OJav. astawa ‘id.’ from Skt. samstava- iaa "id, 
astiti ‘faithful, steadfast’ from Skt. samsthūti- sifeifa ‘constancy, perseverance’, but 
he could not resort to *samsmara- in order to explain Bal. ete. asmara, because it 
does not occur. Moreover, these compounds which hegin with sam- could easily 
have been preserved in Old-Javanese, samsmrtt ‘thoughtfulness’ (i.e. the Skt. 
samsmrü- Beata 'romembrance') and other such words occurring in ancient 
texts. A strong case for Van der Tuuk’s hypothesis is at first sight the OJav. 
askara "ceremony' beside saitskara ‘ceremony, interment’ and saitoskārā ceremony, 
ordination etc.', the origin of which is the Skt. samsküra- GER ers 
sacred ceremony ete.’ (askrta in OJav. pai-askría and Oday. dun n gei 
name’ < Skt. samskrta- ted ‘consecrated’ likewise S a E Mo 
existence of the forms beginning with saia- May, by Waves bes as I know, 
occasioned tho forms askara, askrti whieh, by the vay ME wanting, and the 
Only as a base of derivativos. Beside astuti eto- sana-torms & 


1 ide-spread 
A + consonant is 8 Wl 
Appearance of so-called prothetie vowels before $ ete. were often preceded 


linguistic phenomenon : the Latin initial clusters 32^ a g in tho French area, 82 
by an i: ispeculator < speculator, and so: (i-e. sk-) took o>, ®° san examples are far 


init} j i ira 12 Indoneslā S 
nitial e : Lat. scribere > escribere> Fr. s ‘gpanish’s gond. ispur < Dutch 
nj 


from rare : Mal. Ispanyol < anc. Dutch Spa te that a prothotic vowel, 
“Poor ‘railway’ oto, Tt is, further, important "0 Ws ate. were almost always 
ough very rare in MIA. and NIA.— groups lā BE unknown to the Indians: an 


EAR tir : ‘bathing’ : 
eerste or altored to kh-, th- ete.— was not Šā and isnān gala bathing 
T - sometimes appears as such : Hindi e$" 
eus Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


con- 


RIT IN INDONESIA 


958 Digitized by Arya saftNGundation Chennai and eGangotri — 
ee — = MEN A i 
&, sndna- €i id" We may add that Kern''* explained the "- 
kt, snāna- eh 4 1 | 
s "destruction" from the Skt. kgaya- Na ‘id. . Ot 


Special mention must be made of the Indian loan for ‘wife, Woman’ rep 
sented by the OJav. strī, which is in perfect harmony with the Skt. sirī e tan 
the Moa. Jav. krama-term èstri and the likewise (regional, and in the standard 
dialect obsolete) krama istri vite, woman womanlike, female”, the Mal, ister} 
‘wife, consort’, the Sund. istri a lady etc. ^ mS agdtion; s Tegional Jay, krama 
sétri, which is at the root of the coll. kr. DONE s ga-sétri-an female privy "m 
may be mentioned; & trace of this same sétri is preserved in the Mal. késtérian 
‘enana. It would be a rash conclusion to assume the monosyllabic form of the 
nae dM as the source of the longer words in the modern IN. idioms, Tor 
the very declination of the Skt. str?, on one hand, shows that this word formerly 
was dissyllabio!' and guch Prākrit forms as AMg. oto. atthi (of. also Apabhrarņta 
itthi gk), on the other, point to a first syllable i, and to a common Original 
*isirī, Besides, such forms as Assamese tiri, Paūijābī tiryā feral, Nepali tiriya fifi, 
Beng. tiri are commonly held to indicate another original form without initial 
vowel to wit stir? or si?ri,'" the words mentioned having dropped the initial 4, 
These faots leave ample room for the possibility of the longer IN. forms’ being 
directly sprung from Indian sources. 

Syncope. 

Cases of syncope (shortening of a word by loss of a medial sound or syl- 
lable) are now and then found: Mod. Jav. (lit.) trangana ‘star(s)’<OJav. taron- 
gana <Skt. tūragaņa- WAN ‘group of stars; byabya ‘the north-west’ < OJav. 
bayabya<Skt. vāyavya- TA; Mod. Jav. rana *draught-soreen' <(obs.) wrana 
‘screen; pretext; substitute’ beside warana "ecreen' <OJav. warana "partition. 


. Wall, impediment’ : Skt. varana- IRM ‘warding off, impediment’; mraja ‘king, 


prince’ (beside the full form) « OJav. makārāja: Skt. maharaja- HERI. The usual 
form for ‘fast, fasting’ in Modern-Javanese is pasa, the more original puwasa it 
still found in regional use (Skt. wpavasa. Sata). Jav. prusd and, now obsolete, 
prosa is a base for ‘using violence’; the more original parusa, parosa were formerly 
also used «Ski, parusa- WW ‘harsh, rough’; lit. Jav. markata beside marakata i 
identical with Skt. marakata- AIFA ‘emerald’; Jav. prawasa (lit.) ‘overpowering 


n c : 
Gee) maltreated’ « Skt. paravasa- WIAT ‘subdued’; lit. pérjaya ‘defeated, dead! € 


ER MM ‘defeat’. In OJav. texts the Asvins (elsewhere Aiwino < Skt. 
; T!) are sometimes called Asno; this may be regarded a8% caso 0 
syncope; besides, we even find Maino, probably because of tho identical Or simular 
tion (M) 4 the Jav. prefixes md- and d-. As these forms admitted of a pronunolé 
ion UZjdséno, a fourth form Séno quoted by Van der Tuuk, might be understand 


able."® Of cour, A Dni H b 
the author of S there are also questionable cases. Is Jahni, which is ugad bY 


Jav. Ram, 1 q $ opa 
form or a new formation? 6, 31 instead of Jahnawi (Skt. Wea), a 8yno P 


An incorrect ef ji^ 
ymolo €. aay? to W 
Bkt, Ilzsrav- wena "Aitina ep. ot tho Tag, lalawa spider Cg) 


& saliva, spider’: laba-laba (Mal.), lawa-lawa (Ja 


ja A 


In Mal. nyata ‘mani 
settled, fixed, sure, est 


More Sporadic Changes, Pāli ñata- ‘known’? 


Tn a com i 
parativel 
Y large number cases more or less is 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


olated, part 


SA 

Digitized by Arya Samar Fšūnditidāēsernat and eGangotri 
inissrutho T e 2 
salar and gometime: rather radical, but Uncommon, op 59 
jj vo % collection taken from Old- and Middle] » Changeg Occur, 
beside) pralaya : Skt. pralaya- TSF ‘dissolution daka Su 
ay. tralaya ‘death’. A similar case is, in all es 3 WE repeat 

-.h points to a base trajaya besid ee the r 
which pc g i ae amrajaya ‘to defeat kil! - 
viotory. It is worth mentioning that trasasat, trēsatsg, a 
given side by side with prasasat"? ‘as if, ag good ag? ri 

, 8 a y: 

‘to devour, however, ċomes from Skt. naramamsa- he Midale 

A small, but very interesting group of Old- 
seems to have, an initial instead of sa in Sans 
ed 88 corresponding to them. The form upata 2 

‘oath, curse’ (Skt. § "m in Mod. Jav. litera- 
ture, means oath, curs kt. sapatha- IQA ja), A class of ti Tapio 
the ancient history and state of affairs in the island of Bali (i ae lus 
blishment of a Javanese colony and of new kingdoms) is NS Es EE 
name which has not yet been satisfactorily explained!t : Twonh a a = 
it from Skt. sāsana- TIAA ‘charter, royal edict i ur punc 

: Ea A ; any written book, scripture, teach- 
ing. Does the OJav. ujna command' represent the freguent OJav sajaa (Skt. 
YS [UNS 3 " NNI C) sc D RU. 
ājīā "m ‘order, command, Permission ) by (your) order, with (your) permission’? 
Is this initial w a prothetic vowel arisen after the words had 
aphaeresis? Inversely, the ‘vital power or breath’ Skt. udāna- IFT is also called 
sadana in Bali. : 
In à limited number of regional Javanese words an initial g is found instead 
of an original labial: reg. kr. grama "fire —brama < Skt. Brahma stall ‘name of a 
god’; génjara ‘committing to prison’ <Skt. pafijara- Ww ‘cage’. Besides, lit. 
givaikara=diwaikara ‘sun’ <Skt. divakara- fara id” 

- In the Wirātaparwa (p.317) upaküra is used to express the idea of ‘insult, 
offence’, which in Sanskrit and in other OJay. passages is signified by apakāra- 
ATER; the form may, of course, be due to the error of an ancient copyist or of 
the author himself, but the word upakūra (Skt. upakāra- TSR) ‘assistance, bene- 
fit, preparation’ etc. is often used in the same and related texte, ae 

Incidental loss of a single consonant is found in lit. Jav. wsara dew = 
tusara< Skt. tusāra- JT 'id”; coll. Jav. irama ‘time (in music) beside wirama < 
Skt, virama- XUA ‘pause’; the reg. Jav. imba-imba or emba-emba GARE ad A 
back to Skt. bimba- fata ‘reflected form, image’; as the same word T E 
ae Or disc-shaped object the kr. i. imba ‘eyebrow can be regarded as ety 
cally identical 

es e ‘ont zamla < Skt. amla- 

An initial coneonant is added in lit. Jav. kamla sour =am 

a ja, du 
(LU me io light” which no doubt 

Instead of the lit. Jav. wakya manifest, co a find reg. volta "spoken 
p Presenta Skt. vakya- ata ‘saying, declaration T M xs ‘utterance’ < Skt. vacas 
realy » Which may have resulted from a blend with w 
83: ‘Word(s)’. 


. We now proceed to give a collection 


ers 


ated changes of 
? Sit. Sapatha- 


of more or less isol 


f curse : 
Outward form in other IN. languages. The word for ere sipusta Ga calamity 
TA lies in all probability at the root of the KBs: PIPA sakas nis vow In 


ho v! aan 
Or ourse brough < a person wW rona THA tid... 
t spirits on mă- 
ght by the gods or 8p resents Skt. pees ‘preathing out, 


3 
9 sama language the word pustima ‘west Ro: Vāsa» sse 
al. wusuwasa ‘breath’ represents Skt 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


been gubject to 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


260 Digiti oundation Chennai and eGangotri 


` endency to sound-repetition plays a part); wogiya or 
NM M «Skt. alā RT ‘fit, proper; lugraha or lugra takā 
ton! ala- g iavout. 
gion ša E M baisi 'rice-pipo or Malay flageolet” which must " 
regarded as ‘an Indian loan (of. Skt. vami? A fate, ge the Malay idiom of 
Djakarta and Toba-Batak (from Malay) have Vee he co-existence of the 
word sulin ‘fifo, flageolet’ may have occasioned this change in the form of the 
Es poetical usage sabla occurred side by side with sabda ‘word’ <Skt, 
$ - sz id.. 
sabda S the word purahita ‘priest’ (< Skt. purohita- gitfza "house-priest ot 
a prince’) is commonly pronounced prawita. 

Sometimes an interchange of a voiceless stop with another consonant of 
the same class can be noted : Sund. samakta 'in order, ready” and reg. lit. Jay, 
samēkta ‘ready’ beside the lit. samapta ‘id.’ < Skt. samapta- «IR ‘complete’: lit, 
Sund. akma beside aima ‘soul, mind? <Skt. ama ARAI ‘soul’; Mal. rakna (ya'na) 
beside raina jewel, gem’ < Skt. ratna tA ‘jewel, pearl Tag. lipta ‘left, omitted’ 
< likta which also occurs < Skt. rikta- Rt ‘left, void etc.’ 

Many other euch incidental treatments are discussed in the course of this 
seotion. : 

Before leaving this subject we should once more remind ourselves that 
many Sanskrit words reached Indonesia by way of other, Aryan or Dravidian, 
languages. This travelling often caused the outward form of the loans concerned 
to change in a way different from the usual treatment of Sanskrit loan-words. 
Thus Mal. cuka ‘sour palm-wine, vinegar’ is Hindi cwk(a) 4% ‘sourness, acid’ 
(<Skt. cukra- Tā "vinegar'); akas, a by-form of akasa, or usually ankasa ‘atmo- 
sphere’ is no doubt the Hindi form akas H%1a or akas Alaa (Skt. akasa- WA) 
id”; kanji'rice-gruel, congee’ reminds us more of Hindi kamj: msi ‘a kind of 
sour gruel made by steeping rice’ than of the Skt. kaūjika «3t or rather of the 
Tam. kanji.* An unquestionably Prākrit word, which may perhaps be asoribed: 
to Ardhamagadbi'** is OJav. murawa ‘tambourine’ : tho Sanskrit form ia muraja- 
g, which, as far as I know, is foreign to Old.Javanose. For ‘bracelet’ an OJav. 
Da (Udyogaparwan) has tayura, by which, according to Van der Tuuk?" the 
Bkt. keyūra 4% is meant. As we, however, know that in Pāli apart from keyūrā 


ze Ld Mi and kayura FFT are used to denote an ornamental bracket or 
; n on the upper arm etc. and, further, that t.i i in MIA. 
instead of Skt. k- : AMāg. tindūsa "ball aay Relay 


: mere tirida * t with 
three crests’: Skt. kirita. fritz B eure wes, tirida a. dē 


thig i ; |: 4 be 
regarded as a borrowing from MIA. Suggestion must be rejected and the wor 


8 RAS i | bl somdan : OJav. palana ‘saddle’ can be explained {tom 
‘saddle’ (beside palyayana, vous S STS 88 against the Sanskrit palyara- TN, 
royal seals)’, algo ike Mes S eto.). Mal. mētērai ‘sealing, imprinting (esp. C 
is the Tam, muttiraj tb mentérai, though in origin Skt. mudra JAT ‘seal, stam? 
mainly for S curious form is tho Mal. dahaga, déhaga ‘thirst’.: it musty 
which meaning ‘thirst’ S rund apparently be connected with a Dravid. dagat 
daha- 'T& "burning, RE 88 desire, eagerness’, is regarded as a Skt. 109^" 
bypercorrectness, Sas. The Mal. dah. may be due to a tendenoy $ 
bhaya- WH eto. (seo above), We may comP® 


of, bahaya < Bkt, 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ogiya 
ermis. 


SAN 
L———--— Digitized y E A GIDONE Shy eGangotri 
Mal. cahari, cēhari : Skt. cūrī (see above) ang remem 
in Tamil etc. is slightly aspir 
the stops 1n zm Pirated. Mal 
Tam. cagula (sagala) ‘id.’ <Skt. sakala. s rae) 
Variation as to the Form of the Word, 

Apart from merely phonetic substitution i 
words belonging to a foreign tongue are introduced into a 
varios in degree on different Occasions and for different indi 
related to this u-— n development of tw 

me foreign element. It is by no means r 
< IRA EN by way of phonetic substitution, es e that after Speakers 
their own language, inereased familiari&y with the fo 
and more accurate version of the borrowed word. 
placed the Spanish f, which does not occur in native 
have succeeded in reproducing it; in other respects, 
main pronounced in a particular ‘Tagalog’ way. Thus, 
nounce fyesta) first was piyesta (which survives in the 
ofa festival’, even when it is pronounced by ‘modern’ speakers), but now if is 
fiyesta. It goes without saying that in revisions of this kind educated persons 
and schooling may exert influence: in Dutcha motor-car is called oto in the French, 
or auto in the Greek way (both forms being written auto), the latter form often 
by persons desirous of displaying some knowledge of Greek, In other cases, how- 
ever, literacy leads the speakers of the borrowing language to interpret the written 
form of a foreign word in terms of their own orthography : thus, e.g. the (not uni- 
versal) Dutch pronunciation sētē (after Engl. suttee) of the Skt. satz ad. 

As popular etymology and other tendencies to be discussed in other sections 
of this work largely contribute to the same effect, viz. the rise of doublets and 
triplets, it is no wonder that the Sanskrit elements in IN. languages have often, 
developed two or more versions. Not seldom one of the variants is a popular, 
adapted form, the other a more or less learned or predominantly written form : 
in Modern Javaneze arca image (<Skt. arca ardt worship, idol destined to be 
worshipped’) is the literary, réca the spoken form; bëja fortune, good luck or fo 
be fortune’s favourite’ is the common and colloquial form beside the Eo 
bëgja "good luck’; both represent a younger version of the OJav. PUn pī ja 
more ‘popular’ OJav. texts became bkūge: Skt. bhagya- Aus hu v 
the internal cluster has been given up. The M pérséiua ‘occasion, 
cecasion” has been adopted in Malay as pēris, pērtēāš © Kr E 
Once upon a time’. Clusters also come into play i EEG tiksna. dren), The 
tiksa and tikswa beside the original (OJav.) tiksza Pun common ng. duis and 
Sduivalonts of our ‘to possess’ in Mod. Javanese, an ie and drbya (ya e), 
the obsolete and regional dérbe or darbe are, like e De dr can also be found 
adapted formg of Skt. dravya- 39 ‘property which besi 


in ancient literature. é rter form have often 

Olipping and other methods of reducing Me ^ ‘unlawful action’, 
cooperated in producing variants. The Set agy oe to express such das on 
"85 Which has been borrowed by the Malayan peer has developed into 
Wrong inflicted by the strong on the weak Or hs which has, consequently, 
"yaya, niaya, nyaya and, in Penang Malay, even E NRE, The Skt. katham. 
"thing to do with Skt. naya- 44 ‘way of life, banay 


261 


articulation of 
e whole of’ ig the 


ber that the 
* Ségala ‘all, th 


reiga tongue leads to another 
Whereas Tagalog at first re- 


Words, by p, modern Speakers 


however, Spanish words fe. 
Sp. fiesta ‘celebration’ (pro- 
derivative &a-piyesta-han 'day 


ds to a sho 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


1 


- 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
262 $ 


L~ iret Arya Samaj Foundations "gyevand eRan9etüre these NE. 
api aafd ‘somehow, !h any Xt been shortened to ta à nd Other 

nE et, though’): it has also od imapi, which, by. 
meanings (even, V has developed into (antiquated and regional) Mog, Jay 
way of geam. d (often before & noun to emphasize, or to draw attention 
tanapi but, on e (kee) tinapi. The dictionaries very often fail in giving reliable 
to it) and even = Be geographical spread of definito forms, so that we are too 
RS ed to consider a seb of forms as variants in the same community 
fue ebay represents & group ot divergent er peo: The EO varna. 
ati ‘colour eto., for instance, survives in an unaltered form in Malay, in Penang 


—— 


Malay it has become rona OY orta; in other regions urno, wrono have arisen, Like 
- Ma 


other regional terms urna has been adopted by poets. How far exist ansa, gāisa, 
kansa and raisa ‘goose € Skt. hamsa- #a@ side by side with each other in the same 
ME F NN a sufficiency of examples may be found in the other sections of 
this book, it may not be out of place here to draw the attention to some more 
instances : Mal. hasta ‘cubit’ : sētā “ia? (<*(h)aséta)<Skt. hasta- Rta the fore-arm 
(also as a measure of length)’; sorga, soroga beside shurga ‘heaven’ < Skt. svarga- 
wail ‘id’; Mal. raksa ‘quicksilver’, sometimes also rasa<Skt. rasa- ta ‘id’; bēksa 
(in Pahang) beside béreksa, béraksa ‘the cassia tree <Skt. vrksa- TU ‘tree’; Gērda 
beside Géroda< Skt. Garuda- M&S "Vigņu's bird’; kurnia beside karunia ‘favour, 
boanty < Skt. kürunya- SU ‘compassion’; rusia beside rahasia ‘secret’< Skt. 
rahasya- XEXW id”; réncana beside the less common récana (and in Jav. Malay 
rancana) ‘narrative < Skt. racana- Ya ‘preparing, arranging’; in Javanese irama 
(reg.) beside wirama ‘time (in music)’ < Skt. virama- FAUR ‘pause’; Jav. soca (coll.) 
and sotya, Bal. soca and sotiya jewel, diamond’ : Skt. sauca- ata ‘purity’; in Bal. 
asmara and sémara ‘love’ <Skt. smara- TA ‘id.’; in Sundanese iyatna beside yatna 
‘careful, cautious’ < Skt. yatna: aa ‘effort, endeavour’; in Karo-Batak the more 
colloquial ata beside kata ‘word, tidings’: Skt. katha ‘talk’; oga boside iyoga ‘yoke 
of the plough’ (Skt. yoga- atm or (and) yuga- GM ‘yoke’); butara beside utara ‘north’: 
Skt. uttara- Sw 'id.. 

We do, however, well to remember that part of these instances are, Or MAY 
be, due to an original difference in form: thus the Bal. (h)orta ‘news, tidings 


been made to such instances as 


who possesses supranormal k 
teacher’; 


comparab » Phonetical changes: from Skt. mahurddhika- WR dS Lija 
Parable way minii ‘official the Sumatran (and manti the Minangkaba? 


mēntēri 125 FAN "high official’; the general Malay form A 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Aryag ager Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


T IN INDONESIA 


263 


NOTES 


| H. Kern, in the preface to his edition ' 
of the OJav. Ramayana ( The Hague | 
1900), p-I. Compare also J. G. H. Gun- | 
ning, (The OJav.) Bhārata-yuddha (The | 
Hagae 1903), p.TI. For other particulars | 
geo my editions of the OJav. Brahmanda- | 
purana (Bandung 1932), p.28ff.; (the 
OJav.) Agastyaparwa (The Hague 1933- 
1936), p.4f.; the OJav. Bhīgmaparva | 
(Bandung 1936) p.3f. 

3 Geo chapter II, section T. 

3 Gee Pischel, Grammatik der Prakrit- 
Sprachen (Strassburg 1900), $ 225. 

4 See Pischel, § 243. 

5 See Pischel, § 222. 

6 In Sanskrit ranaaga- TF means 'im. | 
plement of war, sword’. 

7 Yet, there are exceptions, which might 
be collected. The MSS. of the Tantu 
Panggēlaran» for instance, consistently 
write Makāmeru (Skt. Mahameru- AZAT) 
and bhatari (not in Pet. Dict. and MW. 
ef. bhatiarika zi ‘noble lady or 
‘tutelary deity’ and bhattara- NE noble 
lord'). In spelling foreign words and 
proper names copyists show a predilec- 
tion for notations used to indicate long 
vowels; thus, we find karanā intead of 
karana (Skt. karana- #0) ‘cause, ground, 
motive’. Other letters (¢, d, th for in- 
stance) are used in loan-words in season 
and out of season; thus prasadda in- 
stead of the Skt. prūsāda MAIZ ‘temple’: 
amritha instead of the Skt. amria- IZT | 
the draught of immortality’. In a simi- | 
lar way the aspirate mutes, being super- | 
fluous in spelling native speech-sounds, | 
Were apparently considered elegant and | 
fit to appear in Sanskrit words : loka- , 
Phala instead of lokapāla- Bteues world- 
Proteotor' Many habits and inconsis- 
tencies no doubt originate in the manu- 
Seripts of the authors themselves, hen 
Wavered between agoptbepeRny ia sne 


ļ 
| 
| 
| 


| Ventional and the 


Was, probably, for the greater Bart con- 


reality of daily par. 
lance on the One side, and, on the Sm 


between Uncertainty and a desire of 


showing off their learning. For other 


particulars see H. Kern ( Introductory 
remarks to hia edition of the) Kufjara- 
karna, VG., X, p.4ff.; Th. G. Th, Pigeaud, 
De Tantu Panggélaran (The Hague 1924) 
p.8ff.; J. L. Swellengrebel, Korawāgra- 


ma, ( Santpoort-Netherlands, 1936 ), 
p.42ff. 


| * For the meaning of thia word se the 
: next chapter. 


| 9 In Javanese agni has developed into 


géni (the a dropped after the word had 
become the trisyllabic agni). By a part- 
ly parallel development the same Skt. 
word became akkini in Tamil. 

10 Other instances are Mal. séloka ‘ran- 
dom rhyme; satirical saying, esp. in 
verse: Skt. sloka- ael ‘strophe; re- 
port’; sastëra ‘Hindu sacred books; 
books of divination, astrological tables” < 
Skt. sdstra- Ue ‘a scientific or canoni- 
cal work’; sérigala jackal’ « Skt. srgala- 
«nam ‘id’; méséra beside mésra per- 
meation (eg. of salt in water)’ <Skt. 
mitra. fR9 ‘mised, blended; jālēma< 
jélma “nearnation’ «gt. janma SFR 
“birth etc); jéniéra wheel, esp: rt 
ing-wheel’ «Bk*. yanira- aA instrumen ; 
machine’ (not Skt. chaira i.e. 
ga as Wilkinson, MED. I, x Eyes 
of. also such forma as Borneo Ma. ji à 
RO teria “a member of the warrio: 
in. "e olas! <Skt. ksatriya- Sf? 
* Ps ‘shelter from sun OF E 
e brella, à large state-umbrella 
a gei parasol (as an em- 
. cēikērama beside cén- 
disseminated, or 
a romance etc.) < 
‘going about’ and 


apparatus, 


shed (of news 
grt. caùkrama- i 


tya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


364 


3 
caiikramā FATI ‘the going about, jāja 
whereas the Sund. cankrama has a 
original meaning : ‘to make a dy Ee 
picnic’; Mal. cēritēra narrative PES 
caritra- ARA ‘acts, adventures, oxploits B 
cērēna ‘assimilated, digested (of food) 
(algo used of & cancer or rodent ulcer 
eating into the body) <Skt. 71774- sitet 
‘digested’; Sund. suparaba very splen- 
did'<Skt. suprabha- ZIA id; parabu 
beside prabu and pērbu ‘a title of & great 
ruler <Skt. prabhu: 93 "lord, ruler’; 
parapti ‘ready < Skt. prāpli- mà ‘the 
reaching, attaining, obtainment, suc- 
cessful termination’; cf. also Skt. prüpta- 
ma ‘one who has attained, accomplieh- 
ed etc; sowara beside swara “voice, 
sound” «Sk. svara- tat "id^; Jav. (lit.) 
saraya=sraya ‘aid’ <Skt. asraya MAT 
Sa2; Bal, suweca beside sweca favour, 
affection, attachment’ < Skt. sveccha Rael 
“free wil, own.wish; gēneya OJav. 
agneya ‘south east(ern) <Skt. agneya- 
aaa ‘belonging to Agni, south-eastern’. 
Attention may be drawn to the now 
. obsolete Mal. bérida ‘old, aged’<Skt. 
"vrddha- FE ‘id’, and béraksa, biraksa 
‘the bérinin or warinin-tree, Ficus ben- 
jamina < Skt. vrksa- JT ‘tree’. 
" See Van der Tuuk, Tobasche Spraak- 
kunst (Amsterdam 1864), p. 6 ($7, n.6) 
who points out that -tra- and -ila- do not 
exist in Toba-Batak, -tora- and -tora- being 
the sound-groups actually occurring. 
12 A collection of instances abreast of 
modern philological and linguistic re- 
search is needed. 
13 , 

M a IRL N 
à 9 ge of the Kharosthi 
ocuments from Chinese Turk at 
(Cambridge 1937), $ 10; G v0 estan 
Historical Grammar of Tes Sēdi 
(Poona 1948), p. 65f.; 8. K, Chatterji, 


The origin and development ofthe Ben 
gali language (Calcutta Univ P à 
1926), T, p 378ft. Er: 


" Bee also K. Wu 
d lf, 
Kamahāyānan 


Apabhramša, 


Sang h 
i yang 
mantrānaya ( Danish 


me : NESIA 
Digitized by MRSS; Fair? Chennai and eGangotri 


Academy, Hist.-fil. 21, 4, Co 
1935), p-38ff. ps 
'5 Q. A. Grierson, Spontaneous Nag 

lization in the Indo-Aryan Tane ero, 
JRAS. 1922, p.384. 
16 See also W. Geiger, Pali, Strassburg 

1916, p. 43. j 
17 R. L. Turner, Gujerati Phonology 
JRAS. 1921, p. 344. | 


18 For particulars and further refor. 


ences see my paper on the subject 
(‘Inwendige nasaal- en liquida-verbindin. 
gen...) in BKI., CI (1942), p.141-206. . 
19 Of. also the remarks made by $. K, 
Chatterji, o.c , I, p.368ff., who points out 
that there was an old tendency in Indo. 
Aryan towards articulating both through 
the mouth and the nose, and thus bring- 
ing in a nasalization. 

20 See the paragraph on aphaeresis. 

21 H, Kern, VG. X, p.284. 

22 Vander Tuuk, KBW. IV, 357 suggest. 
ed :«kady antaka ‘like dead’, which is 
not plausible. R 

23 At first sight the first meaning seems 
to be preferable. Juynboll's suggestion 
(Wāb. p.203) ‘the story of a former-birth 
of the Buddha’ cannot be approved. 

24 Note that in the Prākrit of the 
Kharosthi documents final -ya becomes 
-i:muli ‘price’. The interesting Mal. 
bērnioga (Skt. vanijya- ISA “trade, 
vanija- aia ‘merchant’) is dicouseed 
in another section of this book. More 
examples may be found in my paper on 
the subject referred to in note 18, P 
167ff. 

25 The Mal. benten ‘breastwork, low pare- 
pet? has erroneously been conneoted 
with Skt. bhitti- fafa ‘wall’. 

** Other instances of this spontaneous 
nasalization are Mal. béranta in bērantā 
yudu the Bharata war <Skt. bhāralā- 
ma ‘belonging to the Bharatas’'; cintala 
a definite bird, Cuculus melanoleucti 
believed to live on raindrops’ and gom 


à 6 
times confounded with céntayt F 
? ; 


mat ala 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat sna praka Bt. cataka- NAB ‘ia’ gm 


qperdemnan < Skt. gopüla- tus m 

znkara and even bénkara ‘a crawfish’: 
at Skt. makara- WX ‘a kind of sea- 
Mi ros mankota ‘crown’: cf. Skt. 
ATE mukuta- "Z2, qe tua aaa 
diadem’; O apada beside majapada, 
mayapada ‘abode of mortals, the earth’ 
zgkt. OJav. madhyapada- AAI (not 
given in the Skt. dictionaries) id^; Mēn- 
gada < Skt- Magadha- ATA ‘name of a 
country in ancient India’; mënta ‘mad, 
is kuga (of & warrior), rutting (ot 


‘qn olephant), beside mta ‘id.’ < Skt, 


matia- WA 'id.; nēntiasā»  nanliasa, 
beside néttasa (in sé-, sa-néntiasa) always” 
zgkt. nityasah fw: ‘constantly’; 


réncana beside rēcana ‘narration, and 
(in vernacular schools) ‘dictation’ <Skt. 
racană TATI ‘arrangement, literary com- 
position’; cémpala ‘to show temper, to 
wrangle < OJav. capala ‘fickle, incon- 
stant, mischievous, imprudent’ < Skt. 


tp . . 
capala- ATS fickle, wanton, inconsi- | 


dorate, ill-mannered’; abaniara : Skt. 
avatdra- AAAI ‘divine incarnation’; sém- 
burna; samburna ‘gold-coloured’ <Skt. 
suvarna- GAN ‘gold, golden’; Sémbadra 
name of a nymph <$kt. Subhadra JASI; 
umpama 
instance’) < Skt. upama STAI ‘resem- 
blance; comparison, image (in stylistics)’. 
Some more Javanose instances: liñsa 
- ‘nit? (compensatory nasalizetion) < Skt. 
liksa few ‘id.’ (in Tag. lisa the cluster 
Was reduced to a single consonant); 
reg. kr. minsa = misa ‘buffalo’ < Skt. 
mahisa- mfg jā”; lit. ancala 'moun- 
tain’ < Skt. acala- US 'id.”; lit. bantala, 
béntala, buntala (see above); lit. diwañ- 
kora» ‘sun’< Skt. divakara- ids 
"Wnlaraga a name given to Arjuna 88 42 
asoetic< Skt. vitardga- NAUT ‘free from 
Passions’; from the Skt. asraya- WAT 
depending on, refuge a regional deri- 
Vative minansraya ‘summoned to some 
body's aid’ was formed; lit. nimpuna 
able, adroit’ < Skt. nipuna "id '; from Skt. 
rasa ‘taste, feeling! rumansa ‘be aware 


‘instance’ ( wmpama-nya ‘for | 


| 
i 
į 


| sippi 


Digitized by Arya SANEA uRbrnoesad eGangotri 


265 
of, Perceive’ wag 
n 


` derived; 
orthern)' < Skt. uttara. IN 


kr. séngata beside |; 
C ide lit. and t 
hospitable reception’ < aM moe 


lit. untara 
te 
id^ reg. 


svūgaia- 
ta< Skt. 
glorions’ 
charming’; 
tūrāgana- 


hon Sinta besida Si 
> lit. sumbaga ‘prai 
<Skt. subha, Ro 
lit m gaa lucky, 
puts star(s)’ < Skt, 
Omm è Multitudo of att and in 
card) eae keel la (tor the 
< Skt. Bie ae M RU 
see above); the 
proper name Bagadénia<Skt. Bhaga- 
o: Augu. Sund. koncara ‘renown. 
ed gomos from the OJav. koccūra (the 
native prefix ka- and uccāra=uccūraņa-, 
cf. Skt, uccdrana- STANU ‘pronunciation, 
enunciation’. Compare also Sund. cun- 
damanik ‘name of a native dagger’<Skt. 
cudamani- YETATA jewel worn on the top 
of the head”. In connection with the, 
Tag. form sunhi which beside sugh? 
means ‘ascertaining, making sure of, 
Kern (VG. X, p.276) made the remark 
that the owed its origin to a tendency 
to reproduce the double consonant of 
the Skt. prototype suddhi- Tā .“clear- 
ness, certainty which is wanting in 
Tagalog. There no doubt exists a con- 
nection between double consonants end 
internal nasalization in cases of this 
description, but the above examples 
show that the latter phenomenon also 


occurs after short syllables and before 


single consonants. 
22 to Javanese etc. consonants are not 


‘doubled’ in the Sanskrit way- For m 
difficult questions connected ts d 
dvirbbava 560 J. Lindes s; 
sche Grammatik I, ( CoE mn 
110f. When authors speak o a 

ts’ they often mean long; 
consonan à 


eo M. Grammont, 
thened consonante « (Paris 1933) p.58tf. 
- Mod. Jav. lit 


" a wash! <Stt. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


9266 


amaj Foundatipn Che 


IL p.92)< Kosika ie. Ski. Kausika- 
Afra, By the side of the lit. and cut 
» » ‘ahga ‘the official 
quated bujanga, OEE 

court man of letters’ Modern JOR 
has bērjaiga ‘the village diviner : Skt. 
bhujanga- YAR may be at the root of 
both of them (see the next chapter). in 
Perak Malay korsa occurs beside ankusa 
or ankus ‘mahout’s goad’ : cf. Skt. anku- 
sa~ “a2, seo also K. Wulff, Acta 
Orientalia IV, p.288. 

25 Attention may be drawn to the faot 
that an internal] before consonant is 
not rarein native vocables of this lan- 
guage : sēlkut ‘setting on fire’. 

39 See Kern, VG.X, 6; E.M. Uhlenbeck, 
De structuur van het Javaanse morphe- 
em (Bandung 1949), p.169. 

3! Now and then &he 'insertion' of & 
consonant is only orthographical : Mal. 
mahkota ‘crown’ beside makota, mahakota 
() and Min. mankota : cf. Skt. makuta- 
Ez, mukuļa= FZ ‘crest, diadem’. 

?* The word is of Dravidian origin. 

33 More particulars may be found BKI, 
CI,p.197. 

14 See the same paper, p.198. 

25 I refer to G.V. Tagare, o.c., p.100f. 

>< See also my paper ‘Dissimilation de 
mots entiers", which will appear in the 
Acta Orientalia. A number of Indo. 
Aryan instances is given by J. Bloch, La 
formation de la langue marathe (Thesis 
s 14), p.171 (‘superposition sylla- 
27 On metathesis in gen 

mont, in osa pe Cram, 
(Gottingen 1993), p.72 
de phonétique, (Paris 
5° E.H. Sturtevant, 
Linguistic Science? 


Ap Wackernagel, 
ff.; the same, Trait 
1933), p.269ff. 

Àn Introduction bo 
(New Haven 1948), 


p.91. 
*? Other instances ar i 
ART 9: lit. Jav. ki 
‘delighting in Sexual pleasures’ cija 
e 


lit. krida ‘iq ' «gkt krī 
id. - krida sei * 
amusement’; lit. kurda a 


beside lit, kroda 
may ‘anger’, 


“son, MED.II, p.290 who adds: < 


find rubiya | 


animal (in cont 


beings’. 
41 Some lexicographers helq the M 

pura? ‘pretence, shamming to b al. 
inverted form of rupa “semblance 4 P 
look'«Skt. rüpa- T "form, es 


MESES Outw 
appearance' (Klinkert, s.v. pura; Wii. 


Said to 
be back-slang for rupa’). As sound trans 


position is well-known in IN. slang this 
explanation is not absurd, but Unoer. 
tain, because Javanese has pura-pura a 
another sense (‘disdaining’). 

42 I refer to R. Brandstetter, An Intro. 
duction to Indonesian Linguistics, trang. 
lated by C.O. Blagden, (London 1916), 
Essay IV, §160ff. : 

43 This point has been touched upon by 
H. Kern, VG.VIII, p.187f. 

44 Juynboll, Wdb. p.1 mentions aum for 
Skt. om, but this is rather aim (a-um) 
the constituent sounds of the holy syl. 
lable being known; see KBW. I, p.15. 
45 Pischel, GPS., p.70f. 

46 Compare the interchange of e andi 
in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit (Edgerton, 
JAOS. LXVI, p.199ff. $28, 59, 67). See e.g. 
also M.A. Mehendale, Historical Gram- 
mar of Inscriptional Prakrits, (Poona 
1948), § 375. 

‘7 See Kern, VG.X, p.261 and nl We 
do well to remember that in Tagalog 
and other IN. languages e and i are, 
from the phonological point of view, 
identical. 

“ Of. KBW. II, p. 426. 

*” The poet of the Ram. could have 
used the latter form instead of -€- it he 
was in want of a long syllable. 

5a Other Jav. instances are:li& endré- 
jala ‘artifice’ <Skt. indrajala- TATS, 
‘magic, delusion’; lit. dewaikara 8” 
< Skt. divakara- Fravet "ib; and MP 
the kr. estri ‘woman’ < istri (Skt. st? 
which is discussed further on); %": oe 
‘nice’ represents an older a-icohó *rejole" 
ing, with pleasure’ (Jav. prefix 89 


got. | 
radistinotion to hu 
Man 


iccha- 3751 ‘desire’). Compare also 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya SameitRendetior tenner” eGangotri * 


; 967 
‘ 2? < Skt. . vari s 
lit. wareh water Skt. OJav. vari a | the minority and, ag 
m Ks | zed by anii 1 ; ^ rule, characteri- 
y Tho meaning death’ is given by Indian | «s gr, Ul other peculiarities, 
: aa * 3, 0.¢., p.194. 
icographers. — m | saan accordance wi : 
Aired by Poerbatjaraka, BKI. | ons "seven fir co Wit tho Muslim opini- 


o:i maments” or ‘pétala of t 
dM (1986). | Sky", "each of which is the residence o 


eh must not be regarded as an | 

= Sigue of OJav. sūksma (Skt. sūk- mes P Hle to exist; the first 
S :q) which can express a similar | (Enoch! virgin silver, the second 
sma- QEA ^ noch's) cf gold ete. In à similar wa 
meaning. (KBW. IV, 552). | the existence of seven strata (pētala) 4 
s4 Notin Pet. Dict. and MW. the earth is taken for granted Tam 
ss Pisohel, GPS., p.100, $195. should not be-confused at = at 
se For this term see R. Jacobson, Ob. | *” Hor instance: Mal. Jay. pércaya trust 
gervations sur le classement phonolo- | belief <$kt. pratyaya. sera Sa: Mal 
gique des consonnes, In Proceedings of | pērdana ‘first, foremost? < Skt, pradhana- 
the third International Congress of Pho- | 447 ‘main, chief’; pērmana “quantity? 
netic Sciences, p.348. <Skt. prama- TAU ‘measure, extent’; 
s? However, the Mal. sankéla “hand- | pérwara suite of a queen, her followers 
cuffs, fetters corresponds to Pkt. saù- | orattendants, and esp. her ladies-in-wait- 
khala ag 81, siùkhala [agis sankalo US | ing and maids of honour’<Skt. pravara- 
eto. ‘chain’ (Skt. srūkhala- WEE Sd’). Wav ‘principal, chief, distinguished’; për- 
ss For some particulars I refer to J. | wira ‘hero, warrior; courageous <Skt. 
Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik, I, pravira- TAN ‘id’; Sund. pérlaya "uni- 
(Göttingen 1896), p.3f.; J. Bloch, L’Indo- | versal destruction, general annihilation 
aryen. du Voda aux temps modernes, (in consequence of a plague or calamity) 
(Paris 1934), p.31f. and reg. Jav. pērloja epidemic’ « Skt, 
59 Gf. e.g, OJav. wčiu ‘to go out’, wan | pralaya- ASA destruction ( esp. of the : 
‘night’; pēga ‘hard pressed ete.. universe); péryoga beside prova be- 
55 Cf. E.M. Uhlenbeck, De structuur | coming, decent, proper, dignified, well- 
van het Javaansch Morpheem, p.169f. made : Skt. prayoga- slt use, practice, 


ice; pe beside priyaina "pru- 
“ Yan Ronkel, TBG. XLV (1902), p.111t. | devices Peruain’ 


€ 
š s A 
i t, careful’ <$kt. prayatna- TAT e 
s Cf. also Kuiper, Proto-Munda words e instr. and abl. ‘carefully’; përcaya 
in Sanskrit, p.161. | 


v 4 le 
M i m c Š above); Jav. pérmana to be ab 
* This seems at least to be the case in M Memo pes 
odern Javanese; see Uhlenbeck, o.c. 0 w qam 


P169. This author, who does not reckon E TS yuma ‘ether world, 
with the real pronunciation of Indian hell, which already ocours in ancient 
4, loses sight of the fact that something Me ot be dissociated from the 
like wérnd and not warna was, in the RS S qaa which not only means 
; j De kt. yamana- i 
Archipelago, the original pronunciation. geo but also ag is m i 
ence na- an and deceasi : 

on oe DILST of the ruler of the €80 ts diction- 
orma<Skt. dharma- TĀ in Toba-Batak tin the 8 


i ie, however PC 465) 
m this language original 270). For i Van det Tuuk (KBW. RUE 4 
Other particulars see Chatterji, Bengali Lad to be a2 une e 
AnBuüago, I, p.243; 3531. Mehendale, Yamanilaya * a he E, 
istorioa1 Grammar of Insoriptional The likewise lit. Jav. yt We. ( it) ign 
ea rits, (Poona 1948), p.269. prosperity’ stands fo Y 


Tisyllables are, Heaeer, SatuetirdBShastri Collection. — MS 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


268 Diglized by Arya-Samej Fourrdatton Chennai and eGangotri 


which is the Skt. gauvana- qaa ‘youth, 
youthfulness’ (OJav. yowana). 4 di 
5» The meaning of this word is dis- 
ussed elsewhere. 
= See e.g. Geiger, Pali, p-50, 895. 
71 Le.confined to archaisms, loan-words, 
expressivo and similar words etc. See 
Uhlenbeck, o.c., p.88; 161; 173. 
72 Tam under the impreesion that the 
above-mentioned OJav. words gyat and 
gya were of the expressive or emotive 
type, but in losing this charactor be- 
came adapted to ‘normal’ speech-forme. 
73 However, not all instances make 
their first appearance in the same texts. 
A thorough investigation into the in- 
teresting point of the spread of this 
change is seriously hampored by our 
ignorance of many chronological details. 
73® For the final? tee section 3 of this 
chapter. However, the Malay form is 
surga, and Cam has also swrgū and 
suraga or suraga. 
"4 See Geiger, o.c., p.50,8 25; Burrow, 
Language Kharosthi Doc., $ 7. 
75 Eg, dol as against Mal. jual ‘to sell’; 
` woh : Mal. buah ‘fruit’. 
75 But the relative frequency at a 
former period cannot exactly be known 
from the data available, 
77 Compare the similar treatment in the 
Kharorthi documents. 
?* Other instances are: Jav, Mal. (obs.) 
buwana ‘world’ (in Mod. Jav. “continent 
part of the world’); Dula ‘ogre evil 
spirit’ (Skt. bkūta- ga ‘being, donis - 
Jav. boga ‘food’, Sund. boga ‘to enjoy, 
possess, have’<Skt. bhoga- uta m ķi 
ment, possession’; Jav, dērma eR 
bution to a philanthropio foundatio 
Y n 
etc., Mal. dérma ‘charitable gifts, b 
volence' <Skt. dharma. añ EAA 
order and customs, merit eto”; Mal. 


d li 4 3 -ye 
das dust’ < Skt. dhūli- We, dhūl Net 


$ See also H. Kern, VG. VIII 
For the sake of brevity I 
Ohatterji, Bengali Language p 


» p.188f. 
refer to 
441ff. 


9! Kern, VG. X, p.276. 
82 Seo also further on, For Mal, 5; 
hari etc. see also Kern, VG: X, vas 
* H. O. Klinkert, Nieuw wi 
Nederlandsch Woordenboek? 
1916) p. 203 regards Mal. bo 
unintelligent’ as a loan from 
supposing  abodha- aata 
stupid? to be its origin. 


54 Attention may also be drawn to Mal, 
gahara, géhara ‘of royal birth on both 
sides’ which may be connected with the 
Or. ghara dx, Hindi ghar X etc. ‘house, 
home, native place’; and to Mal. tahana 
‘state, dignity’ (bér-tahana is a courtly 
equivalent of duduk ‘to sit’ applied to 
persons of high rank)< Pkt. thana- 3H, 
ef. Skt. sihana- tata which can also mean 
"rank, office, dignity’. 

25 The reader may be referred to 0. 
Jespersen, Lehrbuch der Phonetik (Leip- 
zig-Berlin 1913), p.103 and to M. Gram 
mont, Traité de phonétique (Paris 1933), 
p-108. 

"6 See also the facts mentioned by 
Wackernagel, Altindische Grammatik 
I,p.115. F 

*7 Van der Tuuk, Bataksch-Nedordult- 
sch Woordenboek (Amsterdam 1861), 
p.288. 

sa See also above. 

* Ci. KBW. IV, p.823. , 
s The above instances are 2 : 
harmony with the Tamil rules of pro 
nunciation, 

"See also T. Burrow, BOAS. n 
(1948), p.376. 

%2 Bee already Lafeber, Vere: Klan 
van het Niasisch, p.100f., 224 
Kuiper, Der Stimmtonverlust 1 
dischen Anlaut, BSOS. rz (1 


klee? 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Ssaaisionpgatign SORA and eGangotri 
IA 1 


p.9911f- 
93 Pischel, GPS. p.175f.; Mehendale, o.c. 


p.274- 
34 T refer to J. Wackernagel, Altindische 
Grammatik T, (Gottingen 1896), p.183. 
ss T. Burrow, The language of the Kha- 
rogthi documents...(Cambridge 1937) 
p.8. 

s6 Goo Pischel, Grammatik, p.144. 

97 We also find Jav. Mal. bomantara ‘sky, 
atmosphere’; OJav. byomantara .end 
dyumantara. In these words the Skt. 
vyoman- AT, and antara- ara (ef. 
Skt. dvpantara- ENA, vanūniara- 
qatzat etc.) have combined: see my 
remarks in BKI. XOVII, p.496. 

98 Cf, Pischel, GPS., p.219ff.; Mehen- 
dale, p.275 ($470); Chatterji, Bengali 
Language I, p.469ff. The form churi gt 
= ksurī gū appears, it is true, in later 
Sanskrit texts and lexicographical works. 
The form churika gf ‘knife’, (cf. Mal. 
cériga, curiga “a broad-bladed short 
sword’, which we already mentioned 
elsewhere) is also Sanskrit. 

99 Chapter I, section 1. 

10 The curious sais? ‘to doubt, suspect, 
to halt between two opinions’ in collo- 
quial Malay (also ké-sansi-an ‘objection, 
suspicion’) must, to all appearance, be 
connected with this word. According 
to Wilkinson, MED. II, p.384, it is 
Jakarta Malay. If this happens to be 
correct it can perhaps be connected 
with Bal. saūsan (as a base) ‘shelving, 
shunting'—thero are many Balinisms 
„in the idiom ofthe capital, due to immi- 
gration —, which has the same meaning 
a8 Bal. sayan ‘more and more, the longer 
the...” Both words may be regarded a8 
shortened forms of saisaya which in Old 
Javanese meant ‘anxiety, care, concern, 
suspicion, fear, hesitation’ and also ‘the 
longer the...’; tho latter meaning, then, 
Probably, sprung from the idea of put» 
ting oft indefinitely’. The origin is Skt. 
Samsaya- War 'irrosolution, hesitation - 

, 


101 " y = 
Skt. sapatha- SS PSP Sja V rastri WA 


' 969 
Mod. J AV. supata, bu 


Skt. viveka- fais * 


weka ‘paying heed to? 


and Suma. 


102 

Bis IIl, p.574 and I, p.519. 
„Dore instances: lit. Jav, cula= 

acala ‘mountain’ «gkt, acala. Ws ‘id? 

obs. kr. wasta ‘name’ < Skt. — 

situation, position’ (OJay. awastha ‘ap- 


" ; 
p R, state’) which are also Sanskrit 
meanings, 


103 Putrupasaji. 

™ KBW. IV, p.210. 

'^* B.J.O. Schrieke, Het Boek van Bons- 
ng (Thesis Leyden 1916), p.146. 

"5 The prefix pra- will be discussed in 
another section. 

197 This word is not in the dictionaries. 
It is, as far as I know, not OJay. either. 
108 Of. KBW. I, p.519. 

109 See for other instances BKI. 
LXXXVIII (1931), p.463. 

"0 Compare also lit. Jay. aksama 'par-, 
don’ < Skt. ksama Wal ‘forbearance’, 
whereas Skt. aksama- HA means unable 
to endure. 

1n KBW. I, p.219ff. 

112 The reader may be referred to M. 


Leumann, in Stolz-Schmalz, Lateini- 


| gehe Grammatik", (München 1998), p.98; 


Tu. Bloomfield, Language, (London 1933), 


p.339tf. m 
113 For particulars £66 S. K. Chatter), 
The Originand Development of the Ben- 
gali Language (Calcutta University Press 


1926), L p.d77f- 

14 H. Kern, VG. X, p.296. 

us Qf. also KBW. I, p.218. . = 
116 T refer to A. Debrunner und ku M: 
kernagel, Altindische anre x a 
(Göttingen 1930), p.181t:; Pischel, GPS., 


; Turner, Diet. Nep. Language, 


o.c p.918. 
pa ; Swellengrebel 
118 Of. I, p.225) 


i SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
910 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation-C ^ E 
123 Cf. Pischel, GPS. $954. 

124 KBW. II, p.739. 
125 Let us add a brief list of 
forms: lit. Jav. pijana D 


Korawāsrams, P- 914. 
us KBW.II, 604; 608. Van der Tuuk 


refers to Mod. Jav. (dial. and obsolete) SM 


tērsanda ‘token mark” instead of për- 

tanda L ponds to Skt. udyana- ITA "iq"; icis 
j . « . 5 O 

120 Here a secondary base beginning with read, examined must be connected wig, 


the likewise lit. upiksa ‘giving noti 
making a communication’; in M 
upeksa not only means ‘disregardeg’ 2 
also knowing; udaya (Skt. udaya- ši 
‘rise (of the sun etc.), elevation’ not ni 
denotes ‘the top (of a mountain), cone 
but also ‘ocean’ (= udadi < Skt, udadhi 
galu ‘ocean’, apparently because the 
words were regarded as variants in the 


386, held it to have sprung from Skt. native way; upaka stood for ‘water’ 
avasána- SAAT ‘end’, but this supposi- (mistaken for Skt. udaka- SZF ‘water’ 
tion is improbable for semantical rea- which also occurs); waodadi was used 
sons. The Skt. word mentioned must | for ‘water’ as well as ‘ocean’; reg. Jay, 
have been the origin of the lit. Jav. | $"r& "entirely —sarwa «Sk. sarva- à 
usana 'end, finally' and Jav. wasana 'end, ‘all’; coll. Jav. wétara "between, inter- 


i has been formed after the many models 
of nasalized forms (e.g. beginning with n) 
belonging to bases beginning with t and 
other voiceless mutes. 

121 Qf. C.C. Berg, De Middel-Javaansche 
historische traditie, (Thesis Leyden 
1927), p.12ff. Juynboll, Supplement op 
den Catalogus van de Javaansche.. 
handschriften..., (Leyden 1911) IL, p. 


close' space’ stands for antara ‘meantime, in- 
122 Of. Kuiper, BSOS. IX, p.997. terspaco’ <Skt. antara- AFAT 'id.. 
SECTION 2 


MORPHOLOGY I 


Sanskrit Stems as Represented in Indonesia. 
As will appear from the particulars discussed in this section morphological 


ndings : in Frenob, English an 
oans, however, appear in a 8¢ 
the original Sanskrit brahmana- ^. 
the modern pronunciation (cf. va 
part of the originally Sanskrit wor A 
Ty sources, but by way of % moder 


ill more 
form : as against 
Brahman. But Doro 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


E v 
SANSKRIT IN IND 
E x 4 ONES 
——-—pigitlzed by Arya Samaj Foundation Chantal ki eGangotri -901 
whereas the terminations of Greek words bo 
1d be assimilated to the Latin case.syet trowed by the ancient R 
cou e M t “System, a case-lesg Es 
1anguage, 98 poa AN the foreign elements in one im even flection-lesg 
ally tends to i 4 mu its po surroundings : the process of NES This form usu- 
As to the Sanskri b oans in Indonesia, they show in general NE | < 
which is only to be expected; Although most of them original i sence of endings 
Jearned character, i.e. were borrowed from books, in a E slc 
nunoi ation of the contemporary Indians with whom the ERA of cases the pro- 
contact, or even the younger Indo-Aryan developments whi a came into 
must be taken into account. ch arose from thám 


Let us therefore briefly discuss th 3 2 

krit words were introduced into In dones audi AR I in which the Sans- 

lves here with th stion i i ELS Old-Javanese, 

concern OUrB9!V 7 e question in which particular aspect (st i 
native etc.) they come before our eyes. Beginning with the ik stem, nomi- 
Sanskrit -a- stems, which are very numerous, end, in Old and Mod ae x 
and apart from specia] changes (e.g. -a > -o in Minangkabau and deria EO. 
dhanam JAR : OJ av. dhana; dhvastaļ takā: : OJay. dhwasta eto. "There are, ho ds 
curious exceptions za limited number of them appear, in Old-Javanese, like this: 
gajah elephant (which is the only usual form in the modern language) beside gaja 
Skt. Ts; corah ‘thief’ beside cora (Skt. ati), caura- SN; tirah ‘bank, shore’ beside 
tīra (Skt. Az); moktah “disappear, pass away’ beside mokta ‘free, disappeared, decea- 
sed, pass aW ay’ < Skt. mukta- YT ‘released etc.’ (cf. Bal. mukiah), and, moreover, 
such cases as, in law-texte, agnidah ‘incendiary’ (Skt. dgnida- ARTZ) ; asanadah 
‘giving a seat’ (Skt. ūsanada- 41943) and astanddah ‘giving a site’ (i.e. Skt. asthana- 
4-da-(aieati+z)'; and, in an inscription, parahitaniratah ‘quite intent upon an- 
other's welfare, and some other instances. Whereas we may suspect some casaz» 
and especially the older ones, to be reflections of the Skt. sandhi-form in -ah,, 
younger instances of the final h—which, being distinctly audible now, was appa- 
rently pronounced as such—, may be due to analogic processes, to metanalysis, to 
metrical reasons, and to a tendency to indicate the a pronunciation : as is well- 
known a final a in the course of time became à in large parta of the Javanese area; 
and in modern loans which have preserved their original a this is written ah. 

As to the origin of such forms like the OJav. gaja and dhana it has been 
supposed that the final h? and m were not distinctly audible to Javanese iw 
This explanation is, however, not innocent of simplism. Tus s we to 
that in the curious ‘mixed dialect’, called ‘Hybrid Sanskrit esi to 
Edgerton, was based on a protocanonical Buddhist de oe 7 the masou- 
Ardhamagadhi and to Apabhramsa,‘ -a is quite common al a correctly regards 
line and neuter nominative singular : dvija, jnana etc. K „am (-am) by 
these forms as phonetically derived from Skt. -as Calo - 


: ist Sans- 
: in Hybrid Buddhis 
Prakritic loss of the final consonant. The phenol ees he shortening of this -o to 


krit are, however, much more complicated, 107 ' further, be remarked that 
wit -u) and other word-ends, are not lacking: ter nominative-scsusslive 
the masc. accusative singular: behaves like the neue" OMS the MOM 
muse ME. the nom. an 

d and here ae noo with these facts : 


and 


Singular : 80 gaja represents two š 
tive. In tho language of the Kharostbi 
aco. have, in a similar way, been confuse i 
18 the accusative (-am).? Other MIA. data 7° 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
912 


EN 1, "eto. bat also ero (Lo. th 

the Prākrit grammarians DE dd t ENS, ibo ioi id E 
A.) as nom. sg of UC bear, viscum Suaoristions. Finally tho ae of 
the nom. and ace. 88: xd xi to the mind of those who used or borrowed “form 
of such noe ses numerous compounds (OJav. gajapati : Skt. i SR 
E uA. Gut, dhanada. Ws), counteracted tho possible influence of tondas. 

Š ‘ "iginal forms. 
ae p. OM ORAE often appears in -w- or -4- stems. Thug wg find 
OJav. y (before a vowel, so that, in 8 at ais?" fails to turn 
Qr Nar 063) bio ambu (Skt, anbu: SR) water (In Stt, word ja montor ug 
always eads in vi); wibhuh "powerful, which 2 in tho Boe aw toxts known to 
us, at least, far moro frequent than wibu (sic) : Skt. vibhu- FY, by the sido of 
prabhu ‘lord, prince, monarch’ (in the same stanza : Arjunawiwaha 14, 18), which 
constantly does without the final consonant. In a law-text we find pratibhūh 
‘security’ which is the Sanskrit pratibhū- afaa with à. Tho feminine -tt-stem 
vadhū (young) woman’ (Skt. vadhi aq), occurs as such, in contradietinction to 
galuh ‘a sort of gem’ (Skt. galū m) which, as galuh, galoh has been introduced into 
Malay literature as a title or honorific designation for princesses. The word for 
‘earth’, Skt. bhū- X, is OJav. bhüh, bhuh; we even find bhuh tala beside bhütala. 
The adjective bhīru ‘timid’ (Skt. bhiru- itt) seems to occur always without h. 

Most of the stems in -i- do, in Old.Javanese, without a final h: atith 
‘guest’ (Skt. atithi- ARFI m.); utpatti ‘birth; production’ (Skt. utpatti- safa f.), and 
other worde. However, beside rati ‘enjoyment etc.’ (Skt. rati- Ufa f.), which occurs 
only incidentally (in lit. Mod. Jav. rati means ‘moon’), we regularly find OJav. 
ratih ‘amorous enjoyment, and Kama's wife’; in the first member of such com- 
pounds as rūtt-bhawana etc. the h is generally omitted. Moreover, Skt. vari af 
‘water’, a neuter word without forms in -% is represented by lit. Jav. Bal. warih. 

In view ofthe facts hitherto discussed, and especially of this word ratih 
one might feel inclined to derive the well-known Javanese title patih ‘prime minis- 
ter, imperial chancellor from the Skt. pati- yfa ‘lord, master, sovereign’. The 
form pati is, apart from compounds (aswapati etc.) rare in ancient texts; in the 
traditional literary style of Modern Javanese it is occasionally found, bub then 

. probably. an abbreviated form (<adipati, Skt. adhipati- afagfa). Some scholars 

have, however, raised difficultios and regarded patih as a native term, mainly be- 
ua" of the base patih ‘to arrango, draw up in battle aires 
tou Ks a or D NUM of tho forms a-patih and ma-patil, ERE 
forms, originally have ARI CH) < n MU pan Won ros ES pe 
tions. The word mamatih bat h RM vares pih m atih 
and cau ng, on the other side, must be derived from pat i 


not be made an argument in di y odi 
E n dis edi . Them 
eredible hypothesis is perha cussing the origin of the latter 


: ps that the loan and the nativo words have blended. 
hé TM Sosa Indo-Aryan direct cases of -i- and -w- stems, after 
t naed in -2 and .à in Prākrit, became terminationless in the Apabhrams 
period. Bal. danuh nationless 


‘the si ; AUR RES hant- 
ag ‘bow’ or dhanus- i tb Zodiac Sagittarius’ may stand for Skt: i 


The = ‘ 
in metrical eee? Qum thought’ appears as dhūk. Some words in 
(Rām. 90, 79, Skt. laksmīvati gaitai for instance laksmīvat? ‘lucky, han 


; o di 
But we may easily conceive, that Us 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


stem in 


SANSKRIT IN 
.— Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Che PONM S Sangoi 


ə between -? and -2 could not be maint 

3 elevant to Javanese sounds. 
E S dier (Skt. kundi $8, gati 
Ph forms indiscriminately. 

In ancient texts many stoms in -q were, ; P 
consistently written in the correct manner: ajia ‘comms! d D ER zater 
ana); abha splendour (but also «bha, aba; Skt. abha awm); ido a aja 
(also 104, especially o later and Tore popular texts; hence, Mod. Jav p xi 
‘enjoyable, to one's liking’ « a-F ica: Skt. iccha Zea) ete. E id es eca 
atances We come across such forms E srddha ‘faithful(ness), trust’ ete aA 
'kindness" in such expressions as our ‘be so kind ag to...’, and then siela T 
traddha El ‘faith, trust, faithfulness etc”. And such cases ae tunha Ge. but 
repoatedly also tunha) ‘top’, whereas the Skt. form is twiga- UF ‘elevation, height, 


top. In India proper the OIA. and Pkt. -z stems predominatingly adopted a-end- 
ings in the direct cases in the Apabhramša period.* 


But let us leave such orthographic details which 
consequence, and consider the stems in -r-. Some of them appear in two OJav 
forms, the stem and the nominative singular : pity and pita, pita (Skt. mite Ra) 
‘ather’ (the stem-form, of course, often occurs in compounds); dhair and dhātā (in 
a metrical text) ‘creator’ (Skt. dhatr- 414). But other words of this class seem to 
have been borrowed in their nominative form only : mata ‘mother’, which is inci- 
dentally used (Skt. muir- AJ); duhita, duhita ‘daughter’ (Skt. duhitr- g3); trata 
‘protector’ (Skt. truir- A19); wakta ‘speaker etc.’ (which became a base for deri- 
vatives; Skt. vaktr- a73). —The word for ‘cow’ Skt. gau]. a: appears as goh or go 
(even gohriipa). 


278 
ained, the distinctio 

; n of quantit 
So we finā kupi ‘well? (Skt. kūpi - 
t. ghafi qd) etc., and offen 


foront 


‘half an hour (Sk 


are, in the main, of no 


Suflixless consonant-stems are not very frequent. Sometimes they appear 


in their stem-form which is often at tho same time a particular sandhi-form of. 


the nominative singular : tajit ‘lightning’ (Skt. tadit- afša); pajyut ‘light, lamp’ 
may contain Skt. dyut- GL (RV. and Mbh.), pa- is a Javanese prefix. In other 
words, however, a form of the nominative has been borrowed : the Jav. -in-form 
dinrk "(one, they) see(s) (it) has been derived from drk ‘sight, view’ (Skt. drs- FW): 
further, digwidig ‘the points of the compass’ (Skt. digvidis- fefafex); wak ‘word’ 
(Skt. vac. ara); puspalit ‘bee’ (Skt. puspalih- JISE). The numeral catur four’ is, 
in my opinion, abstracted from the numerous compounds beginning with this stem 
(Skt. catur AF4); similarly, the by-form catus which is casually used. The sam m 
"d drop their final sound : candrama ‘moon’ (in Sanskrit this is a sandhi-variant of 
9 nom. sg. candramās TRAI ). Oo 
The stems in -as- not E drop the final consonant. Hence, nabha sky’ 
(beside nabhastala? ete. : Skt. nabhas- nom. nabhah, nabhas, nabho 38); ane 
kt. retas- Taq), but also retah;* teja ‘energy, prestige, splendour ete.’ (S i^g 
RU, of which derivatives are formed : katejan (i.e. ka-teja-an) sh es (Skt. 
renown, honour, meritorious deed’ (Skt. yasas- amg) and qud Kč inten- 
duryāšas. Sig), etc. On tho other hand: manah ‘mood, digg aa tan 
den (Skt. manah R=:, stem AAG); tamah ‘darkness, A S E cR 
es rae ‘youth, ago" (Skt. vayah- 390), ato ond ns Ee. any rule as to the 
Sion oceurs in both forms. It is not possible tag d as representing the 
1PPeaTanco of this final olement. The h may be ins ae layed a part in 
ndian h of Ühe-nomibat à n ingular and can have play 
ominative and accusative SINS 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
_Digitized-by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri ^ —— —— 

aa resulting in the spread of this final sound over part g 
It is worth mentioning that neither “o-slems nor -as-stems arg 
Mcr dhi-forms in o (internal sandhi of -as- in manohara charmin 
o ye etc. excepted). In this these borrowing words differ consi 
zan -m assumed by old Indian words in Pāli and Prākritin genera], 
from ce sie Sanskrit words in -us- end in -uh : ayuh ‘life’ (Skt. ayuh su) 
A Ec ‘long-lived’ (Skt. cirayul faug:), but: dirghayu ‘long-lived’ (Skt. dir. 
hayus- SigA, but in ancient texte, RV., Brahmanas also dirghayu. deg) (va 
Cm however, remember that only part of the Old-Javanese texts have been publi. 
EN iis that other forms may be found in future); asto the last-mentioned Word, 
wo also come across dirghayusa, pub is not known to me from Sanskrit, and per. 
haps algo dirghayus.” Bapuh ‘body’ is the Skt. vapuļ aS: ; oye” is caltgu (Skt. caksus. 
agg"). The -is-stem jyot?s- sometimes drops the s: jyoti beside ivotih light, bright. 
ness? (Skt. jyotih sūtfā:); arci ‘ray of light’ can represent the Skt. arci ate or arcih 

era). 1 
The words formed with -n-suffixes present remarkable features, in go far 
that those in -nt- have an undeniable preference for the nominative singular: 
daityawan ‘demoniac’ (Skt. daityavan ZAIM, not in Pet. Dict. and MW.); udanwan 
‘sea’ (Skt. udanvan IgA); buddhiman ‘wise’ (Skt. id. JAT); niimün ‘prudent’ 
(Skt. id. MART) eto." The neuter stems in -an- likewise form a homogeneous 
class: karma ‘deed, work etc.’ (Skt. id. FA); mama ‘name’ (Skt. id. TA); janma 
‘birth, incarnation ete.’ (Skt. id. S77); prema ‘love’ (Skt. id. 3H); jatuwesma ‘a 
house plastered with lac’ (Skt. id. WqazH) etc, Tbe other -n-steme, however, 
appear variously: aima "soul, self’ is the Skt. nominative dima ARAT, the (long) a 
not being expressed in the variant atma; mahdtma‘a highly-gifted holy man’ (Skt. 
mahaima AZRA); paratma ‘highest soul’ (Skt. paraima TIRAT) and other such com- 
a pounds occur with -a (also in metrical texts); other words in a are not raro, but 
adhwa way, road (Skt. adhva awi); arwa (arwwā : Skt. arva stat horse") are, in 
KBW., given with a. Many -in-stems have been borrowed, always in the nomi- 
native singular, Whether the 7 has been correctly expressed as in kami ‘lover’ 
es 8,64, Skt, kami «nib; brati ‘observing a vow’ (Rim. 6,104, Skt. vratī A) 
not as in bali strong (Ram. 5,95, Skt. bali att); paksi ‘bird’ (Ram. 6,66, Skt. 


paksi mit. We know that the development in India has also led to such adjectives 
as the Hindi soki sitzt ‘mournful’. 


These instances, which ; Tu j : in 
what form Sanskrit nou could easily be multiplied, will sufico to show 


il en (S n8 were borrowed by the Javanose. Apart from this point 
is in the dos. am here of some new formations. As ig well known thero 
Y of Indo-Aryan, a tendenoy to simplifying the doolensional 

called thematic, i.o 1 words from other declensions to the 50 
the ancient dani HOMES Hr Thus Pāli sarada iz ‘autumn’ takes the place 0 
piban fas i: ARE, Prakrit pianto fjart ‘drinking’ supersedes the ancient 
this growth of the themati the period of Old-Indo- Aryan many instances 0 
cient pad- qe * ematic class can be noticed: pada- qTq by the side of the an“ 
We como across, in later g] SEIN instead of mahat, mahant Wea, ‘great’ otc." Thus 
he orjgi Cassical Sanskrit, Seana. gara * dog’, and the feminine svani 
Binal sva $3, stom svan. Za and e gat and in Prākrit 
Dears a8 sano BION, sane mpi, in Pāli suna, SW P 


me wor , |; ava- 
d has, ag swana, been borrowed by tho J 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


974 


== 


> 
the analogio process = 
,Iepte. 
derably 


and 


Digitized by Arya Sama Folia NC HenotvndreGangotri 


e although the poet of the Nāgarakrtāgama gi 
à ing the original form (52, 4 swa» sic). + his learning by 
sona survived in literary style, BIS, in Javanese, to o 
ning. 88 against Skt. vidyut- frag id. ned widyuta ‘light- 

Tho stems in -ant- LEA RE Indian, 

are in the language of the Kharosthi 3 Ķ 

GA (Ardhamagadhi) milamante E pore? SRI "Yietorious';'« 
dteacat ‘virtuous’, and Hindi balvani auara ‘strong’. MEL Pali silavanto 
Javanese texts : puņyamanta virtuous, honest, Re < . are found in 
is no doubt such a younger -anta-form, borrowed from post-Old-Inà ers De 
habits; * the form puxyawūn is, however, also to be met with NU vds 
wan Silawan). There are other instances : bhagyamanta (Bhismaparwa > eg 
nate, bappy' : cf., in Sanskrit bhagyavant- wwaarq; gunamanta (sie Ram. 1. 3: 4 ES 
‘excellent’ (cf. in Sanskrit guņavant- gma) beside gunawan (Ràm 15 7); yos a 
manta’? (Rām.) ‘powerful’ (Skt. saktimant- afma) beside saktiman (Bh Kw 
93,14. Bhomakāwya 91, 13 we find jaramanta (sic) ‘old, an old ut 
jarāmani- AVAL is not known to me. The explanation proposed by vem der 
Tuuk,'* according to whom these words represent plural nominatives (<guņa- 
mantah etc.), must be considered as incorrect. In Malay romance bura TUO 
is a poetic name for the blue lotus: Mal. buza ‘flower’ and Ski. nilavant- sitae, 
‘blackish, bluish’. 

A comparable ‘thematization’ may be assumed to appear in OJay. baņija 
‘merchant, trader’ which, in all probability, is the Skt. vanija-, a by-form of oe 
afitst gi ven by Indian lexicographers. Discussing the interesting history of this 
word in the Archipelago elsewhere, we only observe here that the meaning ‘to 
trade’ which can also be expressed by the Javanese word, can perhaps also be 
connected with the Skt. vanijā aus ‘trafic, commerce’ which is likewise given 
by lexicographers, and, further, that Skt. vanija- alts, bāņija- afta (e.g. in the 
Mbh.) ‘trader’ etc. may have exerted infiuence as well. 

Sometimes it is difficult to decide whether a loan-word appears in an 
extended form by adding the Indian -a-, for there is also a homonymous native 
element which, especially in the so-called Middle-Javanese texts and in the lan- 
guage of definite regions in the east of the island, is frequently added to a word 
Without perceptibly altering its sence. Metanalysis and other processes, more- 
over, are factors to be reckoned with. So, it would be open to objection to inter- 
Pret a word like gatyā which occurs Nag. 97,3 as meaning ‘existence, condition’, 
though it is doubtless connected with the much-used gati ‘state of things, condi- 
tion, circumstances’ (Skt. gati- WÑ which can also express similar ideas), to be a 
themiatized’ form, the less so as the Indian stems in -i- have maintained their 
Position in a large way. Such forms as "gatyā- are nos found pnr. Olav. 
Word z MAURO pure enin M teen Hohe in con- 
NM Toman servani ; it is not mensis d and paricūriņā qfvarfion ‘id’. 
n" menn to paricarika RaRa iw ee to female persons? Or is it 
K masculine form (-in-adj.) referring lke V i 

ar feminine beside paricara- altam? Or a 19 


very often enlarged to -anta- : 


minine made in Java? A 

ite’ (sir: i); in Sanskrit 
ee is kuļumbī which has the meaning 'house-vife bu. denda a te a 
of a householder’ is expressed by kujumbint . baa 


Do f 5 a E < 
orm (-in-adi) or a new form arisen in Java 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


or elsew here! 


»* 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
276 _ Digitized by Arya Samaj-Feundation Chennai and eGangotr 


. ‘wife’ -yived. The epic young woman > 
as a literary term for wife, Srv) 3 Krpi gd 


i od Karpini, sister of Karpa”? H > the 
: Trp HA was, in Java, calle pen C ere, then 
Suo c MA Beside vasumdharā the earth’ (Skt. aguti) we 8 in; 
orm W . 


i also f 
pasumdhari which is not givon by Pet. Dict. and MW. i nd 
' Now and then matters are complicated : a Jey word for Qeen-congory 
also known to the Malays and used of a sovereign 8 principal wives, is padmi, 
Although influence of Skt. padmint giai an excellent woman is not entirely oy, 
of the question —it is, however, not in tho Javanese dictionaries —, the hypothesis 
ofa blend of Skt. padma WW the lotus-hued one, Sri and Skt. patni qed * 
(which now is a lit. Jav. by-form of padmi) may be preferable. 
Sanskrit Flection in Indonesia. 

Although there is, generally speaking, no reason why certain classes of worda 
should not participate in the process of borrowing, we usually see that some Cate. 
gories are, in contradistinction to others, received to a very limited extent, But 
before discussing this point we must mention the important fact that definite spe- 
cial forms of words belonging to any clasa are, as a rule, borrowed only quite 
exceptionally :case-forms and finite verbal forms are, apart from such particular 
cases as the Engl. rendez-vous < Fr. rendez-vous, in which the 2d pers. of the im. 
perative plural rendez forms part of a standing phrase» and apart from the existence 
of intimate relations between the idioms concerned, very seldom adopted. Or, to 
express ourselyes otherwise : the borrowed word is, as to its grammatical forms, 
subjected to the system of the borrowing language, even if this language is nearly 
related to the idiom which lends. There are, of course, exceptions, especially in 
learned words (the Greek plural of museum etc. is for instance often used in Dutch) 
or in words which have, from the beginning, been used in a special form : thus, the 
Russian plural bolsheviki is used in English alongside the English plural-derivation 

*ebo'sheviks; the idea expressed usually being plural or collective. 

Tt is, in view of these facts, interesting to sce that Old-Javanese .which is 
neither an inflecting langaage nor related to Sanskrit, has borrowed a number of 
inflected forms from it. In translated works such a form may be found in the 
text of the original. As instances of Sanskrit quotations in these works have al- 
ready been given, it may suffice here to mention that in the Agastyaparwa & new 


paragraph, introduced by a question, or tt i ù : 
« E he d J ca ( or- 
fect) ‘he said’, , answer, are introduced by wvaca (pel 


ari ‘my pupil’ jas a the Skt. compound madantevàsi S857 
farci pupil) uu. anda 4 ies by the ‘Javanese’ ikai pinakasisya (Skt. $19)0- 
"he made an egg’: js T AVS iS, likewise followed by a translation 
À curious TUAM D she weeps’ and other such short quotations. 

has thin jagat kabeh makawak 'P. p.168, where, in tho story of Aurva ara the tox! 

wak ūpyūvanā (mss. apyayani or apyayani) tka, lawan apst 
80 words are a rendering of Mbh. 1, 180, 17 and 18 
SMA, tho term apyayani DG) ua jagat Sai weg afāfgar: | aaant 
anata (ct. apya. aq T and 9 erroneously used instead of a form of pomat- 


body of this enti E) and the meaning of th must be: ‘the 
b me ntire world consist g 9 sentence i ind 


Wife’ 


all appearance, crept into the t A the tatwa bearing it”, but the locative has, 5 
apsu tam and 18 tasmad aps ext because the original has it (cf. also stanza 2 


is wyati ‘in the air in the 9600" 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN j : P 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Founda ion SRANEShA eGangotri 2 


iyati Aafa), which also oceur ; 40. 4. —— 
> (Skt. viyat 2 ~> occurs as awyati (e.g. Ki 
D. sing. matu]. «td: mother" is incidentally foun iB a NIU e 
The 8 That a feminine vocative like priye FÈ has been ais 


Bi is used in the correct way; and TT hah pri 
86, E Gh surprising as ths very fact that it Occurs o 
pot 80 h-used titles, terms for family relationship etc. 
of ea language: the Latin vocative amice ‘o friend’ ig 
" M Crus of the same word, quite common in Dutch (as 
Y and domine has, not only in addressing, become a y. 


D sn. Beside Mod. Jav. pramana we find the, likewise obsolete, form pra- 


manëm both meaning ‘(to be able to see) exactly; visual faculty’; the latter looks 
like a Skt. neuter in SATA quotations in OJav. texts -amis often handed down 
as -ĒM, 6-8. petradipēm <Skt. pretadhipa- Saag ‘Lord of the deceased’, 

The dual nominative $rote ( «Skt. srotre MÀ) ‘the two ears’ does not sur- 
prise us either (KBW. III, 785 the word was quite naturally, often found in this 
form. Another dual in OJav. is Aswino ‘the Aéyins (two divinities)’ <Skt. Ašvinau 
akadt. ; 

A plural form is wyādhaya ill { KBW. IV,607 ) which: occurs beside the 
singular wyādhi: Skt. vyādhayaļ AVAA: ‘diseases’, a word which like the Bal. pitara 
'ghost(s), wandering spirit(s)’ < Skt. pitarah ftat: ‘the manes’, is apt to be met 
with in a plural case. 

The numeral trīņi is, by the side of traya and irrespective of its original 
neuter character, repeatedly found : Kidung Pamaneangah 1,130 putra jalu katrīni 
‘his three sons’ (ka- is a Javanese prefix which, added to numerals, helps to express 
the idea of totality). In a similar way an inscription? speaks of catwāri lokapāla 
"the four lokapálas'. 


a form of addresg in 
ery common term for 


Coming now to verbal forms we only make passing mention cf some par- 
ticiples, which are essentially adjectives. Apart from Skt. varíamüna- adam > 
OJav. wartamana ‘present, happening now; today’, and dolayamana- (Skt. STAT) 
‘hesitating, doubtful’ we come across dipayat dIqud, ‘kindling, illuminating’ in 
man-dipayat and another derivative which in one of the ancient Javanese versions 
of the Paūcatantra,*? seems to mean ‘kindle’ and ‘to give a light’. 

The finite form asti (Skt. asti ata) is incidentally used for ‘there is (OJav. 
hana?*), ang, moreover, in the Adiparwa (p.28) where it has been translated by 
hana and, therefore, must be regarded as a quotation. The imperative astu Sd» 
owever, is not rare: ‘be it so”; as is well known, it is much used in Sanskrit 
literature, and comparable imperative and other forms were borrowed in aim 
languages ag well: Dutch allez ‘go’ and soit ‘be it so!” from French. The wor 
astu has, Moreover, become the base for several derivatives, part of them Sus 
Constantly Used: Jav. pa-ñastu ‘benediction’, a-nasiw-akén ete. to nee ne 
ara Of and other words. The borrowing was no be Mec 
SR ang frequent fonmulas pn ees In Sun- 

Anese EY NL and nomo du Cx = true, real, really’, derivatives 
Meanin RS tājā in the sense of jindeed biti: ES missive; obseguious'; in 
8 assuring, agreeing with’; esto means ‘to De Su 


gs 23 ; affirming’. 

derivative esti and istu (<estu) express tho ideas of selah auzprati att. 

ay id. Pamancangah 1,80 we find the Skt. phrase Mo imperfect asit (Skt. 
‘he attained a great age. The St pent 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a 


078 Digitized by Arya SamB/PSSEdAUEn Bheh ha GREE gotri 


k i ompound asitkala. '; 
anata) appears a8 8 er P vui bes Tuuk?5) mun time 
pu SOM nd pagi ‘the first of the four ages of the ou mn 
p B cinis GRE extended by the OJav. ‘preposition’ in ‘in, at, on”, oe ti 
pers. pl. d the Paficatantra: vasantin (KBW. III, 545). The frequent Skt. qj 
pean orist) ‘he or she said’ underlies the late OJav. brawit ‘word(s)’,_ i 
Ot a a by no means uncommon imperative form is astam, whi 

e to have been misunderstood by former authors. Tho dictiong 
dot d Juynboll) only mention, or unequivocally prefer, the orthograp 
ae PEE: ipis (e.g. those of the Dus OA EOS , astam. But the Ortho. 
graphy of Old-Javanese manuscripts Dir pom being consistent or etymologically 
correct. The form astam would induce us to miorpret the word as the neuter of 
the verbal adjective of the Sanskrit root as. to ae : aslam WW ‘lett off, got 
aside, given up’. The orthography asiam, which is also attested, on ‘the other hand, 
points to the 34 pers. of the imperative of Skt. Ip NIS, whioh is well known in 
Indian literature : "Lot it be, let it remain, let it be enough’ : asta, tavat Sat may 
‘let it be enough, let us put an end to (mentioning or enumerating facts, showing 
oneself...etc.). The way in which ancient Javanese authors use this word is in 
keeping with this: Nag. 43, 8 ina catalogue of the king’s merits : ūstām...'it would 


ch, how. 


rieg (Van 
hy astan, 


be needless to mention also---; in short’; ibid.93,9; BY. 38, 3. 
One form of a Sanskrit future is, at times, found: bhavisyati ARAR em- 


ployed to express our ‘soon, before long’. 


The stem of the game future (bhavisya- 


H H . . . H í 
ufārY) has, likewise, come into use: bhawisya means, in ancient Java, ‘next, there- 


upon, afterwards’. 


- ‘ 
We have to mention also a perfect form: uvāca garu : san wvaca nara, who 


speaks human language’. 


The form jagra ‘be awake, wake up’ may be identified with the stem of the 
Skt. present jagrati MAÑ ‘they aro awake’ etc. 


NOTES 


' See KBW. I, p.206. 


2 Taleo refer to Kern, VG. VIII, p.189f., 
who points out % (in pausa or before a 
consonant) and final h were equivalent; 


therefore -h is aa a tule the form pre- 
ferred in romanizing. ' 


* K. Wulff, Den oldjavanske Wirāta- 
krit-original, (Copen- 


krit, HJAS I (1936) p.67ff. EU 
- Burrow, The Language of the Kha. 


rosthi Documents from Chinese Turkes: 
tan, (Cambridge 1937), p.4, $12. — l 
* I refer to G. V. Tagare, Histories 
Grammar of Apabhraméa, p.100. Fd 
7 Which is the Skt. nabhastala- tā 
‘firmament’, not nabhahsthala- qus 
as Van der Tuuk, KBW. 1,069 has E 

* KBW. I, p.737, cf. p.736. 

? In the AAA geo H. Toynbee 
Drie boeken van het Ona tea 
Mahābhārata, p. 47; the word aw , 
Yusa, occurring here, contains the nbo 
suffix -a, but the underlying form ^ 


- js 
dirghayusa gtatga. Juynboll, Mr this 
rather careless, says nothing abo neil 


Point (cf. p.176). The word does 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN IN co 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation CALAN BRS g 


— 279 
Ee not gurvive in ae | a. Ct. Wackernagel-Debrunner, Oca p. 
as I į Malay has it (dirgahayu) as a Ot. 
nego, bU xpression when doing homage | 17 The a which ig 
courtly © 


not Seldom / founā is 
only of orthographica] moment (ef. 
punyawan ete,), 
'* Van der Tuuk, KBW. IV, p.40. In 
the notes on my Brahmandapurana 
(Gonda, Het Oud-Javaansche Brabmanda. 
purana, Bandung 1932). I still adhered 
to this view (p.300), 

'5 This word will De disc 
next section. 


20 T refer to Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in 
den Archipel, (Thesis Leyden 1996) 


: s: O King, live for 
iu h wishes as: 
with guc 
over! ag is Vedic. 
"4 dd. he forms in -nia see further on. 
4 Fus to J. Bloch, L'Indo-Aryen, 
E NOU), e.g. p.130f.; W. Geiger, 
as  (Birslēsburs 1916), p.771.; R.Pischel, 
a matik der Prakrit-Sprachen, (Strass- 
Gram 4 
burg 1900), p-241ff. 
a gee J. Wackornagel-A. Debrunner, 
Mam Grammatik, (Göttingen i E 
: f p.17. 
.919ff. 
re T The Language of the | *' See also KBW, I, p.253. 
d = Documents from Chinese | ** Cohen Stuart, Kawi-Oorkonden, 16H. 
c 28 | ? Cf, KBW. II, p.499. 
t 5 Pe : i 
E aria. 94 the word puwnya. | E Ci. KBW. Eu 
: -f a 

anta serves to translate the Skt. distya | *? KBW. I, p.212. 
n $ | 
Ran. 


ussed in the 


SECTION 3 
MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF WORDS 


a rale vage Sem and new words in general od key uo 

ng i à 
à and rā at ils end of many couples of Sanskrit words Re ie Puy 
und for analogie processes. No less than four EM 4 isi KS pes. 
from Sanskrit, can be found in Old-Javanese : 1° the RT Maec 
deva- XA ‘god’ : devi ZA ‘goddess’, in which the element -a- 


= rule, wan- 
. 8a : devi ZAN are, as a 
aa 1988 Such sets as Eng. god : goddess, Skt. deva 


; ifferent words 
: logically di c 
à either etymo. ina ‘hen’ : ayam jantan 
-idi hich, if necessary, use bēlina hen : 
vinas rā or sucb phrases a8 e poster important part play 
S eS -goat elio), s ltural affairs in 
la a v D ^. of. Engl. she goa ition of ou 
ed by ae eee Subir and the present conditi 
in modern s 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
980 


Digitized-by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotrt.— 
general have been conduoivo to ite a ed em se qo 
tion, which, as to IELA 2s pace m 53 lieti )'s nell Sets -g: EN Tepr Ot. 
in Malay by such pairs as putéra (in courtly d dos scion ofa Princely bo ti 
putéri ‘daughter (of princely birth), De (but now also ina more > 
TTE ka-putri-an *girl's Banocla non ). : Thus we find, derived from Bonera 
pēmudi ‘girl’ beside pēmuda ‘young man’ (from Mal. muda young’): 
reader’ : pēmbaca ‘reader’ (from the borrowed base baca to read’) 
ra, which in classical Malay means brother and sister, 
female counterpart (which existed in Sanskrit : sodari stai : 
saudari ‘sister’ has turned up. 

Apart from (1?) the rather numerous sets dewa : dèwi the following ly 

of word-pairs must be considered here : 22 such Sanskrit Synonyms or A 
nagara- AVI : nagari att ‘town’; kūpa- BI pit: well’ : küpi FN ‘a ame S t 
which came also to ancient Java; 3° such cases as Skt. yoga- ata ‘yogu’ : yogi hi 
‘a yogin’; 4? such pairs as Skt. prūpta- TIẸ reached, obtained’ : prapli- M ‘reah, 
ing. As gender distinction is unknown in Javanese and the exaot forma] distine. 
tion between substantives and adjectives, made in Sanskrit, was not upheld (thu 
yoga may also refer to a yogin, ete.), quite a considerable number of these 4:4 
(>Jav. i) pairs came to be naturalized as variants: comparable to the originally 
indigenous variants which in IN. idioms are frequent and often diffe 
of the word.! 


It was no more than natural that the cooxistence of such borrowed "as. 
pairs soon produced analogical forms. 


b And aven sa 


r as to the end 


Thus, we often come deross such (Jay, 
words asmargi way by the side of márga (Skt. marga- mÑ); wargi ‘group’ (Skt. 
varga- TÀ) : warga; desi ‘region’: desa (Skt. deša. S31); and» derived from words ending 
in -à (Javanese does not distinguish between a and à): puji ‘praising’. Whereas 
dewali was, as we have already seen, formed to mean ‘goddess’, apsari ‘a fomale 
deity’ (from (Skt.) apsaras atutī:, apsara atati) and apsara were used indisri- | 
minately. To such cases as Mal. bagi, bahagi ‘allotting’ the Skt. form bhēgi amt 


in Dhagikaroti vitālā ‘to divide, share’ is likely to have contributed; cf also Skt 


bhasmīkaroti REREN ‘to reduce to ashes’ and Jav. bēsmi ‘setting on fire’. 


Now, part of these variants have come to play a part in the um | 
vocabulary, those in -4 often finding a place in the so-called ceremonious kor | 
lary (krama), which is used by the Javanese when speaking to a person bo 
£o a higher class, to older People, to persons whom they do not know oF d 
TM wish to behave politely; those in -a are often adopted in the vocabulary % 
E RH (oko). Thus, in Mod. Javaneso marna is ngoko-, marni a krana 
P P (even from (Skt.) varna AN); utawa ng. utawi k. for OF 

There are, however, 
ance’, which ig a loan- 
only "regional krama” 


* . í i 
complications. Thus, the word rupa ‘outward e i 
à g., but its conn i 0 
„8 i E 

YPercorrect” form used by ‘uneducated Y pon b 
d, 988 


its krama ig antawis: «nen, BDACO" and ‘guess’ does not exist (as fat 39^ , ]ac6s 
» Country’) ig d PEEL, In krama desa ‘village’ (from Skt. dosa- & 
Dlaced hy dusun, not liso och, edt leen anoient I? 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESI 
igitize j ion Chennai and eGangotri 281 


Under the same influence many native E 


ing U ; uve 
ting ivo’, lama ‘ancient (in OJav and Obsolete in 
recelv* » 


(krama equiv 


hi analogical device which originated in e x ot rare. And 
this 


4 S Z pairs hag 
living factor 1n modern ki 78. (w)landa (< Port, Hollanda HAR A 
(u)landi "Dutch, European. We must, however, remember that the very S 


transformed Sanskrit 
their way also to the vocabulary of neighbouri Nr 


1ng peoples, In Sund ; 
RU. . anese margi 
jg the courteous form of marga ‘way, means”; g 


prayogi of prayoga ‘suitable beco 
` . S = 
iag’ (Skt. prayoga- sata ‘application, practice’); nami of nama ‘name’ (Skt nāma 
am); upami of upama "if, in the event of, for instance, similarity, simile’ «Skt 


upama STAT ‘resemb lance; image’); utami of utama ‘fit, appropriate, excellent’ (Skt. 
utama- SAA highest”); kula-wargiis an extremely polite' term for "relatives, 
family’, wheroas its counterpart in -a is only polite (Skt. kula- 89 ‘family’ and 
varga AM group). In many languages puji is a secondary by-form of pūjā (Skt. 
pūjā Tl) "honour, respect, worship’; Mal biji ‘seed, grain’ and Mod. Jav. biji ‘marks 
(on an examination list)’ are like Mod. Jav. wiji ‘seed? variants of Skt. bija- stu 
‘soed’, which is preserved in the Min. bijo ‘grain’. In the same way Mal. sunyi 
‘lonely’ (Sund. suni) stands for sunya (lit. Jav. ‘void’), i.e. Skt. Siinya- I “empty, 
void, lonely’. In Balinese kali means ‘time’ : Skt. kala- FIS ‘id.’, and dewati is a 
literary synonym of dewi (Skt. devi 34t) ‘goddess’, 

Blending. 

Now and then the original form of a word is altered by the influence of 
other words the meaning of which is in some way or other related to that of the 
word in question. As the common term denoting this phenomenon,.to wit ‘conta- 
mination’ also expresses the idea of ‘defilement or pollution’ we would prefer call- 
ing it ‘blending’, Thus grevis which is found in later Latin beside the old word 


gravis ‘heavy’ has apparently changed under the influence of levis ‘light (in 


weight)’ 
nated ( 
other 
‘ 


; and perhaps also under that of brevis ‘short’. The so-called contami- 
or, rather, blended) grevis is simply a combination of two, or even more, 
Words, not a tainted or deteriorated word. In a similar way Fr. rendre 
2 give back, restoro' is a blending of Lat. reddere ‘to give back’ with prendere ‘to 
ake, 

; We may indulge in the supposition that lit. Jav. suira, which occurs be- 
side the likewise lit. suta ‘son, child’ (<Skt. suia- S ‘son’), eue os to the in- 
«000 Of the now krama-inggil synonym putra < Skt. putra- JA son’, and agree 
with Swellengrebel? in considering the OJav. form diwarsa, van qone in the 
vative Pinaka-pa-diwarsa-(a)n ‘functioning as ‘measures of time , an instance 
Ben Contamination’ ; Skt. divasa- faa ‘day’ and Skt. varsa- ad the bes vi 
80n, Year in OJav. diwasa hag a tatherilarse range of ws M 
and warsa has kept its usual sense. We already iene 
d! which seems to be a blending of the loan-word pe nae Mer 
tūrneg o z ith tho nativo lukis ‘drawing, desoribing - kat o ‘lucky mark, 
būti, s complished, perfected’ came 4 s has, however, sometimes 

Which brings luck’ in Malay: sémpéna; 15 DAS) j 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
s oM ine A A ; 

onfused with sémpurna complete, perfect! Skt. — — 
been v fabulous great bird in Javanese romance used ag à Vehicle id The 
m p. ata), wilmand, owes its origin to Skt. vimana. farm ‘ ; a E 
ee. aerial car’ and to Jav. wil (OJav. wwil) giant’; in Malay ia} 
even come across such variations as walman m walimana which, likewise m 
ring to the steed of the titan Boma, is said to be a kind of man-bira or Rin 
endowed with the faculty of speech. uss Baréo sāupana a, kinā of stairg 
ing of inclined boards with cross-laths, which ig à borrowing from 
sapana ‘state staircase" (<Skt. sopüna- Atara sen J was explained by A 
as a contamination’ with the native sáu gearing into each other, "— 
on to’. . g . 

In Malay pērkasa ‘gallant, skilled in war” (<Skt. prakata- 
and kuasa ‘authority’ were sometimes confused : 80 tho form 
Beside pascima 'west(ern) «Skt. pašcima- qan ‘westerly’ (pascima uiri ‘the 
west’) literary Javanese uses pracima; as Skt. pracina- aria ‘eastern’, which conli 
have served as a model has, ae far as I know, not yet been found in Javanese, we 
had better regard this instance as resulting from analogous adaptation in general, 
As to the puzzling paksina which in literary Malay occurs as a synonym for utara 
: ‘north, northern’, it go strongly reminds us of the likewise literary daksina ‘south’ 


<Skt. daksina- ¢f an ‘id.’ that we can not omit mentioning it in this section, but 
which word has lent the initial p to it ? 


In Old-Javanese santa mea 
ara id”), and srānta (Skt. sranta 


» COnsig, 


Bug 


inea . 
Arianjs 


- 


NRIN “renowned! 
Dērkuasg arose, 


na appeased, calm, free from passions’ (Skt. santa. 
- ATA ‘tired, exhausted’) or saranta (svarabhakti) 
» annoyed’; hence the rather unusual Sund. saranta 
drance, impediment, adversity’ and ‘being, or 
off Hence also the Jav. ora sranta ‘not being 
o wait. Without a negative particle the now 
iet, collected’. This meaning no doubt developed 
On the other hanā saranta is sometimes given as 
Words are now and then explained by the same 
omposed, purified’ may, therefore, have exerted 

Leaving this point to further investigations, 
we cannot refrain from observing tha 


t ‘calmed, tranquil’, i.e. santa is also given a£ 
t. 


waiting, impatiently for, putting 
able to endure annoyance or t 
obsolete saranta means 'ealm, qu 
Írom "having exercised patience. 
synonymous with santa ang both 
equivalente. Jav. santa ‘calm, c 


Thus sédia expressed tho ide 4 
m Y Works, although it, as to its form, ME 
been retained. The c ready, Prepared’; the latter meaning has, indeed, à 


pud Sédékala ‘at all times, immemorial’, which is bo 
1 : Es E wa 
stdia instead of Skt, m AED Often figures as sédiakala; in tho same 
: owever, ox : 
Plistic. The lit, 


Plaining all cases of thig kind by blending would be too gim- 
“ay. kénaka, which is also krama inggil for ‘nail’ has the outs 

Which occurg in Old- and later Javanese exis" , 
"As the latter Word was sometimes abbreviated to naka 


is), the Word for na; o- 
69, be lengthened fi op (< Skt, nakha- sq) could, by way of inverse 81% 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


Me = Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundaties: Chentah M m = 


nalysis- 5 
Meta rite every child who learns to speak its nat 


imeelf wd is E me language hag to iuter 
tthab language which are used by those who already speak 
0 s and to acquire its structure. He ig only in 
e rnt the facts which form the basis of the Psychic 
s sufficiently numerous and intelligible. Even in 
Frosted adults denne always find themselves in thig favourable situation. Then 
they 219 apt to produce forms or turns of their Own making, which clash wi 1 
+ : : « , clash with 
those which are in general use, ie. they ‘make mistakes’. Sometimes however 
they may be exoused. There are, indeed, forms or Dhrases which are iu: 4 
being analyzed aE eke than one way. One of them is, of course, tha right one, i.e 
in accordance with gūstā „T the same ‘mistake’ is repeatedly made, if the ante 
or similar ‘re-interpretations’ are, over and over again, conceived, pronounced and 
heard, they often gain access to the vocabulary of a large circle of contemporaries 
and even become the common or only correct way to express oneself. The phe- 
nomenon, usually called metanalysis, belongs to the processes which can lead to 
this result. The name of one of the administrative distriets of Yorkshire, North- 
Riding, was originally North Thriding (i.e. ‘third part’), but the phrase was divi- 
ded after the double th which easily coalesced. Eng. a nickname<a nike name 
originates in an ēkenāme ‘an additional name’; when ēke became unintelligible, 
„the n was reinterpreted as part of the article. Andin he runs a muck the first syl- 
lable of the foreign (Malay) word amok (‘furious attack, ‘amuck”) was regarded as 
the English artiele.* 

In a similar way the bull Nandaka- Argā is called Andaka by the author of 
the Middle-Javanese text Tantu Panggélaran; the form was also known to 
other Javanese and Malay writers.* In the Korawasrama (a text belonging to the 
same class of literature) the nine jewels, Skt. navaraina- tat, are spoken of as 
awaraina. We also find Awaruci for Nawaruci etc. Other Skt. words have in- 
creased in size’: uroja- StH ‘the female breast’ >nuroja; the compound nisja- 
madhyama-uttama- (< Skt. kanistha- PAS otc.) was re-interpreted as risla-madhya- 
mollama, and so the form mottama=Skt. uttama- came into being. In OBE 
nese the sound x often plays a part in this process. The reason for this will be 
found in the high frequency of Old-Javanese words ending in this sound, us 
Which such ‘grammatical words’ as yan, n ‘that (rel.), and, further, tag, DO 

The lit. Jav. phrase data-tita (also data-pitana) ‘well, next es ione 
' 0n to the next topic of a narrative) must be explained c E. Mone that, 
cu nos MEUS gas nenv p a e element) and 

let that pass’ (OJav. nda ‘and, next, but, well’, rawluse Tite TNR 
rontaing the Skt. atīta. adta ‘passed, going beyond’. The likewise cs v 
Tenowned’ ; Lr ee its origin to the rather frequent 
M e (w hich occurs beside kyati) ONERE a) and so on 'famous in 
8 kyatin rat or kyati rat (beside kyāti rit 7 


ji ‘in’, rat "world, 
a dildós ginally Skt. khyati- eatfa ‘renown and OJav. iù in 


īve tongue, every adult who 


Pret the elements 
f it, to analyze its 
a position to accomplish this 
al processes leading to success 
Speaking their mother tongue 


ears ago, 1 was 

em». Besi des, there are also complicated cases- If ape < a synonym 

hs tin explaining the curious form atgatā,” which may d future; unknown’, 

s in TON, ‘frightened, afraid’, from Skt. ana TN of the above pro- 
#Ymology can show how the co-operation of two Or 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
984 


LLL — — — —Bigitized-by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and AME — 
cesses is apt to complioate matters. Anāgdta in Old-Javanese adopte 


dt 
ing ‘apprehensive, afraid' (at first in all probability... of tho unknown ELS 
often appears as nūgatd. Tho by-form naigaia, whioh is found in Miei 
texts, can either be explained from analogical Processes (padgata < Skt, Zp ki 
sn ‘unhappy’ and similar words expressing meanings which are likely to hs 
associated with the meaning of this word may be supposed to have exert a 
ence) or be ranged under the so-called spontaneous insertion 
Atgata, finally, was a product of metanalysis. ) 

In a similar way the Mal. réstw blessing, curse; wishing good or ovi 
morphosis' (a synonym of sétu : Skt. astu ATF ‘be it so’) is the same Skt, im 
enlarged with the final r of such preceding words as siddhir fafax Ģ 
Sryawantipura in a wayang text contains a not understood Skt. S»; and 
pura- sit AIRT. 

Popular Etymology and Adaptation. 

If people use a word and associate or interpret its meaning in such a way 
as to connect it with words which are (historically speaking) not cognate, they 
perform an act of so-called popular etymology. Like all other irregular or 
semantically obscure speech-units foreign words, which occupy an isolated posi- 
tion, are often connected with native elements, and re-interpreted. The Javanese 
who no longer understood the Skt. mithuna- figa “a pair (male and female); pair- 
ing explained the traditional phrase lir mimi mi(n tuna ‘as (an inseparable) pair 
of mimi fishes’ (a simile describing the behaviour of inseparable lovers) like this: 
"as mimi and mi(n)tuna’, mimi supposed to be the name of the male, mi(n)tuna 
that of the female fish. The literary Javanese pasaūgiri ‘a solemn contest or 


competition with a prize, a stipulation solemnly made for the obtaining of a prize; 
prize question’ which is doubtless cognate to Si 


promise’ has been interpreted as pasai giri i.e, 
le. ‘as firm as a mountain’? The Mal. 

conduct, (good) behaviour’), which is also 
(after) the Dutch fashion, in Dutch’, bec 


of Consonants 


l, meta. 
Perativo 
SU0C6gg', 
Avanti. 


st. samgtrate Ww ‘to recognize, 
‘the arrangement of a mountain 
cara ‘way, manner’ (<Skt. acara- ATT 
used in euch phrases as cara Bēlanda "in 
ame known to the Barée speaking Tora- 
Dutch way’, i.e. ‘in a hurry’; sara-sara 
"quiek(ly)', mampé-sara-sara ‘to hurry & 
Often, however 


„the speech-maki 
obsolete native t eames in 


cus CS 8 community not only re-interprets &n 
it in such a way as to nar Pm Word of unfamiliar sound or meaning, but alters 
being used in common n more intelligible, more familiar, moro suitable for 
more or legs similar mn Mu senlace it by a single word or a compound of 
widely different from that , du meaning of which is generally clear, but often 
formations of this kind, which, s ord or compound displaced. Regularizing new" 


ENS aija Be ically Speaking, disagreo with the earlier fore 
However, COBRE. niin Pn aro usually called ‘popular etymolog!98 * 
gies. They occur in al 


cesses connected with it 
with even a slight Tesemblance to Dativ. a Duaning to whioh foreign Va, 
e ong 


8 lend themselves. This tendency i 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ed influ. 1 


SANSKRIT IN INDONES] 


SL : 
Digitized by Arya: j ion Chennai and eGangotri 985 
not absent in Indonesia either: the Dutch kapitalist 


Tadonenia cita “capitalist? i 
in Malay as kapi-sētali an infidel (Ar, Usually kapir) ot ju eos 
rena mā an Indian instance may be added: the P. ro 
o of a dance) is not a ‘counter dance in the mM c = 

: 166 direction” or some- 
ginal country dance, 
in rows, 


nam : 
thing like that, but an adaptation of its English Gy 


dance’, generally one in which men and Women stand 
circles facing one another. If we are right in 
muitam etc. the origin of Skt. mukta YTI ‘pearl i 
tation : the ancient Indians apparently associate orm is an adap. 
‘loosened’ and interpreted the unfamiliar kri: native mukia- Hg 


€ 
as that which ig ] 
tho pearl-oyster shell’, an explanation Which has beeu ado res Be 
lexicographers."' p y modern 


In Indone-ian languages which in the cours i 

other tongues, such adaptations are far from ait elc ncs 
divorced woman to remarry her former husband uuless she has been IM 
some one else in the interval. So when this condition has not been fulfilled an 
unattractive person is paid to marry the woman and divorco her immediately. Such 
a person, a muhallil, has also a popular name : Cina buta "blind Chinaman', which 
is an adaptation of Skt. cihna- faa ‘mark, sign’ and bhukti- SIRE which has already 
been discussed.'? 


Li 

8 rural 
in squares, or in 
Dravidian muttu, 


In Old-Javanese two Sanskrit words, mala- NT ‘impurity’, but also 'inear- 
nate into a lower existence’ (Sakasaptati) and (according to lexicographers) 'unbe- 
lieving, godless '* and pātaka- waa “causing io fall; sin, crime; loss of caste’, 
combined to denote ‘a deformed or misshapen figure due to a curse’. In Malay 
mala came to be used for ‘baleful, having a curse resting on allone does. The 
full form mala pataka, which means "wretchedness, misery, due to a malediction, 
an incantation, the interference of the (pre-Muslim) gods, commonly consisting in? 
being born as a monster or a ghastly human being’ has apparently been connected 
with tho native malai ‘adversity, mischance; hence malan-pēstaka beside mala- 
péstaka, the second member of which was identified with pēstaku (<Skt. pustaka- 
GIF book’) ‘book of sorcery or divination, black art in general’. Another form 
of the same term, bala-pustaka, has no donkt arisen under the influence of the 
Arabic word bala’ > Mal. bala, bēla ‘calamity, disaster'.'5 Apart from Malay péstaka 
<Skt. pustaka- 3338 ‘book’ and pëstaka< pataka JAF there is in that language, & 
third homonym. A balai pēstāka is a ‘throne-room or other place where the sultan 
shows himself to his people; an unwalled but roofed raised platform, on which 
the sultan and his chief dignitaries are seated during the performance a ur 
ceremonies’. Other forms of this phrase are balai astaka or balai as = 

Sy S ‘ nsisting of eight parts, 
most plausible etymology is : Skt. astaka- AZF (a whole) co 1. rumah (Mal. 
probably in tho sense of a building in octagonal forms e the Mab C sisting of 

ouse’) bér-astakona (Skt. astakona- agai ‘an octagon’), i.e. 8 house con 
& central portion and wings. m 

Under the word kētika Wilkinson's Malay-Englisl ki 

Poaeral meaning ‘period of time; season’, and, uen 5 to divination; (iii) in 
1) time or season in general; (ii) time with special referen 


ladg ētika stars th: viz. tor 5 l l Oe he Ple 
. rice-p ant ng 1.8. t 
ab tell the time, 1 f 


ti ; Now, the first and second sense alone belong P. represents Skt. kritikah 
"9 (24 or 48 minutes)’; the third, bistorioally spesking, 


h Dictionary'S gives the 
nguishes three senses: 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


jJ: SANSKRIT 1N INDONESIA 
986 


- Digitized by Arya Samaj Foun , tion Chennai a ' e angotri ae 
the Pleiads'. Malay popular elief has no doubt Peon influential] ; E 
Sis ta a certain hour the Pleiads are at such a hei n thig 


i 
: ; PE ght 
held on the hand just slips off it ig time m the 


reinterpretation : when at 
horizon that a grain of rice 


i has often been remarked that (complicated) popular etymolog 


attach much value to the essential correctness of the new forms which 
The ‘sparrow grass —the English word has, by this process, arisen from asparagus 
which, by way of Latin and French, comes from the Greek aspharagos—j, 
neither a grass nor favoured by sparrows. The Malay bijak léksana “modest 
chaste’ is, by adaptation, a lengthening of bijaksana practical wisdom or skill! 
< Skt. vicalisana- AAT ‘sagacious, experienced, familiar with’; bijak is a frequent 
Mee orn of bijaksana and léksana, laksana ‘similarity, like’ («8kt, 
laksaņa- SAN ‘symptom, form, designation’, and ifc. ‘appearing as’) apparently 
Bervecito make the second part of the long word a little more familiar, A 
mahout's goad is, in Kédah Malay, sometimes called bčsi kuasa "the strong irop 
(Mal. bčsi iron") which apparently is an adapted form of kosa, one of the words 
for the object (=ankusa, see farther on). . 

The word mrtasamjivani RIASA ‘revival of a dead person’ (also ag a 
title of several works) has had a very interesting history.'” In Old-Javanese it 
was changed to amrtasanjiwant, no doubt under the influence of the well-known 
Skt. amrta- AGA ‘immortal; the draught of immortality’ (which often occurs in 
ancient Javanese literature); another form was amridījīwanī. Then it aseumed 
the meaning 'draught of immortality, water of life. In Malay the word for 
‘water’ air (to be pronounced ayér) was added,—an addition which is often called 


‘tautological’, but in fact shows that the word was not so completely intelligible 
as before. As méría is, in Malay, an isolated word 


Y doeg not 
it Creafog . 


, it fell a victim to adapting 


x 


g being, animal’), etc. 
4: ‘flowers’ was well-known, denoting 


used to indicate a single flower. In Jav. 
, e Ld transformed into sumarsana; it is questionable whe- 

> : dec IDE: inquiring’, or marsaņa- AGN ‘enduring; pati- 
DREAM 3 ies in the Jav. vocabulary, have played a part in this 
the cémpaka in OCR = ned the appearance of sēmēndērasa which denclet 
AUN ipn m ee influence of rasa < Skt. rasa. TA ‘taste, sensation’? 
Rus GOS Gare ptation ìs the Kedah Mal, sembawarna ‘gold-coloured, 
‘gold’, but has been Seer id. Which represents the Skt. suvarna- Ga" 
Mal. asmara-danta'? ‘ivory eC : Skt. varna- qoi ‘id.’ Next, e 
nothing to do with asmarg ‘lo eeth)” which, etymologically speaking, 24 
goes back to the likewi Ve, gexual relations’ < Skt. smāra- WX id., but 


Z 86 Ocourrin Sim e 
-um-form, derived from sridanta 8 sémërdania iE cn literary Javanese 


gadin ‘ivory’ =Skt, danta- 37a) "A courtly name for the séri-gading flower (Jav. 
The name of the ep 


lo perg Ys SR 
of Java, the first syllable, n Sikhandin becamo Srikandi in the island 
88 


placed by the honorifo iy > are 2 fite native personal article si being » 
Wor-namo gēnitēri "Flaeocarpus angist- 


. CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


* Dayak, Sasak etc. sandawa; Mac. sundawa; 


; field Where a watchman is stationed to protect the orop 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
i ee 


PASI EE Di itiz e panera) fgynision Crematand.eGangoti 287 
lia was no doubt connected with ganda ‘perfume’ (<Skt. gandha ais 
Jā the Malays created the by-form gandalēri, Instead SM ME id, ; 

À ma 


honour’ «a Pkt. form corresponding to Skt. Drastarana. TER ‘seat Suet 
d cidentally find péta-raina (ratna gem, jewel < Skt. ta ja), : _ ee 
i The Skt. word for saltpetre’, saindhava. &eq 


i A was borrow 
guages of the Archipelago: Jav. Sund, séndawa; 


Mal. sënda 
Bug. sunrawa 
and so on, 


ed by many lan. 
wa, cendawa, Ngaju 
languages sadawa etc; Tag. Sanyawa, sanyawa ; in other Celebes 
undergone & onrioug alteration, due to Popular 
of (the) foreigners'.*? 4 

Another curious etymological development is in al] 
the Skt. swrabhi- fa ‘well-favoured, sweet, lovely’, also a name of ‘the holy 
basil and other plants’, and a name of en apsaras: in Old-Javanes 
formed into suratri (cf. Skt. suratri- Buta ‘a fine night’) 
and mixed up with surastri (<Skt. surastri GEM “a celes 
In later poetical Javanese surabi 


stars’. 


etymology :> so tai n drawa ‘muck 


probability shown by 


e it was trans- 
and sulatri (< suresri) 
tial woman, apsarag’.?! 
denotes either the 'pudak-fower" or ‘the 


In this connection it is worth mentioning that the 
an important —and not yet completely elucidated— 
Whereas in a group of words pañca- clearly 


Skt- panca ‘five’ has played 
part in Indonesian adaptations.2? 
represents the Indian numeral (e.g. 
Jav., Sund., Dal. pancadriya ‘the five organs of sense’< Skt. pancendriya. qe 3f-z; 


Sund. pancasona ‘name of a dagger’ « Gkt. paūcasūnā IAA ‘the five things in a 
house by which animal life may be accidentally destroyed, to wit the fire-place, 
slab for grinding condiments, broom, pestle and mortar, and water-pot ), other 
words must, in all probability, be explained by assuming their first part to be an 
altered form?” of the Skt. manca- AFA ‘a stage or platform es columns or on a 
palace; dais, raised seat, couch, pedestal, elevated platform ete. : Mal. pancadiraja 
or pancaraja-diraja ‘royal hearse’ (the second part rajadiraja (<Skt. rdja and 


Ta Nias the word has’ 


d ; C (5 1 bathing- . 
tais magni fa truly royal king’); and pancapérsada ‘a tiered royal bathing 


pavilion’?* : pērsada, which may bs replaced by the native Dione RN mats 
bathing-place or bath-house in general, is the Skt. is ms. GE ani 
platform or terrace’, so that ihe expression originally NEAN EE 
Gative compound or phrase. The OJay. pancarankan or 2 m a i 
might be a better orthography) ‘pavilion’ must be expli kā a'a?® justified 
Oday. raikai alone likewise means ‘a pavilion’. A the ashes of 
conjecture Bal, pancarénga ‘a small building or house hcm no doubt being Skt. 
^ royal corpse’ contains this same mañŭca. The second 2 vanities stage, arena 
TANGA. TH ‘a place for dramatic exhibition or for pub ic day-prova to eal Seite 
elc. it will not be surprising if the entire word will ue erected for paxticu- 
krit compound : cf. Skt. maīcamandapa- SERES m Min. panco alone (final o 
lar ceremonies’. We may also include in this uer on the fields where they 
Sa) ‘a hut for temporary use, put up by cultivator 


: bamboos in à 
s tform raised on RS 3 
WOtk':in India mañca also denotes an elevated pla from birds ete.. Five being 


i E ven 

18 applied in many cases of a natural and vds 

items into a group : Pāli paūca-gorasā five T su 
"56 compounds, while finding their way to 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
EON. — oudeethriyrsamy Foundation Od EET ——— 


à s. Thus Skt. pañcavarna- TAAN ‘five-coloured’ becamo the Ma). 
their meaning ide by side with the original form and the ‘inverag? form NU 
S M Bs in Sasak) was used to DAD Gialabā ‘multicoloured hee 

i De 4 a strands of different colours). The meaning ‘many, multiple jg d 
A a S mancasuara ‘many-voiced, many-tongued’ (: Skt. svara. em "toc 
E K Šīns from the second member the word pancalogam "multicoloured 
lero norite metal or stone (used of veined penne colonted marbles ote.) hag 
reached the Malayan area by the way of Tamil KC Skt. paiwaloha gzgetg the five 
metals, viz. copper, brass, tin, lead, and iron". Likewise the Mal. pancaragam 
‘capricious’ which contains the Indian loan (Skt. raga- uy any feeling, passion, or 
interest’) by way of Tamil ragam ‘manner, dispositidn’.?® Panca thus becoming a 
rather frequent initial element of dignified sound and somewhat vaguo meaning, 
seems to have been deemed fit to replace or to enlarge the first part of some long 
words or phrases : Mal. pancakérawala is a by-form of cakčrawala which (like lit, 
Jay. cakrawala ‘sky; horizon’) is the Indian cakravada- “RAZ, cakravāla.: RATT; 
in Sanskrit cakravala- AHATE means ‘circle’, in Sanskrit Buddhist texts and in Pal; 
it is the name of a mythical range of mountains oncircling tho earth and being 
the limit of light and darkness, hence, it also denotes ‘the whole of the world, a 
whole world-system';?? the meaning of the Malay term is, rather, ‘the wheeling 
vault of heaven, the heavenly bodies which seem to circle, esp. the sun and the 
moon’, and also ‘the circle of the year’. 

A mysterious word is the lit. Jav. pancaruba or pancawora ‘gale, storm of 
wind with rain’; in lit. Sasak this meaning is given to the form panca-ruta. In 

Malay, pancaroba means “changeable, uncertain’ of a wind, but also of inconsistent 


speech; besides, the months of May and October are called the ‘pancaroba seasons’, 
the seasons of variable winds or changes of monsoon 
is also known elsewhere (e.g. in Lombok). 


to me. However, the form panca-ruta seems to be identical with tho Bal. ‘polite’ 
term panca-ruta (which also occurs in the OJuv. Kidung Sunda 2,87) ‘shot, scrap- 
Iron , which may contain the Skt. ruta- Wi'any kind of roar or noise’. /The Jav. 


; in this sense the same form 
The history of this word is not.clear 


à etymology. The Balinese have a panca- 
S ous offering’ : probably Skt. balikarma af ‘offering 
; Eos to all creatures etc.. The Bal. pancagina ‘pentagonal’ must be consi- 
De za 5 o ORO paücakona (Skt. paūcakoņa. atm ‘a pon- 

; a polite by-form of gu < f īcaguna 
(<Bkt. paricaguna- vam) “vef M im) ot Oar. io 


old’, 
In Mal. pancabi 
Ord Ek: dent ea the second member has been ‘adapted’. The 
of a Riau king at hig installation’, tre gold head-ornament placed in the headdress 


9 Original for 


ment mentioned’: Skt. upacara- 
1 ction to upacara, the Mal. anche 
cara. fw ‘deliberation oto.) is 9 


or emblems of, royalty, 
STAR ‘ornament, decor 
[1 * 
deliberation, discussion, opin; 
Pinion eto,” 

much-used word. $ eto. (Skt, 

In combination 
Bund. panca-bagah ‘to bo at vari 


the mutual relationship’ (kaki ‘g 
village community’) panca 


ation’. 


with wordg of native origin 


ance, to quarrel’ 
Tandfather’); re 
may Derhapg ho toga 


(e.g. Mod. Jav. panca-bakals 
„and Sund. panca-kaki ‘discussing 
g. Jav. ‘the oldest members of % 
"ded as indicative of a vory vag 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
— = ia ma =o Phannare i 2 
tizgca)) Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangatri — E 


plurality, variddi 
Other instances clearly show that the Indonesians Us 
ject to ® part of tke new-formed Speech-unit hein 


gens? ( 


ing these wards do 


8 Unintellia; 

t ob : ; nin c D 5 ntelliaible, In i 
no oso literaturo a toli datu eignifies à woven helt or Waistband’ N Sun 
Ton means ‘ropo, cord, string’, can be used of articles of clothin ki; 
whi put datu has no sense. The term is an adaptati Ing suggesting 


cords, 
OJav: and B 3 
q gerves as à means of attaching an amulet, 
cord F Sur: ? an E 
sonsisting of three parts threefold’. Iu Javanese the Skt. anuraga agun 
C "an" to express the idea of ‘modesty hy > NES 
‘affection camo E y, "umnblenegg" the form of tha 
anged to anor-raga : anor is an anei ord for * 
word also changed E 3 g Ecc Détent word for below, down, low’, 
i gula dérawa sugary syrup’ (as a symbol of exireme Sweetnoss) < Pkt 
* , b F = s 2 xb. 
eto. gula JE ‘molasses’ and Skt. drava- 73 ‘duid, liquefied; juice, decoction’ the 
Malays commonly ER y gula di-rawak : di- is a Very useful native verbal prefix, but 
e base rawak means throwing or shooting blindly’, 
A very instructive instance is found in the so. 
Kidung Pamaneangah 5, 75, where Siva's weapon Kal 
tusk’ is called Kaladunastra through the infi 


al. denotes a three-coloured cord or Swing; in the island of M 
ali thia 


tu. fag 


called Middle-Javaneze 
adamstra- SWISS 'Kàla's 
uence of Skt. astra- qx ‘arrow, dart, 
bow’. 

In other languages these processes have led to similar results 
in the arms of Morpheus the Irish often say in the arms of 
a well-known name in their country. 

We cannot omit mentioning that San 


: instead of 
Murphy, Murphy being 


skrit loans in Indonesian languages 
have even in modern times played an active part in transforming words. The 
Dutch bloemencorso “floral parade’ has been Javanized by substituting the first 
member bloemen ‘flowers’ by brama sounding like a regicnal Javanese word 
for ‘fire’ which, etymologically speaking, is Skt. brehma al," and the second 
part corso by karsa which is homonymous with karsa ‘to wish, like’, the etymo- 
logy of which will be discussed in one of the following paragraphs. The 
adaptation of the Dutch propaganda ‘propaganda’ is, from the semantic point of 
view, a greater success : purwaganda "the preceding smell’: both Skt. pürva- {a 
and gandha- n= ‘odour’ have survived in Java. The Jav. word rajawérdi ‘pale 
blue enamel’ has etymologically nothing to do with raja ‘king’ (Skt. rajan- U37) 
and wérdi (desp) meaning of words’ (<Skt. vrddhi- fe ‘increase’),3? because it is 
the Pers. Zazuwardi ‘ot a blue colour (of the colour of lapis lazuli (lazhuward)’. 
lu Malay tho Same word bas no less than three forms: rajavardi, rajawali (which 
< homonymons with the term for ‘eagle’: Skt. rajjuvāla- TANS a kind of MS 
fowl $ 7 Mal. rajawali, by ‘popular etymology’, the eagle being the king pe 
a e irt pis jd o mr ce ae tan 
LM Hing. (lajwardi ‘made of, consisting of, ae 
Retrogr azure; lapis lazuli’, which are tho Persian words). 
ade Derivation. 

while si, Unfrequontly loan-words appear tol 

§ rational in the language borrowing 
; tha lending language. In Dutch the -en of t 


ln er ingular 
na au 48 the nativo plural ending; hence a now singul 
, 4 simi 


gular, f 


have been analyzed in a way which, 

is entirely foreign to the struc- 
he plant-name cyclamen was 
form cyclaam arose. 


is, histori eaking, only a supposed 
ar Way the Engl. marquee is, historically SP 8, "o 


4 í > which was 
Tom French marquise ‘awning, sunshade wh 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


IN 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

990 -  Digitized-by-Arya-Sama] Foundation Chennai and eGanigotrt— ——— 
Een is, as to its origin, a supposed singular instead of ¢ 
Bech d from French, the final s being regarded as a plural em 
et M inns pertama (Skt. prathama- TAA *first) means first, first 


heris, Which 
ng. 


ly’; but th 


very first’ is périama-iama and not pērtama-pērlamā. This way of doubling sho 3 
that tama was conceived as a sort of base, #ér- by itself being a native Prefix n 
a similar way sēgala-gala expresses the idea of everywhere, allover’, ius 


beside Ségala 
native element). 
without reason, 
middle between 
ts Skt, Satatatm) 


(from Tamil, Skt. sakala- AFS ‘all, every"; sč- is also & frequent nat 
sēmēna-mēna (and also samana-mana) in the phrase £idak ( not )s. 
wantonly’ < Skt. samana- QAT equal (in pense ete), holding the 
two extremes; Sas. sélala-tata continually’ beside sētata represen 
aad id.. , 

The very existence of secondary word-bases often teaches us how loan. 
words were interpreted. The loan-word mētērat royal seal or signet’ (from Tamil, 
Skt. mudrā Yel) was used by the Malayans as a verb : "to impress with the royal 
signet’. As the prefix mč- in combination with the suflix -2 usually denotes pro. 
cesses directed towards a local object, a base iéra could easily be supposed to 
underlie the verb. Hence, I think, such phrases as cap (‘seal’) tëra ‘the Official 
seal of a sultanate’ and iēra ‘seal, mintmark eto.. The Sund. riksa (in ha-riksa) 
‘be carefully, taking care of, looking carefully after’ comes in a comparable way 
from Skt. pariksa WN ‘examination’, which is also preserved; caya ‘giving some. 
thing as a substitute of something else, buying on promise to pay afterwards’ may 
be considered a secondary base, sprung from pércaya ‘trusting’ < Skt. pralyaya- 
wea ‘trust, confidence’; the reg. Jav. caya ‘security, bail’ (also in Sund.) is, of 
course, identical; Bal. hasa ‘force, surprise (attack) comes from sahasa ‘by violence’ 
<Skt. sahasa Meum ‘id’. In these words the first syllable was taken for a pre- 
fix, but the tendency to shortening words by aphaeresis must not be left ‘out of 
account. 

Reinterpretation may be regarded as unquestionable when the initial of 
the secondary (abbreviated) base has changed in accordance with IN. tendencies: 


Sund. sa-ieka-ieku (beside sa-neka-neka) ‘as much ag possible’: ef. Jav. neka-neka 
various <Skt. meka- 833 ‘manifold’. 


i i In Balinese paca serves as a secondary 
base for reading, reciting’ (in ka-paca); 


E ke the nasalized maca (from waca: of. the 
EA "MAE Was apparently interpreted as a derivative of a base begim 
with p. Skt. moksa- "e. ) 
UR ui. E bg Tq ‘final emancipation’ is preserved in the Tag. muli 
Th m enn secondary base was derived : puksd; hence pinuksa killed. 
© interesting history of the word vanija- ais etc. deserves more than 


passing notice. As we know ija i 
already Old- i i a. e 
to trade’ and also banijakarma, dnd b Ver 


, S fin 
banyaga, banyaga (i A rce. By the side of there words WO ^, 
ï vanvaa (in Kā 1,116, for instance) ‘captain of a merchaťi 
© used to denote his ship, the merchan 
point of th ord is bandyaga, bandyaga.* The sta! 
baro "Pe s has no doubt been Sisi/oka. Td fira NE already d 
already in Sanskr ‘ata. Asis well known the suffix -ka- n 
léher degree in Prākrit, is added to DI 
m in the former language, especially s 
Popular i iliar ub * 
88 ourselves mor ar, and, in proper nouns, a fam! pt- 
ly represent a word of Prükrit in io the Old-Javanese words pU m 
ca medial & became g and j bocame 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ae ——— 291 
d Kern” hag even gone 50 far as to surmise that the dial 
and that Jaina baniyans RU helped to spread the word outsi 
„ya- often becoming e ee Eu as bandega (aud banega 
earn ai ot ims Vei T 

T eral, 3 , people i ; s 

a ae ghar side, iden AOI Mens EU fishermen, 
pe are on the run. Thus, a foreigner who ig a fogitive kc Wanderers 
ies Javanese poem, à page et In Sundanese jalma por st O 
yaga 879 people who, being of foreign origin, have recently settled down in a cer- 
fain region. In Tagalog —for the Indian word has also come to the Philippines— 
banyūga means merchant, pedlar; in Bisaya binayága expresses the idea of 
“hawking, pedling £ Now, Malay has borrowed it ag bēniaga, bērniaga ‘to trade” 
(ora biniaga merchant ) synonymous with the native bér-dagan ‘to trade’; daga 
‘foreign, foreigner, foreign trader’), in which bér hag been interpreted as the Malay 
prefix bér- (which is instrumental in forming words meaning “occupying or con- 
corning oneself with’), so that from a secondary base niaga a word for ‘trade- 
wares, merchandise’, pér-niaga.an (=dagan-an) has been derived. In Minangkabau 
this secondary base even lost its initial nasalization > tiago ‘commerce, merchan- 
dise’. 
Duplication. l 

Although in the so-called more advanced stages of civilization, among groups 
and classes which have, generally speaking, lost contact with ‘primitiveness’, in 
circles where the ‘modern’ or ‘intellectual’ mental structure is dominant redupli- 
cating and interative devices are a rather unimportant part of language, we see over 
and over again that 'primitiveness' is everywhere apt to come to the surface. In 
small communities, under simple and traditional circumstances, among men who 
are used to speaking in a natural way without forcing back their emotions, their 
phantasy and inclination to play with their language and to connect the speech- 
Units with each other or to adapt them for their personal use» reduplicating ten- 
dencies are far from being rare. We must, of course, confine our remarks here to 
doubling or duplication {the repetition of the complete word) and reduplication 
(the repetition of part of the word) as a process affecting words borrowed from 
Sanskrit. 

In Malay séma séma and séséma are by-forms of sélésema, all of um 
di CA in the head’; démam (a native word for b ) und K: A is 
same jm sieri ne ili ki Ro po ium m be connected with 

rak "ce the word gérgaji saw, to RT ich is in fact a redupli- 

ataca: SEF ‘saw’ in Sanskrit, is also known as-gegast, whichis Edd A 
cated form, and as gaji gaji, a complete result of the tendency to duplication. An 
interasting į : 3 ‘breathing’ which represents Skt. uc- 

8 instance is the Bal. wusuwasa breathing ioh. boride 

unt SUPR ‘id., sigh’. Bugi instances are: kuma-kuma, M 
oma-koma » sigh’. — Buginese tandard form is kumkuma saffron’: 
of. the Sk ae in Malay, where the 8 ivus); Pkt. kumkuma- SSH; 
indi kt. kuikuma- Sea ‘saffron (Crocus satovus); een orsa led 
"Unum, Sen, kumkumā GBA eto; and sarasare SUUS T séisara ‘pain, 

9 derivative mana ‘torturing oppressing. from sansata: * The wide- 
ortury, misery’ ace ‘the isery of worldly existence . jeu id 
Droad es Y <Skt. samsara- WAR the misery idw e have already pai 
much transformed word for pigeon, 


Mop t 
On (Skt. pa etc), while appear 
BOFGUatar SUID SENA Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ing ‘ 


or 
hich w 


ing as palapati in Tag. 


iRIT IN, INDONESIA 
292 Digitized by Arf] Bun ation Chennai and eGangotri 


SAGEN «gumed the duplicated form patipati in anot 
eng i E dle NIA. loan Mal. suasa ‘pinchbeck’ ete, bp 
a A the Minangkabaus, tosun (beside suasa) by the Sunà 
That the TBat. word for ‘fives penalty’ is dandan instoad of danda (: Skt, da 
que ‘punishment’) must be regarded as the outcome of this same tondenoy, vii 
times a word is, after many native modela (cf. Mal. gunui-ganaii mountains " 
general : gun? ‘mountain’, sayur-mayur greens of all sorts’: sayur), subjected k 
repetition with some variation: Min. baso-basi observan ce of customary ceremonial 
etiquette’: Min. baso correspends to Mal. bahasa language, manners, breeding < 
Skt. bhasa WGI ‘specchs language’, and tho variant in-? was added. A cautious 
instance of reduplicatior is the lit. Jav. cacaya false, not genuine’ which must ho 
connected with the regional caya or cahya ‘outward appearance’ < Skt, chiya zm 
‘shadow, complexion’. 


r Phil; . 
Di 
as lransf age 


Ot med 


1 The reader may be referred to my ex- | R.J. Wilkinson, A Malay-English Dic- 
position in Lingua I, p.333ff. | tionary, (Mytilene-Greece, 1932) I, p.587, 
2 Seo the paper in Lingua I referred to | 17 See my paper in BKI.LXXXIX (1932), 
above. v.2911f., and also BKI. C, p.158f. 

1 Another Malay word sémburna, mean- - 
ing ‘homogeneous’, represents the Skt. 
sampürna- AIH ‘completely filled ete’. 
1? See Wilkinson, MED. I, p.50.and II, 
p.496. 

20 See also A. Lafeber, Vergelijkende 
klankleer van het Niasisch, p.93. 

?! I refer to KBW. III, p.98. 


2 Swellengrebel, Korawāsrama, p.987 

and 172. 

+ Adriani, Barée-Nederlandsch Woorden- 

bosk, p 689. 4 

* Also refer to my remarks in BKI, C 

(1941), p.1401f. 

* This etymology is far more plausible 

than that proposed by Klinkert, Mal. 

Y 7 L 1 

Aa Neat enhost, D-73 : Skt. dhūka. | 22 This point has recently been discus- 
: | sed by F. S. Eringa, Lootoeng Kasaroenš 

1 See BEL, LXXX id = (W i 

LM E peer SPM p.463. | T, Verhandelingen (Works edited by te 

* See Van der Task TRG xxv .. | Koninklijk Instituut voor Teal Land- 

n ^ TBG. XXV, p. | en Volkenkunde VIII (1949), eom 

Een i 
'? Bee Gerioke and Roorda, Jav..Ned ** See the paragraph on initial nasate 


H e the preceding section. 
ne res II (1901), p.283. 24 The "ee steps (three, five à 
'* Cf. alo BKI. C, p.156f. seven, the number varying with tne 


13 Seo ch. IIT, 8.4, 
'* Of. KBW. IV, p.581 See 

, p.981. 1 
XXV, pp.511; 613; 533, "PG. 
15 H, C. Klinkert, Nieuw 
landach Woordenboek 


rank of the person using the pavilion) 
leading up to a central platform. ji 
** Eringa, o.c., p.287. As to the ae 
: building called isi Th, P. Gales 
M gcalled pancarési ? 
aleisch-Neder. Houtbouw op oost-Javaansche tempe 
» | reliefs (The Hague 1936), p-114 fin 

caused by incantati the opini d contain 
no doubt in accordance m a animent, Mer Balinese algo 
tradition. the Malay havea saplarēsi which ig a kind of poil 


ing (bale) with seven posts: 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


+ week 


SANSKRIT IN I 


cR E 


OJav. 
mentioned. 
76 Gf. also in Old-Javanese and Balinese 


-wara ‘the so-called Indonesian 
consisting of five days (Skt. vara. 
The now obsolete 


panta 


, 
an ‘day of a week'). 
Jav. pancawara applying to various ma. 
«ical practises (such as facilitating the 
difficult confinoment of & woman by 
means of muttered formulas) seems to 
contain tho same vára- in the sense of 
*turn, moment; opportunity, ete.’ Besides, 
Balinese has panca-aksara or pancaksara 
(Skt. aksara- 9581 "letter, syllable’) ‘the 
five ‘holy letters’ or initials of the names 
of the five so-called market-days’; pan- 
ca dewa (Skt. deva- Za ‘god’), ‘the fice 
gods (of the four quarters of the sky and 
the centre); panca-wisaya (Skt. visaya- 


fada ‘objects of the senses’) ‘the five | 


passions . 

27 See also Van Ronkel, in TBG. XLV 
(1902), p.110. 

28 Van Ronkel, o.c., p.108. 

29 Compare also W. Kirfel, Die Kesmo- 
graphie der Inder, (Bonn-Leipsic 1920), 
p.180f. 


. r E à 
Harivamsa 2,11 a paicabale ig | 20 See also En 
80 Ering 


Digitzed-by Arve Samal Foundation EROR ER eGangotri 


eli 293 
a, ve . 
Mm RE RR 


32 This Skt. word can 
ase, growth 
ete.’ 


also mean inere- 
S , Prosperity, gain, interes; 
se ee in Javanese the “explication 
‘pretation’ of a text "frui 
and 
(of a woman), l pe 


33 1 
This word occurs Manu 5,19 ag a 


variant of rajjudala, 
3 


> 1 
NS e 
"e t a (p1J.) 
ragawarta which is the Sanskrit 
rajavarta- Uai "lapis lazuli; 
of diamonds or gem of an inferiorq 
* Of. also Kern, VG. X, p.271. 
** Of. also KBW. IV, p.850 and 863. 
*7 See Pischel, GPS. $ 909. 
** Kern, VG. X, p.959, 
°° The Ardhamagadhi forms are vani 
"merchant", vanija ‘trade’, vaxiya "trader", 
vanijja ‘trade; vaniya ‘merchant’; vā- 
niyaga (representing vanijyaka-) ‘trade’ 
and ‘merchant’. Now see also M. Mayr- 
; hofer, alt. vazik 'Kaufmann, Händler 
| (Etym. Miszellen), in Symbolae Hrozny 
| Vol. V, (Prague 1951), p. 69%. 


has 

form: 
a king 
uality’, 


SECTION 4 
MORPHOLOGY 1I 


Affines. 
Aflixes, too, deserve our att 
such, in abstracto, When» however, 


Words, it may be extended to new-formations derived from nativ 
cially when tho loan-words form, through the afix, a di 
the new-formations or at loast the oldest among them, 
group. Thus Latin, French and German aflixes ha 


eution. They are, of course, not borrowed as 
a definito affix occurs in enough borrowed 


e material, espe- 
stinet semantic group: then 

as a rule join that very 
ve become productive in Dutch; 
le, excusable eto. has, in English, 


the French -able in the loan-words variable, agreead 

"en extended to forms like bearable, eatable, drinkab 

"We in passage, pilgrimage (Fr. pélerinage) to leakage, 
in this way, a long history.” tiveness of the Sanskrit 
here are unmistakable instances Of the Te Dealing with 

SH or nirguna- ftn type of composition "C fixes propery wo may state 

another section, and confining ourselves to 5 a h& against! contains. the 

that a Word like the OJav. durlaga ‘difficult to be, fang 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


le, and, likewise, the French 
drifiage. Some affixes have, 


duskria. 
thom in 


; ANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
294 Digitized BOR a Samal Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Sanskrit prefix duk &: and the Javanese base laga ‘fight, combat’, The pret 
known to the ancient Javanese in okt durgama- ZAR unattainable; a rs 
situation" (in the latter sense or danger ib was preserved by tho later generation. 
of poets); durjaya- gs difficult to be conquered, invincible ; end durniti Sial: 
cious person, enemy < Skt. durniti- Bus ‘misconduct, impolicy’; durcara (sic) m 
minal, notorious < Skt. duscara- ZAT behaving wickedly’ and some other ups 
likewise survived. Whereas in these words the sandhi variant dur ZX has Bak 
retained and introduced (dursila gate is also OJav.), lit. Mod. Jav. dist 
duskarti ‘to behave wickedly; crime’ (OJav. duskrtas duskrti ‘crime, evil deeg < 
Skt. duskrta- gs ‘evil deed’, duskrti- FAG 'evil-doer') shows the form dus «gt. 
dus-, dus-, dus- EX, SA, FY. The compound durmala which occurs in Javanese 
literary language as a synonym of durniti», though consisting of dur and mala 
(lit.) ‘evil visitation, affliction’ < Skt. mala- AE ‘impurity, sin’ seems to haye been 
forged in Java. 

As to nir, which occurs in many Skt. loans in OJay. texts (e.g. nirutsaha- 
fga "without energy >OJav. id. ‘powerless’; nirbhita- fmfa ‘fearless’ > lit, 
Mod. Jav. nirbita 'id”) we find it in the hybrid nirdon ‘useless, purposeless’ (OJay, 
don ‘aim’) and nirwwa ‘usoless’. It may even be suggested that the OJav. base nir 
to disappear, to be out, gone’, Mod. Jav. nir ‘gone, disappeared; without? is, as to 
its origin, nothing but the Skt. prefixed element nis-, nir- fra, faz ‘away, forth’. 

The well-known Skt. possessive saffix -vant- TA, nom. sg. -vūn I found 
its way also to the Malays : cf. rupawan ‘handsome’ < Skt. rūpavām JA17, ‘beauti- 
ful’; hartawan "wealthy, owning property <Skt. arthavan EIN "id^; sastérawan 
um e Box ‘skilled in divination’ < Skt. Sastravan RITTER 
UNA — Ges kā ; Séliawan, saliawan loyal, dā < Skt. 
Y Straits Settlements also tis Mala "c x) šā de EE uals (and Mae 
SA cirst (S pann : E though Gta to a Skt. 
to have arisen not long since: it em s S MN e 
Skt. mūlya- qz E ce aa P mulia distinguished, meritorious < 
mered, beaten’ (mas t. ‘h. or b. gold’) Kā, perra Ria venrord S tëmpawan ia 

: ‘trom Mal. témpa ‘working metal with the 


hammer’; the form in wan is li 
E 18 likel isti i é i 
meee ERN ene a distinguished recast of témpaan (with 


The use of Skt. maha 
} i = a , H H 
Jav. Mal. etc, maharaja "(great) zu great which algo occurs in such loan-words 88 


king’; Mahadewa ‘groat god, Si Prince, very royal’ < Skt. maharaja- AZIS ‘supreme 
Ris COLS mE ZB : deva- AZZA ‘Siva’; mahamēntēri ‘high 
such hybrid combinationg 


High’, lit, mahawikan omni o: abis 


€ " r 
^ omniscient’ etc . 
"y 


econd member jg nati "DénMi, ‘of the highest importance eto. 
In others both elements are, a6 to 


guru- 31 ^ i a 
fessor’ kā AR in Sanskrit (‘a very m as such is Indonesian : though mahd- 
nn oo regarded as g loan-trang] ķi able person’) the Mal mahaguru pro- 
ation $ 


4 

high(school) t sn a AI 
d th LOBOS ina comparabl ' ^r Imitation, of the Dutoh hoogleraar , 

and the now obsolete gj « "m 9 way mahasiswa “(uni >< maha 

which y and w after g orm Which h University) student <m 


Z Y way i : 
interchange) of Javanese literary language (in 

comes from Skt, šisya- fap 'id.; 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. d 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


c EE ON... F n 5 Ec. 9 
— guta 'ambasca dt ed QUI Desa preat ton Chenn i 95 


h aa eet \a native word) duta’; 
| romance), minister C ne ete’ (in modem "es duta ‘envoy? (in 
mohamulya ‘Highly Glorious and Mal. idem ‘most illustrioug? en m Tae 
only to roy. 


in Malaya) may represent the Skt. makamūlya. « 

ted i ri Noo LG 
‘most holy nothing Saosin seems d correepond (Skt, suci- ate ur ^ i 
even find mahabansawan very noble’ (see above). An interesting - oly’). We 
pation 18 maha-gémpita for most terrible or ‘most august’: gëmpita "bus = 
«git. kampita- Me o tremblingi As the Malay dictionaries hil fe 
exact statements about the texts in which the Words occur it ig Ex. eer o give 
gely to know when such terms appeared for the first time : Mal. mahajana aen 

seems to have been 


man’ was used in the older literature, but mahajana ‘public’ 
mahajana- AIA ‘a great man’ and ‘a great 


introduced in modern times: cf. Skt. 
multitude of men, populace’. The word maharani ‘queen’, finally, is likely to be 
a NIA. loan : cf. Hindi maharani AIRING maharani agnt ‘principal wife of a maha- 
raja, reigning queen . 
Another Skt. element which was destined to become widely used is ūdi- 
af. In Old-Javanese such loans as adidewa ‘the first god’ «Sit, adideva- mR 
ʻa? were more or less „common, and adi by itself in the sense of "beginning, 
eminent <Skt. adi- sufa beginning was also frequently used. Some compounds 
(e.g. adisajjana- AZETA ‘the first or former virtuous men’) may have arisen in 
the island of Java. In Malay adi came to express the meanings of ‘preeminent, 
paramount, first in war; it was mostly used in honorifics such as adiraja very 
royal < Skt. adiraja- AIRT ‘first king’; adi-muda or di-muda (aphaeresis) which 
contains Mal. muda ‘young’; adi-nin-rat ‘first of the world’ (Jav. mi& and rai); 
adiwaùsa or diwaisa ‘highly born’ has got a new meaning, if it directly represents 
Skt. Gdivamsa- MZAA ‘primitive or first family’. A 
In lit. Jav. supénuh ‘crowded, over-full the first element is the well. 
known Skt. su- g ‘well’, the second the native pënuh ‘fall’. 
To what extent words and other morphemes may be altered and mixed up, 
may also be illustrated by the history of the element ali- In Old-Javaneze a 
number of Sanskrit compounds beginning with aii aia wasin use: OJav. atidana 
(Skt. atidāna- afazta ‘munificence’); atikanta (Skt. atikania- aldara ‘excessively 
beloved’), ete.; a word atijoti to be found in the Adiparwa, may contain Skt. 
ivotis sata, ‘light? and mean something like ‘very bright’. In some texts, for 
instance the OJay. Ramayana, these compounds with ati- are as much liked as 
in certain classical Sanskrit works: in the Ram. over 50 are found, among Kae 
alisokamanasa "very a‘ilicted, very distressed” (beside Sokamanasa, sā oo 
Containing Skt. šoka- ata ‘sadness’ and manasa- AAG mid da eos es is 
maamies), and atisalurga ‘vary glad’ (Skt. saharsa- WEN ess as 15, 13 ati mapu 
i OR WORSE : Rim. 8,06 alma a a h'; ati-ka-trés -an (trčs, tērēs 
1 pecu) very difficult’; ati-lara "very sad or peevis f being aflicted by the pro- 
m = a Korenito clea es sia denote V of the later ages 
(C by the bese) mach sid t EE afgatam); tisudhā ‘very 
IET kitiāra U tsan w bsc remained in use. Bat 
side b ust Skt. atisobhana- sf Mer appear: ti in lit. Jav. tisaya 
b enum the original form ati other hich may have originated by metana- 
ngly’(<Skt. atisaya: ARTA); atya ware 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


NSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


996 Digitized by Aa Samaj Foundation Ghennat anc-eGangotri— 
BM anti (internal nasalization); ‘antya: 


nning with aly-a3 
ords beginning wit Lt ctia ion? 
To ogia Gei ISES excessive’ wh 


Foal SIRO such forms as aniyantd, mati(yjanta, matyanta, man, 
Java MN tye etc., bas on account of ita similar form and mean: 
BE eir influence upon the outward topa R à ps i M 
- Tho Skt. prefix sa- & will be dealt with in the next chapter. 

As to the sufixes making stems in Sanskrit, Gāja soldom OT Never 
become productive in Indonesia, —if we pat on one side tho complicated history 
of tho -i variants beside words in -4. There exists an OJav. word for "border 
length’ : dawata, which can be regarded as an abstract in the Sanskrit way, derived 
from OJav. dawa ‘long; length’. 

Let us now pass on bo a more detailed discussion of a special point, The 
history of the element pra- constitutes a dificult problem, which has alroady been 
touched upon by some authors.* According to Priyohutomo’s opinion, which 
essentially reaches back to the view of Roorda and Poensen who in 1855 and 1897 
wrote Javanese grammars, bwo prefixes pra- must, historically speaking, be dig. 
tinguished in the Javanese language, viz. the Sanskrit element and a native prefix 
which may be considered a more dignified by-form of the Javanese pa-. Kiliaan 
however, regarded all words with pra- as containing the Sanskrit element, whidh, 
then, in part of the cases is a borrowed prefix. It is a fact that several Old. 
Javanese words beginning with pra-, which in part continue to exist in the 
modern language, are loan-words froin Sanskrit : prabhawa (Skt. prabhāva. ama) 
‘power, might’, and, also in modern literary style ‘miraculous power; pramüda 
(Skt. pramada- AHIZ) ‘carelessness etc.; pramukha (Skt. pramukha- AY8) "fore- 
most, chief’; pramudita- (Skt. pramudita- 38A) ‘glad’ etc. In modern Javanoso 
prayitna ( « prayatna XA) still occurs to express the idea of carefulness' or ‘being 

" careful; taking precautions against imminent dangers’; prayoga is in its meaning 
intelligent forothought and consideration’ antiquated, but still in use as a word 
MR. o sirable B Skt. prayoga- HAIN ‘practice, device; prakara is a 
rot A RM affair, topic, case, lawsuit’; pralaya (St. sea) occurs 
le. outside the traditional ay pe ee epidemic in so-called dialectal speech, 
(cm OB PM : cultural centre, tho Principalities; Skt. pralabdha- 
tr ma eceived continues to exist as the lit. Mod. Jav. pralébda, now mean- 
Ing experienced, versed in an art : 3 : BV i € : 
dignified word for *deceaged' Bt ee pralina, guauna.s x literaria 
adopted to denote a Pod de =), and the derivative pralénan ba been 
believe in’ (< Skt. pratyaya- OMM pracaya means persuasion, faith' or "m 
Sanskrit safga Ens) c Ah i S SC pele language grani is 
Pranava- ANA is a well-known term ep Pialichtning';,. pranawa dn Meo 
sight’, etc. ete, As the words und RENT Ksgeóred onyllnblp. Om) as e ‘ed 
as well (e.g. bhawa: Skt. bhava- aa it these compounds were often borrons 
IAG; yatna- : Skt. yatna- AA) it bec kaka» : Bit, mukha- ga; mudita : Skt. niis 
it fo native words. Roorda w caine possible to ‘abstract? pra- and to proux 
and especially the later Java as, however, right in remarking that the Javarnoses 
of Bkt, pra- 8. In such (ag nese, could not understand the fine shades of moaning 

39 : pramudita- ggfza Ce TEES prabheda- 3312 ‘difference’: modi 
i Vatna- A: prayatna. TAA (endeavour ete. tbo 


to all ap A 
pearance, regarded j 
e rded it ag a ; i 
meaning or more an tension adding a somewhat more intensive 

ine word, ‘ 


matya; 
ich in 
tyanta, 
Ng, no 


lysis in W i 
maniya; ia; tV 


dignified aspect to 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


U— C a 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


= Di " d MS maj Foundation Chenmaiand-eGangotri ied 
It ie, fort TP TRE UTR A alkeady in Old-Ja vaneso te cts whi m 
gidered as comparatively ancient, th mi: 
con 


is Process of transferri O native 

| | ops $ erring pru- ( i 

S ; : we find, in the OJav. Ràm. pragagakh ‘valiant, Courageous’ (g : 
agah 


a ee firi"), which may hay 

‘spirited; a pracacal ‘gone VA Meo Re upon Skt. Pragalbha- seq 
*bold: Sunes , valági. “torme O cacah id”), ct. Skt. chinna. fg : pra- 
ner di pralag Y Magi id”); pratiikah ‘state of things” uU 
É Kiliaan, who often proved an ingenious, but t 
untrained writer, has tried to trace the analogical 
Jav. pratinkah, o3, must, in his opinion, have aris 
after the model of Skt. pracdra- ma conduct, behaviour’: cāra- SIN ‘going, course 
proceeding otc. A weak point of his argument is, however, that he repeatedly 
utilizes Sanskris words which are (hitherto) not found in Javanese, When he, e =| 
explains the couple pratzkél, which in Mod, Jav. meang ‘expedient, rule or method 
to be followed in order to be successful; hint, tip' and also had the now obsolete 
meaning ‘ceromony, ceremonious session’: (iki "broken, cracked; having a crack; 
doubled’ by referring to Skt. nata- 48 ‘bent, curved, inclined, bowing, saluting’, 
which, according to him, has been a Synonym of Jav. sómbah ‘the Javanese aiijali, 
the ceremonious or polite gesture of worship or homage’ : pranata- XNA ‘bent or 
bowed (forwards), respectful, humble etc.", he, in the first Place, dismisses the se- 
mantic problems too unconsideredly, and further, omits investigating as to whether 
the Skt. nata- XA actually occurs in Javanese literature, According to the same 
author, the Javanese title pratingi (to be foundin Modern Jay. outside the Principa- 
lities) "village-headman' has been modelled upon the Sanskrit couple pramukha- 
WHA: mukha- Ya, tiùgi ‘high’ being given; now pramukha- "Hu in Sanskrit can 
denote a ‘chief, principal, respectable man, head of a corporation’, and mukha- ga 
can, in Java as well as in India, mean ‘chief, best, principal’ (OJav. maka-mukha 
‘having as chief?) and so be nearly rynonymousto a shade of meaning expressed by 
tiùgi. But here Kiliaan’s simplistic explanation encounters another difficulty : we 
find side by side with pratingi, outside the Principalities also patiùgi, which, as 
pēliūgi, also occurs in Malay, apparently as a borrowed word. Now the Indonesi- 
an prefix pa- is often instrumental in formiog words for functionaries or persons 
occupying themselves with definite duties or activities: Jav. palaku ‘beadle’; 
Pasinden ‘female singer’ (sindēn ‘song, singing of women in the gamelan orchestra J; 
Sund. pagawe ‘labourer, person liable to forced labour’; Mal. péduduk “resident, 
Occupant’; the initial sound of the base is often pre-nasalized or replaced by ds 
corresponding nasal : Mal. péndiiin ‘chilly persou' (divin ‘cold’). The word pénu- 
lu "headman (in a very general eonse), which is a derivativa of hulu head, RU 
Part’, ig widespread (Malay, Karo-Batak, Javanese etc.). So a native RR 
have existed before the Sanskrit couple mukha- 89 : pramukha- Ro Wu fūrs 
marii. Moreover, we have to remember that the method of vial toby KIM 
jona by means of ‘proportional aualogy',* consistently ae derivatives is 
as In many cases proved inadequate. The process of forn ula à: be : x sug- 
often far more subtle and complicated thau the classical em. so-called dialect 
se Tho study of local difforentiations in a RE tU research, has 
eeoBraphy, which supplements the comparative method of ling 


: way for a newer 
in the matter of word-formation as well as other points jo M 
and bettor understanding of the mechanism of change in $ 


generally 


09 Imaginative, uncritical and 
process in partioulars, The 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


en beside the original tinkah ` 


modern words with për- 


! SANSKRIT 1N INDONESIA 
998 Digitized by Arya Samaj r ; 

w be said on the whole, and taking into account the à 

It may ZR our knowledge which do not admit of applying t 

h adopted in the investigation of living languages, th 


9plorayi. 


numerous g3p8 i he Subla 


f researc ) ` de GT. ia, 
OA Jav. word pratanda with the now obsolete meaning ‘token, dist 
E mark etc., may, as to its origin, be regarded as influenced by the Bh. 
gui a b 


. ar anings also expresses the i A 
gramana. TAWI which among other mea CE p ur ideas of ‘Proof 
j although Skt. mana- Al proof, evidence’ is ] 
ı àg 
hang, 
ever, 


8 : in general), 
sanae a ori in our Old-Javanese toxts, but, also, on the other 
that in several other casee, we must, for the time being and perbaps for 
remain in the dark about the oxact process of analogous extension, 

Apart from the already discussed pratings there are other Javanero words 
beginning with pra- beside vinis forms with pa- are in Qu or less Boneral use; 
prajurit and pojurit IIO Ocour in the same OJav. text, both being derived 
from tho same native base jurit (to) fight; prajurit is still used to denote the 
native military and bas (as pērjurit etc.) even found its way to tho literature 
outside Java; both prasanakan and pasanakan (base sanak ‘a remote kinsman’) 
aro denotatīve of the idea of ‘rolatives’, the second being (according to Pigeaud’s 
lexicon) colloquial, and side by side with OJav. palambai which denotes some. 
thing like ‘formulated text or song’ we find pralambar ‘allegoric saw and prophecy’, 
I would consider these cases of pra- words in Javanese as blendings or so-called 
contaminations.” Although we are, of course, often in the dark about the question 
which words may have helped towards the formation of particular pra- forms 
beside pa- forms, we may admit that the existence of a group of borrowed (and 
analogous) pra-forms has given rise to new pra-words besido the pa-words, which, 
as we have seen, are quite regular in an IN. idiom like Javanese. Having, by the 
side of Kd-, sa- and other prefixes an unusual. form and occurring in a large 
number of borrowed and more or less elevated words, the pra-variant sometimes 
assumed a more diguified character than the original pa-form.® 

The problem is» however, more complicated; because beside the IN. prefix 
pa-, pé- a form par-, pér- i3 not rarely found. Although we cannot here deal with 
this complication in all particulars, because part of them have no bearing on the 
m alt upon IN. languages, it seems useful to dwell upon this point 

» In order to show what kind of difficulties can arise when a 


native and a foreign formativo eļ 5 
an 3 ement are ho c rit and other 
words beginning with pra- rnonymous. Sanskr 


are, on the one hand, now and probably for a long time 
past, also pronounced a8 pēr-: Mod. Jav. colloquial a | ide pracaya CBE 
Dratyaya- FAA, pērtelan "stat Arin 
tion), mention’. The same { 
teri) ‘prime (minister) < Sk 
similar syllables in IN. idio 
par- which as such occurs 
logically identical pag- in 
Kern," not found in Ja 
one the Orig, IN, T2 

we not seldom 
moreover, the E iet a A sid 
efore th. 


way which usually ig called * * consonant of a following syllable’ in & 


» Or, rather, unetymological.'” A 
of loan-words from Malay. 80»! 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


as për- in Malay and as tho etymo- 
: Para- or pay. ),'° ie, according bo RÀ 
whore its etymological form would have been pah 
SIDE into h>O in that language. But instead of h 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSRRIT 1N INDONESIA 


ee 299 
possible that part of the older Javanese words begi 


t Stoning with pz. ģ s 
irety of IN. origin. But the Javanese Ste pcr- are in their 


ent 


n ‘lo travel”: base 


à Oner of € i 
iet y : entences' ag 
se) a functionary such as g 


So we may, i i 
šai Y, m contradistineti 
Roorda'* conclude that Sanskrit influence has, at all events, played a di 


able part in es ira: e with the elementa pra-, pir... 

The we Fits ee wien we are aware that the Javanese, given the 
ae iki ke a rs e de Sound-group pra par per, have, on the lines 
of such 3 aktā à im agi i Mew o and the like formed pra-words 
out of ol et pg „not begin in t 1S Way, e.g. pradañga (lit.) ‘the gamelan 
(-orchestra) < Skt. mrdaAga- Wax ‘tabour’; prawata ‘mountain’ < Skt parvata- 
qaa 'id."; pradikan, pérdikan exempt from taxation! « Skt. maharddhika. qzfax 
which, whilst meaning us powerful, prosperous or wise’ in SUE ces te 
ancient Java used to denote divine persons etc. whó were exempt from taxation. 
And, by the way, in Mod. Jav. pragēdēl the Dutch frikadel ‘minced-meat ball” hides 
itself, and in prahoto tha Dutch vrachtauto *motor-lorry". Oceasionally, moreover, 
pra has developed from para-: Mod. Jav. lit. prameswari "royal spouse! « Skt. 
OJav. paramesvari WHA. This change, which often occurs in Jav. numerals 
(fractions) beginning with a native element para, apparently fails to turn up in 

"m n Lr? = s . . 
paramarta (lit., gentle) <Skt. paramartha- way (the history of which is dealt 
with in another section), and other words. 

This remark brings us to tho analogous and partly connected problems of 
the words beginning with para and pari in Javanese. A word like paracidra which 
in modern lit. Jav. means "perfidious" or ‘perfidy’ oceurs already in ancient texts 
(‘traitor’) and reaches back to Skt. parackidra- Tz; containing para- 4% ‘another’ 
and chidra- (3% ‘waak point’, it is in Pet. Dict. and MW. only given as another's 
fault or defect'. But how to explain lit. Jav. parakrama (and, as a case of dissi- 
milation, palakrama) ‘marriage’? The word krama was already in later Old-Java- 
nese, and is still in so-called krama inggil (i.e. a rather limited vocabulary, used 
when one wishes to emphasize thas the person addressed cr the person spoken 
about, his limbs, acts otc, are noble, exalted or highly honovred'*) known to denote 
the idea of ‘marry’ which I have never seen expressed by the Skt. krama- *8H, 
though it may havo developed from ite meanings regular Beno Ts F 
rulo sanctioned by tradition’. May we consider parakrama kā y [a IE 
parikrama- GRR, which in Skt. means ‘circumambulation ,in E 

DE à g. pan 
rather numerous words beginning with para another (eg. 2 aad 
and para ‘hich? X ; ‘eminent post?) in Old-Javanese, and as 
Para high” (e.g. parakawi ‘eminent p : Yeading the bride 
Semantic sid f th bl mpare Skt. parwaya- qf ? E 
a Side of the problem, comp im. 179,30 trir agnim te pari- 
Ound tho fire, marriage’, and such passages as Rampau Pay ore 
kram fafa 3 A irc f a marriage-ceremony 
4 Va AUA & IRE in the description o adire Tarinaa wor ER 
. 3 a 
9 Now antiquated paracampah ‘acornful’'? (campa. Sa as based on OJav. para- 

5 : 

scoffing’) can, however, with less reserve be rega 


b: . ata ‘to be impelled or 
Codya scornful’, which, of course, contains the ee gs to eriticize ete.'), and 
au raising questions; dificult question S ae dus wordà 

` OJav. í k of others, slander, 
Viegaraumdas "us ER ou Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


300 Digitized by Arya-Samaj-Foundation-Chennai-and-eGangotri 


he now obsoleto parapadu ‘dispute, quarrel’ (padu da^) and paratantaji, N um 
as the ES (lantaà *challenge') seem to be etymologically analyzable ; elli. 
p si A further opening up of the Javanese literature will Possibly Es 8 
a šis to establish such connections more minutely. oy 
m ets of Javanese words beginning with pari form a vexing Problem, gia 
side ciat loan-words as the literary term Ss a com plete, finished” (Sk 
TRTA) thero are some rather unusual words the second part of whioh at all events, 
of Indonesian origin, e.g. parikudu [oelinpercaty papelled tg kudu be obliged, feol. 
ing impelled to’).'® In expressinginteneiby, fullness or high degree this pari iii. 
nizes with Skt. pari- qR in paridina- qfiZta ‘much afflicted > paridurbala- qizig 
‘extremely weak’ etc. It would, therefore, be a tempting hypothesis to consider 
Mod. Jav. lit. paripēksa ‘outrage’ (paksa ‘violence J, parikudu and a few other 
words like O. and lit. Jav. parisuka ‘very glad’ which is not in Pet. Dict. ang MW, 
but may be borrowed from Indian texts, as products of analogic processes.!? The 
word paripadu ‘to dispute would, then, be explained as an innovalion Created 
under the influenco of pariklesa, pariksirna, paritusta, paritrüna, paribhawa, pari. 
wada and other OJav. loan-words. Yet, H. Kern, arguing that we may not iden. 
tify this Jav. pari with the Skt. element as long as we have not furnished an arrogt. 
ing proof of its being inexplicable from Javanese or other IN. languages, defended 
the thesis that Jav. pari is etymologically connected with Fijian vei, Samoan 
fe-, Mota ver- etc.” Without dwelling upon this point with which the students 
of Austronesian comparative linguisties will have to concern themselves, we must 
briefly remark that Javanese and the languages mentioned are only distant rela- 
tives, that further, IN. pa- being widespread and having a variety of functions, and 
elements containing r are often apt to manifest themselves, a similar prefix .also 
appears in Celebes and Philippine languages?" in such a way that I would, for the 
time being, rather suppose these elements to have come into existence in several 
parts of the Austronesian area in an independent manner, than derive them from 
one Orig. Austr. "Urform. Parallel or semi-parallel developments are, in a family 
of languages, far from being rare.?? Leaving aside other objections to Kern's 


view we would conclude that, to all appearance; the Skt. prefix pari qR has, in 
Javanese, been instrumental in forming new words. 
Compounds. 

It is a remarkable fact th 
influenced by Sanskrit should ha: 


cose, 


at the Indonesian languages which were largely 
for, as we have alread ve borrowed 2 considerable number of oorno 
speaking, few and, as 4 ‘te. C Indonesian compounds are, compares 
; frequent use of cs i e, dificult to distinguish from phrases, The highly 
AS RN md pe especially the use of long and complicated com- 
Tavaness counterpart us ^5 main characteristics of Sanskrit has no Malay ot 
pounds of the Sero Non g Sossible. to translate some of tho Indian ki 
Word-groups which hes E Or bahuvrīhi class into Indonesian idioms 9Y 
according to others sho s Rd Some grammarians may be called compounds, 
(Mal. ibu-bapa "parent DRE lengbln part, rather be considered a kind of phrase 


(associated with the D i Geena manat; raja muda ‘hoir-apparen! 
panas hati ‘excit P Mo Government)’ : of. Skt, yuvarūja- atst Mel 
“renguil-hoartad’, pupa e i Wt such Skt. compounds as bind ae 3 
pūrvasadrūjūrsitulyaku, So utely impossible to render such Indian words? 


Qprab], 775 s 
tāvakīrti- by Some expression or other which woul 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


S ioo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
posee IN INDONESIA 


MEC. 301 


ER us of an Indoeuropean compound. Any term Ms 
Sanskrit sage Ra E ex = text must, therefore, l 
; as adding to the artifici H 
nal alee oe Mew iki Mar style of the passage in which 
ib C which contains/ener MET aa truction modelled upon the Sanskrit 
examples; —-——v€— 7 . nents, And by far the largest number 

of compounc ormed after In 
Sanskrit elements are, likewise, of Indian origin. 

As is only to bc expected the Old-Javanese high lit 
in this class of borrowings. The very presence of in 
pounds in these ancient texts indicates the ability of the 
in analyzing and understanding the literary language o 
find a compound used, when the original Sanskrit text, 
itself in another way : examples are Bhismaparwa p.110 
sayaka ‘arrows on which heron’s feathers are fixed' (n 
p.81 dewüsura-yudd ha-carita "the story of the deeds don 
gods and the asuras' : the Skt. text has devasure yuddhe; Āšrem. parwa (Mbh. XV) 
p.48 (Juynboll, Drie boeken) Pandu-saranim ‘Pandu’s way’: Wirātaparwa, D6 
(ed. Fokker) pratibkā-vilāsa ‘manifestation of wit’, which in Sanskrit (faasa) 
is a title of several works. In the Arjunawiwaha (AD. 1035) we find, for instance, 
nrpati-putra : Skt. Gaga ‘son ot the king; surā-laya : Skt. BUSA "residenco of 
the gods; Meru-parwata : Skt. HeIaa ‘the Meru mountain’; twhina-parwata : Skt. 
afgaqaa ‘snow-mountain’; tīrtha-gocara : Skt. danta "(being within) the range 
of the place of pilgrimage’; — Dbhujaga-carma : Skt. garas 'gerpent's hide; rakta- 
warna : Skt. THAT *red-coloured'; bharata warsa-mandala : Skt. AWAGAISS ‘the 
territory of India’; madhu.masa-kala : Skt. FTAA ‘the time of the vernal mon- 
th’; mahāsura-pādaraksa : Skt. ARI 'foot-guards of eminent titans’; gujā- 
sva-ratha : Skt. ASZATA ‘elephants, horses and chariots’. 

In the official and sometimes pompous style of the royal edicts we find 
fine instances of long or elaborate compounds: sakalajagatpālaka ‘protecting the 
whole of the world’ : Skt. UFAS; paramajagaipalaka ‘the highest protector 
of the world’ : Skt, WCHsSUTIES; saiksasaiksasahasracakramakara : ‘whose emblem 


T is 


DO re; 


erary style indulges much 


authors and their readers 
f India. We not seldcm 
if there is any, expresses 
(ed. Gonda) kaika-ņaitra- 
ot in Mbh, 6,88:8ff.); id. 
e in the fight between the 


is the wheel of the thousands who learn and who are accomplished’: Skt ASI- 


MNWRSSUERES; jūūnograšakti ‘who is endowed with the mighty power of wisdom’: 
Skt. maaar; gatigatisatūnantaduhkhabhibhūta ‘overcome by the endless sorrow 
of hundreds of various incarnations’. And the court-poet Propaiica, who Dr his 
Nagarakrtigama (1365) praised King Hayam Wuruk, likewise acquitted biinselé 
Well in combining stately and well-sounding words into complicated € s 
1,2 rin wighnotsarana-prayoga Yamarāja in the means of driving away Hue es 
ho is king Yama’; 4 garbheswara-natha ‘a kiag who is lord in (of) the wom BS : 
“oyal prince before his birth; in Sanskrit a garbhesvara- SU sere Hd 
by birth’); 9,2 adhika-bhayan-kari (sic) ‘causing excessive fear; 16,5 E af dizine 
tri "sea. oflicey" i.e. ‘admiral’; 40,1 dewatmaka-yoni-ja hom from : eer 9 
nature’; 43,1 sad-abhijna-dharaka ‘possessed of the siX Rida nis per 
(arka-wyakaranadi-kastra ‘philosophical discussion, paar C. 
Š sarwopadesadika ‘all teaching and so on; 722 oe (bow to) punish the 

owing (how to further) the welfare of the virtuous AD oet'8 Indian colleagues 
Wieked?, Such alliterating samāsas as are liked by the M ind, in another text 
"ets Wanting : 70, 1 widhi-widhana ‘the established rule ; 

E CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


mees 


Digitized by Arya Sargidjektdatipa Chennehers eSangotri 
309 : —— 


M urga 'the company of (the HD RN of) heaven’. In the Wr — 
an OJav- didactic poem on metrics we read ee compound rula uiri pg 
50) which is also found in the commentary ou the Indian author Pig. 
whereas Pihgala himself DRSROMOT IUS TB word, which means ‘of which 
rows of waves are moved by the wind Wades res the name of a metre (vūtorm; e 
In the more popular and less artificial historical and romantic kā 

of the kidung variety Sanskrit compounds ere not wanting, though the mos xm 
rate types are highly uncommon : gajapati lord, bast ci elephants’ (Skt, es 
aadfā); rajapisuna ‘calumny’ (<$kt. raja usn king and pisuna- nga tika 
narendra ‘king’ (Skt. avg); naranatha id. „Bi. anu); krtānugraha Té 
(Skt. kria- FA made’ and anugraha- agaa favour ). Somo aro likely to A 
been made in Java: Sürasüra a strong OT eminent hero’ (<Skt. sürq. m x 
sara- NW. ‘best of heroes); balawarga ‘soldiers and relatives’ (Skt. bala. qm vs 
varga- ai); sakalamargi ‘everywhere’ (<Skt. sakala AFV ‘all’ and compare märga. 
a ^way). And nota few comparatively simple compounds were prezerved in 
literary or even in common usage : Jav. rajaputra fa kings sou, prince' (Skt. raja | 
Wal and pulra- Fa); pratamapurusa ‘the third person (in grammar)’ (Skt. prathana | 
AAR and purusa- YETI); lit. atmaja ‘son or daughter! (Skt. ATRA); lit. pradipta 
‘light, lamp TACT; lit. prakampita ‘trembling of an earthquake’ (Skt. srfzqa), lit, 
purwa-madya-wusana ‘from beginning to end’ (Skt. pūrva- qå ‘beginning’, madhyo. 
RU "middle and dvasdna- ATATA ‘termination’); ' lit. ardawalepa "forward, bold, 
which seems to contain Skt. rddha- rā, finereaced, abundant’ and avalepa- aadt 
*haughtiness'; bupati (lit) ‘king’ and also ‘a title of high Javanese officials’ 
(Skt. fa ). : 

. In the Old-Javanese high literary style derivatives formed, in the native 
Way; from Sanskrit compounds are far from being rare: ka-dharmadhyaksa-(a)s 
the residence of the president of the High Court’ (Skt. dharmadhyaksa- aman). 
Other examples are : ka-dibya-caksusa-(a)n ‘the quality of being possessed of the 
divine sight’ (Skt. divyacaksus- fReqage); ka-waisnawa-sarira-(a)n ‘the quality ol 
being Vignu in the flesh’ (Skt. vaiszava- AWA ‘belonging to Vigņu” and sarira- WH 
body); ka-siitha-wikrama-(a)n ‘a lion’s courage’ (Skt. simha- fag ‘lion’ and eihre 
T fiwa ‘courage’ ); ka-sitha-purusa-nta ‘your man-lion character’; & onm 
siiiha-nada to raise a lion’s roar (war-cry)’ (Skt. simha- fag and nada- qu ‘ory Ji 
dU ena uen the sun’ (Skt. sürya- WA ‘sun’ and sevana- ve i 
Bkt. pradaksina sra eee the right side towards (oironmambal aja 
Skt. prati af [os Aa balation ); mratisubaddhakén ( o T NT 

on, and subaddha- x ‘woll-bound; fixed , JAY 


-aké VENTI 

ls A a initial forming a class of transitive verbs); ma-deua atem 
es eco the gods’: <Skt. agüra- AWI or dgüra. AMT seems to per 
ran, pa- and s a compound : ef. OJav. grha(<Skt. grha- Jā *house') adit P 
(pa- -an Bervalive st d s pe ās padewaharan being explained Leid 
the second element to As oma- 8H ‘sacrifice’; the repetition, in the IN. V 


5 ves a the 
ké-aneka-warna-an ‘variety’ 3 K even in modern times appears from at vol 
form',2» : Bkt. Gnekavarņa. «ati 'many-coloureo n 

Sometimes the Meaning of riot? 


change, because of itg a Sanskrit compound has undergone ^ + psi 


being associ 
Oclat i m ic 
CC-0. Prof. Satya ved stilā eher compounds with W 


a 


‘word has, according to Wilkinson,?® been associated 


SANSERIT , f 
Digitized by Arya : Samaj urtid N Dgariparand eGangotri 
m hs o 303 


ber in common. There can be no rea 


Son for 

mos iffi E Wonder 

M modern people have difficulty in distinguishing m half-culti. 
ra astrologer. à; astronomer and 
In Sanskrit vanavasa- qaqa means “dwell; 4 


wandering habits; the life of a hermit’; vanūnta»: in the forest 
tho plural San nar pas forests’; vanāntaram gacchat; amrai uzzfī * 
into the forest ** and vanādri- a«1fz (I am not in a position E 
in Sanskrit literature where this compound i 
mountains”. All these words occur in anciens Javanese texts ( 
9225), vanantara in all probability in the senge of forest, woodla 
lands (in general). The last mentioned word became know 
bēlantara ‘trea-covered waste, forest, wilderness of woods’, 


to indicat 


e passa 
8 found) "forest Eo 


(8) and rock(s) or 
twanadri Nag, 39, 
nd scenery, wood- 
n to the Malays as 
This likewise literary 


by the Malays themselv 
or Wilkins y es 
with antara (Skt. antara AFAT ‘intorspace’) extended by the native prefix bér-, and 


interpreted as a ‘boundless waste of forest’, or, according to Klinkert,?? ag "inter. 
mediato (terrain,’. In Jav. literature all three words came indiscriminately into 
use to donate ‘a forest or wilderness’. 

In this connection transformations of tha hy 
seeming’ and sayojana- Batwa ‘as far as a yojana (a 
Skt. yojana- ataa) in Malay deserve a pas 


brid sayogya aata ‘suitable, 
measure of length in India’, 
sing notice. The former changed to 
saïgia ‘verily’, the original form being preserved in Sa-yogia-nya (native affixes) 
‘accordingly, verily, as a matter of fact’, and the latter is best known in the 
transformed sa-ujana ‘extensive’ or (less commonly) sa-wijana, 
83..'. In Kedah Malay we also find sajauhana and so'jana. 
There are, moreover, many compounds or combinations which, though enti- 

rely consisting of Sanskrit elements, do not, as far as I know, appear in the Sans- 
krit dictionaries (which does by no means imply that they are not in the edited 
or written Sanskrit texts !). In classical Malay literature bala-téntéra is a well- 
known term for ‘army, forces’; the form bala-tantra has in literary Javanese the 
same meaning : in OJav. and Malay bala (Skt. bala- J army’) has been naturalized 
and Skt. tanira- āra ( « Mal. tēntēra ‘army, soldiery’) is sporadically found to con- 
vey the same sense. When and where were bala and tantra combined for the first 
time? Other examples are : puspadanta in the Malay (lit.) sense of carved ivory 
(Skt. puspa- JF ‘flower’ and danta- 3*3 ‘ivory’); apraty-adhiraksana, found in the 
OJav. Bhomaküwya 49,19 ‘irresistible protection’, which may be of Indian 
origin (cf. apratirüpakatha ‘incomparable disceurse' etc.); already in Old. Jav. texts 
triwarna and also triwanša occurred to denote the three classes brabmans, cr 
Vaiéyas : cf. such Skt. compounds as trivarga- faa ‘the three pes uae 
three duties’?® Mark also the type makaklistasarira occurring pue |i 
Parwa, p.34 ‘whose body is in a very bad condition’ : Big T S of 
. Although Sanskrit, like other languages, has various Age Pede put toge- 
salone character, as exhibiting combinations Bienen in which thes pube 

®t, and among them also asmimana- RAAT self-co kala (Skt. asi alate ‘he (it) 
ber Consists of a verb, I have never met with asil : ‘former days, the past’. 
Was and kala. xr ‘time’) which occurs in OJav. tex to state whether a given 
Ti is, however, not always easy or possible ess to be a compound in ihe 
. Group composed of Sanskrit elements MR Indonesian way, oF only à 
udian way a cat phrase or so-called compound in the 


wijana ‘as far 


Word.g 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
304 Digitized by Arya-Samaj-Feundatior Chennai and eGangotri — E 
ae Eh serving a8 9 short representation of what might kadā VC 
La d at the same time syntactically more transparent ex. 


p in a longer, an i ATA 1 Manner, 

a Pitas, Ew names, much used terms indicative Of complex concepta 
& , Aw S . 

Be 3$ tho initiated etc. often tend to be worded in not quite regular ‘com 

snown . 


A . in compound-like expressions which are only understan 
ot te Po expressed and the development of itg eo 
: ficiently known. 
gon pU caries. (61) there is question of a dharma-kaivcana-siaan; 
or dharma-kaiicana; as appears pom: the S ZAR (i oe art for 
making gold (Skt. kāūcana- aaa) is meant : siddhi o dhi- tafa) ig often 
used to denote ‘the acquisition of supernormal powers by magical means’ ag we 
NE riora Pau O acquired’ but what is the meaning of the word 
dharma in this connection? The curious dharmagati found in the Old-Malay 

Gandasuli inscription? refers to the condition of a person undergoing the metem. 
psychosis in such a way that he embodies the law norm of tho Buddhists’. In the 
same inscription we come across sarabhara which is aleo found in OJav. texts; its 
original meaning seems to have been something like bearing (Skt. bhara. wm) the 
pith or power (Skt. sara- HR), hence ‘powerful, exercizing power, acting in per- 
formance of a function’. The origins of such combinations as prdana-jiwan (Skt. 
prana- TW ‘life’ and jiva sita living?) ‘to revive’ are likewise not completely 
clear. 

Does the reg. Jav. brama-corah ‘the underworld, esp. rabble employed to 
trace other criminals’ represent an ancient compound (Skt. barama- 9H ‘roaming 
about’ (?) and cora- RTU or caura- SI ‘thief’), or is it a secondary compound? 

In a number of cases the very order of the members of such a ‘compound’ 
or phrase reveals their Indonesian origin. Whereas in Sanskrit the determining 
element occupies the first place in a tatpurusa-compound (e.g. Visnu-bali facgatē 

offering to Visnu’), Indonesian languages put the determined noun in the first 
place. Thus lit. Jav. yuda-smara, though containing Skt. yuddha- Zg ‘battle’ and 


€ as 
smara- XHX love’, is a compound of Javanese making : ‘love-war’. In word-groupš 
the Skt. dharma- 4H, the semantic evolution of whi 


: ch we discuss in tbe next 
chapter of this book, may be of interest : 


ER may, in Modern Javanese a mitra-darma (lit) 
is & good (or true) friónd'; one might compare dharma- in such Skt. compounds 88 


[3 A i 
dharmayuddha- AAJ ‘an honest fight’; dharmapatn; IÄT ‘a lawful wife; in 
Old-Javanese texts (cf., e. : 


6: Rangga Lawe 9,19) sõnal: dharma seems to be compa- 

Hoe Skt. Ee rte: GEREEN fadopted son’; the term dharmapuira is, in 
bably d PEE Oday. texts, and has, in the course of time —and pro" 
Pe Šā ri the native dama ‘to love or spoil a ohild'—been simpli- 
putra. Whereas in Sanskrit buddhidharma- afgaa ox presses the idea 


of having & virtuous mind 16 is Vv. Qarma, W DIC 
1 . } H h is eq i t 
i , 1n Mod. Ja - budi da P 1C 


now obsolete Jay. sčgara-yasa age indicates itg being created in Indonesia. 
because yasa here m 
way the lit. raga 
(Skt. raga. 


‘ 
ans a merit 
4 


orio k : m imilar 
"UB Work of art or engineering’. In a si, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by AryS SARER bnini paid eGangotri 


BE —— s — 305- 
jit. jiwa-raga soul (Skt. jiva- sita) and body’, 


nations beginning with guna : Jav. guna-bisq 
referring to supranormal power ot magic’; 

words guna- U7, viga- PIS ‘anything actively pornicious’, sarana ‘ Su 
Jav. 'means' and sakti- We supranormal power’ the Jay. A AR protection : 
nuity, magical potency shows their being Indonesian, Ing of guna ‘inge- 

At first sight tho meaning of the Javanese phrase mukti wibawa ‘to ; 

in worldly ploasures and luxury; luxury’ ceems very ate (M E 
which has also come to the ancient Javanese, being the word re c mukti- gie, 
tion’ which implies the complete abandonment of all worldly inte es emancipa- 
wibawa the first member bas however been derived from bhukti (S " a Wes 
enjoyment) : OJav. a-mukli, multi etc. ‘to enjoy, to possess, rule’ ia pio: ufu 
ings of Skt. bhuj. BH); the second member is alr ‘ ee = 


eady in Sanskrit oj 

. f ; 3 krit vibhava- faxa 

denotative of luxury. Another word which in the course of its history in Java 
€ : . 5 ES 

acquired the sense of ruling, governing’ is mürwa, a verbal derivative from pürwa 


‘irst, former(ly)’, i.c. Skt. parva S ‘former, prior, first ete.’ : in OJav. a-mürwa 
(> mürwa) means to be the first’, and, hence, ‘to gather’, ‘to deflower’ and ‘to 
rule. Nowadays kai (a native article) Murba is a name of God, and saù (an 
article) Murba-wisesa (wisesa means ‘supremacy’ < Skt. visesa- fT ‘superiority’ 
may be tranelated by ‘the Supreme Ruler’. 

In lit. Jav. krama-niti is equivalent to ‘the right manner of behaving, the 
right method of acting’ (krama ‘good manners etc.’ : Skt. krama- A ‘order, manner’ 
and lit. nit ‘prudence’: Skt. miti- Afa 'id.); in krama desa ‘the vocabulary of 
courtesy resorted to by rustic people outside the Principalities krama has, more- 
over, its Javanese sense (‘courteous choice of words. There is an OJav. term 
of somewhat uncertain meaning, bala-krama (Kd. Sunda 1,52b and 2,129) : Van 
der Tuuk?' translated it by ‘ordinary soldiers’, Berg?? by ‘guards; anyhow, a 
special class of military men is meant and perhaps a translation "a body of sol- 
diers (in charge of maintaining) order’ willdo. Jay. krama is also expressive of 
"good order’. 

How to explain tho lit. Jav. kērtiyasa ‘able, superior’ beside which the reg. 
tiyasa ‘able, accustomed to, superior’, and, like kértiyasa ‘one who has contributed 
to religious buildings’? At first sight the latter form may be regurded as short- 
ened< kčriiyasa, but it has at the time been interpreted? as sprung from Skt. 
atiyasas- Sau ‘very famous’. Probably an ancient krlayaías- TAUTĀ The 
has accomplished glorious deeds’ (not in MW., a lit. Jav. kértayasa means able 
and ‘leader (in war)’) was either blended with Skt. krii gat ‘expert, skilful which 
is, howover, seldom found in Javanese, or phonetically changed into kevisyasas 
Anyhow, yasas has no longer the Sanskrit meaning. 

| A number of twin formulas —to which we sh 
sisting of two Sanskrit elements, is likely to have b 
use Siksa- fara means ‘punishment’, in Malay i$ the idea of ‘vexations of all 
fee 4 cs; SUR "mundāne existence) to vii: „S ‘id and kirana KR 
‘cause? m mula-karéna means ‘origin E hee ‘synonymous or gemantioally 
related | ther such aggregations consisting o ade Ji or' «composed of Jav. 
qn Can-words are : lit. Jav. inapape Ex 3 inferior” and lit. papa  adver- 
m ;' "4 defective, deficient’ <Skt. hina- ét oW, dios sorrowful’ <Skt. dudas 
Y SSkt. papa- gia ‘ovil’; lit. duka-nastapa very 98 


* 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


There exists g nu 


mber o; ; 
» guna sarana, f combi- 


una-sčkti, all of the 
though they are composed of the Skt, 


all soon return —, though con- 
een forged in Indonesia. In 
has, as seksa, joined sensara 


NESIA 
306 Digitiz AN ARES, TN PADOND Chennai and eGangotri 


G TA 3 noe E 
Lu '"anvleasent! and manastūpa- FATT poeni ache. In hi Javanes 
Sra unpleas the iden of ‘religious worship (pudya from puja < Skt, 
siuti expresses © - cafa praise). Also in literar 
‘honour, worship’ and Skt. stuti- eft praise’) ry style, J 


; ike ‘disaster and calamity’: the 
cintaka expresses something like disaster an ; first w 


S 
9 Dudya- 
Pūjā qw 
av, Dūpa» 
Ord is, of 


Skt püpa- ATR ‘evil, misfortune’, the second is one of the forms into which’ 
course, DEt 


Skt jataka: IAF ‘born under (an asterism etc.), with which Ne deal elsewhere, 

< developed in Java. In anciont Javaneso texts the compound siladri seem, te 
a been liked to express the meaning of boulder(s), maes(es) of rock’, Origi- 
nally :be compound may havo been a PDE D" karmadharaya, el. og, 
Bhāratayudāha 30,4 and the native interpretation gunui batu mountain of stone’, 
<Skt. sila agt ‘stone, crack, rock’ and Skt. adri- erfz stone, mountain, rock”. The 
author of the Arjunawiwaha 8,11 supplies us with an expatiation which may be 
considered as an interpretation : Siwa, when fighting with Arjuna, discharges a 
Gladrikifa-arrow, hru wunkal sawukir ‘a siladri-peak-arrow, i.e. an arrow (hru) 


D g 1 PX ` 
consisting in stone (wunkal) or a stone arrow as big as a mountain’; in st. 13 thig. 


weapon is briefly called a siladri. The point or peak of a rock-stone cannot be 
said to be as big as a mountain, and so $ilddr? seema to have meant a 'rock- 
mountain’ and, hence ‘a mass of rocks, a stone mountain? (compare also Bhoma- 
kāwya 98,1). Anyhow, the later literature has used siladri and the younger form 
selardi in the sense of ‘mountain, mass of rocks’. 

In other compounds the original Sanskrit appears in a younger form. Not 
unfrequently the secondary character of & compound comes to light by such a 
transformation. Although Pigeaud had mañestupada (lit.) printed as one word, 
itis, at least originally, a phrase consisting of estu ‘be is so’ (< Skt. astu 93), 
used as a sign of agreement or approval, especially to give evidence of obedience 
and bondage (lit. mestu means ‘to render homage to’) and lit. pada ‘foot’ (<Skt. 
pada- cs id”) which forms part of several expressions for ‘honouring, rendering 
Homage (e.g. in lit. nyuikēmi pada ‘to prostrate oneself before the feet of a supe- 
rior), preceded by the native prefix ma-+nasalization. —In lit. Jav. antya basa 
denotes 'a rather courteous way of expressing oneself' : antya may be considered 
a E elen) abbreviated form of antyanta <Skt. anantya- AAA ‘uninter- 
rupted» complete’, which in Javanese has aleo adopted the sense of Skt. ati afā 


€ . , 

quite, most’, as a by-form of atya — ati i p 
ya= atr, cr 5 tter byi 

fluence of the former. a as 


In the OJav. Aáramawagan 


come across the Jav. deriv aparwa (Mahābhārata XV), p.36 (Juynboll) we 


ga: “OY. derivative ka-dyiitanite ‘gambling’ which containa Skt. dyita* 
3 Ge ten aud mila which also in other parts of tho OJav. prose version 
It is worth D aa tead of Skt, panita: attra ‘hetted; bet, stake’. 
mentioning that the Javanese (and other Indonesian peoples) 
i A Word or phrase by a synonym, not infrequently 
ourious words ag Wilwa-Tikta (, Into Sanskrit, To this tendency we owe such 
end its fruit’ and tilta. face ‘bi or Wila-Tikta) <Skt. bilva- faea ‘the wood-apple 
means ‘the bitter amas instead of the native Maja-Pahit, which literally 
pura- Bt "city? instead : PMara-pura ‘Love's city’ <Skt. smara- TAT ovo’ an 


: of the A ; 
with OJav. Bal. kus, ‘pangs of ai EKluiklu which was apparently connecte 
Sometimes the Me 


err transl T 
tinguished by-form of the cei Tesorted to hybrid forms: Klapodyana was % dis 
shone territory and family Kubon-Elapa, lit, ‘coconut 


x ' CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Saj BButidatipg Ghasosi ear eGangotri 


E c = 307 
= € , — a E 
gardēn ; Skt. udyana- SATA garden’. The name of the Balinese princ; eee 
pulu Was re-interpreted as Bheda-Ulu and sanskri tized to Bheda.: principality Bada- 


ūz ‘breach, alteration’ and mukha- JA ‘face’, Mukha : Skt. bheda- 
A quasi-bahuvribi is for instance lit. Jav. marda 


. x 3 wa-ba s 
lagu, in which the second member is the Jav. word for foelod a i 
of whom is lovely; verbal artist, musician’ : Skt. OJay. mardana- Iia 4 es 
34 softness, 


a te.’ in lit. Mod. Jav. H lea t , 
gentleness e ims pleasant, lovely’, and Skt. bhas c E 
Phrases of this type may, on one hand, have been modelled rer S ee 

7 zri 


* pahuvrībis borrowed by the Javanese : yowanarwpa (OJav. Adip.) : Skt yaw 
-) : Skt. VANG- 


n. BAAS of youthful appaarance’; ari 

rupa- 4 T oi y appearance; dewatarüpa (OJav.Ràm.):Gkt. ža att 

‘of divine form’; mūnusūkrii : Skt. TS WIE ‘of human figure’ m. b t à 
; Proc V st on 


the other hand take into account a special class of Javanese (and Malay ete.) ‘com- 
pounds which remind us strongly of the Indian bahuvrihi, viz. the type represented 
by the Jav. instance s (waiisulan eio kai) landēp budi-ne literally ‘(anawer-of 28 
who is (she)) sharp wit (mind)- of his’, i.e. ‘(the answer of a) sharp-witted (man)', i.e 
‘(a) shrewd (an swor), or by Mal. sakit hati (s. “ll; hati ‘heart’), which not Es 
means annoyance (subst.), but else annoyed, offended’ (compare such Skt. com- 
pounds as sūnta-hrdaya- AU*déa whose heart is tranquil, tranquil-hearted'). 

An interesting Jav. example is dana-bau (bau is dissyllabic) ‘to make a pre- 
sent of one 8 labour - the benefit of works of charity and benevolence’, <dana 
voluntary donation’<Skt. düna- qw ‘gift’ and baw ‘arm, esp. upper arm’ <Skt. 
bahu- Ave 'idJ. Besides, the phrase dana-driyah, or (reg.) dana jriyah means ‘prac- 
tising beneficence’, the second clement of which has erroneously been regarded as 
an Arabic loan. Is may be supposed that a compound danendriya (cf. Skt. dana- 
šila- gaas ‘liberally disposed’) was at the root of the Jav. expression: Skt. dana- 
ZId and indriya- #34 ‘organ of sense’, in OJav. alo "thought. If this be 
correct, driyah as a now obsolete base for ‘practising charity’ seems to have 
come into existence after the aggregation danendriya, and driyah on one hand and 
lit. Jav. driya ‘mind, heart’ on the other are another instance of differentiation. 
In the lit. Jav. dana-krama, the meaning of which shifted to ‘well-mannered’, 
Skt. krama- SA ‘proceeding, custom, peculiar manner’, in Old-Javanese also ‘con- 
duct, manner of life’ is preserved. There is a difference in function pee 
theso aggregations and lit. Jay. boja-krama ‘reception of guests : Skt. bhoja- Ata 
liberal’. H 

Some aggregations which may be regarded as having arisen in Indonesia 
strongly remind us of the limited group of Vedic compounds in which Wi first 
member is a present participle governing the second element: ii agag 
"winni "e - atagzafi ‘inciting the mind’. Some proper 
winning good things’, codayanmati- sits s MIERS Ee fe 
nouns and technical terms are retained after the Vedic period. hi x OT GE 
beyond the scope of this work to attempt tracing the origin of t 2 the 

tid : ios jn those languages in which they 
compounds or oven classifying their subspecies 10 h compounds as Cassé- 
occur, Howover, it is worth observing that such o - words in other 
foit ‘nut-crackers’ and cache-pot ‘flowerpot cover» 87 3 


languages are nearly related. Now reg 


ese has jaga-baya ‘village 
g watch, seeing to, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


3 Digitized by Aaya SÉ RHF Fēhndklid) GR rib and eGangotri 
30; 


pediment” (<OJav. wisti ‘work, difficulty, ganger distress’ < Skt, visti- fafu ‘eo 
i k) Besides, we find such regional compounds as jaga.latj « 
pulsory P CeSkt ratri- Ufā ‘night’); Jaga-tirta surveyor of the irrigation- 
men MES tīrtha- MNA ‘bathing-place, piece of water”); kas 
(nos of enclosure surrounding 8 house and yard’ e Lol enemy’ «gr. 
atri. aF ‘enemy'). And the hybrid Ragresation kt ent night-watchman’ (Tan 
bēģi ‘night’). IN Malay and Sundanese uek 18 meja) cuci-mulka Wash-stayq! 
(Port.> Mal. etc. meja table; cuc, which has been commented upon Clsewherg 
‘leaning’, muka "face < Skt. mukha- 398. ‘id.’). 4 

In this connection mention must be made of the Jav. bawa-rasa ‘carry. 
ing on a conversation’ and bawa-léksana (or -lésana) walking in the right way, 
keeping one's word’ which occur already in comparatively ancient texts : the 
firat element is the Skt. bh@va- WIA manner of acting, conduct, state of mind 
or body’, which, in Java, came to express the idea of ‘assuming an attitude, pre. 
tending to be’ (e.g. with the native lara “W: a-bhawa lara ‘pretending to be 
il). As to the second members, rasa» in lit. Jav. ‘meaning (often in a mystical 
sense) — compare also rérasan € ré-rasa-an ‘carrying on a conversation!) ig tho 
Skt. rasa- t@ ‘higher experience, sentiment’, and lit. Jav. lēksana ‘lucky, without 
mishap, etc. the Skt. laksana- STT in tho sense of ‘quality, attribute, symptom, 
characteristic’, in OJav. also ‘conduct’. 

Even in such languages as Sanskrit in which certain clear-cut classes of 
compounds can be distinguished, all classifications, however useful for our analysis, 
leave a number of cases outside. On the ono hand the vagueness of the relations 
between the members, which is one of the characteristics of composition, easily 
leads to the effect that some compounds may be analyzed in more than one way. 
On the other hand, a union of words used separately is not seldom brought 
about in such a way that ‘irregular’ compounds came into being. Words which 
usually appear together, groups of words oi various syntactical relations and 
of any meaning now and then coalesco into a single element of the sentence, 
which defies classification. German scholars have coined such terms as Satz- 
komposita, Berührungskomposita, Zusammenrückungen to cover these combinations. 
ToS ad find in Sanskrit vad-asaniya. AZAÑA ‘anything which may be eaten < 
Rd carat) et (stu watever may bo cator? ina ET 
towards and away fr ieee pees odesa, it, was’; acapara ari E for 
superiority" Saban d à ca para ca MA YU 3; ahamultara- AKTĀ contes Si 
SE arah W&Hw Tam superior’; Pāli sace AX ‘if’ <sa ced a TA 
if be; Lat. suprascriptus ‘written above’ n K ; ; ‘written’ 
Balmannan. vro above < supra "above and scriptus es 
: € €. maintain) <Lat. manu tenére ‘to hold in the hand’. An 07% 
instance is probably na-poriksa < Skt kate 2018 inthe Ha aP 
niti-text**: narendra naparilsa n; “241 not” and pariksa TS IRR king 
did not inspect and tā nirghréna (Skt. Rez and nirghrna- MAT) tho 


wa iful’ : ‘ TID 1 ro 
usual a-roga atta, 8 Unmerciful’ : of. Skt. na-roga WT ‘not ill’ beside the mo 


night, 


At first sight OJav. pranagala m 
gent, etc. looks like a son pen] 
i l meaning: ‘whose breath bate ^7 
krit : putrahata- paga s e el-imown, there aro a, d notable example? in Ban? 
„And, theoretical] 15008 slain’, But in India gataprana- TIT 
Y Speaking other expl m et iret als 
Shasnntieng,ere possible. 


Digitized by Aryasaeichan datio rhsgaaL and eGangotri 


309 
“nother form prégata, Which occurs in the same or si 
Jt may be considered as having developed from prana 
In the OJav. Korawāšrama the aggregation mila bhokta ig r nhe 

in the sense of mūla (Skt. mīla. HS) alone "origin, cause? What repeatedly used 
phoktā AEI ‘who enjoys’ seems to be out of the question : AS Rd mee 
gupposition?" g bo native buka "beginning "€ Es OS 

Such combinations as prati pratita ‘very ca (GA 
prati-pratyaya (Skt. pratyaya Tā) "to have Mer m ue mo aud 

> VETE RE 1 n, to trust’, which 
occur in the OJav. prose-version of the Mahābhārata, have been explained?” 
instancēs of so-called incomplete gemination or duplication : IN (d ms ag 
were-twereh ‘fiancé(e)’ constitute a well-known variety of duplicated Ms 4 Si 
feel no objection to this view as far as prati-pratita ig concerned, but p. 
other word I am not go aure, for ‘confidence in return’ (Skt. prati xo) would NE 
the context (cf. o g. the Skt. compounds pratipapa. sma ‘recompensing evil, evil 
in return, pratipanya- S97 ‘merchandise in exchange’ etc.). Gamers cee 
OJav. prati-su-baddha (Skt. subaddha- JTZ, ‘well-constructed’) ‘well-settled, well- 
arrenged . 

Hybrid Aggregations. 

There are many hybrid phrases?? in Modern Javanese, e.g. ambël sura 'he- 
roic (Jav. ambék ‘character’ and Skt. sūra. It ‘hero’); lit. aùloù jiwa ‘emaciated? 
(Jav. baso loù ‘to take off” and Skt. jiva- cita ‘lifo’); lit. data-tita ‘now, then, more- 
over’ as an inceptive phrase (Jav. data, which is found only in this expression, -is 
the OJav. nda-i ‘well, now, then, but, however; already in OJav. this word and 
Skt. atita. Hata ‘passed’ combined to form phrases (nda ' aŭta, ndatita) meaning 
‘now, (this has) passed’ >‘let us now be silent about that, we will no longer talk 
about that’); lit. datu-laya ‘royal residence’ (Jav. datu ‘prince’ and Skt. laya- €T 
‘residence, place’); juru-basa (also in Malay) ‘interpreter’ (Jav. juru ‘trained work- 
er at some occupation other than a handicraft’ and Skt. bhas 41a ‘language ); 
juru kunci ‘koy-kesper’ (Jav. juru and the Indian kunci gla, kunji- pfa); lit. lara 
karuna ‘weep bitterly’ (Jav. lara ‘be ill, pain’ and Skt. karuna- R&T *pitiable'); lit. 
lara braita ‘anguish of the soul’ (Jav. lara and Skt. bhrūnta- ata ‘confused; error, 
bewilderment’); lit. minta-ksama ‘to ask forgiveness’ (Jav minta ‘asking and Skt. 
ksama RI ‘forbearance’; nikal basa 'adroitly speaking, debating’ (Jav: nikal to 
wind, roll up (a thread etc.) and Skt. bhasa, see above); iñawiyat ha the sky, in 
tho atmosphere? (Jav. ii ‘in’ and Skt. viyat- faa ‘the ait, the sky); obs. and kr. 
i. sap-asta ‘handkerchief’ (Jav. sapu ‘brash’ and Skt. ‘hand ; al. obs. Jav. ies 
and Mal. sapu taan (hand)kerchief’ from sapu and the native d mie ilis 
isaka... ‘in tho year---' (Jav. i ‘in’ and Skt. Saka- We belonging to BR etc.” 
Sika-era’); lit. akasa ‘in, towards the air’ and similar words ME 
and Skt. akasa- ATTA ‘atmosphere, sky'); mbawa die Pcr Jav. dewe 'self'); 
(Skt bhava. WA ‘state; condition, behaviours disposed Ws £ the Malay phrase 
dina gáde ‘tostal day" (Skt. dina- fga ‘day’ and Jav. gēde tā a great"); dina 
hari raya or hari bēsar ‘id? : Mal. hori day; Mal. raya AA 


i rnormal 
wes; * s ‘ owers; possessing SUDO 
eit day and night’; guna-gawe 'sopernormal NE Jav. gawe "work; reg. kr. 


Powers’ (Skt. guna- I0 in Jav. ‘genius, ingenuity a tia. rope RU 
kala benji erase (Skt. kala- ze ‘ime and a “very pros- 
"ardikerrat ‘wise or very powerful man’ (Skt. maker pis BE. and woman, 
Porous or powerful’, and lit. iù rat ‘in the world ); lit. 2a M 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


milar phrases a 
8 Pra 
gata. pranagata, 


iib Digitized by Arfat atu la NAQNESIAY eGangotri 


' (Skt. siri FAL *woman'); lit. raja-panatigo "royal dress 
qa ‘king’ and Jav. pa-nango pss garde); tsēgātja wedi "sandy desert? 

‘oa’ and-Jav. wedi sand ); obs. pati sasi the last day of the b 
sūgarā- E deprived of” and Skt. šašī Bait 'month'). Further, such mti 
Rs " E antara ‘shortly after” (03 av. end i» tan ‘not’, Skt. antara s 
terval’); of. also Bal. ritatkala =tatkala Nonas d ho moment : OJav. ete, b 
in’ (a general preposition) and Skt. tatkāla- Ss happening at that sam 
Tn derivatives : ké-dalu-twarsa superaunugted (Jav. dalu over-ripe , Skt. y 
‘year’ and the Jav. prefix ké- denoting that & person e an object has beon 
by the idea expressed by the base, ie. by dalu-wársa); kris 8-pulra-wayoy,, 
«n ith child and grandchild’ (Skt. sa- U with... , Skt. putra- YA ‘son’, Jay, wayah 
‘erandchild’, Jav. sufix -e indicating porsession). From the above OJay. nda i 
aiita in its shorter forms ndatžta, ndatitan (sufix -ën expressing an order or re. 
guest) and ndatitančn (the double form of the same sufix) ‘be silent about it? Wero 
derived. 
There are also proper names of this type : in the Jav. literary tradition g 
princess Candra-Sékor is mentioned (Skt. candra- ax ‘moon’ and Jav. sēkar 
'Bower); man’s names are Kébo-Taruna (Jav. kébo ‘buffalo’ and Skt. taruna- qum 
"young, tender); Gagak-Mrdanga (Jav. gagak ‘crow’ and Skt. mrdanga. ag 
'arum?); Sagara-Muficar (Skt. sagara- WW ‘sea’ and Jav. muñcar ‘glittering (of 
sunrays in water); Wahu-Prāpta ‘the immigrant’ (« Jav. wahu ‘just, newly’ and 
Skt. prūpta- AS ‘arrived’. Uran-Makara consists of a Javanese and a Sanekrit 
synonym both denoting ‘decapods or prawn-like crabs’ (<Skt. makara- AFT ‘sea 
monster). From Old-Javanese historical or legendary texts it appears that 
aggregations of this type were rather frequent. Bogor-pradesi (Kd. Sunda 2,59) 
“the region of Bogor (a Jav. variant in -i of Skt. pradesa- Sā ‘district’), Paduir 
Krta (Jav. padai ‘opened up, secure’ and Skt. krta- HA in the Jav. sense of 'pros- 
perous are instances of this principle applied to geographical objeots. 
In a similar way the Sasak vocabulary contains such words as dónda-pah - 

"the technical term for the penalty in case of a grave offenco (in customary lay): 
dēnda "fine, penalty' «Skt. danda- ZUS ‘punishment’ and Sas. pati ‘peril of life; 
iedos undai-detva ‘incense’, lit. ‘inviting the gods’ : (Sas. undai ‘inviting au 
a Cii god"). The Bal. nawa-saita (Skt. nava 1 ‘nine’ and the native sie 
ib) are the pine gods’. The Mal. sama rata ‘on tho same level” (Skt. sama- SH 
„even, like, equal", used, in Malay, to express parity or sameness and Mal. rato 
level, fiat, uniform’) was borrowed by the Gayos in a phrase which even admits 


of a so-called conjugated form deri it 4 É ider to be 
A erived f z z consider 9 
situated on the samo level”, rom it i-samarata-nko you fot 


A well-known Sundanese inst is kérnallal 

z A ese instance S i 

: V ls <tērna= karna, karana ‘cause, origin; because, for the sake ol Ce 

dit TRN cause’ and the Arab. Allah Hybrid aggre og Bory 
a : . * , 

Arco riis :Jav. minas drawa 'painted with gold-paint fr 

A and Skt, drava- 3 "liquid (substance)) The Tag. olabisó 


mous serpent’ contaj | 
viņā» firq ARĪ ns an IN. element denoting ‘serpent’? (cf. Mal. aan X 


men and women (Skt, rajy 


(Skt 


ri at, 
9 time, 
arsa. qq 
affected 


There is still 
At is a well-kno ; another type of h 


periods of their hist 
with Bynonym ous 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by AH SSIITF Dn datam ance! and eGangotri 


811 
pairs of synonyms not infrequently displayed a 


g guch : 1 
completing the senee of a nativo word 


usin 3 
tuositY in 


ing SYP E AU. 
M Pn: The richness of English in delicate 
0 


pears such passages of the Hook of Common Prayer as assemble and NL i 
acknowledge and confess, perceive and know. Official and ceremonious speech oft 
resorbed bo such phrase i Oxi to exclude vagueness and misunderstanding : fs 
ancient Dutch affectie en genegenheid (a French and a nativo word for ‘attachme i 
But of course, mere routine and traditionalism soon tended to reduce a : 
them to oumbrous and superabundant fossils. The interesting category of » E 
forms found in a great many languages and cha = Nut 


racterized by such devices i 
groa i ‘ as alli- 
eration and echoic effects ie well-known in IN. idioms. In general they p 
intensity, variety, repetition, etc.: Mal. pantai-pēmali "taboos of all sorts’; lalu- 


lintat ‘dashing across’; pénuh-pépak 'chockfull.** Now and then one of the mem- 
pers is a loan-word : Mal. gondah-gulana ‘melancholy’ : Mal. gondah ‘sorrowing 
regret’ and Skt. glana- T&A ‘wearied, exbausted, feeling aversion’; manis mēndēra 
which is explained as gentle langour (such as that of a tired beauty) or as ‘dear 
and quiet’ (in accordance with the rules of conduct for the ancient Malay ladies) : 
Mal. manis "sweet and Skt. mandra- ez "pleasant, charming’; susah sčůsara ‘uneasi- 
ness (Mal. and misery’ (<Skt. samsara- QAR ‘mundane existence) In adzab 
sénsara ‘vexations of all sorts’ the first element is Arabic, in suka-rela ‘willing con- 
sent? (Skt. sukha- J7 ‘happy, easy’) the second. In such instances as marabahaya 
(often pronounced mérbaya or mérbahia) “danger of all kinds’ both elements are 
* Sanskrit : mara- AIZ ‘death, pestilence’ and bhaya- WA ‘danger’ (ree above). Java- 
nese instances are syuh sirna ‘destroyed’ (<Skt. sirna- attr 'erushed'); lit. mula- 
buka ‘origin, beginning’ (< Skt. mīla- 4€ ‘id.’); OJav. walat sakasa ‘outrage’ (< 
Skt. sahasa- atzA ‘violence’). In Gayo we find balgid tuah ‘fortune, luck’ (Skt. 
bhagya- una “id.’). 

Another highly frequent type of twin-forms is the Mal. saywr-mayur type 
(‘greens of all sorts’). Well-known in English ( hodge-podge ) and NIA. languages 
(Hindi mej-vej 3rst-Hst ‘tables and such things’ and garda-varda ‘iron beam’ from 
the Eng. girder), it is characterized by the repetition of a usually short wor with 
some variation. Sometimes a loan-word lies at the root : Mal. sēria:mērta ab the 
Very moment, simultaneously' from sērta "along with’ which also Bec coin- 
cidence< Skt, sartha- «Td ‘company’; tērka-tērki (also tēka-tēki) ‘riddle’ «Slt, tarka- 
gm 'conjecture, reasoning’. s ; Mal 

Passing mention has already been made of such hybrid bis ee eae 
sa umpama ‘as for instance’ (Skt. upama STH ‘similarity; sarupa k T (Skt. 
(Sla. rūpa- U 'form'): dēian sa-suci-suci hati ‘with the prm M i 
Pri ufu ‘pure, honost’, the other elements are native), d de Y. Mee. 
s Combined with loan-words. In a similar way We find = is za auno 

“tween; meanwhile’ (Skt. antara- AFAT ‘interval, while’); in ar 
48 can be carried away’ (Skt. bhara- AR load’) i.e. ‘very much sd 
Hybrid loan-translations will be dealt with in ghan ieoa 


Synonyms is clear to 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


$12 E 
LN o 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri _ 


NOTES 


1 Van der Tuuk, KBW. RT P 
Juynboll, Wal. p.284 incorrectly Sy 
the Skt. suffix tara- IT as & sopar 
entry on tho ground of such texts ex 
Ojay. Ram. 11, 7% BhK. 7, 8, where it 
is, however, added to Skt. words ghirzu- 
tatara gfadat m is repeatedly found; 
jāgrattara- MATTU. 
Ep reader might be referred to H. 
Paul, Prinzipien der Sprachgescbicbte* 
$989, and to L. Bloomfield, Language, 
.404t. : 
Tunt so-called Malay opera which in 
Indonesia proper is called komidi ( < 
Dutch comedie ‘comedy, play’) owes its 
name to that of the first company (the 
Indéra bangsawan, called after the my- 
thical hero of an old Malay romance), 
which produced these plays, in which 
Malay songs aresung to European tunes; 
the story is often borrowed from the 
Arabian Nights or from an European 
play. 
+ See T. Roorda, Javaaneche Gramma- 
tica, (Amsterdam 1855), p.234ff.; C. 
Poensen, Grammatica der Javaansche 
Taal, (Leyden 1897), p.171f; .H. N. 
Kiliaan, Javaausche Spraakkunst, 'g 
Gravenhage 1919, p.198f.; M. Pryohoe- 
tomo. Javaansche Spraakkunet, (Leyden 
1937), p.116f. 
* Beo eg. D. Bloomfield, Language, Eng. 
lish edition (London 1935), p,406ff. 
* I refer to W.v. Wartburg, 
in Problematik und Methodik 
wissenschaft, ( Balle/8. 19 
UR m Fronoh edition of 
ok : Problèmes t 
methodes de la linguistique ( E 
1946), » (Paris 
? As to the linguistic i 
ing seo oig, Bloomfiela, ot ace A 


* For Javanesa words 
o 
the Consonant-R-Vowel puentes x 


Einführung 
der Sprach. 
43) p.718, 


Uhlenbeck, De structuur Var 


anso morpheem, (Bandung 1949) Ko 
? See, e.g. the remarks made by K 


Wulff, in Acta Orientali : 
Eur entalia IV (1926), 
10 T refer to R. Brandstettar, Dio Laut- 
erscheinungon in den indonesischen 
Sprachen, (Luzern 1915), $199g. (=R 
Brandstetter, An Introduction to DM 


.nesian Linguistic, translated by 0.0 


Blagden, (London 1916), p.2791f.) ang 
O. Dempwolff, Vergleichende Lautlehra 


| des austronesischen Wortschatzes, 3 


volumer, (Berlin-Hamburg, 1934-1938), 
"UO R.A. Kern, De partikel pa in de 
Indonesische talen, in BKI., XOII, p.14. 
12 I refer to Dempwolff, o.c., TIT, p.5Tff. 
13 As to this phenomenon see my paper 
‘Inwendige nasaal- en liquida-verbindin- 
gen in Indonesische talon’, in BKI. OI, 
p.141ff. 

14 Roorda, o.c., p.234. 

15 For this concept see Bloomfield, 0.0., 
p.302. Through the process of inverse 
analogy so-called hyper-correct forms 
come into being. 

16 See my article "Tho Javanese voca- 
bulary of courtesy’ in Lingua I (1948), 
333ff., and especially p.337. 
17 Pigeaud translates by ‘veel smalend. 
18 These words and all others beginning . 
with pra- etc. may easily be found in 
the dictionaries. See also A.HJ.8. Wal- 
bechm, De woorden als zinedelen in hot 
Javaansch, (Leyden 1897) p-160ff. — 
° Kiliaan bas, however, dixcussed this 
point again with an exuberance of phan- 
tagy: o.c., p.200ff. T 
20 [na paper entitled "Klankvorwi£é 
ingin de Maloi«ch-Polynosiscbe vēlē 
BKI. XXXVI (1887), which is reprint 
in VG. VI, p.100ff. d 
^ I refor to N. Adriani, Sangire 


el- 


ogohe 


yne seo BM, Spraakkunst (Thesis Leyden 1893), p.14. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i 


T3 game, Spraakkunst der Barée-taal, 
(Ch dung 1931) p.241f. and other gram- 
mars. 


pistorique ot linguistique gončrale, (Paris 


1921), p.86ff. z 
13 Let us add a small selection froin the 


hundreds of Indian compounds to be 
fou 
stanza of Old-Javanese prose-texts of 
the Brahmāņdapurāņa and the Ādiparwa 


Digitized by Aryes9A 8 Roendation RRO RA and eGangotri 


| Oday. 
nd on every page and in almost every | 


type and kakawins like the Bhārata- | 


yuddha cr the Arjunawiwaha, only to 
illustrate their variety : G-karņa-pūrņa : 
Slt. AIFNT ‘bent till the ear (of a bow); 
akaga-sabda : Skt. ALBTARET “sound from 


the sky’; apawarga-marga (whichin Old- i 


Javanese has made the impression of & 
rhyming compound of the Skt. svargū- 
pavarga- ANITA -type) "way to final 
Skt. 


emancipation’;  abhiseka krama : 


ufuumxmu ‘the custom (rite) of inaugu- | 


ration’; asi paira-wana: Skt. afaqaaa 
(not in MW.) ‘the forest of sword-blades, 
ie. the forest of trees which have sword- 
shaped leaves’; asfodaya-giri : 
gafi ‘tho mountain of sun-rise and 
sun=set'; ubhaya-sammata ‘approved on 
both sides’, which will be of Indian 
origin, ef. Skt. ubkayānumata- JAAwAd 
agreed to on both sides’; kula-wandhawa- 
mitra ‘family, relatives andfriends' : Skt. 
kulabandhavamitra- smewr Warm; jūāna- 
wisesa : Skt. MARAT ‘a special know- 
ledge’; dig-vidig : Skt, digvidis- BRARTI 
the four cardinal and four intermediate 
quarters’; dolàyamünacitia ‘doubtful in 
mind’, cf. Skt. dolayamanamati- ASAR- 
«lā; dharma-dešanā : Skt. TAJTA ‘ins- 
truction in the dharma’; dharma-para- 
Yana: Skt. wsiqiTaut ‘intent on dharma’; 
dharmartha.kama : Skt. waiwera the 
three duties dharma etc. dhawalai- 
suka ‘Skt. dhavalamiuka- Wei ja 
a dress’; nilotpaladala : Skt. RR- 

4S petals of the blue lotus’; paksa- 
celi : Skt. paksapatin-Taqltad ‘favouring, 
Piejudieed”; parama-saktiman: Skt. para- 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Skt. Sear | 


| werfal', 


' well as sim llo «x 
22 J refer to A. Meillet, Linguistique | L x 


313 


— 


masaktiman Wake, exceedingly po 
In conside : 


nng compounds ag 


ds we must, of Court 
Dore . S a 
take into consideration the changes to 


E Sanskrit borrowings in Indonesia 
ls subject : nitya-sari "constantly run- 
ning which is found in the metrical 
Ramayana 17,94 does no doubt 
not contain the Vedic adjective sarin- 
BRA, but sarin- MRA which occurs in 
Be Indian epics and other texts, 
™ See my, remarks in BKI, XCVII, 
p-464f. and 486. 
i Thus Kern's edition; the text has 
wanūsri. 
5 Wilkinson, MED. I, p.106. 
Sja (0. Klinkert, Nieuw Maleisch-Neder- 
landsch Woordenboek?, (Leyden 1916), 
p-176. 
28 Some more examples are : astra-dhar- 
ma-karya ‘tournament’ : Skt. astra AA 
‘weapon’ and dharmu- WW ‘any act of 
religion or duty; rsy-aükura (in the 
derivative ka-rsyankura-(a)n "brahmani- 
cal hermits’ (Nag. 78,3 conjecture) ) 
literally "sprout(s) (in a metaphorical 
sense!)ofrsis; kanisiha-madhyamottama 
‘the lowest (smallest, least) middle-most 
and highest (greatest, best)’, which in 
the Sang hyang Kamahayanikan p.40 
Kats occurs to explain the compound 
gresthamadhyamakanisthe “the best, mid- 
dlemost and lowest’ of a quotation in 
Sanskrit; karma-pinda ‘food, livelihood 
for the work done’; gamyosadhi 8 suit- 
able or effective medicine : Skt. NFT and 
tafà; citiawalepa ‘haughty thoughts : 
Skt. citia. RW "thought" and avalepa- 
wat ‘haughtiness'; tativopadesagama 
'the authoritative books be 
instruction in the true principles : Skt. 
fativa 24, upaden- SIT and gama- 
amma; triguna- fag the threo guas 
.); daga-soami (Ādip.p.18) ‘the 
(sativa ete za to nem 
lords or learned brabmine (t : 
ten ti relates the Pausya-carita eto); 
eta bhaiga-bhaya ‘Janger (Skt. Wu) for 


t, H L. 
ruin of the country (Skt. qa)’ in the 


es Digitized b 
derivative ka.desabhangabhayas dyūta- 


4 
basicana fraudulont play’: Sis NM 
cambling aud vaitcana- SESRI iraud, 
dents: dharmakarz performer of 
dharma, lawyer’ or some meaning uke 
this: cf. Skt. Gharmakarya SHEA act 
of dharma, virtuous conduct MMOL Cat 
drama ‘the full moon’: ef. Skt. BRUTE 
candra- WIZ ‘id’; prapaicatura. euf- 
fering from attachment to the visible 
world’: Skt. prapaīca- WW**31 the phe- 
nomenal world’ and alura- W3? 'diseas. 
el’; priya-virakālura ‘suffering from the 
separation from the beloved" (Skt. priya- 
frr and alura-); mahu-saktimān ‘very 
powerful’ (Skt. aema); malāsūra ‘name 
ofa musical instrument’: cf. Skt. AZIAN 
‘having greas vigour’; moktikānana 
‘looking like a pearl, 'pearl-faced' (Skt. 
mauktika- APES and ānana- aaa faco’); 
raga-bhaya lin a derivative) ‘fear of pas- 
sion, 1.6. fearing to be violated (2) (Skt. 
IM and W4); raina.siühásana ‘a throne 
(edorned) with jewels’ (Sk; S and 
fazaa); somya-rüpa-tarira "the body of 
whom has an agresable form”: Skt. 
* saumya- AT ‘gentle’, €T and MN. As 
compared with the well-known Skt. 
kanyāraina- Branta ‘a jewel viz. a girl, 
an excellent maiden’ raina-kanyaka, 
which is repeatedly found side by side 
With ratnūuganā TARAN ‘an excellent wo- 
man’, is worthy of note, 
2 See for other īnstanceg 
maire canscrite, p.19]f. 
2 Now sce also J. G. d 
seripties uit de Gailen 
1950), p.50f, ' 
=! KBW. IV, p.972. 
** 0.0. Berg, Kidung 
v 1927), p107, - 
ericke en Roorda, 
Handwh, T, p.689, 
zu n W.D. Whitney, 
mar, 3 1309; L, Re 4 
ae qi Pa Grammaire Bang- 
** Quoted in KBW. I, d 
** Bwellengrebe] 


Renou, Gram. 
e Casparis, In- 
dra-tijd, (Bandung 
Sunda (in BKI. 


J &Y.-Neder], 


A Sanskrit Gram. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


>7 H. H. Juynboll, Drie Boe 


ken Van 


het M 


OJav. Mahābhārata (Leyden 1893) 
is JEDE 
?? I refer to my exposition in Li 
H, p.171. D 


3? Though it must be admitte 
many compounds, aggregaliong o 
ses aro, etymologically 


d that 
Y phra. 
Speaking, moro 
or lees puzzling, the way in which tho 
dictionaries deal with them ig far from 
being satisfactory. If it is true that in 
2 dietionary intended for Practical enda 
there is no room for etymological ox. 
patiationg, it doos not follow that tho 
way in which the words are arranged 
should clash with sound principles of 
classificaticn and those of providing g 
ready survey. Thus, Dr. Pigeaud, in 
his otherwise very useful "Javaans- 
Nederlands Handwoordenboek’ (Gro- 
ningen-Batavia 1938) mentions any 
phrase or compound at the ond of oach 
separate entry even when these locu- 
tions actually belong to different homo- 
nyms: he gives e.g, three different 
words kala, and all phrases ete. begin- 
ning with kala, whether they beloug to 
kala Y, to kala IL or to kala III, after 
kala YII. Now kala I ‘noose, gin, trap’ 
has been considered a native word, but 
must, in point of fact, either bo idenli- 
fied with Hindi kal a ‘machine, inetru- 
ment, trap etc. which is the Skt. , kala 
«1 ‘any practical art, accomplishment, 
contrivance cte. ors rather, bo regarded 
as an abbreviated form of Skt. srrkhala- 
TĀS ‘chain, fetter’; kala II -(lit.), a 


descriptive term for various kinds of 
(evil) spirits and beings (ree also KBW. 
1,224), isthe Skt. kAala. @@ ‘a wicked 


Person, ruffian’; kala III ‘time’ ie the 
Skt. kāla- wre 'id.', After kala III Dr. 


Pigeaud mentions: kala-kala ‘now and 


then’ (Kala III); kala benjin ‘to-morrow, 
(II); kala-jénkin 'scorpion! (Jav. senkin 
"lying, being idle, to lie like ono dead’) : 
this term contains a rather. wide-spread 
Word kala (which has nothing to do with 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya SBilRetuntetie Gaga! fue eGangotri 


315 


e th À a 
Ai scorpion in Malay, Ngaju-Dayak, 


toba-Babak (hala) and othor languages; 
kola-luwai. "gin" (I); reg. kala-mañga 
spider which will be an adapcation or 
transformation of the native kémanga | ; 
M gpider'; cf. Mal. ` kala mayar in- 
net kilémayar luminous: luillipede’ | taing the S! 
ste. and kala scorpion? which in Mada- a Skt 
sascar means spider; kala-mansa ‘at 
Vires! (III and mañsa ‘mouth, Season, | with the king's name j i 
time” < Skt. masa- AW month’); eic, | Mehideva’s medical x = ae x 
Tia similar way, the lit. Jav. expres- | studliascmgralio-vrafügerann DUC 
gion raga-karana to put one’s likable | UAGA etc. ‘prince’ &re Bk. DENM 
and elegant sides foremost’, though con- | borrowed as such; raja- ic A 
taining Skt. raga- W7 in its more origi- | and other terms ats e Mess 
nal sense of ‘loveliness’, is entered as | (Jav, pati ‘death’), and so on 3 

an addendum to reg. raga "basket.work” | * In Malay makara ig Vreserved as mén- 
and lit. raga ‘body’. —After the word ! kara, bénkara, in combination with amis 
raja ‘king’ (Skt. raja Wa) the same | (< Jav. uran) ‘a crawfish’, 


Or not, V j 

zu The worā 78Ja-wérdi "enamel 

Ss f d 

D wo have shown elsewhere, of 
n origin; rajaswala is the Skt 


reo words mentioned) id 
| 
| RELE RII "full of rajas- 
| 
i 
| 


E compound borrowed 28 such 
Which may be Supposed to be identical 


author gives a long lis of expressions | *' I also refer to my Remarks on ono- 
containing a first element raja whether | matopoeia, eic, in TBG. LXXX (1940) 
it is, etymologically speaking, Skt. raje ' p.199. 


SECTION 5 
DIFFERENTIATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOMONYMS 


Differentiation. 

Two borrowed words noi rarely survive in moro than one form. Such doub- 
lets which have sprung from the same source but have passed through different 
circumstances, are always interesting. The Skt. šūpa- M4 ‘oath (seldom), curse, ` 
imprecation? has been introduced into Malay and continues to be used in that 
language in two forms: sērpa and sérapa(h). The first word, sérpa, not only de- 
notes ‘a curse’, but algo ‘a blessing’: the verb sérpa-i means "to call down a bles- 
"id on a person’; it can be combined with the originally Arabic bérkat blessing : 
dērkat sirpa ‘blessing’. The word sérapa(h), however, only applios to imprecations 
n P evil; . Sumpah sirapa(h) means ‘careiug and swearing, bad language (sumpah 
oath, imprecation; the verb mé-nyérapa (base sérapa) can be used fo denote to 
lay a Curse upon a person so that he undergoes a metamorp 
the well-known effect of a sapa- NT in Indian literature. + thea Soe 

The word pratyaya- WAA which in Sanskrit, apar : mU 
OM means ‘belief, firm conviction, faith, ground, basis, b S A 
baron) ^ Olā-Javaneso insta E d Mi n used in the sense of reli- 
gious beli >m confidato m boto’ also occurs in Sundanese, a8 

ef, faith’, and, as pércaya, 'beliof, trust e 


hosis) This is often 


tiong 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA | 
816 Di em 6 Chemat and eSangetii- — SN 
= Malay. The more naturalized form (with 6) m ^ 
kz ĀJS and suffered other alterations (parcaya, in ANE 
Lb Es Ei and Mod. Jav. pitaya; the form with -ty- jg ial 


apart 

h also pércaya; Sanskrit', given b in tinti ftom 
E. text which has been translated from Sanskrit!, Y Inscriptions, 
ancient text w 


in Malay, puja by the side of puji. The first term applies | 

We find, ES s' texts over an object, to the mumbling of texts ta 0 
the uttering of m ps to the worship of the ancient gods by reli. 
to the da to secure supranormal powers; it can now also bo used 
formulas etc. in or RE oing without theso connotations. The word puji 
to express the idea T» laudation; to praise; puji-pujian are the traditional 
ne ie m PE of an ancient Malay letter. In Javanese wo find 
complimen : ) orship' and puji ‘prayer, (praying) wish; to adore, wish a per- 
Id Hn DS Sundanese puja means ‘religious worship’; puji ‘praise, 
laudation, glory. In Achebnese puja applies. to the È orship of spirits, Saints 
and; kings or to recitations etc. in order to bring ae Me effecta, pujos 
(€ puji) to praising, adoring (especially of Allah) The seconc word is wide-spread 
in the Archipelago: Mac., Bug. io praise, approve of, sometimes (Sasak) algo 
qm 'oor' " Old-Javanese the semantic differentiation has, 
magic formula', or to pray. In Io: Bs Joe 
as far as I see, not made great progress : puja (< Skt. puga qan) (religious) yor 
ship, cult; to adore, praise, pay homage (not only divine beinge, but also men), 
puji ‘praise, honour. Yet, the word puji must, as to ite origin, be only an inno 
vation, arisen on the scheme deva- 34 : devi S4l—püja: puji. Afterwards, two 
forms existing side by side of each other, a semantic differentiation has come 
to develop. 

The word kota- s&tz ‘fort, stronghold’ (also kotta- ātē ‘id.’) which, may be 
considered a loan-word from Sanskrit, occurs in OJav. (Lula ‘fortress, fortified 
encampment’), Mod. Jav. (kuta) and Sunā. (kuta) ‘ring-wall, permanent circular 
breastwork, fortress’, and also ‘a town (not a capital)’, and other IN. languages. 
In Malay (kota) two meanings are distinguished : ‘a fortress, fortified town, a 
Permanent fortification in general’, and ‘a Minangkabau defended village (in 
Toba-Batak this is called a huta <*kuta) or a village in general. According to 
Joustra? two different terms appe 


1 
ar in-Karo-Batak : kota ‘fortress, entrenchment 
and kuta ‘town or village as a political unit”. 


In Sundanese the abbrevia 
but the full form pariksa ex 
also belong to the original Skt, pariksa qat. 


The tendency to differentiation can easily lead to a lasting result, hes 
word it affects has a wide range of meanings. While postponing till anothor n to 
ter those cases of bifureation, which are not attended by a differentiation 48 


ķi al 
the outward &ppearance, we shall now discuss some instancos of semantic and 
the same time outward change. 


percayd, pecaya, 


1 
P E = ing for 
ted riksa is a base for ‘being careful, caring m 
$ 3 ie ining w 
prosses the ideas of ‘investigating examining 


5 4 í ag, U60; 
A4 means ‘aim, Purpose; cause, motive; advantages 


ings 

money; sense, meaning’. Although most of these mena 

are well-known to Old-Javanese authors, two of them were (as far as Icon asd 

9y (a doga artha is, e.g., ‘an offence which is liable to * this 

the derivatives especially expressing the latter pae 

itality : a-tartha, ‘to understand, to explain’. Th ony this 
* —for semantic reasons we find no occasion to identify 


Proves to be full of y 
artha, arthi arti &rigeg 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


I 


SANSKRIT R : 
. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatid NChSP Se Gangotri 


-e : : Ss Se 317 
with the Indian adj. arthin- was longing, wanting Ne 
, 


. € s 
came to signify explanation of words; an interlinear expl t 
3 " : anatio 1 - 
Jn Modern Javanese arla ps arti are different words : nofa kakawin’, 
? . = TOY, € 
"t ‘money, the latter a ngoko word for meaning! (th 


and & base for dorivatives expressing, in 


cal term) 


, 
i ‘ S and arti or Ji - A zi 

more usual) ense, meaning; to understand’: being entirely icm es » 
uralized, the 


latter forms ir des These ine Words for ‘property’ and ‘significance? 
aro also found in languages of the Sumatran group (Malay, Karo.Batak) 

The ii vat EN EE riso to Bal. sesi ‘to leave a person to his fate’ besidà 
sisa, sesa vest, remainder <Skt. sesa- AT id.’, and to Jay. Mal. Sund. suišri : 
‘pearing rein’ beside suira which came to mean ‘silk’, Skt, Seem WOULD 
‘thread, cord, wire’. Cae 

In Sanskrit bhägya- ARA not only means ‘entitled to a thare’ 
tunate’ and as a substantive, ‘destiny, fortune, good fortune, Mis welfare' 
Apart from the first sense which is seldom found in Sanskrit, these i are 
well-known to the ancient Javanese authors. Moreover, the word is, like the 
younger form bages* used as a welcome or as a term expressing this idea. Altho- 
ugh we are usually not in a position to provide a satisfactory reconstruetion of 
such pro cesses and to account for particulars, we must conclude from the present- 
day Javanese and Sundanese that this word, too, has been split vp into two: the 
literary bagya ‘fortunes fortunate, prosperous’ and the colloquial bagé ‘thank good- 
nese!’ beside which we find the literary bagea ‘welcome! hail! (the-a represents 
an ancient Javanese suffix expressing a wish, a possibility, the future ete.) This 
bageya has found its way to Sundanese, where bagja is used for ‘fortune, fortunate 
etc.’ 


cuniary resources 


bué also ‘for. 


Skt. phala- %% ‘fruit’ and in a special sense nutmeg’, is often metaphorically 
used : ‘effect, result, benefit; interest on capital'? In the same way in Old-Java- 
nese. But in modern times pala denotes the nutmeg (Jav. Sund., Mal, KBat. 
etc., in Jav. literary usage also ‘fruit’ and ‘result, profit’), pahala (Jav. lit.; Mal.), 
véhala (Mal., KBat.), pahla (Suud.) ‘profit, gain, reward (also of the winning of 
Eternal Life, etc.).5 It is worth remarking that the more abstract and literary, 
the less colloquial of the two meanings is expressed by an outward form which is 
less familiar in IN. tongues and, in a sense,.adheres more closely to the d 

In Modern-Javanece two words beda are current : () Urna ti E: LA 
di asa base-word for ‘vexing, teasing’. The latter meaning Kari sitions a 
mbeda ‘to vex, irritate’ : bé-beda-(a)n ‘disturbance’ or a ghort or spp 


teases)’ and elsowhore. Both words trace their origin m i VĒ bM s 
‘part from ‘distinction’, ean mean ‘disturbance, violae on X DE o 
tionary even distinguished between bida ‘trick, hoax and beda : source of differen- 
The frequent alternation of b and w° has also Mes semantic develop- 
tiated forms, Although an exhaustive investigation E tā E V us 
ment of Skt, pūrva- va in ancient Java will pahane, 8 2 Men 
Particulars, we are already in a position to state that bas ‘to be the first to 


i : loped : ASA 
eing before, first’ some special meanings Lave MES (a) fowerļs); ‘to 
Cohabit with a virgin; to deflower’; ‘to (be the firat 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRİT IN INDONESI A 


318 Digitized by Arya Samaj Fo ri 
1 irbh or 8 country’ (Kd. Pamancangah 1,12 saù amurwa bhümi “tho 2 
i Eu the king’)? Ia Modern-Javanese the literary purwa still nes 
of the cou J ng 


which is likewise a bookish word, however, 


H t] - has 
(esses beginning; purba, cone 
first; beginuins » force on others’. Ina paralle = 


1 d ing 
mean ‘role, to impose one ? controlling dt S REA 
ese has-purwa ‘origin, beginnings and purba powerful, to impose one’s authority 
nose . j Wie e j 
i wever, is only ancient. 
Malay purba, however, i E. TA NL, 
An excellent illustration of this typo is Skt. seva «4l service, Du, 
An e 


homage, reverence; practice, frequent enjoyment: resorting (to), 
quentation’, which in OJav. served E n 5 qa Ep audiendo and ag 
a base for “to pay homage, to pay one's rospoois to (tho king ete.), to wait upon’, 
In the Principalities seba has long Doensrusec to mi the idea of presenting 
oneself on an appointed day etc. before a prince or a highly placed person. The 
Sundanese, however, employ the same form ta donoto a Desant offered to the 
prince or a superior as a mark of esteem or submissivenees. The obymological 
variant sewa, on the other hand, was, in Sundanese and regional Javanase, pro» 
ferred to signify the rent, espocially the land-revenue to bo paid by a village or by 
individuals to the authorities (when they had to wait upon them), hence, it ig 
used in the sense ‘rent, to hire (in general)’: Sund. kuda sewa ‘a hired horse’, 
Apart from tha derivative pé-seba-(a)n. ‘tho verandah, platform or gallery to 
which the general public ie admitted when a sovereign holds court’, which has 
bean borrowed from Javanese, only sewa "hire; to rent; to engage for payment’ 
recurs in Malay. A third form, which is already very frequent in Old-Javaneso, ig 
siwi to respect, honour, render homage, serve’ : it represents the MIA. form: cf. 
Skt. sevi tat servant .'? 

The alternation p/w has given rise to Sund. rupa ‘outward appearance, 
visible form; colour’ («Skt. ripa-€q id”) and ruwa "property, nature, aspect 
(appearance) . i 

Wo must once more draw attention to the facs that the history and 
the travellings of variants very often account for their difference in meaning : 
boside salya, sélya "pure, clear (heart, intentions, disposition) «Skt. satya- A 
pure, pail, Virtuous’, Sundanese satiya, which has been regarded as a Malay 
Joan, means faithful’. In Minangkabau a ‘pupil or student’ is called sasian, in 


old-fashioned Malay the form siswa can bo found. Both words represent Skt. 
- sisya- fara ‘id’, the | | 


worship, fre. 


volume it has already become sufficiently 
t seldom appears in differont forms bi 
tion. More often than not tho Indonesian 
tation affocted a loan-word to guoh an extent 


Je 0 

Penang, assu +), *Pportioning’ bagi hag, in tho ‘bazaar’ Malay 5 

d ON 1 med the Sense of ‘giving’ (In general VA s Pet d ‘allottin g: 
REG. ONGga- MA ‘sharo’; bhagi ani se it also stands 

nese untara is a regional an 


< Skt. antara- eqq "interi 
naturalized ag 


3 
aco eio 
was 
ida, 


d colloquial 
or, interval", 


; ianbs 
& colloquial fofīn, while In other cases ono of tho varian 


the other was folt as polite: Jav- * 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


wb 
t effected; 


rgonago W 
pe! ') tho. ronto of “decessad Pee iid OJav. ‘a holy or blessed 
porson ; os "S develop; hence th 
d seda ‘to pass away’. © Jay. krama 


inggil wore aa ky e : 
An interesting iade, which may be mentioned because : 
onents bas been borrowed from Sanskrit, is the Nets p of its com- 
distinguishes between kabudayan "culture, Civilization? (Dutch ii zu Javanese 
doen ‘plantations’ (Dutch cultures), both words Ns EDU kabu- 
‘an, which together help to form nouns. The fecond word Pee is uc oe 
tive of budi-deya devise plans, take pains to... tho first hag mee dd p 
budaya, & now obsolete and literary word for ‘talented, nM = 
culture, civilization’. Kabudayan (which distinctly emphasizes the abet ae 
tor of the idea exprossed) has taken the place of its base budaya;. s A i arac- 
repeatedly happen. But budaya and budidaya are, in E. opinion: ow 
first being a prod uct of haplology : bu(di)dayo. Budi is, of course Skt. buddhi- ghz 
which ig still p ur use : ingenuity, intelligence (to solve a problem, or to 
contrive T kkas J ene ps member is IN. daya, which in Jav. sell meani 
energy, inhereut power, in but in Sundanese and Malay "artifice, dodge, 
way, usually a trieky way of doing something; cunning prudence’. In Sundanese 
budi-daya means prudence’. 
Homonyms. 
: This is a convenient place to adduce some examples of what we may call 
etymological coincidences. Now and thea phonetical and other processes have 
resulted ina new form which was homonymous with another Indian loan, or 
could easily be confourded with such a word. Thus Bal. iyukķi (lit) not only 
represents Skt. yukti- gm ‘properly, justly’, but also vyakti- ifm ‘visible appear- 
ance, becoming evident’. As Skt. uttara- Sw ‘north, northern’ was also pro- 
nounced untara in (lit.) Javanese, it became a homonym of untara, a regional and 
colloquial by-form of antara ‘intervening space, interval etc.’ <Skt. antara- sed 
middle, interval’. Skv. smara- €Rč ‘love’ and samara- SHE ‘encounter, fight’, were 
sometimes confused in Javanese texts. At first sight OJav. arda (usually written 
arddha) ‘vory, rather’ ard lit. Mod. Jav. arda ‘excessively; desirous, eager’ are 
rather puzzling; attempts to explain them from Skt. erdha- 9H half’, which is 
also found in OJav. texts (in ardhacandra- swa eto), have failed for semantic 
PIQUE does it represent Skt. rddha- KE ‘increased, abundant ? EE 
Piata book of divination’ <Skt. pustaka- Je book' also eS ae ER 
vith mala : mala pēstaka ‘spell or evil as the result of aounig or of $ ‘ y M 
a stands for pataka < Skt. pataka- qme "sin, Mer the phrase Rap nena 
Dore clero one ae rl, eana (ark eae Tet E 
s TOU MOM ‘ +? no doubt because it 
d rule of conduct”) which came to denote ‘a lawsuit, n 


i eliheration, conver- 
Men for bi ‘court- roceeding' and also de 
cara court-case> legal p S road qud (ot. also am 


judge’). On the other hand, 
nial'<Skt. upacūra- STAT 
resses the game mean- 
aram (the latter word 


p 


blishe 
Waa t 


sation? < Skt. vicara- AAT ‘procedure, case, exar 
x^ NR 'one who makes an investi MN 
(āra, also found instead of upacara Insignis C ie 
1 Nee, coromony, ornament’. Besides it somasi 


Inga : iehi called ch 
8 acaram "betrothal.ring or gift’, which is also 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


- 


Digitized gy ASEMA RANA RN E RLfhnai and eGangotri 


SO e eae ^ 
a a ss áo — . i B N 
Iso means earnest-mOneY, instalment’), azd by its final sound betrays its comin 
also 


: « f prescribed rites, custom, usas 
from Tamil: ācāram the performance ot pres , : m 


Skt, acara- ATT. 
Garā ist namber of cases, part of which constitute etymological ie 
zlea, a loan-word from Sanskrit and a native term have ECCO the same ds 
ward form. Thus, OJav. aga to be (vwell- disposed, willing’, Which hag mor 
survived, and Skt. OJav. anga- X body; CU ali to hope, desire etc. ; Skt, 
OJav. ati af ‘exceedingly, very; OJ av. ari stop, ceare : Skt. Olas. ari- Bf 
‘enemy’; OJav. asi ‘while’ : Skt. OJav. as?- afa sword ; Oday. kaya "like' and kaya 
(a base for) ‘to exert oneself’ : Skt. OJav. kaya. Vt body’; OJav. dwi "wing. 
OJav. dwi from Skt. dvi- fz ‘two’; OJav. Mana destroyed, hurt’: Skt. OJav, nang 
am ‘variously, differently’; OJav. para ‘(to) come’ : Skt. OJav. para- 4% ‘another’, 
In Achehnese a word uséha means ‘attending, nursing (Mal. asuh), but its homo. 
nym usüha ‘industry, exertion’ is the Mal. usaha ‘id.’ <Skt. utstha- KATE ‘en. 
deavour, exertion. In the same language gonta not only means ‘trembling, 
quivering’ (Mal. géntar), but also ‘bell’ (Mal. génta : Skt. etc. ghanja auzī ‘hel’), 
In a similar way the Malay dua ‘two is unrelated to Skt. dvà- £l in compounds, 
with which it has its meaning in common, the former being a wide-spread IN, 
word. And OJav. tuigai ‘to mount’ is alien to Skt. twiga- ds "highs height, top'. 
In some cases etymological connections have been incorrectly admitted : the OJav. 
word indra ‘eyeball, pupil’, for instance, has nothing to do with OJav. indér (a 
derivative of which is indéra, indra) turn round’, but has been borrowed from 
Sanskrit g*Z ‘pupil of the eye. The coincidence of Skt. katara- Flay ‘timid, 
cowardly’ and OJav. katara ‘apparent’ has occasioned some unfounded supposi- 
tions as to their interrelation. 
nah A dificult point is- the word kali which in Malay, Karo-Batak etc. means 

time’ (in connection with numerals: Mal. tiga -kali ‘three times’), or ‘occasion’: 
pada ké-dua kali ‘on both occasions. Some lexicographers have derived Mal. sëka- 
lian all’ and sēkali once, at one time, altogether, very; totally! from this kali, 
supposing it to be a native term. It is possible, but H. Kern" was right in remark- 
ing tbat some of the meanings of Malay sékali make us think of Skt. sakala- Ge 
all, whole» entire, Whereas sēkaltan as to both form and meaning resembles the 
An cud do dis, sakalyena EET EI entirely, completely. Does, ws 
UCM 2 M aan istewa once upon a time — the second member o 
(a definite) Gan EH te d ae ere contem the locative of Skt. kala- ae ‘ 
then, possibly n S i 4 A E kiss Wo Ws he 
inclined to emphasize the fa, 1 mud te ee gi wo occasionally ? He uj 
' beside the synonym kali fee "X 4 Balinese kala ‘time, momoni ur ert 
from the vocabulary of God Um MEER verte) that isto se ora d 
thesis that "Mal, eto. kah is x ede tie oslo in favour ot ai 
type. x completely naturalized Sanskrit loan of the pwt 

The intticate 

with Skt. hari. eft oy 
has already been ciroy 


| Tespect, 


uestion "TD : i 
as to Mal, hari ‘day’ and its supposed connection 


ich among other meanings also expresses that of tho su 
mstan ially discussed, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKR , 
__ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundallin GRANE sna eGangotri 
pa dt ae ee 321 


NOTES EE 


1 ang byang Kamahayanikan, ed. Kats, | of this chapter 


LN S 
62. LE MESE I: | __ "OW compare om 
P M. Joustra, Karo-Bataksch Woorden- | Kasaroong, ees Eringa, Loetoeng 


posk, (Leyden 1907), p.52 and 53. 
1 The Javanese variation "a: -i has been > There is no u 
explained in a previous paragraph. à sing th 
4 The change ya> e has been explained | ‘to rule’ hag developed fr h 

in the first section of this chapter. (the three acts are often ea S ee 
s [t is a matter of indifference from what | or the Words for one of pan ed 
sourco the word itself derives (cf. T. | cally used for another). E 
Burrow, in Transactions of the Philolo- | 1° See ch. IV, 8.1 (treatment 
gical Society (London 1946), p.10), for i " Kern, VG. X, p.274. 
OJav. phala is unmistakably Sanskrit. '* The prefix sa- means ‘a, one? : sa-hari 
6 For pahala < phala see the first section ! ‘a day’, 


| * See the first section, 


8e in Prematurely discus 
` 55i 
9 question whether the meaning 

o 


of vowels), 


SECTION 6 
VARIOUS ETYMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 


Even when these processes are duly taken into consideration there are words 
which are apparently, or probably, Indian, but nevertheless, etymologically speak- 
ing, unaccountable. Part of them were already casually mentioned by other 
authors. Other words, though etymologically understandable, have undergone 
incidental transformations so as to make us doubt of their Sanskrit, or even Indo- 
Aryan, source as far as a given Indonesian language is concerned. A third cate- 
gory may include Indonesian vocables which however have a curious resemblance 
to Sanskrit words of similar meaning. Although we have already now and then 
taken the opportunity to discuss such puzzling or questionable etymologies, this 
may be a convenient place to make a comprehensive survey of the various difficul- 
ties with which we are confronted.' j 

Let us begin with some problems, or pseudo-ebymologies, of the last-named 
variety. Some authors held the Mal. dara ‘maiden; virgin’ to be a Gansta qud 
to wit dārāh ZWI: ‘wife’. As the Malay word must be connected with lit. pis cd 
(SOJav. rara) id”, TBat. dara ‘id’, Tag. dalaga ‘id’, representing an Re be 
daya"? and the meanings are not in harmony, the above supposition mus 


rejected. ) haps rather intricate. 
ET ". -wool' is perha 
The history of Mal. kapas ‘cotton, cotton-w be admitted that kapās #118 


Tt has been regarded as a Hindi loan! and it must ce. The existence 

denotes the 'cotton-plant, Gossypium herbaceum’ in that Mete Bee o 

of Jay, Mad., Sund. kapas is not decisive in discussing the ir Men are clearly 

May have been borrowed too. However, the spread of kās Ped as Roti adas < 

Sate all over the Archipolago* and the occurrence o d e sr This hypo- 

an original kapas® load us to suppose that this word is Bae Sedang, kipaih in 
8818 ig corroborated by the existence of such words as 


a ae Z jatic languages: 
nar and similar forms in other Austro-Asiati 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


rya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri—— 
lleged Indian origin of Mal. timak ‘tin (bug 


322 


In my opinion the a 


enerio term covering zinc OT spelter) (Tag. Bis. tita; Pamp. liga»); Bis a 
os Mao. tumbera; Bug. tumera, tambura; TBat. simbora:? < Skt, DM He 


‘sin’ cannot be supported by sufficient evidenco.'? 
In a similar way the resemblance of the Skt. root kri- aq ‘cutting ine 
cos’ (present krntati Fafa etc.) on dao eng hand and Mal. kérat ‘to cu PS 
Jav. kērēt ‘a severed part or limb, a joint or part of eugar-cano', TBa 
ver’ on the other must be regarded as due to the morest chance," 

The OJav. panji ‘banner, stand of colours and the Mal, Danji-panji «y. 
non, pennant (of long triangular flag-omblems)’, TBat. panji-panji "plumes, ionem 
;: ornament (of children)’ and cognate words in other IN. languages (e.g. Sund. panji. 
panji trousers’) have been connected with the Skt. pañji or paūji (sx, qF ‘the n 
of cotton from which thread is spun’, and paiiika WAI 'id., and aleo ‘a perpetual 
commentary, a register or record’ etc. As, the IN. word panji, which may belong 
to the came Austrio group, can also denote ‘kapok’ (Ach. pono), and, on the other 
hand, one of the supposed changes of meaning (‘register’>‘pennon’) ig very impro. 
bable, and for the other ('cotton' > 'pennon") the hypothesis of an Indian prototype 
is superfluous, we will do wisely to reject the above suggestion. 

In contradistinction to Van der Tuuk who thought it possible to derive the 
IN. émpat ‘four’ from the Skt. pad- We ‘foot, quarter," arguing that words for 
“font, leg, thigh’ came to be used for ‘a quarter’, I consider the similarity of these 
words as a mere coincidence. 

I have not succeeded in tracing a Sanskrit origin of the Mal. hantu, which 
is a general term for invisible spirits of evil which work in darkness and secrecy 
(such as gnomes of the soil, demons of localities, tutelary spirits, demons behind 
En DTE E associated with definito diseases, ghost-birds, 
discarded divinities 4 m js. S EOM ed ee ae MeL 
dian. Some of its connotations a j h S PRA aE bed M 
IIS Clau evil coirite eto > n dae aps also the fact that in Javanese beside 
(<Skt. hantu- 274 ‘tilling’: in e er (lit) antu occurs whieh means death 
Tavera to derive the former term NEA Cd also for dying ) bave led Pardojde 

: Hos Sanskrit, In my opinion this etymology 

Basoen kiss zs A N the ovil associations of the word. 
pearance of which, however is diff R) i 59 Maisy ae pace a 
following instances : Jav Pasii: (i xim as GEL BS to the 
represent Skt. nisciti. fafafa tering: v IKO) ER) -scrupulous ma 
scrupulous’? — Tf the lit. Jav. 2 EN n ju pdt blondes eo 
Prastarana. WRIT ‘reat, couch? ib paved' hag something to do with ši 
stone, flat surface; prastūra- GS Compare prasiara- IEI “couch of lear 
Kashmiri pathuy TAT ‘bare floor’ t D surface’; Pāli pattharo qeaat ‘stone; 
of popular etymology, with the M it may have been connected, by processes 
Perous (country ), antes, reli Rod bata ‘brick’. — Doos Bal. Sas. tērpi pros- 

| which haa not come ^ our "P'eased, contented (heart) represent a Skt. trpi- 
satisfied, pleased’ and such atthe (cf. however the root irp- ga ‘to become 
or has it developed from trpti (Sk as arti- fÀ ‘dance’, krsi- ufq ‘ploughing’ et0.)*; 
t. ipti- Sf ‘satisfaction’ which occurs in Old: 


Javanese? Mal, Jav. „7 
S «CAV. agota * hk à j 
id”, but what is its i E limb’ strongly reminds us of Skt. aiga- 


t through’ 
t. horot ‘to 
88 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Ays SNRESIHRUn Edi D Oe ppaj and eGangotri 
II I I 328 
ci uy be regarded as an admissible h MS 
alone» altogether, pure, cd notwith 
Skt. samatā equality, impartiality’ s 
25 eos in Old-Javanese es polls UE » the origina] "onse of which 
Gn < Gkt. samasta- AA ‘id.’ with which iti Mal. sēmēstu ‘all, 
enura l' looks like an altered form of Bal. -—Bug banna- 
a an evil spirit’, 
- TART ‘forest. 
for ‘jackal’, an 
- —The OJav. wasita 
with the Skt, avasita- 
h which it has been 
n’: cf. Skt. obhipraya- 


Uum banaspati ‘tree, evil spirit inhabiting a forest’ < Skt, vanaspati 
treo’ and a namo of Visnu. —Whereas pèruh is a younger Bal, form 
old Bal. inscription has puruh: the Skt. word is pheru- šrg 
*ord', a-wasila speaking has, in my opinion, nothing to do 
aafaa ‘onded, finished, fixed, ascertained, understood? wit 
connected; it seems to represent Skt. bhasita. urfga “spoke 
afaa ‘intention’ : OJav. wipraya 'id.'5, 

Whereas such words as Mal. Mad. mota ‘a rush use 
Cyperus compressus’ are without difficulties, because they 
OIA. form (ef. Pkt. motiha ati, Hindi motha sta ja” as against Skt. musta- ga), 
the history of other words is less evident : beside aùkusa ‘mahout’s goad’ Malay 
has also ankus and kosa; the reg. Jav. form is ankus ‘fire-hook’ : the first form ig 
identical with the Skt. ankusa- Zz, '(elephant-driver's) hook’, the second appa- 
rently represents the NIA. a4Lus; the third form, however, must bo either a 
clipped form or another word (can Skt kusa- $a; kosa- eta ‘an (iron) plough- 
share’, in some way or other, be considered as etymologically identical 2). 

It may be mentioned in passing that other words would have been entered 
in the list of Indian loans if historical facts did not prove their origin: Mak. 
lakari and Bug. kalakari ‘sealing-wax’ are, so far as the-e IN. idioms are concern- 
ed, Portuguese loans (lacre), though it is not native Portuguese, but a loan-word 
(ultimately from India MIA. and NIA. lakkha, lakha ete.); the Jav. lak is the same 
word, introduced by way of Dutch. 

An instance of a probably wide-spread word the ultimate origin and mani- 
fold migrations of which are wrapped up in mystery is the Mal. kuda ‘horse’, 
TBat. hoda; the word (Kuda) also occurred in Old-Javanese, and in the «astern 
districts of Java it still is a krama term. From Java it came to other islands in 
the east of the Archipelago. Long ago (1989), Kern! supposed it to bà a Dravi- 
dian loan introduced into Sumatra by inhabitants of the Coromandel or pe 
gana districts : ‘although’, he says, ‘kodaga is the only Tamil form known, a 
May have existed too’. Such Dravidian forms as Can. kudure ete pube ER 
Their Similarity with OIA. ghota- az ‘horse’, Skt. ghofaka- ates tid. €— À 
"Scognized, and the Dravidian origin of this Aryan Bet eh Ū karā 

3b Oriya ghord, Beng. ghora, Hindi ghora ste! eto. E Bes eriticized 
this hypothesis janet inüdeent of simplism and has accordingly jean 
BER Sanskrit loan. 
?Y Jules Blogp, is Anyhow Mal. ete. cannot be considered a 


-bag Hindi loan: 
ot Hindi gon RÙM, gon atta ‘a bag of coarse cloth’. Se. ig no objection 
i Dowover, denoted by the form go? (of. Tolugu mcr Ww d NN 

he hypothesis that the Malay word was a is a borrowing from Hindi: 


in alay has two words suji. The firs 
Tu i -groun Ae SES 
n uit Wheaten flour in fine granules, coarse d ‘smbroidery’ and has been 
Y Stināing wheat in a special way’, the other m 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


d for making mat-cloth, 
clearly represent a post- 


d flour, the meal obtained: 


P. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA ` 
324 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation C. i MET. 


E h in Old-Javanese and elsewhere denotes thg 
This word is, e.g., found in 


DES 
Poteupina 
Sundanese 


c from suji whic 
was formerly used as & needle” a S 

dge-hog or porcupine’; pee sujzan roasting-spit’. E : 
bed chain used as an instrument of torture"); jn Node dE 
ion pancak suji "iron railings or trellis-work”, in is 
(i.e. suji-an) "pin used for fastening or piercing ju S n osa a lu the lit 
rary word s-in-uji ‘embroidered with pearls eto. b in ld -Javanose (suji ‘quill; 
sting, prickle; embroidery’). In Macassar we find suji to embroider » Which will bo 
a loan-word from Malay, side by side with sige and suki (id”). Buginese has suji and 
suki in the same sense. Adriani considers Barée suji as borrowed from Malay. 
In Bimanese we find sujé "roasting-spit. Tag. araa quill’, etc. Ag Tag. 7 in 
this position not only corresponds to Jav. and Mal. J. ìn IN. words, but also in such 
vocables as Tag. puri ‘praise’, Mal. puji 'id., Jav. puji 'adoration'?? which we 
have brought into connection with the loan Jav. ote. puja ‘worship’ < Ski. püja 
Gail ‘honour’, the second consonant of the word under discussion does not, ag far 
as I see, present difficulties in connection with an attempt to consider it aga 
loan-word. This word, indeed, reminds us of Skt. sūci- qñ, sūci aut "needle, any 
sharp-pointed instrument or object, the sharp point of anything’ (rails, balustrades, 
doorbolte, sharp files etc. are called sici- or sūci); in connection with a word for 
‘porcupine’ it denotes the ‘quill’ of that animal, a sūlasūci WSQ is ‘the pointed 
end of a pike or spear. Notwithstanding several attempts to derive this word 
from Indo-european roots? (it has, to mention only this, been connected with Skt. 
sūtra- (QA ‘thread’ ete, from the root siv- Ra ‘to sew’), there is a difficulty on the 
formal side (the c in the word) and a complication on the semantic side : sücipat- 
tra- QTA and sūci- itself, mean ‘an index or table of contents’, the verb sūcayati 
‘to show, indicate, reveal, ascertain’. Has this use developed from the idea of 'point- 
ing at (witha pointed object)’> pointing out’? 

At times a word comes into being which looks like a genuine Sanskrit loan, 
though it is never found in that language. OJav. prakosa, lit. Mod. Jav. prēkosa 
may be quoted as anexample.** Tt means ‘powerful, mighty, strong, solid, dura- 
i PE senie identified it with OJav. prakasa "famous, n 
E hod x MN e famous ), but this supposition d 
pal orgy TS peep a “ated J Jav. kosa, which expresses] a similar i , 

EE ical with kosa (as a base) ‘doing violence to, over 
Poe enor) neither Sanskrit nor Indonesian. Now, the d 
control, authority? ig bsc o AM ^ de ir Hr i ie Eo 
the general idea of "power, bei RM ; frais 4 exerc oyored i g beo 
posed to have developed to M MIU] duis trisylisblo word R i have 
been a secondary, MU cuo hoe , and prakosa (p ralkoša) m UAR 
at the samo time tha MH da erivative of it. The word kawasa is, iii 
powerful’ : another instance of ait ae Os ORS ON ad ue ene 
and suwarga are in a ee erentiation as to the outward form. . As . 2 

Y representatives of the Skt. svarga- <a heave 


As to kuwasa, ku, i 5 

“physical un jā, VES also introduced into Malay, where it is not usod of 

founded with pé ee gt Power and 'aūthority'. But it was occasionally cor- 

hence through ieee Ue ve, Skilled in war'<Skt. prakasa- HIT (see wr 
n P - ; T: 

from tho semantic us lon, the form pērkuas. The word is also interes 


of view : the Tag, kuwasa, kawasa 'self-restraint" and 


derived? 
quill which 
(suji ‘quills of a he 
(‘chain’) sujèn a bar sd 
Javanese (in the combinas 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya SBRISTGUntistiom Gennej and.eGangotri 


‘ eg - 32 
Sula (east of Celebes) kawasa power; = 


(40018, implements may, be considered identiea] zs ii es Us TBat. huwaso 
ives in lit. Jav. pamasa (prefix pa- 'Sinal Skt. vaza au 
lp; ation) ‘prince’; beside it we fi 
nasa aie vasya- ALA ‘obedient’. 
from What is the origin of the Javanese krama inggil ter. k 
ing , wanting; being ready or disposed; will, wish’, «LĪS karsa 
algo Sundanese : kërsa desiring; will, desire? ? As far as its 
could have sprung from pJ av. ka-harsa ‘hope, 
is the Skt. harsa- «4 joy ); or 18 i6 more COrrec 
amg ‘drawing towards one’s self, attractio 
which is also Old-Javanese). There also exis sana) a neo 
with, wanting which was identified with the above Skt. akarsana..26 
sideration of the fact that the meaning of Skt, harsa->OJay, Ju 2 
taking delight in’ changed to "wishing, desiring’ ā 
pressing intention and futurity) in lit. Javane 
be regarded as more probable, the more go ag in Balinese 'eourt-langua 
is a synonym of arsa, both meaning "delight; having a mind to, 
fond of. Moreover, karsa can serve as an e 
form beginning with k may have been Secondarily derived from nasalized verb 
forms, developed out of harsa, under the influence of kaharsa >karsa : as to the 
supposed contraction it may be observed that Skt. saharsa- qg8 ‘joyful’ resulted 
in the (now obs.) Jay. sarsa ‘slag’. 
Another word, the history of which is worthy of our attention is Skt. spha- 
tika- wales ‘crystal, quartz’. The OJav. Ram. (e.g. 3,35) has the correct form, but 
the more ‘popular’ Nawaruci has pasttka.** In other ancient texts which may be 
reckoned to the Middle Javanese class amastika (‘appearing as pastika’) is used to 
describe teeth and the word itself can be synonymous with manik ‘a (powerful) 
gem’. In Malay the word appears as mēstika or mustika ‘a bezoar, especially when 
endowed with talismanic properties’2? In Malaya a mēstika is Bameshing ORY: 
miraculous or suprancrmal, which can, for instance, bring the dead to life.^^ Now 
in Minangkabau a ‘bezoar’ found in the bodies of certain animals or held to be 
found in places where valuables are hidden, is called a mantiko or d It ray 
be the identical word, but we must remember that the Skt. mauktika- ut Mess 
has, as OJav. moktika, also found its way to the Archipelago, = paca i in 
With it, itg Prākrit equivalent muktika- gr." The source of t e bor. D 
all Probability, Dravidian : Tamil multu, muttam 'peatl eto. MNA (the 
Original form, be it directly from Dravidian, or by the way pem of. also 
rm mutya- ex ‘pearl’ which is also Sanskrit, occurs a and its dialectical 
vE Mitityd Jewel’) has come to Java in Mod. d a a er form : Mod, Jav. 
Y-form munte (formerly also "pearl')?^ There is also à isos) metteyara(k); 
mutiyara and muntiyara ‘pearl’, Mal. mutiara ‘id.’ Mad. D 33 will represent 
montiara, Ba]. mulyara, which being shortened from Va these forms we might 
kt, Mulyahara- JAF ‘a string of pearls.** In ae not represent a blended 
me Whether the above mentioned Min. Mere. this assumption. T 
BT can, however, be perfectly explained Wi mado of the tendency to give 
Word Uti connection passing uijā e. to the Malays and other 
8 an Arabic appearance, which has been P 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


(or kérsa) "wish. 
a courteous term is 
form is Concerned it 


attracting’ 


se (arsa), the former possibility must 
ge karsa 
a liking for, being 
quivalent of budi ‘desire, will’2” The 


S Digitized t ARBRES PSU TRANS Ai and eGangotri 
3 NEN S en 


C MR 


i f the Arehipolago who used the Arabie script, Ioue ete 
dE n. Arabic aspirated guttural (Cain) was sometimeg writt Wc 
correct k (kāf) an 7 E no pant < Skt. bumba» gu kadi cuna M 
kumba frontal ca ien € "ife" was now and then written with the 
has lived, age oat: di "ord for ‘heaven’ Skt. svarga- IÙ often S 

ādā (instead of sin); the wor j i b. appears in 
à lay as skurga with the Arabie shin. Tho Skt. bheda- Hq difference ete. Was 
ae written with dz inatead of d ( Mal. pU xe ); many Malay; 
regarded the word as Arabic, and pronounced it like o eer words with tho Arab 
āzād ie.with d+ the Engl. th of the (the usual transliteration in Malay-English 
dictionaries is dz). As the dzad as pronounced by the Arabs ue an emphatically 
articulated palatal d we may surmise that Qus original aspiration in the Sanskrit il 
word is not alien to this orthography which is especially consistently adhered E 
to in older manuscripts. It may be observed. that in other loans, too, an original 
Indian sound was retained in the Malay orthography, e.g. in Mal. karéna ‘be. 
cause etc.’ < Skt. karana- ERT ‘cause, reason’, the % and a representing the original 
kā; bahwa ‘the facts are as follows, the story goes’ (used at the beginning ota 
story or paragraph)<Skt. bhava- UTA ‘occurrence, existence, state, condition’. 

An Arabic appearance was also given to the originally Sanskrit hatta ‘now, 
next, well then’ (used fo open a new section) by writing it with 7: it doubtless 
represents atha % ‘then, now, further, also which was also borrowed by the 
ancient Javanese; the word was, however, influenced by, or identified with, the 
Arab. hatia ‘to, until, as far as, so that ete.. 

Other words came to resemble Arabie vocables through the very change 
of their sounds in the IN. language which adopted them. Thus Skt. nirviga- f 
"poisonless' changed to nurbisa *countercharm to draw poison out of a wound etc." 
which has of course nothing to do with the Arab. nr — Mal. nur ‘light’. To a 
similar way: Mal. nurmala ‘faded’<Skt. nirmala- FAAS ‘stainless’. The resem- 
blance between Mal. nustapa or (usually) nastapa ‘agony, anguish’? <Skt. manastapa- 
MEN "heart-ache' with such Arab. words as mustafa ‘chosen’ (in Malay also | 
mustapa) must likewise be attributed to chance, Such coincidences have, how- 
ever, contributed to the obliteration of the true etymology.”* J ' 

Let us finally add that in some cases a transliteration into the Arabio 
script may have occasioned anew pronunciation. Apart from the word beda (see | 
above) Skt. varņa- act ‘hue, colour'2 Mal. idem must be mentioned in this conner 


tion because of the pronunciation "rna, orna: the written word can represent 
warna hut also urna, orna.36 


9n in 
me Ong 
Arabic 


NOTES 


' The examples given are only a selec s 


tion, which could easily be enlarged, 


AREJA 
aa, MED. I, p.257 connects it | 4 Wilkinson, MED. I, p.508 Mie 
wi t. adara, without giving its gense, | out that it especially ds Pus 


7 AUS 
D Enn adara aa ‘not | cotton-plant, Gossypium ind 
care, trouble’ ? 1a- BAX respect, thes, Boegincesch-Hollandsch ur 


* Which i boek (The Hague 1874), v. 787 
Which is marked by. Dempwolff, Ver: ! 5 I refer to P. S. A. de Olereg: 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


gleichende Lautlehre, III, p.42 88 8 


ralized loan-word. ints 


A. A. Pul le; 


Digitized by Arye AVR Ralindation sena and eGangotri 


cm Plantkundig Woordenboek voor ] 
ai prlandsch-Indié®, n° 1958ff, | 
3s o also J. C. S. Jonker, Rottineesche | 
6 go 


B raakkunst (Leyden 1915), p.44 and 81, it 
p 


empwollff, o.c., III, p.75. 
j 20 a x "BB. (The Philippine 
d is B is already discussed ina prece. | 
uh pari of thia volume). 
g Matthes, 0.C., p.306. 
10 Qf, also Dempwolff, o.c., M, p-188. | 
11 Van der Tuuk, Bataks-Nederduitsch 


Woordenboek (Amsterdam 1861), p.86 ;. 


upheld the identity of these words. See 
also Dempwolff, o.c., IIT, p.77. 

12 Lafeber, Vergelijkende klankleer van 
het Niasisch, p.94. 


Woordenboek, p.325. 
1 Qf. Pardo de Tavera, El sanscrito en ! 
la lengua Tagalog, p.16. 

'5 Seo Gonda, BKI. XCVIII(1939), p.245. 
'5 See now Kern, VG. VI: p.116. 

1 See og. R. Caldwell, A comparative 
grammar of the Dravidian... languages? 
(London 1913), p 577, and C. Rēgamey, | 
in BEFEO. XXXIV (1935), p.555. 
" J. Bloch, BSL. XXV, p.lff.; see also | 
S. Lévi otc. (Bagchi), Pre-Aryan and Pre- 
Dravidian in India, p.46ff. 

? Wilkinson, MED I, p.381. 

** Of. Wilkinson, MED. II, p.494. 

*' Adriani, Barée-Nederlandseh Woor- | 


ļ 

denboek, p.739. W Dunnebier, Boloang | 
E onBondowsch-Nederlandsch Woorden- | 
| 


book 370 likewise | 
(The Haguo 1951), p.370 likewise |o ta connesdn tha ieee 


I jana (Van 
f jana, majana and even masjana 
| ne TBG. 54, p.915) instead of the 


considers Bol, Mong. sugi ‘embroidering’ 
à Malay loan. 
empwolfi, Vergleichende Lautlehre | 
88 austronesischen Wortschatzes T, p. | 
2 and TIT, p.120. 
c f. Walde-Pokorny, Vergleichendes 
Wörterbuch der indogormanischen Sprar 
chen, IJ, P-515 and I, p.33. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a (GC Lafeber 


V2 i Pryoho 
: Utrecht 1934), 


; : > 0.., p.91. 
5 Gericke. } 

es Roorda, Jav..Neā. Handwb,]I, - 
27 Of. also KBW. II, p.87. 


etomo's edition (Thesis 
p.44, 

?? The initial m may be due to such 
derivatives as amastika. i 


?? For further particulars see Wilkin- 


; Son; MED., TT, p.138f. 


3! See Pischel, GPS. S. 74; Kern, VG. 


| X, p.971. 
13 Van der Tuuk, Bataksch-Nederduitsch | 


** In Malay mutia is used for 
shell’, in Batavian colloquial the 
mute and muii denote ‘head’. 


‘pearl, 
forms 


: 33 See also KBW. IV, p.571. 


?* OJav. Ram. 6,194 has it, 
35 See also W. E. Maxwell, in JRAS. 
XIII (1881), who in connection with 


| the Malay word ciri (see ch., 5.5) 


remarks that it seems to be a Sanskrit 


invocation, now perfectly unintelligible 


to the people who have handed it down 
for generations by oral repetition; in 


Muslim times the word and the formula 
were written in Árabie characters and 
| much corrupted in consequence. Tha 


Malays of Brunai also have their ciri, 
which however differs very much from 
the Porak formula of praise addressed 
to a Hindu god or to a Hindu king. 


j ich is also found 

i pahajana which is a 
Wade WENT ‘an eminent 
) may be mentioned: the same 


E m oan represent mahajana 


written for 
and mahjana. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and. eGangotri 


CHAPTER V 
CHANGE OF MEANING 


SEOTION 1 
GENERAL REMARKS 


Human socieby and spiritual, political, econcmical, social and other institu. 
tons, ideals and tendencies, which do not fail to exert influence on man’s way of 
living, feeling and thinking, change, and so do his symbolizing and referential 
habits, i.e. so does his vocabulary. In so-called static societies, under cultural 
circumstances which on the surface remain stationary, a large part of the Block of 
words used by the great mass of the people often, it is true, prove to be rather 
resistive to modification,—social unrest of any kind, migrations, wars, revolutions, 
invasions and occupations, and even peaceful activitics such as commercial coloni- 
sation and relations or the spread of new spiritual ideas as a rule entail an oppo- 
site efect. Then the disappearance or change of objects, institutions, concepts, 
ete. from the social life of a community carries with it the loss or the fossilizing 
of many words used to designate them, and new concepts and objects have to be 
named and labeled. "That highly disturbed decenniad in the history of Indonesia, 
1940-1950 may safely be adduced as a really typical instance: there is a verita- 
ble gulf between the range of language employed by the traditionally Malay. 
using people of the former period of this century and a considerable part of the In- 
donesian’ vocabulary used or preferred by the youngest generation. 

The chapter of linguistic science dealing with this change is, however, a 
difficult one. The term semantics, (taken in a wide sense), which comprises the 
study of the evolution of the meanings together with the mutual relations of the 
words, necessarily also includes or at least touches upon the investigation into 
problems concerning decay, disappearance, survival and, sometimes even revival 
of speech-units, into the cautes of the creation of new forms and new words, and 
into all questions bearing upon the history of words in general. This branch of 
linguistic study isin an inextricable manner connected with psychological pro- 
cesses; for the development of meanings cannot, as a rule, be logically accounted 


for, the emotive attitude on the part ofthe speaking community largely condi 
tioning occasional or relativel 


notations, and meaning of words. 


es and developments in the history of civiliza- 
he change in the meaning of tho elements of 
ated attempts, semantics have proved far loss 
ms of regular changes, developments, and corres 
es of linguistic study which deal with the formal, 


eoe oak 
Even the mero statement of meaning is * n 


. q n 
and more or less inciden ansferred meanings, their con i 


tal emotional ; belop 
f : 5 al value. W ing with facts be 
0 the past, difficulties of this description a m. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by ASASKBI olddata Qhegeai and eGangotri 


X 399 


— 


As to somantics propor, which is an historical branch t 
ot le 


praotioe, in addition to tho study already montioned, Tequirog g, 
f the history of the languago concerned, and an und Ā 
lodge Mos in the past which may have exorta iis erstanding o 
SN ide studied, of all the words with which is Mie On all th 
of the ted. For a change in the moaning h mc tv 
peon connacre AES > sa 1» an element results in 
‘on in tho systematic clusters to which it belonged, and Semantic d 
LEA J1 mix and combine their products, And ‘a sufficiont hist ey 
ie language concerned includes the understanding of the sist 
phological developments of the words and the study of their syntactic 
ovon transitory adjustments of a word to the ever-changing 
oan bo instrumental in prodr more permanent changes of meaning. Anyo 
realizing theso requirements will not fail to see that lasting results of ge M 
investigations may only be expected when they are exeonted with respect s 
guages which are perfectly known and thoroughly studied, languages the history of 
which can be reconstructed from an abundance and Variety of sources and hag 
already beon inquired into to a sufficient degree. N 
However, scientific research in Indonesian languagos can scarcely be said 
to have passed its infancy, and the historical and ethno-psychological Dreparatory 
work needed has as yet made no suficient progress or is even altogether wanting, 
Moreover, our subject is loan-words, and loan-words often carry with them their 
special semantic problems. When a word is borrowed from another language its 
referential field is apt to be modified. The semantic cluster or clusiers of the 
language borrowing into which they force their way are, as a rule, not the same ag 
„the groups of words to which they belonged in the language lending them and tha 
process of acclimatization entails semantic alterations, which may even result 
in considerable deviations from the earlier sense of the words concerned. Most 
foreign speech-forms bear connotations of their own, and the changing of these 
shades of meaning, the tivalry between the foreign and the native elements of the 
Vocabulary, the process of naturalization (successful or otherwise), however fasci- 
nating a view they present to the student of linguistics, can only be understood 
if sufficient knowledgo of both languages, the borrowing and the lending, and of 
both Civilizations is availablo. As, however, the lexicographic registration of die 
Whole of the Indian (Old., Middle-, and New-Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, and "Moņģa") 
m is far from boing complete, it will be clear that in i um 
o p ihe disadvantage. Ig ee ee Sanekrit and of 
$t "Ma the disposal Of a complete dictionary of yee DUE 
mantic studies on the uso of the words concerned in the Indian 


; iti i full 
and Although, for all these reasons, we are not yet in a qv 
s Satisfactory account of the semantic developments of the E i onem 
Te Indonesian Archipelago, the abundance of the pap cs ont- 

e 
acter of part of the changes concerned enable us to ie isa an iea ās 


i 
te a Provisional remarks, which may help the roader x It to co-operate in 
MD Work to bo done and to indue bim to Det vocabularies and 
their M tho task of investigating the Indian and In : 


3 wledge; itg 
ict know- 


9 cognates 
&y or other, 
a modifica- 
velopments! 
1 knowledge 
ic and mor. 
use, becarga 
needs of the context 


A 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


330 Digitized ati Samaj i 


. SECTION 2 
SEMANTIO OHANGE AND HISTORIOAL EVOLUTION 


ning is not seldom connected with historica] evol 
ith some change in the history of civilization." This is especially clear 
XI for religious, social or political institutions are concerned. In Sa 
SS a apart from other use, designates ‘a traditional precept, doctring 
We ot presepte, collection of such doctrines’; in short, ‘anything handed down 
and fixed by tradition’; itis, moreover: the name of a class of works inculcating 
' the so-called tantric worship of Siva and Sakti. In Old-Javanese it could apply 
to a body of customary law ora Dharma-book, and to religious Or moral tradi. 
tions, and the words sañ hyai the divine, holy’ often preceding a8 emphasize itg 
superhuman character.” The term is, moreover, used to signify the religious 
knowledge of a brahman (Nag. 83,3), and also that of a high Buddhist functionary, 
Islam, in the spread of which many compatriots of Sivaists and Buddhists who had 
led the way into the Archipelago took an important part, adopted the term, and so 
did, in the course of time, Christianity. Nowadays agama (in Malay and Gayo 
also igama, ugama) is in Javanese, Malay etc. ‘religion’: agama Islam meang ‘the 
Muslim religion’, agama Kristén ‘Christianity’, and sometimes derivatives have 
been formed with a specific Christian meaning: Bar. to po'agama ‘confirmation can- 
didate’ (to means ‘man, person’). 
Old-Javanese borrowed the Skt. pandita- aftsa in its Indian sense ‘(a) 
learned or wise (man), philosopher, teacher etc.’; Nag. 51,5 the leaders of the 
three persuasions (the ‘rgis’, Sivaists and Buddhists?) are called panditas. In old 
Malay literature the word (pandita, pēndeta) occurs to denote non-royal ascetics: 
but also persons distinguished for religious erudition: a pandita Yahudi is & 
‘rabbi; Muslim theologians are sometimes styled péndiias. While surviving in 
literary Javanese in the old meaning, the word has now been adopted to Christian 
use: a pandita is a ‘clergyman’ or a ‘(protestant) missionary’. 

4 The history of UpaŅĀSa- SWal@ runs parallel. In Sanskrit, it denotes 4 
i ce penso, a religious attitude comprising abstinenco from all sensual 
a p Td id C ER perfumes, etc. included; fasting 1g an e 
PD D a Pin ee rco AME In the course of time the ter A 
signify the Muslim med AR vus M pe Mili fasting, and drei 
fast throughout the daytime Now, ai) every follgxer af hem d ted 
it for their fest, — Tn x zd prem Roman Catholic Indonesians have a E 
unsullied, virtuoug Ee le way such terms as Skt. $uci- afa ‘clear, puro 

4 tally pure, holy! and doga. gta ‘fault, transgression, 


sin’ came to be used i i S w 
means ‘ritually pure’ in Muslim and Christian communities: there the former no 


; (in 8 Muslim sense) and ‘holy’ +t ig translato 
into : nd holy’ (the Holy Spirit is i 
nur C kd Suci, Rok being the Arab. rūh ‘the incorporeal quick- 
ofa Christian A fb e latter is employed to signify a sin against Allah or 9,97 
"meal, food’ Don. The phrase bujana suci (from Skt. bhojana- 
Dutoh is callod Introduced to render tho Christian ‘Lord’s Supper’, WHIO 

ed Heilig Avondmaal, i.o, ‘Holy Suppor’. It is, however oney 1 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Change of mea Ution, 
When 


Dskrit 


SANS 

p- —— Dighicod by Arya Same] E ANENA and eGangotri m 
uii thoir Sanskri pat s of the olā connotations nac diverge 
oles” ee 3 i. aa is of A m pe qualified by Jay. suci aM ee 
jg called 2 wali (t = i -— 2 T le origin), a Christian saint iig E 
santah (fem, ai 5 iac S "Ram m E ve For ‘spiritual Perfection? th Gan 9E 
lowever, use rums mi an (ka-an denoting, inter alia, abstract i Y REN 
sampirna- eu perfect . t be Ideas): Skt, 
A Chrietian church’ or ‘parish’ is nowaday 


3 s call 
the word which also denotes a ‘company, e 
, 


» n Javanese, a pasa- 


mutans : ae F à a meeting or E 
formerly» in addition, a feast or festival’, is a derivative (Jav WERE cue 


paan) of sémuwa, 
in OJav. the word 
fixes pa-an denote 
is ‘hermitage’ : Skt. 
olic abbey is “called 


ig the Skt. samitha- WIR ‘assemblage, association, corporation’. 
often meant a multitude..' In lit. Jay. a pasraman, (the * 
the place whero the idea expressed by the base is found) 
asrama- ATAA ‘id.’ (also in OJav.); nowadays a Roman-Cath 
by the same word. 

A very important group of Sanskrit words, all of them having a bearing on 
mysticism, developed special Javanese connotations. Their use was adopted to 
the specific requirements and trends of Muslim-Javanese mystic thought. Although 
a more thorough research into them, and into the reception of Sanskrit terminology 
and Indian thought in general by the Muslims ig needed, we haye already in one 
of the previous chapters of this volume? drawn attention to words of this 
catégory. 

It need hardly be said that many changes of meaning remain unclear if we 
fail to gain an insight into the ancient Hindu and Indonesian views on the ways 
in which the events, facts or objects are mutually related, on causes and effects, 
on origin and end of various phenomena of nature and society. The two main 
meanings of Mod. Jav. mala, viz. (lit.) ‘affliction, evil’ and (reg.) ‘disease, ailment, 
esp. skin-disease’, the sense of Mal. mala ‘having a curse resting on all one 
does; evil, disaster’, the Bal. rasa ‘impurity or ailment in general, infection, 
tumour; contagious’ can only be understood, if we know that Skt. mala- We, 
which survives in these IN. words, not only means ‘dirt’ in the literal sense, but 
also ‘impurity’ in a moral sense, that this impurity or ‘sin’ was considered an evil 
of the same kind as disease, physical weakness, disaster etc. which aro intimately 
connected with it and often result from it. Sin and disease were often regarded as 
a unity. But diseasos were also sent by demons or gods because man had commit- 
ted Something against tho natural order of things, or they originated in pex 
(one of tho most dreaded among the evil things) of an enemy. kat à Él 
further, algo in the Indian medical schools, reference to the e o E du 

he waste.products or secretions of the body (the lx ue ud 
à: ear, eye, noso and of the holes of the hairs, sweat, nd oie y exist in such 
hnot be assimilated into the body, are called mala- 


d mal , in Javanese: 
ee as to cause diseases Unna Baar = wee are, on 
i 2 A skir- 3 

alinege, been especially applied to the frequen mic (ie eg. the OJav. 


8 other hand, repeatedly connected with ‘moral’ trans 
Sastyaparwa, p.25 (353)). m formations are asa rule 
, difications of meaning based upon social tran’ denoy to pejoration or 
very ‘astructive in showing that words often manifest a ten s our habit of addres- 
"elioretion, Pojoration, depreciation in meaning, soften anm 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
923 _. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri—-—— M 
| unknown Ot highor-placed people, especially when trying to m 
be polite or to avoid hurting, with & somewhat ata. a hie 
ve a claim. In Dutch mijnheer (originally ae lakā) a 
ble to almost all men under many circumata h 
-waiter ( « Germ. Oberkellner ) 


sing functionaries, 
tiate ourselves, to 
that to which they a 
ecomo applica 
ae a German loan for ‘head 
Paik r waiter, 
MO li know Skt. ejā pa aa MC the Sacred toxta 
and formulas, a wiso man, & minister or M M o : AE w 4 readily adopted 
by tho ancient Javanese as a title for high-p ES Uno Mie right-hanā men of 
tho king, commanders of the army included. de ee on of the four ahs 
ses given in a dharma-text the maniri occupies t ET a o : 18 ee ksatriya. ar, 
In modern times, however, the title has saska y deva, uated : all minor ofr. 
cials and subordinate functionaries vested with some authority are called mantri, 
in Jaanese a maniri alas is a forester, a maniri gulai 8 warehouse-kooper"; 
overseera, keepers, head clerks etc. share the title; a mantri polisi is a Javanese 
'ehief-dotective', The English word constable is something to go by: now deno. 
ting in ordinary parlance a policeman or subordinate official who serves legal papers 
in minor cases ete. it was in the Middle Ages the title of an official of high rank, 
the ‘count of the stable’, i.e. the Grand Master of the Horse. In special Use and 
phrases such ‘pejorated’ words sometimes persist : the High Constable of England 
was a high officer of state, whose office was abolished in the KVItb century, but 
temporarily re-established on special occasions. Being a title of "ministers! and 
high-placed officials in classical Malay literature mēntēri formerly denoted a senior 
civil servant in Malacca and was occasionally preserved as an honorific in titles, 
In Sumatra, where it also was an honorific, it could signify one of the threo divi- 
sions of the Minangkabau gentry, the two others being the malim (also a title’ given ` 
to mosque elders) and the dubalai (warriors, commanders'). In its popular form 
manti the people of Minangkabau use the word to style the supreme master of the 
ceremonies during & cock-fight. Of late, the word which could always be applied 
to real ministers of foreign countries, has found rehabilitation : the ministers of 
the Indonesian Republic aro called mēntēri : pērdana snéntéri, the well-known title 
in ancient Malay literature, now denotes the prime-minister, a ké-méntér-ian a 
ministry. 
In a comparable way Pungava- YFA “bull; an eminent person or being, the 


chief or first of his king’ was borrowed by the ancient Javanese to signify ‘a 
leader or commander’, Oday. 


Bods and rgis. Tn old Malay b 
which could be 


Nee, ang 
Dowaday, 


$ e introduced it ag i inglish commissione 
8 high officor in the Civil Service. In inn ASK are, d 
not only officials, but also lower members of the staff of a publio service or ofic^ 
and pon cara office-clorks, Commercial clerks etc, - 
E cd titlog degenorated in that they became mere honorifics. i 
regents. Skt. bhi b commander’ is used in modern times of the aa 
SRM pai i- ata lord of the earth, king, monarch’ likewise &pplie? 
ible and in a sense subaltern officials, 


the same language bendara ig a title of noblemen in the Principalities 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


CENT 


SANSKRIT IN 
nem Digitized. by Arya Samaj Foundation th Stand eGangotri i 
E -. g r U———— $ 
tho ab previated ndara applies to the lower rankg of nobilit ; 
form ig a literary term for master' (as Opposed to 'servant?) y Besides, the full 


. ? 1 
go (master, mistress ) in common usage, 
bandalara) means ‘prime minister of the gu] 
3: it must etymologically be connec 


uror etc 3^ pz] 
fironsur y^ bhandagarika- MIERE ‘treasure 


o itan adha CE ND 
Jn Sanskrit an adhyaksa- AAT is ‘a man who exerci 


tor'; the Jav jaksa in whioh the word is preserved ig ' 
Balinese jaksa E judge , the Sasak jaksa, however, a cle 
‘a village clerk . 3 

Other loan-words adopt a more specialized me 
upon the T apr iš oultnra aoa of the people borrowing, The Skt 
nayaka- WT for instance denotes any leader, guide, chief, lord or e $ 
nūyaka- of an army is a gencral’, a puranayaka. ‘the headman of the Bes x 
In Old-Javaneso the word likewise denoted ‘a chief or principal’, and ARE 
with other words special officials, e.g. the nayaka pralyaya- (Skt, pralyaya- = 
‘confidence’ ). We also come across a nüyaka nii rësi (Skt. rsi- RÑ) ‘a principal 
of the holy men’; a putra nayaka is the eldest son’; saù panayakan (native affixes 
pa an) is ‘the king or prince’, e£c.; in literary language a niyaka nin hayu (niyaka 
<nayald, tho other words are native) is ‘the gem of the beautiful women’: in 
Sanskrit nūyaka can also denote ‘the central gem of a necklace’. Now in the 
Javanese Principalities the word came to express tho specialized sense of ‘the eight 
high officials who acted as councillors of the prime minister or chancellor’. — The 
word buda (Skt. buddha- $F ‘a Buddha’), in the original sense (‘Buddhist’) has now 
booome obsolete in Java; it is, however, retained to express the transferred or 
more general meaning of ‘pre-Muslim, relating to the pre-Mus.im period in Java. 
nese history. —Mention has already been made of the Gayo cérka which means 
‘spinning- wheel’ : it is the Skt. cakra- 9% ‘wheel’. 

An interesting word from the point of view of the historian of civilization 
is the Sxi. makarddhika ates ‘very prosperous or powerful’. In Old-Javaneso 
the word also expressed such ideas as ‘wiso, loarned, reverend, priert , and in Bow 
obsoleto usage also, in general, ‘not subjected to the authority of a chief or princi- 
ptl, excepting God or the king’, and hence ‘free, independent. Thus Jav. mērdika 
could apply to ‘private persons’ (as opposed to officials), and the derivative ae 
kan (suflix -an) means ‘exempt from taxes’, applying to villages, RN Za 
ste. In the religious, social and economio history of the Javanese ut. 
&Waitg description, this word plays an important part. In modern, da Gs 
meaning “free, freedom (in contradistinchion to servitude) yas R 
J Avanego, denoting political freedom or independence « The deriva! 


Meant ‘exemption’, 7 PE. 
Very interosting is also the history of the word godak T 
Soie denotes a. hos or si rt ee NEM however, an Indora cae sub» 
only be addressed by his subjects when they observed & Re suggest equality 
missiveness, and as addrossing him directly and perona bey these, or his 
be Presumption, they bowed to His Majesty» feet, in already early (Old- 
shoes, or even the dust clinging to them. Thus paduka 3 ' [n Malay the term 
Nese) used instead of other expressions for His Majesty - 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


gon 


nsular State, trea- 
landügara. Wenn 
IScussed in another 


768 supervision, an inspec- 
a public Prosecutor', the 
tk (of the court)’ and even 


aning, which largely depends 


ak 3 
. Moliére's comedy of the same name ig, 


SANSKRIT 1N INDONESIA 
334 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai Pee 
EM 3 m 
d devaluation : it can also apply to an Excellency’ or a ‘lorg’ 
a lite term for ‘sir’ in general. 


; 0 
it even beoame a very polite term for sin izt i 
à Words for material objects or qualities bearing upon social or mat 


often extend the range of their meanings under tho influence of the pr 
civilization and technical ability : in addition to its primary meaning: 
nce made by fusing a silicate with other materialg and 
the word glass nowadays stands for ‘an optio 


mm Jūvanegs 


eria] life 
o 

Eross of 
& trang. 
parent substa y used for 
window-panes and vessels , : al instru. 
ment, such as an eyeglass, & telescope, a barometer otc.’ In the same Way tho 


Sanskrit loan kaca (Skt. kaca- #14 ‘crystal, quartz, glass”) has adopted such mean. 
ings as ‘window-pane; mirror, magnifying-glass, burning-glass, lens, ete.’ in Jaya. 
nese. That the Skt. word for ‘scimitar or sword’, khadga- WF, was used to denote 
the native dagger of the Javanese, ‘the kéris’ is not surprising. 

The name of the Indian monetary unit, rüpya- STA ‘wrought silver (or 
gold), stamped coin, rupee’ was introduced into Indonesia to cover various coins, 
the modern Indian rupee (rupiah Hindustani), the old copper guilder (rupiah tim. 
baga), the old Indian so-called sicca rupee and the Dutch guilder; nowadays, 
however, the Indonesian monetary unit is conveniently called by this completely 
naturalized name. 

A word which in former days expressed the idea of ‘rich’, lit. Jay. Grtawan 
< Skt. arthavan AAAF ‘wealthy’ has nowadays become fit to denote ‘a capita- 
list. The Skt. bhanda- WINS ‘capital’ > lit. Jav. banda ‘riches’ has shifted t 
‘capital (in.commerce) and ‘funds’. 5 

The Sanskrit jivātma sitataī is used to denote ‘the personal eoul in the 
living being; in Old-Javaneee it could also express the idea of ‘a holy man’ (Calon 
Arang p.127 etc.°; cf. such terms as Skt. mahaima@ Akal high-souled, an eminent 
man’), and in lit. Javanese in general that of ‘dearest, love (in addressing a lady- 
love) nowadays, however, the word has revived to render the modern idea of 
‘soul(s) in connection with a census. 

The Skt. and OJav. durjana- ZAT ‘a bad man, villain’ was preserved in 
modern usage and nowadays stands for ‘a criminal’. —A modern guru is a (elemen- 
tary or secondary school) teacKer’: Skt. guru- TÈ ‘spiritual guide’, whereas the 
traditional sense of the word in the Archipelago is ‘a religious teacher’. 
logical Ru. E change of meaning which are due to cultural or psycho- 

Y : EO distinguish the category of the accidental modifica- 
ce Luise mi ee eb lo nd te m d 
express Or an event or ETE ve sen zm idea connected with the idea UA 
community. The Fr. tartuffe MEME. nih it is emphasized by the speech-making 

. » Which originally was the name of a character in 
even in English and other languages used 
@ nature under the guise of meekness and 
ab’ was called after an inn in Paris, where 
St. Fiacre (whose image was put pik p. Em Vie Hotel St- EER) 4 Pe 
the VII century. As a mattor of 9 the front of the inn) was a Celtic saint 
their kind. courge such changes of meaning are alone of 


to denote a person who conceals a bag 
sanctity. The. Fr. fiacre ‘a hackney c 
carriages were first kept for hire; 


. The ge imi : 
ble way. est pl number of Sanskrit words has changed in a compara’ 
bure-garden of tho- form mada in the island of Lombok is called aftor a plee” 
er Balinese rulers; ‘this garden itself. perhaps owed its 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


———Áu 335 
pe 


iece of sacred water in the neighbourhood: 


i ; anyhow, the name ‘is iden- 
h that of tho Indian Narmada aat tho moder Ne 
] with 


which literally 

nese a bratayuda i m 

means ’ or ‘final combat’, a-bratayuda 18 fighting 
'8 
prother 


nagg ‘the combat of the Bharatas ag 
yuddha- yi proper name View even became fit to 
The Indis lations by marriage’ in general : J 
| law’ or Te which Krsna was descended an 
family oe Arjuna. In classical Malay texts laksamana is a fre 
famous ee the ‘admiral’ of the ancient Malay kingdom 
title given sea’ and the ‘warden of the coast’. The term j 
ruler of the of Rāma's half-brother Skt. Laksmana- esq, According to the 
with the KĀ the association of the name with the office was fortuitous. The 
Malay El hero Hang Tuah was always Comparing himself to tho epic 
ets Rr the course of time he was nicknamed Laksamana, and finally “was 
Laksamana; in s a title. This title went to his successors with his Office,” 
given tho yes e ection some loan-words are worth mentioning which were used 
j B . Oe . p 
d acd verbs : atiwikrama san saratama (lit.) means his penis (Skt. 
by the CRM: and tama< Skt, uttama- S33 superior) became erect, = 
ON ena expresses the idea of ‘the utmost exertion of a person Wap. 
tiwikrama alone 5 en in order to perform miraculous — 18 ue ; 
i A pc faf ‘who strode over the ya ks do 
3 kt. 2 E i 6 
ap Rada Visņu who often appeared in the To p ws bei 
mu. Ss ide of the god's activity is ui "ak a i 
Sepe P the Engl. to pander i.e. ‘to ie" E X: Troilus and Cres- 
cr pmi dfr the proper name Pandaris eg Ad as the Javanese ° 
pegs i aeniea from pūrvakāla- Yd%18 means ‘a former kis or disaster, the 
metās and UM the past and are often use to aver m play performed 
ai wii eas a 
Me rtm Ši Jav. murwakala came to mean to hay 
nasalized (ver O "NIB inet A 
in order to avert imminent danger . NE etes ee bate 
re are also interesting insti ingiof a ERU CS es 
ro ion or marginal mentor MM 
the fact that a connotation f which became obsolete, wer MEL 
` . 3 € WwW gam i 
a ena otier art in the Middle Ages, apparent iy ps this, several specia- 
Tho Engl. word sona m td of wood', and, in NS levated combinations 
ing ag nowadays : ‘a flat piece ‘table’ still survives in suc * bsolescence board in 
lized meanings. Ono er sher E But before its gener’ : "food received at a 
48 groaming board, hospitable board. to ‘regular meals, ve f the zodiac, an 
the senso of ‘table’ was transferred to kt. rasi- WE ‘a sign o te ‘a person's 
k ich is sti rrent.'' The Skt. ian languages to denote a. mens 
hoard’, which is still cu d into Indonesian the time of his birt 
astrological house’ was Introduce in the ascendant at 
‘star’, i.e. the astrological force in 


"m is raksi 
its usual form is raks 
hout his life’ in n Meno kind of cabalistic 
affecting hig fortunes throughou e 


ia 4 inauspicious 
arly aseool ieious or inm à 
also rasi). As this word was Wie e C Toped was Tuak (in āķa: 
Saloulation, resulting in Me A which it develop needed if a nam 
e 
moments, ono of the secondary m 
€ 


imes especially, röt rasi : ‘a 

d sometimes ean by a strū Sing 

lucky’), As this divination was Saki Gayo people m guide to name-giving 
should be given to a new-born ¢ 


; 4 
g as 
at writing) PAPER S 
gla») diviner’s book (Mal. sur Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


: tri 
Digitized by Arya SANSKRHBation Oteoneiaod eGangotri 
ig ES 


is 


tica 


(in general)’ < Skt, 
described in th 
express the idea 
av. wresni: the Indian 
d who became allied by 


€ Mahābhārata”, 
of ‘brother-in. 
Vrsnis form the 
Marriage to the 
‘quent -honorific 
he was the ‘king or 
8 no doubt identical 


896 j i T i 
teelf came to be a baso for ‘giving a name (to a ON 
has occurred in Achehnese, whero, moreover, 4 
unate, good’, especially applying to objects 
ctations, and to events the consequ 


m S t INDONESIA 
Digitized SANSE BEI] Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


the word rasi by i 
game development 
such ideas 88 ‘fort 
are of use or answer expe 


involve luck. ! hae e 
Just like its Indian original tho Mal. Jav. otc. séri, sri is prefixed to Es 
8 


"or titles of royal or illustrious personages : Sēri Maharaja "His Majesty the king’ 
oto., in Malay also to names of ship3 and plante. However, the Malay Word KS 
convoys the moanings of ‘playing, gambling so that the winner remains undecideg" 
and 'drawn (of a game). Herea marginal meaning of sëri (< Skt. šrī st dn. 1 
luok, the goddess of luck’) must bo taken into account : tho goddess Scr; E 
over one of the five times which have special reference to divination; hence "n. 
became the name of that momont. S 

The Gayo word for ‘marrying (intransitive), boing married’ is kčrjē; kérjj.i 
means ‘to marry (transitive) or marry (a woman)’, kérjón is ‘to give in marriage 
(one of his children)’, and 4érjó to give a wedding-party. The "wedding.party! 
itself is also called kčrjö. Sometimes, however, this word also applies to the acti- 
vity of many people in making preparations for a proper performance of an imp 
tant family-rite or family-feart. As this meaning is only found in set phrases tho 
chances are that it is more original. The cognate Ach. kéroja moans ‘work, labour; 
rd about, performing’, and, in addition to these, ‘feast, wedding-party, Sk 

ing. 


Tas? can express 
or ovents Which 
ences of whioh 


Skt. draviņa- Zan ‘movable property, goods’ is the source of a lit. Jav- 
drawina banguet one of the aspects of wealth being a well-spread table. 


NOTES 


E that in linguistics develop- | Gamillscheg, Franzósische Bedeutung. 
nt —change. i lehro (Tübi ~ 
2 > übingen 1951), p.161ff. 
E Een Een Oud-Java- . © See R. Goris, Beknopt Sasaksch-Ne- 
EN og ud i eyden 1885), p.42, | derlandsch Woordenboek, (Singaradja 
Eu ed uynboll, Drie boeken 1938), p.196 Tho Jav. meaning of nar- 
Disyden x sik hen mada (only in literary works) is ‘river. 
952. » p42; Nāgarakytāgama, ° Seo Wilkinson, MED. IL p.7, and A 
> Seo H. K. | Zieseniss, Funktion und Stellung des 
4 Tn oct dd VIII, p.43, ; Laksamüna am Hofe der malaiisolen 
tho idea of (aris at M expresses Sultano, in Acta Oriontalia, XV, wie 
frequented, onio (ex Me or much | According to F. McNair, Perak and the 
party etc.), and th a ofa wedding. ' Malays, (London 1889), p.291 tho lalst- 
‘to celebrate 8 ped semuwani means , mana was also ia charge of the sultan £ 
wedding in a splendid | zenana when ashore; while in proce 


way’ or (reg.) "to produ ? i gi 
doublet samoha was a P a play; the | sion the Iaksamana’s post was be 


attired.’ m for ‘festively i sultan's palanquin, or he bore his swor 
„ Beo chapter IIT, section 8 | after him when riding in state upor AE 
* Bee my note in BKI, XO m | elephant, Compare Laksmana’s rola- 
” Tho reader ma 83), p.164. Í tions to Rama in the Indian epic. "° 
Y he referred to p, `’ ama in tho Indian Tm 


S 
* "paper on the Rāmāyaņa in Malay ( 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya GENS] PSURd Eod Dena eGangotri 


NE ; a, 337 

orientalis VII (1929), pS14fl.) Ph. S. van | tig Jav. manobayy 

ponkel rightly points out the enormous | oneself) in al gua, PAT (or show 
05 


ularity the Rama legend once enjoy. 
por Archipelago notwithstanding | 


d in the 3 : Fense of '] $ 

‘be fact that the Muslims warned against | love, Kana (ANA that of the god of 

Hindu books and traditions. 4: | 1! Compare also L Blov, SC 

2 One may be tempted to explain the | p43ot Bloomfield, Language, 
SEOTION 3 


NARROWING AND WIDENING OF MEANING 


Words may change thoir meanings by specialization. ‘The person k 
ing normally selects that one of various possible meanings of af term which fore 
fo him best to moet his neede. The generic words for ‘grain’ (in British mm 
corn ) are often kausi to denote a particular kind of grain, tho one that is 
the chief product of a country: in America corn, which originally meant ‘grain (in 
general)’ camo into use for ‘maize’, but in parts of Germany it now means ‘rye’, in 
parts of the Netherlands ‘wheat’; Skt. yava- 34 must have applied to ‘grain ‘Gn 
general)” before denoting the barley.' The practical situation guides us at once 
to take glass as a drinking.glasr, a mirror or some one or other optical instru- 
ment. 

The borrowing of a word from another language is very frequently at- 
tended by a process of semantic specialization, because only one particular 
object of the many denoted by the same word is adopted by the community 
borrowing; or one special application of ‘a general term may sufice to meet a 
requirement, because the borrowers are not interested in more than one aspect 
of the general concept symbolized by that term. In English puitee (puttie) 
means ‘a narrow strip of cloth wound spirally round the leg from shemale 
below the knee’, but in Hindi, from which the term was borrowed, pal; Ta has js 
very wide meaning : ‘a strip or piece of cloth, be it a bandage or plaster, a tie 
or à ribbon, a head-band or another band’, and the same word, moreover, applios 
to a lath of split bamboo, a rafter, a spoke of a wheel, a rale io dresse 
small plank, and many other objects. 

It ig, therefore, not surprising that polysemous 
can bo judged by appearances, not seldom had one or 
When borrowed by Indonesian. In some casos tbis is only t 
Nr meaning being to die exclusion i 5s others, usua 
c PME afatq ‘moon’ has —quite natur to ā 

Y, not in the meaning ‘containing a hare, Ot 0 
of metre, i E oun 
" n , 
ee Ta veaa E = de 3 0 other 
EN à thesis, controversion, dispute, e. : pada, but this word es ņ > e 
SANE »orrowed by the Bataks of Suma! ts used for oryiné ecd He 
d De than quarrel’. Tha Jav. wada Ea ‘nickname Oniy- The Skt. ¢ RS 
s. LlVativo wadanan stands for scorn 8n liar mark, speeles,. 


Sanskrit words, so far as 
two meanings left behind 
o be expected, that 
l in Sanskrit itself. 
wed in that sense 


-— been borro 5 
ces hor or & kind 
4 


enote the camp 


including ‘advice, 3r 
position elo. . Tt 


f ee rong: ‘distinction, Dee 
E admits of a large v&ciot prat sappligablans ii d 


Digiiaeddwrtvya Bra PNA Chennai and eGangotri 


P: > Qut of them Old-Javanese E 
— ae ; ity eto. ut o : se seems to 
merit, superiority, Dante Sollee guperiority, distinction’ and nowadays E 
already preferre thority’ Gan be considered the only meauing of the word, SU 
macy, Supreme Ea ‘caving’. Skb. grahita- aga means ‘seized, taken (away), accepted 
iom ube pue a d oto. : lit. Jav. graiia and pangraita (prefix pa-) refer to the 
recognized, apprenen Skt. šudāha- JE ‘pure, clear, faultless etc’, but also ‘sub. 


D asp alone. : B < j Z 
IE < preserved in the arithmetical sense 1n Jav. suda subtracting; dimini- 
T 


, . ‘soing n. 
Ed racing has, for instance, arisen in Toba-Batak : whoroag 
a Nu. WW is used for ‘distributed, allotted, loved, cooked, engaged in, 
attached to etc.’ and ‘food’ or ‘meal’, the last-mentioned CMS only survivés in 
Batak, but in a special application in connection with tho victuals allotted to 
man by the gode’, i.e. ‘the lapse of time granted to him to live in this world’, 

In Javanese Skt. dosa- atq ‘deficiency, want, fault, badness, offence, guilt, 
crime, harm, accusation, disease etc. has been preserved bo express the ideas of 
‘sin; sinner’ and ‘crime; criminal’; in Balinese the sense of transgression, omis- 
sion’ was preferred, with special application, however, to a person’s failure to 
pay a fine prescribed by laws or rules or to perform a sacrificial ceremony. The 
Sasak meanings are ‘sin’ and ‘penalty’. 

Sometimes, also, a ‘splitting’ or differentiation can be recorded, that is to 
say two or three of the languages borrowing have preferred a different semantic 
aspect of the same word. As changesin meaning are often so gradual that we 
cannot detect the successive steps of the process, we are, generally speaking, un- 
fortunately not able to account for the reasons why a definite IN. community has 
selected this or the other particular meaning. Whereas, for instance, the Skt. 
santi- mfa could apply to ‘peace, absence of passion or of evil influences, removal 
of evil’, to ‘any expiatory or propitiatory rite for averting calamity, happiness, 
bliss’ and to other ideas of this description, the Bataks (TBat. santi) have selected 
the sense of ‘offering (in the Batak way)’, andthe Javanose (lit. santi or the redup- 
licated sésanti) that of ‘ptayers, blessing. Another instance of this differentiation 
is the Bal. nista ‘of low birth, poor’ (hence, probably, the Sasak meaning of ‘mise- 
rable; misery’) by the side ofthe Jav. nisļa ‘inferior, i.e. of a low standard of 
morality, etc., low, mean’ : both words represent the Skt. kanistha- fw ‘youngest, 
smallest, least, lowest eto." : 

There is also differentiation when two of the meanings of the Sanskrit 
lit ay per ved sin the same language, but not in the same function. Thus, 
ema de an fia Mum ona! but a a vadā bus te wer 
dace IE Tepes of, Bkt. citra- faa ‘anything coloured whio 
im yes and ‘sketch, picture’ and in addition to these ‘conspicuous, bright, 
gated, different, change etc”. Two entries sub found in Pigeaud’s Java 
nese dictionary, the first meaning ‘b TA 4 as NES » ;he second 
(which. also occurs in th PEU ent in it. usage, 9 ai 
e : : e 
benefits upon, treatin E a orn : suba-suba ) being a baso for Ee 
represent Skt. subha. at ratā showering compliments upon’) : bo 
guished, benefit, service. 


vel nn ies give (i) sila ‘please, be so good as to' and (ii) ‘to sib in* 
$ x 3 rme R : g 3 ; fi 
silakanlah “please, be so M Eoo Occurring in the formula sila-lah or silaka h 


„and the derivative mémpér-sila-kan ‘to invite 


duduk bér-sila ‘to sit in tho proper W2Y * 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. . 


word 


the latter in bér-sila or the phrage 


Y SANS 
Digitized by Arya Sāmi TGukadātaotemgaijend eGangotri 


owe their origin to Skt. šīla- 


à; atte "usage 
Karo-Batak musuh jati is an » custom’, 


« 
homer: 
tgemy )s but a kérbo jati is ‘a coia A enemy? 
thoroughbred , indie lee usage tho term sid ; Jali means ‘conn: 
gource of these words is Skt. jati- sfà "zen ti S genuine, real, 
ties, genuine OT true state of an object ete” ; natura] disposition 2m 
As already mentioned in the presi ; » Beneric proper. 
this icr is often attended by a s apter semant 
and agra ‘top’ <Skt. agra- 42 ‘summit’; Sas '€ of form : Jit, 
speech) ‘eyobrow’ <Skt. bimba- fasa ‘any orb ‘mba ‘example’ and wimba (i 
(of. Jav. kr. i. imba ‘eyebrow’, wimba ‘to be na etes image, the object kar ents 
shaft’ and dénda "fine, penalty! «kt. dnd: eR Bae, dina ats 
nugraha ‘bail, blessing, favour, prosperity’ and Staff, punishment’; Bal * » 
consent’ € Skt. anugraha- AZAR ‘favour, ki E lugra, lugraha ‘leave Du VOR: 
Mal. bétara, batara ‘deity’ Our, kindness’, Compare also gu Tmisslon, 
as Mal £ ara ‘deity’ and bérhala ‘idol pare algo such instances 
Boss already been drawn.? » BTaven image” eto, to which 
ther words came, i 3 i 
one special dec A mi pum 
authors from Sanskrit. Thus lit. Mod. Neo Am borrowed by the ancient 
ig At ala from cud- Sz ‘to be impelled, waite a » xi experienced"). 
given verbal forms meaning ' e ES » Tequested, criticised’ 
"(čompletely) stained cA i 3 Old-Javanese. Skt. ise 
mean ‘ready’; the “angie -— , es a , perfect has survived in Javanese to 
expresses the idea of ‘provided sdi € d and regional speech, samēkta 
meanings and applications of Sk x ul equipments ete.. Of the numerous 
Iet a d : K t. upacara- STAT in Modern-Javanese two are 
s Pe ies een, ana > Jav. insignia of the royal dignity, regalia exerting 
The "de ae Aic and, in Surakarta, obsolete) ‘ceremony’. 
edu tho pasēs qo: s svapna- st seems to have been early abandon- 
A Den pete A A Pes ay. supēna (<svapna) is the krama word foe 
even denotes a "vision de Ws mean, ms Mac. sona, dream, Bug. suwanna 
^  Narrowing of pensis by ps ner de 
Àn operation (origi mene can affect the same word in different situations.* 
by à surgeon u ginally working, work') among physicians is an act performed 
affected on tek lies part of the body, among mathematicians a change to be 
ships. A Mum us: among military men e series of movements of To or 
n Sanskrit w iin among printers is one thing and among picture-gosts jana er. 
tion, cone RAS STE means 'help, assistance, service, favour and ‘prepara- 
i n, embellishment’, and the Old-Javanese authors adopted both mean- 


Ings, a . gt H 
But in course of time the Javanese apparently specialized this general 
to express two dife- 


term j 
PG 1 1 tee, 1 , . 
Uch a way that in two different situations if came 
ation into two mean- 


words 


e differentiation of 
" € 
AV. GTG mountain” 


to be used wholly or chiefly in 


Tent g . ; 
inga: nene which now practically represent a bifore wh 
0 kee a et attend to the burial o 
D (a building) in repair", and (ii) to IS 


Person, t 

Outside 

à € 
mark ( 


Cus’, p 
U AR let us not forget that these works often 
* A jantra is now & ‘spinning-whee!” (as no 


Other į 
8 
lands of the Archipelago is, in the first place, 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


dicative of 


terary texts it is also a dis 
describe warfare and acts of 
w masin, mésin in Java and 


the sewing-machin 


e; «Dutch 


repera" > 


I-XI. ci 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
340 Digitized b: j A 
nereas Skt. yanira- UA was applied to any Ga an 
, ru- 


g € H >) wh 

e ‘machine ), n à 
ie 'Spinning-whoel" is, likewise, the meaning of the Bugin 
o esa 


ment or apparatus.‘ pin 
rm of this loan-word jancara. dk Y £ Best; 
i: Other instances of specializabion are : Skt. dāna- QW ‘gift (in lb 


‘a voluntary gift presented, from a sense of philanthropy or religiousnoga t 

Skt. bhojana- Waa ‘the act of eating, meal 7 lit, Jay, ‘banquet 

Skt. bhoga- ata ‘enjoyment (in general)’ > lit. Jav. ‘food’, rog. Jav. even aja, 
Skt. prabha Tt ‘splendour’ > Jav. ‘a kind of nimbus (in wayang plays) d 

The compound krtārtha- BUA in Sanskrit having attained one’s ong or 
object, having accomplished a desire or purpose, etc.’, and also ‘clever’, Was used 
by the poets of the high-style poems (kakawins) (e.g. Arjunawiwāha 19,4) in d 
game sense. But they apparently had already a certain predilection for associat- 
ing tho term with the art of war : Arjunaw. 21,2 ‘they had finished studying milj- 
tary science; Bhomakāwya 81,7 kriāriha rikanan samara ‘succossful in battle’ 
In later literary usage the specialized meaning ‘thoroughly versed in military are 
prevails. Besides, the Skt. sense of ‘satisfied’ shifted, in OJav. texts, to that of 
‘blessed (of deceased)’. 

If the exact moaning of a word is clear from the situation or the context, 
limiting, explaining or other additions easily become superfluous and the word 
itself is api to absorb attributes, which are implied without being pronounced. 
Words for playing or ‘game may be adduced as a case in point. In English to 
BUD CONDOR with “to work’, means, in general, ‘to divert oneself for recrea- 
tion, bnt in to play for money’ the verb refers to gambling, in ‘to play back’ to 
a specific game (cricket etc.), in other situations to a musical performance, and a 
mr el A paccialized meaning sometimes comes to prevail: the 

. 5 “suka a)n (from suka : Skt. sukha- JA ‘ease, pleasure’) which in 
Old-Jav. referred to pleasure and amusement in general’ has become specialized 
to denoto card-playing especially : ‘to play at cards’ in kasukan kērtu (< Port. 
ee oe Tn Sanskrit hina- Sis is a very general term for ‘left 
ESI gom A Renae iion eic. etc., and many of its connotations are 

et by the m UM authors. In the course of time pared of thee 
jamaica: daaga: ete in See ety) , hence even blind (et. Skt. 
Malays have applied the word Kan disregarded, considered unit Tus 
marred by some misfortune a di d to guch UE whose happier y 
"the poor, the humbler Eotors til «S Rito dina TTE dina- Fia 'miserable') are 
position may be designated as ds 19 community’; in Malaya anyonein a humble 
means “versed in (an art or Bean) me a similar way lit. Mod. Jav. labda, lébda 
knowledge, learned ote,’ the ox; MEL c Lilanidvu eal having acapines 
‘met with, having got ee av. labdha had a much wider range of meanings 
compounds. One rae ae d i ete. ; it was, however, mainly used in 
vrddha- 33, ‘grown, cr RETE 9 semantic development of such words as Skt. 

In English, & lady of AS up, advanood in years, old’. . i 
position; the quality, contrast y 18 & lady of high rank or distinguished socia 
‘the gentry’ , asted with the common people, i nonymous with 

gentry. A general and neutral common people, is synony 
predicate signifying a valuation o expression is, thus, used in the songe 0 e 
rare: even such adjectives ag AVE svion.* Instances are far from being 
perty (dhana- WH' can, ina * dhanin. "fW 'rich'<'having much PI? 

Sense, be reforred to. Some words are, on account 


Jav. 
a foundation etc.'; 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i INDONESIA ; 
349 : Digitized NIRS LY Foundation ChennaiandeGangati — 


the following paragraphs. 
Tn Indian literatur 


a e à 
e the udasina- ggīdta isthe man who sits apart, the 


indifferent one, the man whois not involved in a lawsuit podinos UY act as an 
iter , : 1 A q 
Š in ancient Jav. texts the word is synonymous with our unprejudiced 


. 3 € 
umpire? Y and its derivatives convey the meanings ‘to try (a case), to sott], 


(of an arbiter 


dispute)’. ; " : 
* sūtu Skt. apyayana- STATUTS has a wido range of meanings: the act of 


making full; satisfying, causing to thrive; advancing; corpuleney etc. the OJay, 
derivatives express the special meanings to satiety, (to advance >) to aid, help’, 

In Skt. arista- eRe (eubst.) indicates a portent, a natural phenomenon 
boding misfortune, calamity’; the first shade of meaning Is also found in OJay, 
texts, in which the derivatives denote such processes as plunging into misery, 
vexing, destroying’. ion 4: 

Tn a comparable way Jav. mbégawan stands for retiring from political Ife 
and worldly affairs (of a prince)’: Skt. bhagavan AIII ‘holy or reverend man’; 
(lit.) jatèni (from jati) ‘to inform truthfully’ : Skt. Jati- SI (4 ‘birth, species, genuine 
state of anything; (lit.) dusja for ‘stealing, running away with’: Skt. duşta gU 
‘bad, guilty, offensive; (lit.) lumaksa or lumaksana ‘being on one’s way, being en- 
gaged’: cf. OJav. laksana ‘action’ (and also : ‘characteristic, feature and ‘ominous 
sign’, and as a base: carrying into effect’, and laksa ‘soal; aiming at’ : Skt. laksa- 
na- GAN mark, favourable sign; definition; the act of aiming at, effect, operation’ 
and laksa- SW ‘aim, object’. E 

In Javanese astaas a base of kr. i. verbal derivatives means ‘to hold; to 
handle’ «asia ‘hand’ (Skt. hasta- &«a id”); the meaning "a certain measure of leng- 
th' does not appearin the verb. The derivative Jav. ng. padesan i.e. pa-desa-(a)n, 
pa-an expressing the idea of place ‘the country (in contradistinction to the town)’ 
reflects the more original meaning of desa (Skt. desa- ZT ‘region, place, country, 
kingdom’), OJav. ‘country, region, terrain; village’; ng. desa is ‘village, rural 
municipality’. The Jav. noun pambudi ‘genius, ingenuity (esp. when put into prac- 
tice to contrive means or plans) has, as far as I know, not participated in the 
semantic extension of budi (Skt. buddhi- sf ‘intellect, mind, reason’) OJav. ‘insight, 
mind etc., which now also expresses such an idea as ‘way of thinking, mentality” 
D Ao means to get loose (of a child or of a fettered ii. 
M NUM us id e v Jav. guentan means to accompany only, * f 

; ver, in addition to, also' in general. As this word re 
peer? the Skt. sartha- MA ‘a travelling company of traders or pilgrims, Caravan, 
Ro P ENG any company" this original meaning may have been preserved 
in the ver al derivative. Whereas Skt. ksiti- fafa ‘abode, earth, soil etc.” survives 
in Javanese siti (kr.) ‘earth (i.e. the material CH f f our planet"; 
and (optional kr.) SS d S composing the surface o i of our 
‘sort(s) of surface material f J on EEE alam cel 

eee is of the earth, soil’ and ‘(farm)yard’. » : 
"witness's fee’; pasēksi E» eure Msn BH. GASES XR mo n 
(i.e. pa-séksi-an) denotes (de ki iivs Pss meaning, whereas PČ 

It may not be out of place "a aaah Bea i f loans whioh 
underwent a semantic narrowing or kas fous other ae a 3 b whioh 
tendency every particular cage w NAA [saying dt andeclt® € riolreds 
wretch’ (Skt, duratmaka- AO ue. In Javanese the lit. duratmaka Ke 

S is acquiring tho narrowed mense of ‘thiofs ".. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitized by Arya, Samaj Foundati i and eGangotri 
a or dusta base trick’ ( : . 843 


l-doer, criminal etc.”) is now eBpecially a 


to *1oyalty 
gkt. prab 
‘miracu 
Skt. DT ary style ‘a e 

prio 4 pes: as an NS E in common 
m prablāmaņi ala- AWAS; teja (Skt. tejas- SISTI) to ‘glow of light (rai 
otc), and ‘radiation (from a person), the OJay, Meaning bei pit (rainbow 
(ght. krivā feat ‘act, activity ; Skt. OJav. often “eligi eing wider; kriya 
artisan’; guwa (Skt. guha Jz hiding-place, cave, 
or, in regional” usage, to ‘a hole made bya thief t 
(Skt. citra- faa ‘bright, variegated, various etc, etc.', and, as a sub i 
‘picture: sketch, drawing’; in OJav. 'many-coloured, adorning, eine 
ting’; sarjana (< Skt. Oday. sojjana- ama ‘good, respectable, wise es dus 
scholar’. In reg. Jav. wéca (the verbal derivative is mēca) I ‘speaking i a 
mind’, a now obsolete meaning was ‘predicting’ : the Skt. root vac- aq Euge. 
the idea of 'speaking' in a very general sense, in Malay the sense was narrowed 
to ‘reciting’. In the same way sabda only refers to ‘words spoken’, the derivative 
nabda meaning ‘speaking’ : Skt, sabda- eZ, however, denotes ‘sound, tone, voice, 


the lit. citra 


word, speech, name etc... In Javanese kirna (phala kirna) stands for ‘tree-fruit’, . 


no doubt because it falls at the raot of the tree Skt. kirna- RÙ ‘strewn, scattered’, 
In parts of Java a paliwara is a ‘policeman’ or "messenger : it originates in Sans- 
krit : parivara- qfi ‘followers, train, dependents’. 
` When com paring the referential implications of a term as they were current 
at one time with those of the same term prevalent in later texts or spoken lan- 
guage we shall also find instances of widened meanings. Among the most obvious 
cases of this semantic change is the substitution of a word or name indicating a 
species for the generic term. In Javanese literature kokila (Skt. kokila- elles ‘black 
or Indian cuckoo, koil’) has come to signify ‘a bird’ in general; in the popular 
language of Amsterdam ‘finch’ is preferred to denote any wild bird, and in Spanish, 
Portuguoso and Rumanian the Latin passer ‘sparrow’ has likewise been given the 
8eneral sense. P 
Names of well-known historical, mythological or literary PSE 
seldom extended to persons supposed to resemble them : a poe b: vas oe 
betrayor’. It may be mentioned in passing that they can also change 


‘ . 
i ; . ade the name of a parti- 
names.. In J avanese literature tēksaka (Skt. Tu Mika m 


d background)’; this 


ly the whole or their class: 


‘mountain’ (Skt. 


E i) The ethnic 


m NET narmada ‘river’ (Skt. Narmada aña; 
pos the chief wifo of a king’ (Skt. Valin kl hich were not f 
B me of Sabara. NIT— one of the outcast peine ‘hun 
— ig i 4 8 
BIS in Javaneso texts incidentally used to uoh words as Ja 


Ia thi ; ention also 5 í 
(ka.eng, his conneotion we should m ae opt, Indra- eR, means t 


Bon) Which, though derisgd, hat Shastri Collection. 


he world of the 


— 


V SIA 
u „an AU 
i Ex. 4 i i S Uc 
ik SON and bratayuda (often tautologioslly preceded by pran war) 
gods in gen fr m Bharataynddha anagg the war of the Bharatas’, tho m 
de ine of the Mabābbārata, is used for any war between brothers! x 
DOS O already mentioned that for poetical purposes the Javanese a 
es E ress the idea of ‘flying into a demoniae rage’ it is the Skt 
ae fife i.e. Visnu who strode over the worlds in three steps 
rivik - .e. Visn 10 sbri 
‘to behave like Visnu . 
a izde characteristic of a group, people, tribe etc. can turn a proper 


nt 


; the worā 


poun into a comm S C I An 
taken captive and so the ethnicon came to mean a slave’. In ancient Greece tho 
alk 


Athenians considered the rustic inhabitants of Boiotia as ill-bred; hence Boidtos 
(Bow7ds) in the sense of ‘ill-bred, stupid In a comparable way Skt. candala- 
UIS, the name of a very low mixed caste FOE Buenate, gives a (lit.) Jav. term 
for ‘without any respect, bold, reckless’. It is interosting to eee that Skt. mleccha- 
8x9 ‘foreigner, non-Aryan, any person who speaks a foreign languago und docs not 
conform to the usual Hindu institutions’, which already in Ladis came to denote ‘a 
bad or wicked person’ oxprosses the idea of ‘going back on one’s word” in lit. 
Javanese. 

A well-known extension of meaning consists in using a part, ospecially the 
characteristic, or, at least, an important part of an object to denote the whole of 
it, This ‘pars pto toto-figure of the classical poetics is not only a stylistic device 
(as in Dutch een meisje van vijftien lentes, lit. ‘a girl of fiftoen springs’, i.c. ‘a girl 
aged fifteen (years)’), but also a process leading to lasting extensions or changes 
of meaning : in Vedic the word for ‘autumn’ sarad- NIZ could also denote'a year, 
and the Indian varsa- 44 ‘rain’ (pl. ‘the rains, the rainy season’) was likewise 
already early extended-to the same meaning ‘year’. 

Many words for face are based on terms originally denoting a distinguish- 
ing part.of it: Skt. vadana- aga ‘mouth’>‘face’. The Italian popular viso 
‘face’ comes, like French visage, from Lat. visus ‘sight’, and in a similar way, the 
lit. Jay. nayana ‘face, facial expression? is the Skt. nayana- A7 ‘eye’ (naya occurs 
in the same sense). 

It may be remarked in passing that the semantic development is also found 
to have occurred in the opposite direction. In Sanskrit a pūdapa TZT is a ‘tree’ 
or a ‘plant’, in Old-Javanese, 


appearance (e.g. Nawaraci, p.44 ‘they broke off the young leaves of tho musea- 


flower' : padapa nin sarpakusuma). 


sabaya "of the same sort, condition; like’ 
UIQ ‘of the same vigour or age; Une 
o dream of’, and in literary style also to 
wer of thovght)< Skt. citta- Fam ‘thinking, 
aving met with an accident’? from watgata 
aana ‘a blow’; cf. also Jav. képranan («é-an) 
prana (which survives in literary style) "mind, 
Bans, vitality’ and similar instances. 

metonymy we must, in my opinion, take into 
ges do not distinguish botween singular and plural 
hag borrowed, the Skt. mrdaiga-33q$ donotes &nY 
nd in literary Javanese it is, ag mērdaiga, pradonga, bērdoi€ 


0 t IN. langua 
forms. As goon ag it hag been 
number of drums, a, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


on noun: in the early European Middle Ages many Slavs were . 


Digitized by Arya 
ord for the gamelan-orchestra, 8. kra; 

another W d kr., for ‘bell-metal’) : Skt : T which ig „pg 
d,as DE. ane Bis F Nd ensa, (also 
usod, The meaning of words is, further, é 
cially where tendencies to a Concrete 
ple, "desoribing bave & wide Scope, are apt to 
a or circumstances, for striking or frequent symptoms, inst 
om denoting the main process, the quality. Thug in Java, Of the exprese 
Bae amoring was already in the ancient texts ds 
soi ‘bewildered’ E lic tho Indian extension to ‘rejoicing, joyful’ 
CMM 'spood, haste or fury, rage'. Likewise in li i 
mS za crying, weeping’) denotes grief, affliction? 
that in Sanskrit itself some words for "(feeling), , a 
expressive of symptoms : thus anukroša- agate, lit. ‘the joining; ing! 
can easily conceive how Skt. sambhrama. «9s ‘hurry, 
ness’ and also respect, honour already in OJav, 


Among the other instances of Semantic extension are: 
Mt ‘forerunner, harbinger, attendant’, and at the end of a compound ‘attended 
by Jav. pulasara, a base for 'attending, taking care of, nursing, bringing up, tilling 
(land), tidying up (a room)’ and even (developed from ‘tilling’): ‘cohabiting with a 


only. 


woman’ and ‘chastising’; Skt, gika ‘a commentary (esp. on another commentary)’ 


> lit. Jav. tika ‘book, writing’. Even the Skt. vilapa- fq ‘lamentation? became 
ft to denote ‘a book or letter: lit. Jav. wilapa. 
"It would be of interest to have complete lists of all applications of such 
à word as /unza- JF in India and Indonesia. In Sanskrit this participle means ^. 
"truck, hurt, cut’, but in Old-Javanese such connotations as "being lacking, being 
short, fail” repeatedly occur: a poet's inventiveness, supernormal power, vita- 
lity, renown, the voice, knowledge, affability are, at places, (una; a pëkën tuna 
vuañ is a market (p.) without men (w.)' (Smaradahana 93,6); tuna lčwih means 
now too short, now too long ‘too little (few), short” can sometimes do as a 
translation, As a noun una can convey the meaning ‘shortcoming, imparten: 
ln The derivative katunan (i.e. ka-Lunna-an) means ‘destitute of, d 
Pei url Pha ar ame compost (unis it d 
Tow E tunaracana deficient in (tbe ability of) Er vw Mheyohate 
Served ag " E poene nor ner d ue Bel S E Pe wwais (see above). 
us ae for the hybrid tuna hurip (‘shortliving ME 
definitely considers this ¿una as a native word, i 


: . veys 

ta igo 8 Jadian origin ; hurt > damaged >dafisient ete BINAN AE 
t x n 

egg * šā laok, want, loss; being short of. The Sundanese” 


‘ f profit)’; in 
$; in Madurese it stands for ‘too short’, and loss (of pr 


3 
humble, modest, 

A : ER ap, bun 
Buginege for ‘small, poor (opinion), held E. travelled to 


Ont; H$inese the word has, in the last-mentioned con E 
i al Celebes Bar. tuna ‘humble eto.'). The Malay facts are, once agar 


- gadas the suture 
ci tradition : tuna "wound (cf. Skt. iunnasevam qu 


A x isfortune: 
» also in connection with injured feelings Or m 
[i 


: ionsbip 
i / family relation 
Ordg for father", ‘brong Q^ Peh Satyr Heat gudriem) 


Digitized Bx ASR RAMA oüR BOR ERbAnai and eGangotri 


846 
tend their meanings beyond indicating physical rela 
tionship : tbe Engl. father not only donotes tho male Pagen! , but also a Eten 
father, 4 person to whom roveronce is due = ain fee position, seniority, 
venerableness eto.. Besides, 2 king gan bo sty ed tho fa er of his people’, Hann 
dotus was described as ‘the father of history, etc. S word for brother E 
alao applies to 2 member of à ‘brotherhood, or sodality , whether physical hs 
ship of the persons united by membership is evident, assumed or oven admittedly 
non-existent : the medical brotherhood. 

Thus the Skt. sodara- atzz ‘born from tho samo womb, brother" which hag 
been retained in Malay (saudara, sudara) in lis original sense : brothor or sister? 
o of about one’s own age came to denoto ‘tho men who are 
AA <Skt. raja Wat 'king), i.e ‘the patriarchal chief of a clan’ in 
there saudürüs are not allowed to marry each other's female rola. 


have often proved liable to ex 


Gayo (saudóró); 
tives. It must, howe 


applier to cousin-germans an 
cases, aga rule, added. Ibis even used of friends, companions and colleagues. 


The loan-word meets a need. for the native IN. terms for ‘brother’ or ‘sister’ indi. 
cato either the elder (Mal. kakah), or the younger (adik). This and the transfer- 
red use, may have been the chief reasons why this word was preserved, while 
other Sanskrit terms of family relationship have disappeared : as a matter of fact 
Skt. pita AT father’, mata «Til ‘mother’ casually occur in Old-Javane:e texts. 
There are, of course, complications. Sometimes the meaning of a word is, 
in the course of time, first extended, and then narrowed : Skt. caikrama- sinu 
means going about, a walk’. In addition to this use, which is often found in OJav. 
texts» we come across such native interpretations as ‘going out for amusement’ : 
wildsa ‘sport, pastime’, to amuse oneself by enjoying beauty ete.,'2 from which we 
may conclude that the sense of the word was (slightly) extended to ‘suing out for 
amusement’. In later literary use this meaning has specialized : "go out hunting 
or fishing’, and in Sundanese :, ‘go out hunting, or : go out to have a picnic’. In Java- 
nese the derivative cankrama-(a)n-i (the suffix, gonorally speaking, forms a type of 
transitive verbs indicating that the process affects a ‘place’) exprosses the ideg of 
dallying with a woman’. In Malay the original sense of the word cónkérma ig 
not entirely lost : in ancient texts it denotes the swarming of holiday-makers over 
parks o playgrounds; but there is also an interesting transferred meaning : ‘to be 
ie RE (i.e. published, of a novel etc.), to spread (of news). - 
jatan sd a à geito | en deavour, care’, which in the popular Hindi 
also express the idon ot ‘p a T al M EUER EPA oU ae 
etc.) and means in youn aU We s guard, (being) attentive sto les sor a 
„An e iusoncos 2 ay aijo) (paid to ati 1 ffered 
2 considerable specialization i 3 open ee ension fatum whlch haa NEI hed 
many connotations EL c geni Javanose. Like Skt. adi. mf% OJav. e) 
P lons Converging in beginning, first”. "They became apparontly ne" 
rowed to prominent’, and, hence, to ‘ I TEES RAE ing 0 
Mod. Jav. adi-adi. The T Br) 10 valuable, precious’, which is the mean H 
aider 16 Čerivatives of this word now express such ideas 28 to 00 
ider a8 very valusble' > "to sing the praises of : o of > over” 
Do m e 05. Aen of recomend; to takoo? 1” 
; The Skt. samtana- xaTa A i Wed 
is found in Old-Javanego texts j sion, expansion; lineage, race, descen 
n the latter group of meanings, which, 12 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


tī, family’ 
Balines 


SANSKRIT 
IN IND 
Digitized by Arya amaj ion Chet NERA eGangotri 


to be narrowed to ‘igsue, offspring! t 
tended. DE E A 8 thou 1 ; 
tive child’; in qe J SMS it came to mean "indt ; the Senge of ‘adop 
(ole punce, 2-7 C E J irth eto,, especially applied v a family of lower ri 
other than the first lady). - Whereas the Sundanes to the x vorat dā 
i 


native nobility by wives of lower rank’, the Malay 1 uic ls ‘off 
y’; a peneran séntana is a ‘prince of the blood? 86 came to be ‘th 
Already in Old-Javanese the more etymologi 
gkt. chidra fz, viz. ‘hole, opening’ Were not usual: D concrete meanings of 
to have been the central meaning and, especially when „Point, weakness? BET 
availing himself of the opportunity offered by the weak i 
20,12), tho starting-point of a Semantic extensi 
strike down treacherously, or to murdor, 
adultery, to abduct (a woman)’ and other such wil 
acts. In modern usage Jav. cidra means ‘tr 
going back from one’s word”. The practical cite us; faithless(nesg). 
all the possibilities of meaning, amon 
gpecial place. The Sundanese meaning of the word i 
m r, the sense of ‘a small defect or flaw’ which e E 
itself in later times, tends to stand out. : E 
: E € LEO 
ee A? Javanese, Skt. gas TS resin” was specially used when denoting 
regin for stuffing (in goldsmith's work), hence it came to mean ‘such stuffing in 
general’, and, as a verbal base ‘to strengthen internally’. Tn the same me 
nyēnjatani means going out hunting’; it is derived from sžnjata per 
rifle’ (in OJav. texts also ready, armed') which is usually considered! g Jic 
form of Skt. samyatta- UIA prepared, ready’ (cf. the Jav. hybrid phrase sénjaia 
pitului, assistance, succor of labourers with the tools needed’). In this case the 
derivative expresses a more extended meaning than its base which represents g, 
specialization. While the Mal. sénjata means "weapon", the KBat. sinjala stands 
_ for the full fighting-kit of a soldier : ritle, sword or knife, powder-horn, cartridge- 
box ete; the word also applies to the accessories of a loom. 

The history of Skt. guza- JT is worthy of a longer comment. In addition to 
the main non-technical meanings given in Pet. Dict. and MW., viz. ‘quality; good 
quality, virtue, excellence’ Old-Javanese authors were also acquainted with ‘power, 
faculty; skill, cleverness; favour, benefit, method’, which, though not mentioned by 
those dictionaries were, in all probability, borrowed from India, because they 
E ior Appearance in later stages of Indo-Aryan. Moreover, sn Ks ae 
x PE spell; dovico supposed to have magical s EM 2 tho 
red by women to ruin a person, or ko ms Eb sho onneitart (ia 
DUNG to id rot seating from Van der Tils pe g :B special development 

m. nother word I would regard this meaning as a 6D 


» i ethod*. 
N "positivo quality, capacity to effect a specifio result, virtue, poten s m a 
m o languages ‘magic’ has tended to become s A rs dd 
Je * Basak (Island of Lombok) guna magie; to bewitch, enc E mic 
liq OWever, other words (such as sēkti b haki ee 

- efie. assine 

"Heu se g as ‘supernormal powers, 
gic potency’ is the more 


(drug, 


famil 


qu i 
M ded to guna in order to express suoh Mer 

Ing 8uporh R 5 1 Tp Malay m 
Specj rouman influence’ etc.'? In x RUNE 
Pacific Meaning of tho wa PERENA Sinostrieclátional, lite 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
348 med ae 


philtre’) guna ‘philtre’; këna J 
guna "charnrs ete., guna-gana C 


amatā. ‘useful, excellent’ has suse to CAN PEDE Jav. ‘ingenious’, i 
Malay ‘skilled in magic art or useful. nother procs meaning which has, ag 
far as I can see, developed from to uso for the benefit of..., to utilize etc”, is ‘to 
spend (money), to pay (a price), to reward (a person), to requito’; it has become 
tho prevalent sense of the word in Macassar. In Balinese other specializations 
arose : wo (‘men’) a-guna (or a-gina) are people versed in music’.'® And jn 
"Modern-Javanese kagunan (i.e. ka-guna-(a)n) means ‘industrial art, appliod art’, and 
even (creative) art. 

In this connection mention may be made of Jav. yatra which is an instance 
of a similar semantic development : Skt. ya£ra AIAT, often meaning ‘journey etc, 
also denotes ‘support of life, livelihood, provisions’. In Old-Javanese both mean- 
ings can be found, and a third is making its appearance : ‘an amount of money 
given, in addition to other gifts, to a person who is taking leave’: see especially 
Calon Arang, ch. 9, where 5 kéti’s (Skt. koti- atfz ‘ten millions’) of yatra, 50 sets 
of clothes, gold etc. are offered to a leaving guest. In modern usage yatra is a 
comparatively courtly word —a so-called madya term, used in daily parlance in the 
street or the market-place, when addressing middle-class men whom one does not 
know —for ‘money (in general)’, duwit (<Dutch duit ‘farthing’) being the ngoko, 
and ariha (<Skt. artha- 44) the krama equivalent. In Sanskrit several words for 
‘property’ or ‘wealth’ tend to express the meaning ‘money’.. The other meanings 
of yatra do no longer appear in Javanese. ; 

Skt. praja XST ‘offspring, creature(s) subjects (of a king) came to denote 
‘subjects, people, public’ and, in addition, ‘a kingdom’ in Old-Javanese literature; 
afterwards this meaning became prevalent; another likewise literary sense the 
seat of the king’, and, hence, also ‘the seat of government, capital’ has no doubt 
developed from tho former. 

„Those loan-words which have preserved their original meaning will not be 
discussed in this chapter. Passing mention may, however, be made of the existence 
ae ; a 18 connection is OJav. prasiddha. In Sanskrit, prasiddha- 

ti cu Roco pishon; arranged; well-known’. From the two meanings 
eg MM Bor unquestionable’ have developed. In one of the P j 
(yon) ES n, p.34) prasiddha pratikūla expresses a thought like 
yourselves) inimical or recalcitrant (Skt. pratikila- aage); 


(id., p.41) prasiddha ma-sih ri kita * ia, see 
prasiddha maharaja ‘he ig n ita who has shown that he loves you’; (id., P 


o doubt a great kin is a). The 

ing ‘well- , g (Skt. maharaja- Haws). ^7 

p s known cannot be completely distinguished from those connotati0n?» 

wile (Sk tr d E prasidāna stri sai Arjuna ‘U. (who is) well-known as Arjuna f 

nits liman, : (tu wee i Wo all know is...); (id, p.37) sai prasiddha kadi vof 

7 ; 88 We know, i pape n the 
perwans and other texts the w 5 as strong (Skt, bakti- fF) as--solephants’ T 


i i ag 
Od Prof SERENA alten: sendika express such meaning? 


^ 


SANSKRIT IN Inno; 


E — 
‘ag is well known 


(Bhismaparwa, p.62 prasiddha tumona hulu 


‘p the true sense of the word” (Bho 
prasiddha dhira ‘resolved, determined’), 
off, take(n) place’. 


zs e 4 NESTA, eGangotri 
Digķifgd by Arya Sarnajeumdene Siew ie s 
Ismaparwa, p.63; id 

jit. ‘well-known considered as (called) 
it F z " muc , 
when the king was a boy, prasiddha aged 16); +, 


Mākāwya 76,9 


DG JAS ae 
th’. ilu Drasi 


eat] wit, namely na Mriyy 
. inan inert 1 
9. eally... scription 
n who SUCCeedg i ju, sētā 


2 ‘that ; 
In Mog. Jav. (ii ) $ Wisdom if one ig 


NOTES 


1Goc e.g. A. Waldo, Vergleichendes Worter- 


buch der indogermanischen Sprachen, | 
herausgegeben von J. Pokorny, I, (Berlin. | 
Leipsic 1930), p.202f. C. D. Buck, A Dic. | 


tionary of selected synonyms in the 


principal Indo-European languages, (Chi- | 


cago 1949), p.513ff. 

* See also Kern, VG. IX, p.315f. and X, 
p.260. 

* Seee.g. K. Nyrop, Das Leben der Wērter 
(Leipsic 1923), p.86f.; L.H. Gray, Founda- 
tions of Language (New York 1989), 
p.257. 

* See also KBW. IV, p.356. 

* One might compare K.O. Erdmann, 


Die Bedeutung des Wortes,(Leipsic1929), . 


p.193ff. 
* Cf. my 
p.187. 


” In Pāli other so-called pregnant mean- | 


ings came into prominence: 
cultivated, skilled’. 

i Van der Tuuk, KBW. III, p.79 appro- 
Priately reminds of such semantic paral- 


‘prepared, 


remarks in Acta Orientalia NX, | 


| lels 28 Mal. dénan * 
| companion, Servant” M 


KBW. II, p.566. 
'" Of. KBW. I; p.678. 

| " This Wordis also d 
'* KBW. IV, p.633. 
'S Cf. also maudra-guna ( lit.) ‘gifted 


with extraordinary skill’ (mandra 'ex- 
traordinary') 


iscussed further on, 


'! The last instance is a ‘jingling com- 

pound’; like in New Indo-Aryan in 
; Indonesian languages many such com- 
binations, the second member of which* 
; often has practically no meaning, are 
current. 
'5 Compare also the OJav. conípound 
bhandagina (the spelling is, of course, 
` variable) ‘musician, bandsman, buffoon’, 
| lit. ‘whose special skill consists in but- 
| foonery ete.’ (Skt. bhanda- ATS). 


i 


SECTION 4 x 
METAPHORS AND OTHER SEMANTIC CHANG 


family, 
Manner’, 
Mainly On | 
Mochanism 
"8 and refe 


erm head in the head of & 


Lexicogr aphers have often commented upon ha t ote ‘used in a figurative 
the head of a college by supplying po ke ae 
Although the traditional classifications 


emantic changes, based 
ings, do not explain the . 


ive mean ify- 
Ogical relations connecting the successive m shifts useful for typify 
of the change they may be considere 
Tential purposes. On the understan 


das make 
ding that the 
er rotations, 


traditional termino- 
thereisno objection 


nof Necessarily implioe-bhersigatvlegisaL inter fection. 


) SANSKRĪT IN INDONESİA 
did Digitized by Arya Samaj Feundation-Chenna-an 
S Goma feature in the practical situation frequently forces ug not to 


: ; feel as central but in a marginal or ‘peas a 

` ə in the meaning we ; i P 

cs UM the so-called metaphor this transference is based upon the resem. 
ferred § . 


blance in one point or other of tha objects or concepts referred to by the Symbol 
& 


to our using it. 


CO MN for ‘head’ have often suffered the above-mentioned semantic exten- 


sion : French chef ‘head’ (in the figurative meaning) S aps RES mukha- 
ga ‘face’ can also express the ideas first, DEUM pn A ; t. vadana- 
aga ‘mouth, face’ adopted such transferred meanings as Sue € a triangle’; 
the ancient Javanese used the word to signify & high official, a chief of functiona- 
ries (e.g. Nag. 88,1). In modern times a wédana (regional krama wēdani, wēdantēn)is 
either the head ofa group or class of royal relativesor subordinates, or the head of a 
district. The latter meaning is also common in Sundanese. — Even standard words 
for the part of the body under discussion originally meant bowl, cup, potsherd', 
and secondarily also ‘skull’. It is common knowledge that Lat. testa ‘potsherd’ 
was used, in late Latin, for ‘skull’ and became a common colloquial word for 
‘head’, a process resulting in the standard words Fr. tête, It. testa. 
In a comparable way Skt. kapala- «T$ which primarily denoted a ‘cup’ or 
‘jar’ was already early also a term for ‘skull’. The meaning ‘head (in general) is 
not given in Pet. Dict. and MW., but has developed in the course of time, cf. e.g. 
Hindi kapal #q1@ ‘skull, head; forehead’. As to Old-Javanese, Wirütaparwa 37 both 
translations may do (two wrestling men clutch eacb other's kapala), and Smara- 
dahana 8,21 ‘head’ is meant (the eyes were bulging out of the head). The second 
metaphor in the word's history came when the Indonesians started usiug it in the 
sense of ‘village-headman’ (Jav.), or ‘chief, headman, leader, director’ (Sund. ‘chief, 
leader, (public) authorities’). The semantic development in Malay is worth a longer 
“discussion : the word has become the synonym of our ‘head’ in most of its appli- 
cations, When referring to the material ‘head’ (in its central meaning) it ‘often; 
but by no means always, occurs in one of a limited number of phrases for ‘base of 
skall, cranium etc.. It can be used of everybody’s head, but in traditional Malay 
géri hulu (g. “ill(ness)’, h. the old native word for “head’) was ‘a (royal) headache” 
as opposed to salit kēpala ‘a (commoner’s) headache’. When symbolizing the ‘seat 
eee an képala, not hulu is resorted to, but in the senso of “chief, hoadman’ 
Képala desa “iin ci K IEM Ru udo rol PT SOS (ue agaitst 
parts’ and the like both A eee pulled to MU a Sone, Benen 
y be used 


loan- 5 E a fi 
à word for the ‘best parts’ : képala nēgēri ‘capital city’, but hulu denotes ‘the 


v € . 
ee me z COR & cart’, or ‘to preside’,! In Achehnese kpala means ‘chief, 
ee irr Y of notice that Skt. kumbha. sw ‘jar, pitcher? not only 
Ung in lit. Javanese, but likewise came to apply to ‘the head’. 
seed in thig Connection was already in Sans- 
of anything; 
ma-sirah can denote "to begin” 


the leader, chief, first’, In Old-Javanese 
krama substituto for ‘head’ 


in modern usage it is the 
(general) word for, ‘persons, souls, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


~~ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai.and eGangotri ; 351 
' when counting & number of people; a 
ds ā 3 sesiral > moreover, jt 
iver’; sé-sirah (now old-fashione 


rac : i a table, thet 
ff Other instances are: Jav. guru ‘teacher (Skt, d 


tual guide’) for "queen (of bees); lit. Jay, kusuma ‘fower (Skt: 
for ‘nobility, ea (cf. such expressions ag ‘the flower of i kusuma Sg) 
countryside etc. in We Mo he youth, of the 

Sometimes a metaphor s of a more or 
of the island of Java a ‘village policeman’ is, ME In part 
native stage-plays, called a dénawa<Skt. danava- aaa a ieee of the 
enemies of the gods’ (in Jav. lit. also ‘giant, denos] er of a class cf 

The various applications of Jav. mastaka (from Skt. 
(lit.) ‘top; crown; summit or top of the roof of a mosq 
cases of metaphor, as the Indian word can denote the to 
anything. 

Such a relation as exists between father and son has not T ore 
ferred’ by all communities and all individuals to the same extent. In Vedic 
times, the terms could easily be used in a ‘figurative sense’—as modern men 
would call it —and in IN. languages such applications of words meaning ‘child’ 
as found in Mal. anak (‘child’) meja (‘table’) for “drawer of a table’, anak denoting 
an important component part of a whole etc.?, and in anak bukit ‘hillock’ (bukit 
hill), anak meaning ‘the smaller of two’, are common; in Mal. ete. anak duit (d. 
‘money’) or derivatives mean ‘interest’. In a comparable way Skt. puira- ga 
‘son’ besides giving the kr: i. term for ‘son’ (or 'daughter), has, in Javanese, ex- 
tended its meaning to ‘imitation object of art’. In OJav. the word is also used 
to express the idea of ‘interest’? Words for ‘seed’ or ‘semen’ give well-known 
metaphors to denote ‘human offspring’ : Engl. the seed of Abraham. In lit. Java- 
neso we find wija, wiji (<Skt. bija- ats): (i) ‘seed’; (ii) ‘child, offspring. In 
Sanskrit raina- XW ‘jewel’ can be applied to anything valuable or the best of 
its kind : kanyaraina SANA ‘an excellent girl, ‘a pearl of a girl”. In lit. Jav. 
Sund. and Mal. it can be used to style a princess, or a bigh-placed woman. 


In Java Skt. sopana- ‘stairs, ladder to’ (in Hindi also ee j 
tended to be used ‘in a figurative manner’ : OJav. Adiparwa 102 mo ive, a, 
bject etc”. Like infernal etc. in 


Mod. Jay. ‘way’, i.e. ‘manner of achieving an 0 EA Te 
English and the equivalente in otber tongues the moming of SH. merta V 
hell’ gave riso to transferred usage: ‘wicked, ele. " er. in faci and, hence, 
distant" also conveys tho idea ‘far’ in the sense © faa ‘broken asunder, bent’ 
improbable’. In tho same language Skt. nirblagna- UD a is used by Olav: 
Camo to mean *resultless'. Skt. vandhya- vun usage regional krama 
Authors in the sense of ‘fail, be abandoned, miss’, in gē 
wande (<wandhya) still bas this meaning. m—— anointing oF glass 

Skt. -8 i tes "the act 0 ķi ;ag a COATS 
ant t. lepa- €&q which deno K pe 

Plaster oto." has in Javanese extende » nd as a colloquial e D 
erm it ig 9 s € s d (of the face), 8D T Est 
quivalent to painte o assist a pors 


n A) 
meane : “to shield somebody (from punishment) t0 M8. additional fuels ox 


ng, deua itself 
Sometimes attendant events OT e y giver to the digi 
Datura] Sequences of a got dirortainga ba BAR Collection. 


masiaka- ts viz, 
1 

ue are however, no 

D or highest part of 


= 


ai 


DONESIA 
Digitized by Ary SANSA ni ana and eGangotri 


ng of the term shifts from the whole to a detail 


352 


1 rds, the meani z whic 
S 2 M EE vienis! or very important. An abhiseka (Skt. ubhiseka. arā) 
is rega 


was in ancient Java as well as in India the inauguration a: consecration of a king, 
he essential act of sprinkling him with water. As the king who n 
called after t the so-called consecratory name, th see 
inaugurated took another name, Peidievavancse texts. Th @-Heaning 
royal name’ Was attached to the word in E i eui " us, 9.£., Pāra. 
raton, p. 18 Sira Ranga Wuni abhiseka Wisnuwar citi a? j a ü ü Rahga Wuni 
being king (karatun "royal dignity") bore the neme per M RM It is, how. 
ever, clear that the name is nota mere Je et poser expressed in a word: in 
Pararaton, p. 14 Ken Angrok attacking Daha, the king of that country says that 
only if Bhatara Guru himself would descend from heaven (and attack hig capital), 
he could, perhaps, be defeated. Thereupon Ken Angrok, having heard this, asks 
the priests permission to abhiseka Bhatara Guru i.o. to be (considered) invested 
with the essence or power of the god and the natural sequences of that dignity, 
‘The now literary shortened form biseka and Mod. Jav. bisikan (also buseka, bisika, 
biksika, biksikan appear in manuscripts) mean "a royal or other such name’. Inci. 
dentally another meaning is found in Old-Javanese : to assume another shape ‘or 
form’ : when being consecrated a king was dressed in ceremonious attire, 

The regional Mod. Jay. badra ‘to begin (doing something)’, or also ‘to open 
up or clear land or forests’ seems identical with Skt. bhadra- WZ ‘auspicious, 
blessed, etc.’ : inaugurating ceremonies begin an important enterprise or open a 
new period etc.* 

The word bhüsana- YI, meaning in Sanskrit, ‘decorating; ornament, em- 
bellishment’ has given rise to a number of OJav. derivatives denoting such acts as 
‘to embellish, adorn etc. As, however, ornaments etc. often.are an essential 
part of ceremonious attire and a dress can even be at the same time ‘an ornament’, 

“the meaning has in the course of time shifted : lit, Mod. Jav. busana ‘attire’. 

‘Giving pleasure to a person’ easily shifts to ‘giving him something by which 
he is pleased’, or, to put it otherwise, a person can be pleased by a presentation : 
Skt. sukha- qa ‘happy; pleasure’> Jay. (obs.) suka ‘glad’, the derivative nyukani 
means ‘to present a person with something’; the form nukani is also found in the 
more original sense of ‘to give pleasure to”, 

Before proceeding to an important enterprise all evil omens must be allay- 
ed; the ceremony of propitiation is an essential part of many undertakings. It ie, 
Peo penny: to be quiet and composed. Hence, again, such a change of 
meaning as Skt. santika- MaE ‘propitiatory, averting evil, being at ease’ (also in 
HE y texts) > Jav. santika ‘being composed and skilful, being proficient, adept (in 
2 uar AINĀRA arms etc)". The derivative kasantikan (ka- 

A svayamwara- «az a? 2 Ea k "m, 
choice, i.e. the election at Pee poih the well-known institution of the x 
public assembly of suitors? A Ma Li Ka Kā emata VE AS LUC ad 
siyumbara) this original Bite are kas are: of Jay. VĀSA, AN m- 
petition for a prize (; preserved, but other applications arose : ^ co 

iot Prize (in general); the puttin (of thi izo): tipulation of 
condition in order to win the prize; th 8 up of vaaks esip ) who 
must be conquerod before de P. ; the persons (in the wayang a demon c 

Very often a shift of i en jj 8 won; the princess herself. gpoolis 

oF components of the idea or com i5 aid upon one of the various ed AE M 
Plex of ideas expressed by a word suflices to co? 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by RAN SERI Fouad PEN Rond eGangotri 353 


‘shango of meaning’, or, in other words, di : 
duco tO a Eu Hs only. centralis es CET Es meaning may become 
more cen WEED hila- ATE), is, in many parti te completo sr 
, gp (Skt. akha- | dii. oF rtieular case», also ‘level, smooth’ or 
Dum and this 1s the sense given to OJav. akila when qualifying a braid of hair 
Leer face or body ete. One who approves, permits, grants ig kindly distosed 
K may also be expected to tak pity on other people, to be satisfied or compas- 
sionato, —such are the connotations conveyed by anumana (Skt. anumāna- agma 
consent) in Old-Javanese. Skt. valgita- araa ‘gone by leaps and bounds, gallop of 
a horse’ has givon the lit. Mod. Jav. walgita quick(ly)’.” 

We can easily understand how Skt. kima- faa ‘the cold season; frost, boar- 
frost, SBOW came to mean, in the Jav. ima and imantaka (which seems to represent 
kt, hemanta- BAA ‘winter’ (occurring in OJav.) ‘haze, mist, cloud’. "The winter- 
less Javanese climate will have contributed to this change of meaning which, 
however, is also found in Fr. brume, Sp. bruma ‘mist’ from Lat. bruma ‘winter’ by 
association of ‘fog’ or ‘haze’ with that season. What first was a connotation, a 
more or less unessential, marginal meaning, referring to an idea that could be, and 
often was, associated with the central idea expressed by the word, gradually came 
to be its main sense. 

In Sanskrit niskala- AES ‘being undivided or indivisible’ is one of the many 
terms used to give an idea of the Indescribable One, the Brahman. The poet of 
the OJav. Nāgarakytāgama (1,1) and other ancient Javanese authors knew it in 
this sense. Literary usage of later times rightly considers it as a name of God, 
and has also applied it to the imperishable Beyond, it is moreover, equivalent to 
our ‘holy, pure’ and ‘safe, free from mischief’. 

Two of the meanings of Skt. viiesa- IRT are that of our ‘distinction’ and 
‘excellence, superiority’; in Old-Javanese a great variety of connotašions connected 
with these meanings occurred. In Modern-Javanese usage the word may be used 
asa noun: ‘supreme authority’ and as a verb: di-wisesd (now old-fashioned) : 
(they) use violence against a person’ (cf. already OJav. kawisesa ‘under the influence 
i controlled by’ (< ‘under the authority of---’). Skt. yauvana- Ata > OJav. yowana 
youth, bloom of youth, youthfulness’ has given lit. Mod. Jav. yuwana “prosperity, 
well-being; prosperous’, these ideas being easily associated with ‘youth’ and consi- 
dered distinctive of it. Many English words may in turn serve as ‘translations of 
Skt. prapaica- HJF% : ‘oxpansion, manifoldness, diffuseness, phenomenon, the phe-. 
nomenal world etc”. As 'diffuseness, error, illusion, bewilderment, irresolution, 
Gason; grief, etc. are characteristics of this world and of all men living init such 
fee were attached to the word by ancient Javanese authors. In lit. Mod. Jav. 
xa meee such ideas as ‘confused, muddled’. In Javanese the Skt. bhrānta- AA 

AE rū nti- afa which mean ‘confused’ and perplexity respectively came to 8P- 
E ad NO the mental derangement of lovers, then to their longing’ and 
E longing or desire’ in & more general sense, butin Balinese the seuse of 
& angry, resentful’ became prevalent. 
(as ul ( obsolete ) lēgēna <0Jav. lagna ( beside nagna ) < Skt. nagna- wa 
Skt. et means destitute of anything, having re MR NE. 
of time Mes "er eque avide S: ieee. Rd pube: qui ‘full 
fulfilled ched the connotation] bitter; aoimony 8 ` paS 1 
„Complete ete.’ has given lit. Mod. Jav. made good, restored. 
Very often comparktivel pr eeeh ošieeesning are due to such asg0= 


LN SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
js - Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai 


Baum. ————- 

iations of ideas 28 exist between ‘beloved by the people or by one'g, follow-men? 
o . 4 5 i. F à 

BERE oer : Skt. Zanapriya- aafia ‘dear to men : lit. Mod. Jav. ka-janapriya 


‘(mundano existence), nativity’ and ‘misery’ : Skt, jataka 

Jav. kajantaka ‘misery’; of. also satisfaction’ (Slt. santosa. 
gratu): ‘being invigorated, fortified’ and eyon trm Sey! cik and derivatives). 
‘struck, burt’ (Skt. tunna- qu): puterine = ges} eee ae t of (Jav. kētunan, 
affixes kž-an); ‘belonging to the family (Skt. kulina- gu m abtached to, devoted 
Pee toned, acquainted with (Jav. kulina); , miserable : (Skt. Karuna. ¥en): 
‘aistrese, weeping’ (lit. Ja v. karuna); naked, bare (Skt. Kena : being without, 
destitute of (obsolete Jav. lēgēna (dissimilation)); ^ lucky ms (Skt. laksana- ww) 
"fortunate, without mishap’ (lit. Jav. lēksana); trembling’ (Skt. kampita. altqa) 
'restless, anxious’ (lit. Jav. kampita); a bad or wicked man’ (Skt. kujana- gma): 
‘bad beings such as demons or criminals’ (lit. Jav. kujana, kunjana), ‘poot’ (Skt. 
kavi- fd which in Java camo to mean poetical or literary language’): ‘pedant, 
affected" (lit. Jav. kumawi-kawi with the infix -um- which often forms words deno- 
ting an attitude. The Sanskrit name of the author of a work on political Science, 
Kamandaka %11735 came to express the idea of ‘fraudvlent, deceptive, devised’ in 
literary Javaneso (Kamandaka), that of Kandarpa- Bray, the god of love the idea 
of ‘desire’ (kadarpa). "The Jav. kémanunsan (affixes ké-an) literally means ‘got into 
contact with people (Skt. manusa- AIJT ‘human being’)’, and hence also ‘desecrated, 
profaned .° 

Whether a particular shifted meaning found in Indonesian records was also 

- usual in India we can only know if historical tradition is kind to us. Marginal 
meanings are occa-ional meanings and their being preserved is often a question of 
tha mere-t chance. In Sanskrit a cdraka- WW* isa ‘secret agent, epy’, but the 
etymology of the word would admit of a much wider meaning : car- AX ‘go, roam 

. about, travel etc”; lexicographers accordingly give such connotations as ‘com- 
panion. In the OJav. Ram. 8,188 Hanuman, addressing Sità and introducing 
himself to her, says he is a caraka sent by Rama: of course, his mission is secret 
and confidential; but the connotations and the emotional value of the word ‘spy’ 
make us hesitate as to the correct translation and ask ourselves whether ‘agent’ 
es ud would not be more to the point: in st. 187 the poet himself uses 

e word dūta. 

Bometimes the secondary sense has developed in two, or even several, IN. 
languages, or in all IN. languages which have borrowed a particular word. In 
M 1 ras uai cee: buit 
& company, the street-traffic, the mark : apapa oni Kespestelly PE i I 
Malay ramai is associated with large Buon. D Modora kika. 
Sundanese the sense of dE e dde Ea ki rather than with pee Que: 
lent. This sense was more LEE Md a seseriai por. ui 
where, moreover, the Skt, D n ecause it also ooours in Old-J: ayia 
in many passages. —Tho Mal. gp i ats pee ital pooublith Was eris 
tale-bearing)’ (Malacca); “offence and es etm aking, trouble (esp. when coe 
lit. Jav. béncana ‘trial’, the Bal MA ster, misfortune, danger; deceiving ; 
fraud, cheating’, vazcana. aga a adversity’ represent the Skt. word for 
Old-Javanese passa * Tho change of meaning comes about in euch 

ges as deal with the baitca: m ung 
Women who try to win the lovo ofa h na of pretty and coquettish youre 
90, of a tiger whioh, in a cunning WAY: 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


‘renowned; between 
atas ‘nativity’ : lit. Mod. 


IR ER QONESIA. eGangotri 355 
surprises & traveller of & thief who beiug unable to lead away a stolen horse 
en cases of minor semantic change are especially intere. 
words affected by it s "e R &roup and an As 
are available. In chapter bs ave ee taken Occasion to o 
meaning of a loan-word is a s ways in keeping with that of the 
another IN. oues , p OF or pce may be added here: Skt. dvāpara- ziii 
in the sen«e of doubt j which in given by lexicographers is olearly recognizable 
in Sund. dopara inconceivable g Whereas the reg, Jav. ndupara even shifted to 
‘neredible, absurd . —The Skt. sunya- Fu empty, de-erted, absent, wholly 
alone, having no companions, free from; deserted place’ has been Preserved, as 
sunyi (variation -a/-?, but compare also Skt. šūnyīkaroti atatia etc.), in Malay: 
"lonely, desolate’, but in Gayo (sēni6) the meanings ‘quiet, calm, tranquil, secure, 
safe’ have developed. 

An implement which usually forms part of the same set of implements as 
another object sometimes borrows its name. In Sanskrit masi, mast aly, «dt is 
& general term for ‘a (black) powder used to paint the eyes, lampblack, root, ink 
etc. It was introduced into Malay to indicate a ‘black stain’; into Djakarta 
Malay to apply to ‘black compound of burnt tamarind.bark for staining the 
tooth’, In Javanese and in modern Malay it is used for ‘ink’, This meaning be- 
camo known to tho Bataks, but they often resorted to mansi to give a name to 
the ‘style’ or oven to the ‘pencil’. 

It is sometimes more correct to ascribe the semantic change to the 
pbenomenon of the so-called ellipsis. An attributive adjunct which describes an 
object as having a dofinite quality not unfrequently comes to express the sense 
of fhe complete combination when the word qualified by the adjunct is omitted: 
painted in oils means: painted in oil-colours. Thus Mod. Jav. (lit.) palamarta 
‘gentle, mild-tempered’ owes its origin to the complete phrase ambék paramarta or 
ambék palamarta ‘(whose) character or mind (is) philosophical or serene’ (Jav. 
ambék): the Skt. origin is paramürtha- WA ‘spiritual wisdom, highest truth’, ef. 
paramürthavid- qa ‘a wise or serene man’. In a comparable way the lit. 
Jav. laksita ‘rule of life (of an ascetic)’ may be supposed to be an abbreviation of a 
longer term in Skt. -laksita &fsa ‘characterized by...{asceticism, definite obser- 
vances)’; (obs.) Jav. samoha ‘dressed up, attired in a festive manner’ of a phrase 
containing Skt. samiha- aaa ‘assemblage, multitude’ (which is not entirely absent 
in Javanese; cf. also Mal. sšmua ‘all’, £3-sémua-nya ‘all of them’). The likewise 
obsolete Jav. praya ‘the look or appearance of a horse’ has, probably with good 
řoason, been connected with Skt. -praya: a ‘resembling’. The lit. Jav. tiria 
‘water’ probably arose as an ellipsis < foya tirtha ‘water (Skt. ioya- ata) of a place 
of pilgrimage (Skt. tirtha- Wa)’. 

An instructive group of words is that which, in literary old-fashioned Java- 
Nese, begins with nara in the sense of ‘prince’ : narakarya ‘subordinate, depen- 
dent’; narakusa, narakuswa "persons or land under the direct power es the prince' 
end in regional usage also ‘liable to forced labour’; narapraja official’; narawita 
reserved for the prince or for special purposes, esp. said of land)’ and in regional 
§nguage ‘communal (of a field). Now, in Sanskrit nara- R merne aman end 
narapati. nugfa, narüdhipa- AWT: narandtha- TAA ete., which AS in lit. 

&Vanese, ‘prince, king’, "TK Fron daņzemhesn«efrtbarutampounds must have been 


tiag when the 
dancy of facts 
bserve that the 
“ame word in 


€ 


356 Digitized by ASANSKBIESIN IND A nd eGangotri Ee 
WR «m. karya- BIA ‘work to be done’) meaning ‘an area of lang’. 
agito ia of ellipsis (<lit. Jav. balakuswa * ; J 
koswa representing another case o; Net SET ATMY-forces? 
which represents Skt. bala- ‘troops and koşa- a T reasury Which aro often men. 
tioned together); Skt. prajā Wsil denoting ‘the king 8 subjects’ and wita being tha 
iila- fa ‘obtained; property’. i 
mae E meaning of the word spoken by A is not only heard and understood by 
B, but often also interpreted, i.e. understood in a specific way. So are tho Wordg 
and phrases used by one group or class of the community : members of another 
group often understand them in their own way and re-interpret them in accor. 
dance with their view of life. What belongs to, or is typical of, the middle ha 
in society, is called middle-class, but some people use to interpret this term ag 
‘ordinary, of second-hand quality’. A courtier is, properly speaking, a person 
who is habitually associated personally with royal personages and movos in 


— 


. cou1t-circles, but many members of the speech-making community take the word 


as emphasizing the deferential manners supposed to be characteristic of courtiers 
and, hence, as a person characterized by an ingratiating behavipur, flattery and 
60 OR. 

We may do well to bear these examples in mind when discussing tho 
semantic history of such words as the (obs.) Jav. l2tkara which, as appears from the 
synonymous Sund. alaikara, represents Skt. OJav. alamkaüra- AGB which, as is 
well known, often means ‘ornament or decoration'.” Ornaments often embellish 
objects which, without them, would be ugly; moreover, they are more often than 
not tinsel. These facts lead us to the understanding of the Jav. and Sund. mean- 
ing : ‘improbable, inconceivable’. Aji-Saka, who introduced the alphabet and 
other cultural achievements was called the vidhayaka : Skt. vidhayaka- farts 
‘founder, establisher’; the Javanese re-interpreted this term as ‘the wise one’ or 
scholar’. 

Sometimes, indeed, Sanskrit loans are adopted and naturalized in such a 
way that the ense they express appears fo have been re-interpreted. As an 
example We may mention the Skt. vajrd- TA ‘a thunderbolt esp. that of Indra, 
said to have been shaped like a circular discus’; now and then this word was 
iet enc peal oer gods md myth blows or fo 
BS. an MR Ae vajra can denote a form of military array and, 
and stars, In OJav De d gi A particular configuration of tho plenoi 
Jav. bajra still sors "light xd et SE tē e i word were preserved, and lit. 
expression for a ghost 6: mae arr TEn baron, however honani pa" 
stricken on the battle-field. There jr meee, people to grow dizzy or panio- 
in another chapter bajora ien ore 18 à connecting link : as wo already observe’ 

In Sanskrit the meanin Es in & phrase denoting ‘a big wooden hammer 
te a divison AREE B8 des to gulma- ITH are “a, cluster oe toe 
texts also ‘a group or coll AME andular enlargement in the abdomen’, in : 

i p or collection’, OJav. works know ‘thicket’ and ‘division of at 
army, but later on the sense of ‘100 million’ É x A must 
connect the TBat. base for ‘augmenti Ms m SONOS SR v NIE oe the 

1ng, increasing’: gulma. In lit. Javanese 


Skt. compound or combinati 
taken as a word for TER taru (and) lata ‘tree(s) and ereoper(s)' came to * 


Very interesting isthe Skt. 


: A loan muri ioi T ye T means 
sill : Bes rka, Originally, Skt. mürkha- A? 
» BIY, Inexporienced, idiot, block-head', but in TS Pasi this genoral mean 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


‘stupid 


Digitized by Ana Samay Fin ED BRI and eGangotri 357 
L—À € liuic Å 
g to have been taken as abnormal, deviating from the usual behaviou 
a ar or 


E dul an an 
uoer fei:0W Ob P racer or temporary noted, 15 addition to the Skt, ‘stu- 
ig’, such traits of characte porary passions as infatuation, preeumption, 
p conceit’. The modern Javanese meanings are ‘selfish’ and (reg.) "EROS 
y ‘choler or wrath fot a) or of mes, (as a court-term and in special 
--— . ‘These meanings, too, seam to have resulted 
applications from the (or one’s) usual behaviour’. fromthe: gener ue 
of fdav1ab1DS A e . 

When, in Javanese, the Skt. mitrba- 3s settled into any fixed shape’ came 
oun ‘to disappear : people may have interpreted the special sense of ‘having 
Jost consciousness 23 a disappearance. ; 

A change of meaning as suffered by Skt. parikrama- IREA 'eireumambulating' 

>Jav. parikrama or palikrama ‘perfectly educated and polite (when speaking eto.) 
is likewise due to a process of re-interpretation, -krama being given the Jav. sense 
of ‘refined manners and choice of words. 

Frequently a change of meaning is effected by using an abstract noun when 
designating a concrete object. The Engl. justice in the sense of ‘a person appointed 
by authority to hold courts’ is identical with the abstract justice ‘principle of 
rectitude and integrity of conduct etc.; Lat. factio ‘making, preparing’ developed 
into OFrench facon *building'.'? 

There are interesting instances of this phenomenon among the Sanskrit words 
inIndonesia. Already in Old-Javanese so-called conerete meanings are associated 
with the Skt. yasas- 4AA, OJav. yasa ‘worth, honour, renown', which differ from 
the objects to which the term could be applied already in Sanskrit! : "water, food, 
wealth’. The word is applied to buildings, such as a pavilion, a cupola, a sepul- 
chraf monument, in short to various buildings. Van der Tuuk’? already correctly 
remarked that it was a meritorious deed (yasa, one of the translations possible in 
some context or other) to found buildings for the general benefit. The building 
was a deed of merit, or built for merit. In Modern-Javanese yasa and su-yasa (Skt. 
Ae W^ ‘well, good’) are literary words, yasan or yéyasan the common term, for 
building’; as a verb yasa is, in krama inggil, expressive of the idea ‘to have a build- 
Ing erected';'* a prabayasa, -yēksa or -suyasa applies, in literary style, to ‘the in- 
ner apartments of the royal residence’;'* yasan and yéyasan also denote other pro- 
ductions of arb or technique; applied to a field they mean ‘privately-owned’ (< 
Privately reclaimed and cultivated’). 

i In a comparable way Skt. dharma- aa, which can often be translated by 
m pres though ‘religion, law, custom’ are other sides of the untranslatable 
m, has given words for ‘contribution to social or humanitarian foundations, 
cae etc.; humanitarian, philanthropic’ (darma, dérma) to the modern Javanese. In 
avanese, however, dharma was used in the sense of foundation’ (sepulchral 
3 R, hermitago, sanctuary, a monastery with a duty-free bee pe x 
A y sometimes refers to hospitals ete. : we kuow e P m a Fx 
with 1" Sosia charitable asylum, place of caked ne od Mens 
UM 5 tarma is often found in the Nagarakr pub R ce oe 
Rē p stod Mod. Jav. wie a kā i 

, anity in literary usage rather vi Em : 
as rli o tālas kajam Si. ri FE tamm d mom 

80 be a Synonym of pistan Tete Barres! elt) Ra 3 


malice, 
in Mala 


Digitized by Anya SgmaiiF ANANA ON band eGangotri 


358 : 
pete n Š FM lE 
eritorious and esp. religious work could b 
e 


, H a m 
cd ts E ataa could also apply to ‘a temple’ and to ‘an 
nmi = fucus the mame of the soni 
e.g. a tank. lu O11-Javanose tho moaning mem [NDS foundation 
etc? is often quite obvious : Nas. 26,2 a complex DX ORD BSED ront yards and houseg 
puilt for embellishment is called a meritorious. work (karti), 96,1 a sepulchra] 
monument, sudharma, ig referred to as a kirti Sr Krlanügara a monument of the 
late king K., which preserves his renown’; 29,2 the word ia used in connoction- 
with a poem : a post before passing away wants Lo leave " poem as a monument 
(a-kirti); as & verb ma-kirli means ‘to found, to establish. In the OJav. Agastya- 
parwa'® asceticism, sacrificing, and religious and humanitarian foundations (tapa 
yajiia kirli) are said to lead to Heaven, and in the following lines kirti is explain- 
ed as : winch malémalan kusala, wikāra, pary aan, patani, pancuran, talaga, itye- 
wumādi (yatika Karte naranya), ic. "to have places of worship, monasteries, sanc- 
tuaries, terraces, fountains, ponds, etc. (founded or) erected (that is called Kirti)’, 
Here lūrti is the general concept, tho more ‘abstract’ term covering various acts 
of founding monuments which themselves may also be called kīrti. In Mod. Jav. 
ma-kirta means ‘to begin writing a book or performing a similar meritorious work’, 
kirti, kirta is a work of this description. 

In the above quotation we came across the word kusala, which in Sanskrit 
(kusala- SAS) expresses such ideas as ‘tight, proper, prosperous» competent; wel- 
fare, well-being. Side by side with such meanings as good, beneficial, virtuous’ 
we find a ‘concrete’ sence, well-known to the native commentators who even tried 
to force i5 upon passages where it does not suit, to wit ‘religious building, place 
of worship’; in later literary usage it was considered as a synonym of the nativa 
pamélénan ‘oratory, chapel’. i 

As to the lit. Jav. arca ‘image’, its ‘concrete’ sense had likewise developed 
in India where it (Skt. arca AÑ) not only means ‘worship’ but also ‘image des- 
tined to be worshipped’. 

A Apart from the lit. sense of 'rospect/ Jav. békti in regional usage, applies to 
hess tomary gift (presented by hunters or people who reclame land to the village- 
head’) <Skt. bhakti- afm ‘homage, love, worship’. 

In other cases an old concrete sense was preserved, while the otber mean- 
ings of the word fell into disuse : in lit. Jav. kama is just ‘somen virile’, in Sans- 
a ea desire, love, the god of love ete.', and, according to lexicographers, 
vs ant a Se ‘nn ot Ih rc re or mee, 
trap’ is identical with it, is n SR Lū opponi ier pa sgumed 2 
concrete sense in other hu Jā kai d a) Miss pond Hikes s chanical 
contrivance, tap, trigger’ D a ka machine, iaa e St lit Jav. 
soca, sotya ‘diamond’ andl ke Birks GU: ata ‘purity’ is the source OF ©” 

In modern lang ME s 
persons (a OP ae of such abstracts as Eng. celebrity ition, ete 
Le. who enjoys celebrity) is ni K: enjoys renown, wide-spread recogni vicinitat 
(re Se ae we i known : cf. also such cases as in Latin, 7^ 
Du ; M) the neighbours’; amor (i) ‘love’, (ii) «e weebhearb - 


teh the A lity” 
male secret parts can be referred to with the abstract manlij éheid virili!? 


and a simil ? 
peers for the femalesnydondanseoscheimmelii kheid, whiob litorally gm 


E 


general ‘cone : 
called a kirti; the word kir 
ility calculated to ro de 


ar t8'; 


4 
gin, 


to signify 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
259 


m 


ccm also Engl. Drivatds fecret parts and oimilar pa N i 

Iet, rahas» 16% ‘privacy could, according to lexicographers ie e 5 
gans 5 intercourse’; in later Indo-Aryan the same and allied treana m The 
gozu gdbarmasástra, 4,144» makes mention of romani rahasyani jain wena th 

M the secret parts. In ancient Jav. texts rahasya- (tae ‘secret’, subst. a à 
Ane repeatedly used to denote the female pudenda; the verbal form A 
n ifs um- is often found in rot: for having a certain attitude, position; 
S ās to an (another) action etc.) can be equivalent to our "having sexual 
UNAM and pa-rahasya-(d)n (pa-an expressing the idea of place) means ‘bed- 


, 
chamber - R 
To what extent loan-words which we regard as expressing general mean- 


ings and referring to states or abstract ideas can assume à concrete sense may be 
shown by such instances as Skt. samsūra- AAW the circuit of mundane existence, 
the world in which we live’: OJav. sansara, quite naturally, also applies to ‘the 
misery of mundane existence’, and in lit. Jav. this senso is preserved: ‘misery, 
distress’. However, in regional usage a sasara desa (<Skt. desa- ZT ‘region’, in 
Jav. ‘villago’) is ‘the village's civic chest’. 

Whon Skt. bhasa HII ‘speech, langu age is not only used for ‘speech, lan- 
guage —often in a specific sense : basa Cina ‘Chinese’, basa balik ‘inverted, i.e. oryp- 
tic speech by inverting the order of the syllables etc. —in Malay, but also means 
‘speech as indicating breeding’ and often just ‘breeding, manners etc., and (as basa- 


"basi (variation)) ‘observance of customary ceremonial, etiquette’ in Minangkabau, 


we may be convinced that the main factor in this change of meaning was the ten- 
dency to judge the mind and character of persons according to such symptoms as 
the words ho speaks and the way of speaking peculiar to him. 

. Words which primarily apply to so-called abstract ideas, qualities, pro- 
perties etc. may be used for concrete objects, events, processes by which the idea 
or quality is indicated or becomes manifest. An instance of this is the Skt. loan 
šīla> sila in tho Archipelago. In Sanskrit stla- WS means ‘habit, (good) character, 
moral conduct, integrity etc.. The same meanings appear in Old-Javanese. Be» 
side this word, Juynboll’s glossary?! gives another word, spelled sila and expres- 
sing the idea of ‘sitting in a well-mannered way. However, the phrase ‘to break 
sila’ applies to persons who do not sit decently,”* and the proper deferential way of 
sitting in the presence of an Indonesian prince or in the company of other people 
always was ono of the most important indications of education, discipline and 
correct behaviour. In Mod-Jav. sila ‘to sit decently (i.e. cross-legged)’, and Mal. 
bér-sila the word has survived. —The lit. Jav. karuna ‘weeping’ is identical with 
the Skt. word for ‘compassionate’, karuna- B&M, which can, however, also denote 
the idea of ‘miserable, lamenting’. —Lit. Jav. jatmika, and coll. jém2«a 'affable, 
modest, well-bred’ represent the Skt. adhyatmika- aem ‘relating to the inner 
self, psychical’. 

Tha In this connection passing mention may. also be 
2 RS lit. Jav. séngara (as a base) addressing kindly, 
Ngara- AIX ‘agreeing together, assent". : : ME 
orda for qualities and processes to be uem PRE 3 MASS 2 
e change their meaning in such a way 38 to rete NW CE ot 
ST senses : Eng. sharp (which is etymologically cognate wi Or ROERRS 


Einally ‘ , "^a to form and shape ‘pointed, 
means: i ierai then, referring tO 
Ē outting, piqrglpes e Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


made of such shifted mean- 
fattering as against Skt. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


geo __—_—_—_Digitized-by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai an ge 
to’, and further of visual images, sounde, tasto eto: distinotly outlineģ, shril] 
pices Whereas prakaja- SX in Sanskrit means evident, clear, plain; y 1 


i ^ d m s isib 3 
MA sez, parkat «az in Hindi) Javanese authors used prakata in ii 
Ci. T $ 

se of ‘a loud noise. R 
KC a word like Skt. karkasa- BEN on the other hand, could already — 


the fields of action of several senses: ‘hard, fxm) barah rough (in a litoral ^m 
metaphorical sense)’; it survives in Jav. rékasa difficult, hard, to have be 
put to it’ which, however, especially means dangerously ill or wounded’, 

We had already occasion to remark? that the traditional way of olagsify. 
ing the stock of words in ten classes is utterly unfit for use in the Indonesian 
domain. Formal criteria which in Sanskrit are, to a considerablo extent, helpful 
in discerning a eubstantive, a verb, an adverb, and 80 on, are, as a rulo, few and 
the syntactic valence of the same form is very often higher than ono, A natural 
consequence of this difference between IN. languages and Sanskrit ig that the 
former when borrowing a word of Indian origin were apt to consider it, with 
respect to its syntactic valence and the position it can occupy in the sentence, 
as a speech-unit of their own and to disregard tho word’s function in Sanskrit, 
Hence the at first sight curious phenomenon that a considerable number of Indian 
words play, without any change or without being enlarged with aflixer, otc., a part 
-in the sentence and convey à meaning entirely different from their original func- 
tion. 


en harg 


Thus, the Skt. adverb paraira IA 'elsewhere, (in the w orld) hereafter’ ‘is 
used by OJav. authore to denote the ‘hereafter’ (tho English term is likewise pri- 
marily an adverb?*) and the ideas of ‘dead? ard ‘to die; in Mod. Jav. (lit.) palas- 
tra (<paratra) means ‘dead’. Skt. apürva. ATA ‘unprecedented, unparalleled’ be- 
came the ‘interjection’ apuwa, apruwa in regional Javanese, meaning ‘come, come 
along, look hera’; Skt. OJav. sasaria- MAA ‘with a seat’ came to mean, in lit. Jay. 
‘a spot or building of, for..., a site’. 

In Mod. Jav. the lit. sudra (Skt. sidra- "IK ‘a person of the lowest class’) 
not only means ‘utterly humble’, but also ‘poverty’; the obsolete sora (<Skt. 
svara- A ‘audible voice’) ‘loud’ and ‘(to speak) aloud’; compare also lit. Jav. 
bajra which means ‘lightening, glittering’ : Skt. vajra- TA ‘lightning’; Skt. saimata 
AKAM ‘community of essence or nature with (the Highest)’ > Jav. satmata ‘visible, 
perceptible’; Jav. umpama not only means ‘instance’, but also ‘put the case that”: 
Skt. upamā «91 ‘comparison’. 
noun)>lit. Jav. ‘praising’ (as a 
"confidence') means "having 
fest survives in lit. Jav. to mean 


; a i 
it were; Skt. mamsa- ata meat’ now means ‘to e on Tavares: (Bub Beale: 


Wz ‘difference’ has given the Mod i iso’: (iii) ‘i 
«Jav. b ‘dif A (SEN: i ii) if 
on the other hand’. V. beda (i) ‘difference’; (ii) ‘otherwise’; (i 


^ $ Skt. marga AÑ ‘way’ can now also convey the meaning 

pie ies The loan-words Serving ag conjunctions are highly ipods from 

e syntactic point of view. They will be commented upon at a later stage when 

we ee to discuss the syntactic influence of Sanskrit on the IN. languages. 

ba t poe oe a Javanese formal change, to wit the aphaeresis od 

Dra cie: ci Onger than two syllableg27 conduced to an extension of tho: 
ce o d word. Beside purohita ‘family priest’ (Skt 


7 the borrowe 
purohita. gitfè j 
tta- Fitta) OJa could mean ‘with g T O 


V. G-purohita 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 


x: 361 

C : Mea i jon &hennai and eGangotri — ————— 
e. but in sis ah yl Aba Soyat Saee AES means teacher? as wel} as ‘to ba 
tice iced to a teacher’. The Skt. buddhi- afz ‘in 


appren Javanese, but, beside mbudi (which is literary) 
noun 


. Thus sēnjata which originally was an adjectiv 
trive - Idiers’ in Old-Javanese. 
D, NE discussion of this phenomenon is complicated by the 
‘oh have suffered a chango as to their outward appaarance, 
her. mention of some cases of aphaeresis. The Skt. priv 
aous native prefix, was apt to disappear in Javanese. Thus lit. Jay, 
nindya and nindita mean irreproachable, superior <Skt. anindita- efiteza iret 
proachable’, nindita- fafeza conveying the opposite meaning; tulya not only stands 
for ‘equal to’ (Skt. tulya- qu id”), but also for excessively; real, genuine’, which 
probably represents Skt. atulya- Ageq “unequalled ; lit. Jav. dvitiya does not mean 
‘the second” (Skt. dvitiya- fata), but ‘excellent? <Skt, adoitiya- HERE "unique, 
matchless’. Jav. ùrčbda, ùrčđa (obs.); (base rébda) ‘to inercase’ must, as far as can 
he judged by appearances, represent Skt, samrabdha- Gīza 'augmented';2 the base 
itself is aleo explained as a verb.?% E 

Not seldom an object is called after one of its most striking properties or 

poouliaritics. The Sanskrit word vadana- aza for ‘taco’ primarily means ‘tho act 
of speaking’, then also ‘the mouth’ and ‘tho face (in general)’, Other words for tho 
same part of the human body are based on the idea of ‘seoing’ or ‘looking’, cf. Fr. 
visage from Lat. visus ‘sight’. The lit. Jav. ujwala ‘face’ is identical with the Skt. 
ujjvala: SAG ‘beaming, splendid’; this meaning has also been preserved. 


m0 p 
presence of worda 
Let us only make 
ative a-, like the 


In tho 
language of the Avesta Cit! ra- is, in a comparable way, an adjective for ‘bright, visible’ 
and a substantivo for ‘look, sight’ and ‘face’. In this connection attention may also 
be drawn to the lit. Jav. sasmila which has two meanings : ‘outward appearance, 
facial expression” and ‘siga, indication, presage’ : it is the Skt. sasmita- afeaa ‘smil- 
ing’. Anothor literary Jay. word for ‘tho face’ or, rather ‘facial expression’ is naya 
which may bo the Skt. naya- TA iu tho sense of ‘conduct, design, leading thought’; 
howevor its Synonym nayana< Skt, nayana- ATA ‘oye’ (and, hence, in Jav. ‘face’, cf. 

* Fr. visage eto.) may have exerted influence. 

A lit. Jav. word for,‘storm’ is pratipa which is the Skt. adjective pratipa- 
Talg ‘contrary, disagreeable, impeding’. Perhaps a more thorough investigation into 
the texts in which the word occurs will one day shed light on the history of this 
and similar semantic shifts. Whereas in Sanskrit, tikta- fa means ‘bitter’ (but 
also “a bitter tasto’), Jav. authors applied the word also to the ‘bile’. 


NOTES 

D M 
Ot moro particulars see Wilkinson, | is discussed in chapter VI, section 2. 

alay-English Dictionary, I, p.561. The | * The word will also be discussed in one 

2 A : . 

modern applications of the word are | of the following paragraphs. , 
disoussoq in chapter VI 5 Otber instances of such transferred; | 
2 B * m fs ` 
ARE also such pairs as Mal. ibu (‘mo- meanings aro Mod. Jav. kr. pēksi (i) bird 
ther’) Danah (5... *) | (Skt. paksi q«i), (ii) ‘an iron peg in the 
hes 5 (archery, bow, arrow E (kris)' (a 

PW: anak C , | handle of the Javanese dagger (kri 
* Th <" panah ‘arrow’. Ni 3 hel rojecting pin in 

Phenomenon of ‘logn-translations’ ! similar object, the long p 
a CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA : 


TL 


4 E: . 
the yoke of a draught-ox, is in a compa- | ardent, acuto, horrible’ > gp, « 


rable way called manuk-at, which lite- 
rally means ‘what is like a bird’); lit. 
Jav warastra (i) ‘a weapon, esp. an 
arrow ‚(ii)‘ penis (Skt.'excellent weapon’: 
varāstra- ATA); Mod Jav. baw (dissylla- 
bio, or bë bau) which, being Skt. bahu- 
‘arm, fore-arm’, also means right 
band man, helper (reg.)’ and ‘labourer’. 
Such cases as colloquial Jav. werga 
‘member of a club or society (a now 
‘antiqnated meaning is ‘rolativex’)< Skt. 
varga- aŭ ‘multitude or group of similar 
things, company, family’ can also be 
classified in another category. 
é The word rājasa- WHA is repeatedly 
found in & specialized sense. Meaning, 
in general, 'endowed with the quality of 
rajas which prompts all beings to be 
active, passionate’ the word ia used by 
the authors of the OJav Bhomakāwya 
to qualify a man who is ‘overpowered? 
by Inve (26,11; cf. also Arjunawiwāha 
18,12); the dorivative karajasan (i.e. 
ka-rajasa-am, ka--an expre-sing ‘being 
affected by the idea expressed by the 
Exch means ‘to bo overpowered, out- 
raged’ (a girl, Bhomakāwya 26,15), and 
rumājasani (inf. um, suff -ani) likewise 
eznresnes the idea. of overpowering in 
tho erotie sphere (46,6), The meaningg 
of lit. Mod. Jav. rējasa ‘disobedient and 
„trying to draw near (to a person)’ have 
In all probability, sprung from the AKG S 
by association. j 
? Pigeaud distinguishes this word walgita 
from the likewigo lit, walgita hook 
letter", Has this anything to do wi h 
the Skt. meaning ‘sounding well’? m 
* Some other instances may be added: | 
Skt. pigana- dtes ‘afflicting, pai i al 
calamity’ > lit. Jay, pidana * a EXE | 
ment’; Skt. Pralaya- TEA ‘digg poe 
j olution 
death’ >lit, Jay. ‘death’, reg. Jav. 'g i 
Am 5 i ras TÀ ‘fal, TS 
t. Jav. purna ‘redressed r , 
Skt. irna- FN "grass? > eee 
» tērni 
Shoots, young leaves’; Skt, tyra, ate | 


bitter. 
= orr 3. YA ha r- 
noss, sorrow’; Skt. tikta. fN bitter’ s 


‘bitter; bile’; “Skt. rūksa xx c. 

hard, dirtied” > ruksa 'damaged'. ES 
samüpia- GAR ‘completed’ > AE 
‘ready, equipped’; Skt. rabhasa. aie 
impetuous; vehomonoe' > OJay. rabhasg, 
‘using force, overpowering’, lig T 
rēbasa id”; Skt. ubhaya. qum ‘bath’ > 
oba. Jav. ‘appointment’; Skt. šrūgāra. 
IFR sexual passion, love’ 7 ]it, Jay. srn- 
gara billing and cooing’; Skt. cūraka. 
UNA ‘spy’ > caraka "messengor"; Ski 
irpli- qÍ8 ‘satisfaction? > trapti which 
also means ‘order’; Skt. sandhi. «fw 
'agreemont, treaty’ > Old. and lit. Jay, 
‘secret, rocrot intontion’; Skt. kasi arsit 
‘moon’ > Jav. ‘month’: Skt, savega- AAN 
‘impetuous’ > lit. Jav. ‘roady’s Skt. tarka- 
aS 'reaconing, doubt’ >tarka, térka 'sus- 
picion'; Skt vighna- fig ‘obstacle, any 
trouble or difficulty’ > lit. Jay. ‘trouble’ 
and ‘pang: of love’; Skt. vibhava- faxa 
‘might, wealth, luxury’ > Jav. "luxury? 
and ‘indulgingin worldly plea-ures’; Skt. 
viveka- IAF ‘concideration? > (obsolete) 
Jav. wiweka, weweka ‘care, prudence'; 
Skt. rudita- xfza ‘lamentation’ >lit. Jav. 
rudita ‘grief’; Sut. viyoga- Rata ‘separa. 
tion (esp. of lovers)’ > ‘longing, grief’; 
Skt. prapasica- Agzāu ‘diversity, diffuse- 
ness, appearance, error’ > OJav. also 
bewildered, irresoluto', lit Jav. ‘con- 
fused’; Skt. deamana- Brana ‘sipping 
water from the palms of the hands for 
purification’ >lit, Jav. arcamana ‘giving 
one’s face a wa-h'; Skt. lalana- BoA 
sporting’ > lit. Jav. lalana ‘being on a 
journey’; Skt. vandito afrga ‘praised, 


| extolled >lit. Jav. wandita 'excollent'; 


Skt. trufi. af ‘cutting, destruction’ > 
lit. Jav. trusļi ‘opening, hole; the Jav. 
Verb ñambara (from Skt. OJav. lit. Jav. 


ambara- azar ‘sky’) means, in lit. lan- 


guage, ‘to fly towards or in tho sky’, in 
the general language it could also ex- 
press the ides of ‘wandering’. In other 
IN. languages wo find, KBat. siksa ‘to 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Wasa 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation-Chennai and eGangotri 363 
— — c 


: Eos who is at work’: Skt. 


fat 'teaching, punishment' > Mal. 
sibs 


sālsā» S? 
3 


vējā my remarks in New Indian Anti. ' 
E. I (Thomas Volume), p 97ff. 
gut ME 


10 Goo eb- Gamillscheg, o.c., p.82ff. 

i [put on one side the poy use 
of gašal AT: and similar pes; in such 
a context as (Satap. Br. 2,2,3,1 gaza 
lig bocomes whosoever, knowing tnis, 
establishes & sacrificial fire of his own 
ete., i.e. the numerous cases in which a 
person i8 called yasal. As is well known 
the common distinction made by gram- 
marians and teachers between , ‘abstrac- 
ta’ and ‘conereta’ does not hold good 
in languages reflecting the thought of 
men who did not operate, with this dis- 
tinction and this terminology. (I have 
fouched upon this point in my book 
‘Notes on brahman’ (Utrecht 1950 , and 
in a paper on Skt. ojah- Sls: and ugra- 
84, Utrecht 1952). Yet, the reader 
will not put a wrong construction on 
my Words, when I join with other 
linguists in using these terms on 
the understanding, however, that we 
consider thom as relative and, if such 
should be the Case, as emphasizing two 
aspects of the same concept; a definite 


building, even when itis tho represen- | 
? * . . S, x ļ 
tative of an Immaterial idea or identi- 


fied with that idea, is a tangible object, 
nota gonoral concept existing, or thought 


ux 48 existing, apart from material 
Objects, 


12 KBW. 


IV, p.454, The suggestion that 
Skt, vyas 


ng of Vasa (De Casparis, Inseripties uit 
v londra-tiid, p.166) must be rejec- 
K Or semantic reasons. 


isa ‘punishment, tribution, tor- | 


4- STIR. extension’ is the proto- , 


Although this wor 
I know, 


meaning of Sung, tyasu or yasa ‘to be 
, able, tolve acquainted, experienced, skil- 
led etc. (as a Courteous term). More- 
over, such Jav. meanings as "having an 
object made, causing to lay out, build, 
manufacture (of objects which do not 
yet exist or which one does not yet 
possess, alsoof a stable, a ricc-field, etc.)* 
can easily be connected with ūyāsa. The 
lit. Jav. yasa ‘strength, power’, finally 
no doubt, points to this Skt, word. 
'* Gericke-Roorda, Jav-Nederl. Hand- 
| woordenboek II, 1.249 seem to Gonheds 
if with Skt. prabha mw 'splendour, 
light’ (> lit. Jav. praba 'id) adding that 
others prefer the form purbayasa, which 
was connected with the name of a no. 
bleman Purbaya who Was" surveyor 
when the palace was built. According to 
; Stutterheim, De kraton vau Majapulit, 
' VKI., p.77 prabhū refers to the pien- 
dour of the regalia which were kept in 
these apartments. 

'5 See KBW. II, p.421f. 

' Compare also Hindi dharmarth agiā 

“a charitable grant’. 

'7 See J Ph. Vogel, Sanskrit kirti, in 
| BEI. LIX 1906), p 344tf., and also J F. 
Fleet, Corpus inscriptionum indicarum, 
TI, (Calcutta 1888), p.212, and Vogel, 
in Annual Report of the Archaeological 
| Survey of India, 1909-03, p.940. 

! 18 Agastyaparwa, ed. J Gonda, (The 
| Hague 1933-1936), p.97 (355). In simi- 
' lar Sanskrit tests other terms are used: 
| dharmakriya wüfz (Manu 12,31 = 
| dānādidharmūnusthāna— Kullūka). 

+ 15 Gerioke-Roorda, Handwoordenboek, 


fis Probable that the verb represents | it, p.480. Van der Tuuk, KBW. T, p.293 
ending (contamination), and that | believes it to be Javanese. 


9 now Old-fashioned form iyasa, which 


86 R 6 * 
acire of to ereot, to have... built’, 
ae Speaking, derives from Skt. 
€« 


20 Useful remarks may be found in Stolz- 
Schmalz, Lateinische Grammatik, 5** 
edition by M. Leumann and J. B. Hof. 


S exertion, labour, teowbkēot. kaa Münch), p.792, 


SANSK ur IN INDONESIA 
364 Digitized DAANG amaj Foundation Ch i and eGangotri 


the text mention may be made of such 
words as those discussed in chapter Ty 
| section 2: Mod. Jav. èstu (< Skt. astu, ay) 
(i) kr. ‘actually happening, come off". (ii) 
optional kr. ‘true, properly’, "sd 
26 Soo chapter VI, section 1. 

27 Seo chapter IV, section 1.: 

| 28 Does Skt. rabdha- IET occur instead 


31 Juynboll, Woordenlijst, p.970. 

22 Of. KBW. II, p-234. 

23 Gee chapter I, section 1. i 

24 But the English word categories, 
though different from Sanskrit, are nob 
to be put on a level with the Indonesian 
ontegories. I would dissuade linguists 
from calling the use made of paratra by 
the Javanese an instance of hypostasis 
asis the Engl. the hereafter. 

25 Jn addition to the instances given in 


of samrabdha- SR in this sense? 
29 See Gericke and Roorda, Jav..Ned 
Handwb. I, p.874f. 


SECTION 5 
TABU, EUPHEMISM ETC. 


: In certain circumstances, at certain times, in certain places the use of ono 
or more special words is avoided, held offensivo or traditionally interdicted, 
because it is a term for an object, a concept, a phenomonon which is under a 
magical, ritual, religious, social tabu, because it refers to holy, harmful, sinister, 
. disagreeable, indecent, terror-inspiring ideas, porsons, or beings, to a place, a time 
or action which is (or may be) charged with power, to which man's reaction 
should maintain the proper distance or expreas the proper respect. Forming port 
of the great complex of "tabu phenomena' in general, linguistic pēmali— to use a 
wide-spread Indonesian term— is the avoidance of words (which are associated, 
nay, identical with the ideas they expross !) springing from awe in the presenco of 
e Me UNE ās critical affairs like hunting, navigation, agriculturo, 

sexual intercourse, should not be utt p i 
“disguised’)' because they, when oig m d m SERM "n e ANS 
Names of divine beings, whether le 1 FEMA pieri MEA Gene 
contain a curse, or which are used A e" e Maie Sid bw vie 
in every part of the world Portone fM oc OE a E. a 
E EA ot nar Dien h e ne ered or excluded in many or most gitua- 
: 4430 My God? the French often prefer parbleu, instead of 
vertu-Dieu they say tudieu or vertubleu.? In communi r} h dencies 

make themeelves strongly felt, tho loss of so inh pd H Eu NO 
even be attributed to tabu, TN it T» Hi Cm e Pd daro) 
g would be incautious to make too much of 


this factor without consideri ible i 
sia, idering other possible influences contributing to a word'8 


Words worth studying in thi 


1 , 8 1 i : 
io When m Gayo (Er T connection are the Indonesian terms for 


E ìn a forest or jungle where he may expect to 
to Eigen er pm nee the ‘normal’ word for the animal, but resorts 
forest’, or he uses the le Model the forest urañ utön ‘tho resident of the 
makes grimaces. Tt Ms Ud pebint Which literally means ‘who grins Or 
a tabu substitutey Theor m mood? that tho normal word, kulē, is likewise 
stituted for such Tee S Hip is, no doubt, possible, because words sub- 
the meaning and in turn b erms may in time become too closely associated with 

: HER Decome undesirable, Bat, if this supposition ia right, is. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRĪT IN INDONESIA 


— — itized-by-Arya-Samaj-Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 365 

> the Sst. word kula- 5%, which, according to lexicographerg, means ‘the 
(Skt. sukula- 
n in indentify- 
(Skt. sumitra- 
terms for the 
ce, savage’, (ii) 


$ corporation"? or is ita shortened form instead of sukula 
from a noble family? Thəre is no cause for hesitatio 
1d.fashioned Mod. Jav. sumitra, which means ‘friend? 
as a tabu substitute. Other, literary, Javanese 
same animal are bragalba, SPD i developed non pragalba (i) ‘fier 
E, (it is, of course, Pd aga Bi AIGA hold’), and sémbawa, which I would 
tin as a regular shortening < a- or ma sambhawa which in the ancient ] 
exp s ‘able, powerful” (Tantu Panggélaran 125 of a do 
): Skt. sambhava- 894 in the sense of ‘ability’, 
At first sight the shift of meaning ‘cow-stall’> ‘forge, smithy’ is rather 
puzzling. In a circumstantial excuraus Lafeber* endeavoured to show that the 
wide-spread word which in Nias occurs as gosali council house (of a village), 
church’, in OJav. as gosali, gusali smithy’, in Sund, as gosali ‘id’, in Lampong as 
kasali ‘id.’, in Old-Buginese as gosali 'residence of tho deceased', in Philippine 
languages (Tagalog, Biol) as gusali "casa grande’ and as bansale, usallo etc. in other 
languages, has belonged to a limited group of words which may be regarded as 
ancient loans of Indian origin, without being Sanskrit. He was of the opinion that 
the meaning of the word was, generally speaking, ‘shed’ and suggested deriving it 
from the Sanskrit name Kosala- TA which denoted an ancient Indian people. It 
is, however, not clear how "a shed’ and the Kosalas may be related. The supposi- 
tion expressed by Kern, who connected gosali with a Pkt. form corresponding to 
Skt. kausalya- IAEA ‘skill’ is not convincing either. It will, in this connection, 
be remembered that among many peoples persons of particular attainments are 
supposed to be endowed with supernormal powers. Thus smiths are often regarded 
as wonder-workers, whose inherent power is not seldom hereditary.* Now, in 
Barée (Central Celebes) a ‘smithy’, is, no doubt for reasons of ‘tabu’, not always 
called kolowo (which is tho word for it), but komali which originally meant, and in 
Philippine languages still means, ‘shed, barn’. I would explain the meaning adop- 
ted by the Skt. gosala- Ttals ‘vow-stall’ in some IN. languages in a similar way. 
Already in ancient Javanese charters gosali and gusali are words for ‘smithy’, 
occurring in the group juru (‘trained worker’) gosali;* in Javanese gusali is now 
obsolete or old-fashioned and bésalin (<*gusali-an) the common form. The other 
IN. sense of ‘council house’ may be compared with the meaning *meeting-place' 
and even ‘assembly, society’ belonging to the Skt. gostha- "tz which primarily 
denotes a 'cow-pen' or ‘abode for cattle’. 1 
, Finally, we would suggest ascribing the change of meaning of Skt. sahya- 
gu to be borne, tolerable’ > OJav. sahya ‘nice, beautiful’ and hence Jav. kr. saé 
8001, virtuous’ to the tendency to avoid praising and boasting. 2 
dott ndonrns ao in see eS 
em E aPgesd ree ex he - (instead of smallpox : ‘the 
Com Aa as ay oe ki 1 me may attract the 
Plaint of the good folk’) etc. The mention of the real na jie 

capricious or dangerous attention of spirits, ghosts, the divina T of the se 

oj ; ; Ne be called 'gras:-secd' In the Batak 

„dā hence in a tin-mino the ore must katlā sl 'spoech"*) ancient 

“8 poda or ‘language of instruction’ (hata: Skt. ka tedly found. Thus 
„Oms, paraphrasea and other unusual expressions are AI am d, no 
instead of ulok“ "— mr ST id! ds used, n 

of ulok ‘serpent’ the Rah Rob 


anguage 
g Ssesse 
a possessed of supernormal 


power 


366 Digitized by SARS Fund aR GERA and eGangotri l 


a = LI AIR. LU EIE E Mr. 


doubt for reasons of linguistic tabu. TBat. sattuwa (written santuwa) ‘mouse? 


` (<Skt. sativa- Ata ‘living being, animal) may be explained in a similar Way. In 


the diviner's vocabulary of the samo language other instances can be found to, 


which reference has already been made, and the use of dadi (of. Mal, dade], 


‘sour thick milk’: Skt. dadhi- gÑ ‘sour milk’) instead of susu whioh also applios to 
the female breast may not only be ascribed to a tendency to avoid misunderstand. 
ings but also to the tabu phenomenon. In a similar way the Mal. biji grain, 
seed’ (af. Skt. bria- MS ‘seed, germ’) is as a numerical coefficienti for small objects 
sometimes avoided because of its other meaning of tosticlo’, In Sundanoro the 
loan-word boga ‘possessing, having’ ( € Skt. bhoga- uta enjoyment, objoct of enjoy. 
ment, possession’) serves as an euphemisu.for ‘the privy parts’. 

Interesting words are, from this poiat of view, those which havo a bearing 
on stools and the daily evacuation. In many languages tho terms for lavatory 
ets, are subject to rapil change because they are sosa tabued, and foreign desig. 
nations (the Latin lavatory in English, tho English abbreviation IV.C. in Dutch) 
are often introduced. In Malay the nativo t rm jamban (‘a privy over a stroam’, 
but in towns any ‘latrino’) is in part of tho Malay aroa (Moluccas) now roga: ded 


"88 very indecent, the Dutch loan kakus («Dutch Fakhuis ‘privy’, which now is 


highly vulgar) represents a higher standard, but the Skt. loan bicara “deliberation, 
discussion, business, question’ (<Skt. vicara- fam consideration, discussion’) 
put after the Mal. témpat ‘place’ is the most decent expression : literally ‘a place 
of business’. PU 

When referring to similar or essentially identical phonomena in modern 
civilizations where the social aspect is often prevalent many authors havo uxed 
the term *euphemism'. Indecent words, terms for unpleasant occurrences, etc. 
are frequently replaced by euphomisins. But, though excluded in many sočial 
Situations, they remain customary in others. For some objecta or concepts there 
is à boundless wealth of euphemistic and evasive expressions, e.g. for sexual inter- 
course and all that is connected with it. Among the ‘euphemisms’ in this pro- 
Vinee are, in many languages, words meaning literally ‘lie or sleep with, come 
together, have relations or intercourse with, be intimato with etc”, which may 
express different degrees of "euphemistic parapbrating’ or answer to different 
shades of evasiveness or fashionableness in the sarne period of the history of the 
same language. Moreover, substitutions created for reasons of magico-religious 


tabu are repeatedly retained ag prevalently social ‘ouphemiams’. So we must re- 


a ELE into »omaatic details when discussing such words as sangama 
xai M sig m Benskrit (samgama- daa "mooting, intercourse, association"), 
js ma RA PEE Henson for sexual union’? In Oid-Javanese the word itself and 
choi aoa are repeatedly found, although it has perhaps never been 
The word san oic Ser Ane. : la tho modern language it is w literary term. 
nese texts eU ds ND ie 28 far as I know, only found in ancient Java» 
krit (samagama. qanm ' "Nn Ju-t like samūgūma, which is also Sans- 
T (sexual) union ) The word krida SEI ‘sport, amusement, 
toex d Of ‘amorous sport’; ancient and later 
210 Press guc ideas ‘ 3 ‘to oo" 
habit’, I do not know Whether the root cumb as to dally or oven 
krit to denote sexual intercourse, but ; Oii "VAL to kiss’ has been used in Sans- 
F , In à , S " 
nese cumbana is still a literary term oa P Avanese it has. In Modern-Java 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN IN 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation RS ai and 


eGangotri 367 
a 
2Y now be destined to 
usual nuroni (lit ‘to 


9 same act is sa-rēsmi 


E 
g already OJav. (explained as samagama) and m 
' LN a decent and high style of expression instead of the 
jum. de”). Another now literary Javanese word for th 
Mi in all probability pe tho Skt lalgmī Batt ‘charm, beauty’: in thig 
gonso ib Was bentoiee ee UNE Cd Bali it camo to apply to "love','' 
although in lit. Jav. tho songe KR 18 preserved; finally it was used as a 
torm for ‘cohabiting’ when speaking of prominont persons,'? 
Words for the monstruation (which one day was likewise g enphemism)'?: 
in Sarak campur is used for it, which is n IN. word for "mixing up, blending, 
confusion otc. : In Javanese it was called garap sari, lit ‘being engaged in the 
quintessence > sar, may Lio roganded ag an -2- variant of the loan-word Skt. sara- 
alt ‘orgy; firmness, quintesrance ; ib can also mean ‘pollen’ and even ‘flower’. 
The Skt. rahasya- X893 secret, pri vate’ (cf. rakasyūni romani ‘the hair on the pri- 
vate parts’) serves as a word for the female privy parts’ in Javanese texte, 

This natural desire to avoid ill-omened words and to veil indecent and 
unpleasant facts by inoffensive names, must, no doubt, be regarded aa one of the 
main factors determining the development whereby words often suffered so-called 
pojoration. In Mod. Jav. sémbrana, which I consider as coming from the Skt. 
sambhrama GAT ‘agitation; error, delusion’, is used to express such ideas as 
'trivolity, folly, bad form, insolence’. When in Sasak the idea of ‘bad, badly’ is 
expressed by bina which in Balino-e and in lit. Javanese means ‘otherwise’ the 
tondency to avoid strong expressions may have exerted influence. In this word 
the Skt. blinna- faa ‘broken, changed, deviating, distinct" has been preserved The 
curious change of meaning of Skt. dukkha- c: *unea. y; pain, sorrow’ in Javanese: 
‘angry’ (in krama inggil) is in my opinion al-o due to the tendency to disguise one’s 
reactions to unpleasant and dangerous events. Another factor is the common 
human tendency to 'over-value' certain acts or objects, to give them a name which, 
properly speaking, ought to be applied to a certain ride of them or to a noble 
manifestation of them only. Thus, among business-men and officials any conver- 
sation may easily become a conference. In Modern-Javanese and Malay a deprecia- 
tive meaning has been associated with the borrowed Jav, wicara, Mal. bicara “speak 
(about) (in OJav. and traditional Malay ‘discussing, deliberating ete.: Skt. vicara- 
TAR 'consideration, discussion’). 

Or occupations, social relations ete. are indicated by a name properly or 
originally donoting just the next higher degree: in Dutch almost any teacher of 
type-writing, car-driving, dancing and so on calls himself a leraar (‘secondary 
school teacher’), not an onderwijzer (‘olomentary school teacher”). In this way 
the words concerned often manifest a tendency to deteriorate. In other cases 


an ethically lowor connotation which may ba implied in a word is emphasized, 


the word specializing to expross just the ignoblo side of the idea or object. ' 
he words for ‘female friend, 


Many instances of this process can be found among t A ane 
2dy-love, beloved, bride’ which frequently camo to mean ie or even 
Prostitute’ : the Engl. whore is cognato with Lat. carus dear, an ngl. minion 
88 developed from ‘favourite’ to ‘concubine’. Cynicism, experience, worldly mi 
flom, too, lead words to suffer pejoration. Terms originally signifying sueh ideas 


€ ` 
Te ay, good, good-natured, blessed’ repeatedly rece o eee 
Silly, simplo’ - ; ; ‘HG ith Germ. selig blessed - 
mu ple’: Engl. silly which is cognato wi 2 à » obj t- 
Virūga (of. tho Skt. viraga- Ga he ba it gneniigotestworldly objects or exte 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 
368 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai an otri 


b e a term for studied or overcarefully elegant (of one's motions ang. 
Jas um hould be inquired into whether this word was first used in con. 
movements) ; its s who had to imporsonate supermundane beings eto.—it actually 
nection with dancers ng— and afterwards interpreted in a more or lesg depre- 


nals) 


applies to Javanese danci 


UNS ag" f ; 
RPM n connection the attention may be drawn to the history of Skt. gam- 


bliüra- qzdH. Is originally expresses the ideas of ‘profound, grave, serious, secret, 

: T 7 Malay its meaning has changed in a curious wav: it 
mysterious, inscrutable. In y MAE nbira is said tea y; 
now applies to ‘passion, excitement ; when a Bee Cetera ts ica: to riso a sud- 
den outburst of anger is meant. Soldiers cager to fight, an animal flying into a rage 
are gēmbira; a warrior's excitement at the flight of his enemy, the fierinoss ofa 
horse likewise come under this term, and nowadays such ideas as Inspired, ani- 
mate, enthusiast are rendered by it. In Javanese the word gémbira has two mean- 
ings : in old-fashioned style it applies to Bali Ca ovorflowing with merriment 
(of men and animals), tempestuous (of the sea)’; in modern colloquial language it 
means: fidgety, uneasy, restless (of persons who are conscious of having done 
wrong). The latter meaning may perhaps represent a pejorabion of a more original 
sense. It may be added in passing that the Malays also used gémbira for ‘strong 
(of a voice)’ : cf. the Skt. meaning 'deep-sounding'; in OJav texts ‘deep or hollow 
sounding, loud’ is likewise found. 

Nearly related to the tendency to address a person with a highor title than 
he has a right to is the desire of emphasizing the good, useful or benevolent aspeots 
of an object, the tendency to over-value their worth and importance. The amelio- 
rative element su- ° was already in Sanskrit affixed to such words as Meru. ÀT 
‘the central mount Meru’ > Sumeru- gs 'id”, which was introduced into Java- 
nese. The Skt. sujanma- Gara ‘of good or noble birth’ ended by denoting ‘a man 
(in general)’ in literary Javanose, and suyasa means, in tho same stylo ‘a building’. 
Compare also the lit. Jav. sudarsana ‘example’ as against Skt. nidarsana. fagāūa 
id”. In Javaneso surasa gradually assumed the sense of ‘tho meaning of a letter’: 
although Skt. surasa- YTA ‘savoury, charming, elegant’ (also in OJav.) may bo at 
the root of this word, we may also give serious consideration to su+ rasa : Skt. 
rasa- 38 ‘flavour, prevailing sentiment in a literary work’, in Jav. also ‘(mystical. 
meaning. Tho now obsolete Jav. wirasa=surasa is curious; it cannot directly be 
connected with Skt. virasa- fata which means ‘flayourless’. 

| The well-known devaluation of adverbs and cther words expressing a degreo 
or intensity (extremely and terribly are, in colloquial English, used instead of 
very, and so on) has also left traces in Indonesia : Skt. divya- fzsq ‘divine, heao 


venly’ is preserved in tho lit. Jav. dibya- ‘(extraordinarily) excellent’; cf. Eng- 
celestial for ‘exquisitely beautiful’. : 


NOTES 


' An interesting instance of alteration 
of the outward appearance is the word 
cilaka ‘misfortune, ill-luck, evil? which 
is also used as an exclamation. The 
Javanese often say instead of this f 


cilakak, cileke, cilekin, cilekik etc. and 
the Achehnese say cilaköë’ or shorten 
the tabued term : cila. The Malay form 
is cilaka or célaka ‘unlucky, ill-starred, 
orm f accursed’, which is often a term of abus? 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT 


Digitized by Arya Samaj FY ISRONIESEAS! and eGangotri 


€ 269 


. laka ‘scoundrel’, the native oran | KBW. IV, p.733: at o 
(ra eo) in Minangkabau we also | Woordenlijst, paga tt Ee "s 
Bet. The origin of the word is | etymology: gusali < Skt, "e — 
fin clear, but it must no dovbt be con- , * See also Van der Tuuk T b d 
nob 1 with TBat. lilaha (1 k)' a deceas- | Spraakkunst, p.VII. d 
nected (of a family)’ and as a base ‘to | 8 According 


ild 
or child by death’. Van der Tuuk, | 
08 | 


Bw. I, p.639 also gives: tilaka with. 
a igeue. Perhaps the Bal. cēlika ‘jea- 
aan envious must rather be considered 
identical with Jav. culika deceitful, false, 
thievich’ which is held to represent Skt. 
cauraka- ATE ‘thievery’ etc. We might 
be tempted to ask ourselves if cilaka (in 
tho Malay sense) represents the Skt. cela- 
ka ABE, which at the end of a com- | 
pound=cela- ĀŪ ‘having the mere out- 
ward appearance of’, i.e. ‘a bad repre- 
seutative of’, some Malay phrases origi- | 
nally being hybrid 
Then the other IN. meanings would be 
secondary. 

* See e.g. K. O. Winstedt, Shaman Saiva 
and Sufi, a study of tho evolution of | 
Malay Magic (London-Bombay-Sydney 
1925), p.6Sff.; W. W. Skeat, Malay Magie | 
(London 1900), p.35ff. and 523ff.; Win- ' 
stedt, The camphor language of Johore | 


loan-translations. 


and Southern Pahang (Journal of the | 
Federated Malay States Museums IX | 
(1922. ), p.59ft.; Annandale, Patani Sea | 
anguage, (Fasciculi Malayenses I, p. | 
94); F.W.T, Hunger, Oogsttalen en | 
"Éebruiken op Noord-Bail (Djawa XVI, | 
0.88); W. Havers, Neuere Literatur zum | 
Sprachtabu, Sitzungsberichte der Aka. | 
ee der Wissonschaften in Wien, Phil- | 
«st. Kl, 993.5 (1946), and my pane | 
The Javanese vocabulary of courtesy’ 
In Lingua | 
P8831. | 
"GA, 
W 
a 


I (Haarlem, Netherl. 1948), 


J. Hazeu, Gajosch-Nederlandsch 
Sordenboek, (Batavia 1907), p.395. 

we Vergelijkende klankloer van 
s. ASl8ch (Tho Hague 1922), p.133ff. 
telor to H, Webster, Magic, (Stanford | 


* 1948). p.16711. | 


Cal 
6 


€ * 
, and comin 


| known in Sanskrit, 
, '" There are also OJav. derivatives: ma- 
| krida ‘to cohabit? ete. 

| " The phrases saù walat smara (Skt. 
| smara- AT love’), sañ walat kahyun (Jav. 
| "Iove, desire’) and san walat rasmi (also 


i of the palace’. 
; rašmi, however, leads us to suppose that 


i to MW. only in lexicons, 

Such meanings ag company, relation’ 
anc g together, meeting; contact; 
intimacy, friendship, love ete.’ are, well. 


MIA. and NIA. 


rasmi) compete with each other (cf. KBW. 
III, p.581), meaning "who &ppropriates 


| love. The form rasmi<laksmi was ex- 


plained by Van der Tuuk (KBW. I, p. 
749) as caused by dissimilation in rimi 
nin puri (Skt. puri S3t town’) ‘the beauty 
The frequent spelling 


the word was blended with Skt. rasmi- 


_ Ufa ‘string, cord’, the loosening of a 


young woman’s waistband being repeat- 
edly described by the authors of Java- 
nese romantic tales. 


j E Pa : g " 
12 The Balinese rasmi and the derivative 
| karasmin mean ‘sexual love; coition?. 


Other loans are OJav. strata i.e. Skt. 


| surata- Sa ‘sexual intercourse’ and a- 


mithuna (Jav. prefix) i.e. Skt. mithuna- 


j faga ‘pairing’. 

| 13 It comes from the Lat. menstrua 
| which originally meant ‘the monthly 
| (event). In the same way the Fr. les 


mois is an indirect term. 
' See, e.g., H. Hatzfeld, Leitfaden der 


vergleichenden Bedeutungslohre?, (Mün- 
chen 1998). 

15 According to H. Kern, Kawi-Studién, 
(The Hague 1871), the Jav. wiraga repre- 
sents OJav. piraga pleasure, affection 

(native prefix and Skt. rāga- UT loveli- 

ness, pleasure. He, however, admits 


the possibility of blending (Skt. virāga- 


S! 1 t Shastri Collection. 
Seo also H. Kern, VG. VII, paš and Petit)! astri Collection 


> Digitized by AN YASARTD Feundstipo Klīešīnai and eGangotri 
870 
UU e ———- 


SEOTION 6 i 
MUTUAL INFLUENCE OF WORDS FROM THE POINT OF 
VIEW OF SEMANTICS 


Lj 

Sometimes a word undergoes a change of meaning under the influenoe of g 
word of a closely resembling appearence. Then such processes as blending, "popu- 
lar etymology’, re-interpretation, adaptation are, of course, likely to play a part, 
In Mod. Jav., the lit. padni denotes the "first consort’: it ie, of course, tho Skt, 
paini Tet ‘wife’; but a by-form is padmi, which, perhaps, might be connected with 
the Skt. Padma T=S77 (alternation a or à : 2), Visnu’s consort, or with padmini 
ufaat ‘i woman of tbe first olaes’ (-¢ instead of -inā). In tho same language mas. 
tapa was used in the sense of tapa ‘asceticism’. 

Or a word may adopt a form originally belonging to another word which 
has, or appears to have, been ousted : in Mod. Jav. the lit. kumara moans ‘jowel’, 
and, further, 'es-enco', echo, reverboration’ and ‘vital spirit. The former mean- 
ing may be believed to bave properly belonged to lit. Jav. kumala "jewel; car- 
buncie’ (to be connected with Skt. kamala- SAG ‘rose-coloured’ ?). Tho other 
applications of kumara are not clear to me; the etymology given by H. Kern in 
Goricke-Roorda’~ Dictionary (Skt. mara- 4X ‘dying, death’ (one of tho explana- 
tions given by lexicographers is: ‘the voice uttered by a dead person’, or the 
‘apparition of a dead person’)) is highly improbable. 

A curious instance of ‘contamization’ is the Jav. wigati. According to 
Gericke’ it means ‘to be successful or prosperous, to succeed’; the word has been 
connected with Skt. wghatin. fam ‘opposing, preventing’; one might, however, 


prefer deriving it from a-vighata. AATA ‘unimpeded’ otc. Other, likewise obso- 
lete, regional or literary meanings are "important, serious; seriousness’; ‘aim, 
purport’, and : ‘sexual intercourse. The last originally belonged to Skt. samgati- 
&ufa, whereas such meanings as ‘happy issue, aim etc.’ can be brought into con* 
nection with Skt. etc. gati- «fs, which in Javanese came to express the notions of 
"going, nne of proceeding, seriousness, importance, important', and 'soxual 
Intercourse. 
Lit. Jav. kulita ‘intimate, being on familiar terms’ may be considered & 
blending of Skt. akalita- *mafza ‘tied, fastened’ and kulina- GEA ‘belonging to the 
family which is the Jav. kulina ‘acquainted, accustomed’. Part of the meaning 
of the pen pond sampurna (Bit. sampūrņa- dq ‘completely filled, entire’) in 
CUm al m E i s in Javanese), (ji) ‘divappear(od)’ is no doubt 
In classical Mala Ko kg ed DOLOR: « ’ 

The phra-e cara bahasa as ian Someshing like the English ‘way’ or manne X 
the Malay way’, A ps gee pur good maunery’; cara Mēlayu means i 
a Cina "to ask or inquire ( native ba-e tanya) in 


Chinese’. In modern usa : 

D e the i f 

Cara eara modern ‘in the rasi i of method, style’ can, too, be oxpre- sed by 

arranging’) pér-kata.an ‘wordu ^y, On modern lines’; cara mé-nyusun ("arranB0» 

the word is used to conve th prgēcas style (in the literary sense)’. In Sundanese 
Y tho cenge of ‘like, in tho manner of..." but aleo that O 

CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SAN a 
EN ANSKRIT IN INDONES 
p : Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati NESIA 
‘ag i077 (ag) for... In Modern.Javanes Chennalande Sandon 871 
5 é e th t ExG-— 
pas NOV been discarded, but to express ʻi the meaning ‘customs. wa A 
ae to express in the ms way, ri 
ibis gtill in uc. In colloquial usage cara he m&nner of.. A in kāri right manner 
€ M * * tae 
means ugually. The verbal derivatives ne (-na can be sud E language ote. 
ayh ~ S S co 7 j : 
wolcone courteously, to deal with in an šai ey the meaning of peor adverba) 
3 2 ana 1 : In 
Jo this sense and especially in that of a or urbano way, t o Invite or to 
n ti dA; me sy 
pase- word and this provides us wi'h th kaa oC asā) treat well eto? 

: i 1 sbr " s acar gi 
qm ‘going, proceeding ote.’ which is e ctymological clue: it i Cara servos as g, 

‘ haviour; : is at the rcot +16 1s not the Sk 
(good) bobaviour; practico, usage, e-tab of the loan-word, b it. cara- 
"b -fabli«h i : 
Javanese P rno alredās 60) ii ablirbed rule of cond m , ug ücüra- STAN 
Á TS Ca Too u m h 
But tho sense in which the Modern.J cüra- ūcūra to ded etc.. In Middle- 
Jav 
of Skt. upacara- STAI wi me OE verbs are us conduct, manner’ 
/ It act of civility, obligi are used remind ner’, 
meaning, like that of ‘marka of hono , obliging behaviour; cond 8 US strongly 
. : D E E H 4 ui z 
derivativo paz-acara in Middle-Java ur, homage’, is also aoar aR etc. and this 
form pacara. Šo, we may MA C texts. Van der Tuuk? y cara and the 
; u ü "e i 
having suffored shortening survive ge that acara- SII end M mentions the 
io * rel T A patāra- 

The Skt. palse- TF has n the Mod. Jav. caza. ra- TTAR after 

aie oni: ws preserved it 
whore ‘inclination, resolution’ Preserved ite meaning ‘opinion’ 

3 qM n, resolution' are found in addi S opinion in Old-J 
ings : ‘insistence, pressure, pors und in addition. The (now ob -Javanese, 
may be considered as zm M wanting oagerly TN solete) mean- 
whether the lit. plaksana E PO resoluteness ete." Now rs oing, compelling’ 
blending of qms ( £ hsana forced, punished; ex ie question arisos 
I : rd and léksana whi ; exemplary punish UP 
av. baee for 'eati-fied (of one' vhieh apart from other use s 
1 nes wi he-) d £O, £ ; 
expresses the sense of ‘aim, obj 8 si bes) <Skt. laksana- &jm , Gas as a lit. 
Morning’. zim, object and, in OJav., N; - , which, inter alia, 
? ` rivetive- E ; 

A word - tive» for executing 
UL. uparatga might have b < : 
Eon; adori hent on c ece een Sanskrit, bug the lit. J 
adorned; : n quite well be explai i. Jav. uparéiga 
4 padding inst tole Splained as a biending g 
e stro to’ < Skt, raige- TE” : ing of Jav. rai 

k F colour, paint! and ong 

, and Skt. upari E 

In addition to th E 
formati e cases of blending : 

ions due to ading of Joans with nati 
procedi popular etymology vith native elemonts 

eceding chapter ymology end other sucl Ba SENN 
onini pter, we now pr eh processes discu ; 
pinions on other words i proceed to make some remarks and s-ed in the 
ab work rda in the hi-tory : s aud venture 

; emphasizit y of which such influon Mes 

asiziug, however influences must 

NA ED ver, the semantie asp st have bee 

£ T ws c aspect of the pr n 
he ar from natural th e problems 
n used as at a word for ' ; 2 
. > SAS " good or m sata 
ion MEM ynonym'afGvr GERD NOE en act’ should have 
^ I Se ‘ d E O Fem- qa a. 1 
leasing! must MR satisfying’, but tbe Mount 3 15, indeed, preserved 
Sit, iara. etse sikara, which is givea.ss ade ae word for idà maring 

NASAS C z ibo au i à Q 
velling’. is BR appropriaticdtarinn tale REDE Lu be derived from 
A ; the native sukēr * 8f Ovar---e5c.', in OJav. also ' 
ew s unolean; m. also com» 

Meaning an; obstacle’ may have co-operated i SR 

n . ated in producing the 
the lax ne of tho most puzzlin 
5 ast hundred years h g words of the Javanese vocabulary which duri 

berg ig bheganga E ds as ee occasioned more than one dozen Me 
e pro i i BAD 
problem connested with this term, which is not yet sol 


ved, Teg 
9 olves it C ; 
self into this : the word OJav. dhujanga, Mod. Jav. bujaiga or pu. 


Jaiga a 
Pparent] S 
Aa belonging z R, in anoiont times in the kingdom of Majapahit a learned 
Diritual and RAS S order’, a more or less official scholar who performed 
’ sionally at iti i 
dan stomcnglitigebniQAttipaion In the course of time 


- ga who composed the official chronicles and kept the genealogical trees, w 


iT IN INDONESIA 
372 Plitis avy Aj Sia] Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


pujanga became the word for, or title of, a scholar who at the samo tim 
poet and author and who served the king in manifold functions : it was th 


9 Was 
8 pujas. 
ho acted 


as a ohancellor and as a master of the ceremonies during religious solemnitieg, who 


studied the ancient language and cultivated the traditional literature, who coulā 
foretell events from the observation of the heavenly bodies and performea Various 
other duties asan adviser in the service of his lord. 'The Skt. bhujamga. BAT on 
the other hand, primarily indicates a serpent. How can theso meanings bo ro. 
conciled, if those scholars who have conuected both words and who aro in tho 
majority, aro right? We cannot aismiss the semantic difficulty by recalling tho fact 
that serpents are often regarded as symbolic of wisdom. For oven if this animal 
symbolized wisdom in ancient Java, why has, to mention only ono point, this 
word alone, and not its 24 synonyms mentioned in tho Amarakosa, been chosen to 
convey the meaning of ‘scholar’? 

Most of the scholars who discussed the term have, in my opinion, paid too 
little attention to two points : on the one hand, tho Skt. bhujamga- has moro mean- 
ings than the above-mentioned, and on the other hand, some connotations of Jav. 
bDhujaiga ave such that the contral meaning of ‘spiritual and learned man, scholar’ 
does not entirely apply to all cases. In a recent paper? professor Bosch has drawn 
attention to the fact that in an Indian inscription on a sauctuary of Ananta-Vāsu: 
deva at Bhuvanešvara in Orissa, which contains a prašasti or glorification in 
honour of the poet Bhavadeva, the word bhujamga is found in a sense unmistaka. 
bly other than 'serpent'. The identity of this eulogized Dhavadeva, who wasa 
man of letters, a scholar and a statesman, with tho author Bhavadeva of whom we 
possess three works is established by an epithet, which is as euch unique, applied 
in the inscription and also found in manuscripta of Bhavadova’s books.” T'his,epi- 
thet, Balavalablūbhujamga- sese tsrsit, has puzzled the editors and other persons 
who concerred themselves with Bhavadeva, his works and the inscription. Most 
authors on the subject acquiesced in the statement that the compound is a porso- 
nal title, adding that such titles are not now capable of explanation. Bosch, 
however, is strongly under the impression that the samantic change ‘serpent’ > 

scholar’ (he does not add : if there ia really such a change) has not become a fact 
in Java, but already in India, because, he says, we know that Bhavadeva who 


. wrote on ritual, on philosophy, on religion, who is stated in the above-mentioned 
inscription to have composed works on astrology, law, and sacred tradition, was” 


exactly what the Javanese called a pujaiga. He, therefore, suggests that itis 
persona] name or title of the great and famous scholar who was Bhavadeva, might 
have been the starting-point of the sproad of the word bhujaiga in this senso in n 
island of Java which maintained relations with Bengal. i , 

3 There is, however, room for an objection. Does bhujamga in Bhavadova ? 
title or surname necessarily mean "scholar, man of letters, ete’, because the per 


son who bore the title was an adviser, lawyer, philosopher, astrologer, and & i 
rary man? Were such surnames derived fr iu 
Tam not inclined to follow 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection.. 2i 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
__— ~~ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri i 


m 


' keeper of a prostit: E 
f ' ‘the paramour or D Prostitute or 8. "lover i ] 
prince» h possibilities of interpretation, Moreo p supply us 


“h enoug 3 5 ver, Bhavadeva ; 
NEST Balawalabhībhujamga, and any attempt to itera rc not called 
i jio 


+ this compound must be regarded as uncertain as long 
per 0 ts bala- and valabhi has not been established. : 
ele pwitostanding the arguments adduced by 

of the hypothesis that the meaning ‘literary I 
your 16 connection between this animal and wise 


men, scholars and persons | 
ead- 
P spiritual life being clear, I would ask myself whether the meaning ‘man of 


Jetters OF scholar in the service of me could not have developed from that 

of ‘a constant companion of a prince’, without any relevance on the serpent’s 

part. There is, however, an argument in favour of the supposition that the 'gal- 

lant’ and not the serpent has lent its name to a metaphorical uso. In the colophon 

of the first book of Visvanatha’s well-known Sahityadarpana" it reads: iti srimanna- 

rayagacaranaravindamadluwratasahityar avakarnadhüradlwaniprasthzpanaparama- 

caryakavisiltiratnükarü stūdašabhūsāvūravilāsinībhujamgasūndhivigrahikamalāņātras 
srivisvanāthakavirājakytau sahityadarpase and so on; the author, Visvanātha, is 
styled a Mahāpātra brahman and a ‘minister deciding upon peace and war’ (a title 
of a high official); he is ‘a pilot in the sea of literary composition’, ‘the highest 
authority to give currency to expressions in poetical style’ and the ‘gallant of the 
eighteen '? courtezans, to wit the vernacular languages which are jewel-mines of 
beautiful sayings of poets’. This text, which is perfectly clear, leads us to suppose 
that the ‘amorous sense’ of bhujamga- has possibly been used to denote court- 
scholars who applied themselves to 2 particular province of knowledge. 

As to the Indonesian side of the problem I already tried to show in a for- 
mor paper that OJav. bkujanga has one connotation more which we did not yet 
mention.'* In the OJav. Brahmāņdapurāņa the word is used to translate the Skt. 
sisya- fer ‘pupil, disciple’. The persons among whom the Veda was distributed 
and who took a part in its transmission are, like other pupils of reis alternately 
styled sisya and bhujanga. Although a pupil may be a scholar himself and is ex- 
pected to become one this use of bhujaūga instead of sisya is too freguent'* and too 
striking to be neglected. We would conclude that rather than ‘scholar’ the Eng- 
lish word ‘student’ which can be applied to any person who is devoted to learn- 
ing, be he a graduate or not, gives an idea of the meaning of the term under discus- 
sion. In the dialogues of the parwans court-bhujgangas often call themselves bhuj- 
Giga haji, lit. ‘the bh. of Your Majesty’; like other persons who use such pbrases 


88 patik haji ‘Your Majesty's humble servant’ they thus emphasize their subordi- 
nation, 


e last mem- 
as the meaning of the 


Bosch and other scholars in 
A nan etc. developed from ‘ger. 


pent’, tl 


With these considerations in mind we should remember that a considerable 
number of Sanskrit words ending in -aùga- or -a/ga- puso n to m 
palaiga. RIR 'elephant's turanga- tē horse’; vihaiga- as bird; pa anga 
id” eto, So RE pe M ‘she clove tree’ the Sanskrit form 
Maiga TAB's wag "s to the ancient Javanese authors, and the IN. form cor- 
"esponding to Skt. Kaliùga- fg ‘an inhabitant of Kalinga’ is Kéliù. Buch tri- 
Syllables in -aiga- were no doubt felt as Sanskrit and could, hence, serve 
Models to be followed when native words were given 8 more dignified outwar 


*PPearance, One of the devices resorted to in so doing Ba b is 
` H E . , 
A Nord with an element whieh-oleakssdyk%rāt HAA 


874 
EEDA be tho correct interpretation of such forms as OJav. kruraya ‘cruel? 
T DIE imay =i twful (ef. Skt. ghora- att), thoy may have n 
(of. Skt. brüra- RU and goraya awit M BONES o 3 rare 

; à d tho author and his readers than the dissy lable.'5 Native 
eee E nos extended in a similar way : by the side of Mal., OJav. reg. 
P M eto. tulaù ‘bone, harder part of the physical body’, the OJav. tulariga 
probably represents à "Sanskritized form. E Ea 

Now, in part of the IN. languages wo come senos te word buja&. In ro- 
gional Mod. Jav. bujai denotes à young, at least unmarried, man who does not 
possess premises of his own; sometimes tt stands for pug likewise regional bujaj. 
an "a regular farmhand’; in the sense of porter, co lie the word ia now obsolete, 
Tn Sundanese the sama word indicatos a ‘young man, a youngster, as a kasar 
term’? it is a goneral word for regular servants, be they mon or women; ña-bujañ 
means ‘to servo a person as a bujañ, to live as a b. in a person's houso’. Tho 
Malay meanings of the same word are: in the firss place ‘free to marry (of a man 
or woman), solitary, calibate’. It is applied to widows, divorcees as well as to 
spinsters; also to unattached men working on their own. Hence, its boing asso- 
ciated with tho idea of loneliness : tiñgal mēm-bujaū. ‘to live by oneself’. How. 
ever, the meaning of the word docs not imply eexual immaturity. It is, in the 
second place, also used in the sense of ‘servant’, whether malo or female. As a 
collective term pibujax-an designates the totality of the bujaz;s and also ‘a home 
for unmarried people’. Besides, pēr-bujan-an occurs as "a descriptive term of 
uncertain meaning applied to many objects associated with a Malay court’.'® In 
Gayo (North Sumatra) bujai means ‘adult fof a young man), an unmarried man’. 
In Achehnese the term is also used in tho senso of ‘page, footboy, squire, herald’. 
It is clear that the central meaning of this word is ‘unmarried, but sexually 
mature person (esp. male person) who (speaking generally) has been engaged by 
other people’. 

Returniag now to bujanga, mention must be made of its Malay applications. 
In the older Malay language a bujaiga was a ‘dweller in solitary places, a hermit’. 
According to Wilkinsou'? the word could also denote ‘a solitary being half 
dragon and half man’ but I doubt the correctness of this view and would prefer to 
take bujaiga in tho senso of ‘half dragon aud half mau’, i.e. in tho sonso of Skt. 
nàga- AIT, as a diroct loanword from Sanskrit: bhujamga- waa ‘sorpent’.2° The 
other PO applications strongly remind us of tho (osea usa of tho word— 
E is kā known, part of the older Malay literaturo camo into existence under 
ae T MSN Old-Javanese literary tradition. Ia the old Hindu-coloured 
ace 5; best a AO Maa polite or humblo pronoun of the first 
The expression yogi béraliman Nr RR a and VUES ss 
like this : ‘ascetics, brahmina &nd xtudents of en is Sco CEDE I gi R d 
with the group brahmana bhujaiga rūsi 2» fy Es religion?) may be compare 

Now in these Malay texts the words b en CO eT. d 
promiseuousl y, Beings which are first call a e i bujanga ave sometimes use 
in another passage, and the former a ‘od Oujangas are referred to 08 bujans 
person. And faiga ‘unmarried youth’ bi io eer e 
tho Malay word jaka, janka “young i » Which hax been considered a variant ch 
however also be taken as a shortened T PS man, esp. if of good family? c&n 

In view of these facts it would m of bujunga, 

9 Nob improper to ask ourselves whether 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized SANSE BU a Nod PNT ai and eGangotri 


Reser oon 


1 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
igitized-by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 575 


, wor 


0 
he 2 ; 
"neo, 19 


ebd bujanga, pujango does not represent either a 
d bujai (the meaning ‘court scholar’ diverges, it 

of the Ae bujait, but thore is a similar difference between the 
of "a Javanoso usage) or a blending of Skt. bhujamga- gin 
p of a province of science, (esp. of literature) and th 
Ras the development of the meaning ‘student, schola 


‘Sanskritizeg’ form 
is true, from the 
Achehnese and 
“attendant of a 
e native bujai. 
r' remains in 


NOTES 


' Gf Gericke-Roorda, Javaansch-Neder- 


Jandach Handwoordenboek (Amsterdam 


1901), II, p 70. 
2 KBW. I, p.584. 


» The papers on tho subject are enumora- | 


ted by myself, in an articlo under the 
title of Bhujanga, in BKI. LXXXIX 
(1932), p.253ff., and by F. D. K. Bosch, 


. B] 2. 
in ‘Nogmaals Oud.Javaans bhujanga in 


Bingkisan Budi, (a volume in honour of | 


Ph. S. van Ronkel, Leyden 1950), p.42. 
1 G. Hazou, Oud en nieuw uit de Java- 
ansche letterkunde (Leyden 1991), p.9ff. 
> See noto 8. 


* The inscription has been edited by | 
Rajendra Lal Mitra, Antignities of: 
Orissa, II (1880), p.8dff.; Kielhorn, | 


Epigraphia Indica VI (1900-01) p.208if. 


and other scholars; see Bosch, o.c., p.48, | 


nl. 
" See Monmohan Chakravarti, Bhatta- 


bhavadeva of Bengal, in Journal of the | 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, NS. VIII | 
(1919), p.333 and P. V, Kane, History of | 
Dharma&üstra, I (Poona 1930), p.301. | 


See especially Acharya, On Balavalabhi 
of Ramacharita and the Epithet Bala- 
Valabhi.bhujanga of Bhatta Bhavadeva, 
"0ocedings Indian Historical Congress, 
UA session (1943), p.70. 
ane, o.c., p.805. At p.717 the same 


au ^ 
thor Propores an alternative: '& young 


allant of Balavalabhi arsaa possibly 
E ? Village where Bhavadeva lived’. 
* 5 man's name Bhujanga occurs in 


80 P 
Mantadvijanatyah, 


ee a S 
o Rējatarahginī 7,91 Bhuj aa onh qur difficulty : W 


| '* Thero is also a chronological difficulty: 
| tbe date of the Bengal author under 
discussion can be approximately fixed 
; about 1100-1125 A.D.; whereas later 
authorities mention him, writers of the 
„XIt" century do not know him. The 
word bhujonga in the sense of ‘scholar’ 
on the other hand already occurs in the 
| OJav. Adiparwa which dates from 996 
A.D. Bosch tried to refute this chrono- 
| logical argument by relying upon a new 
theory on the date and the development 
of the OJav. parwan texts founded by 
professor Berg (Leyden). As Bergs 
arguments have not yo: been published 
it is not possible to express our opinion 
on this oint. However, we can already 
| say that a long period must have elapsed. 
before a Bengal author came to be looked 
* upon as such a great authority that his 
| very namo was used 28 8 common noun 
or title in distant Java. Tbe OJav. 
term bhujanga, on tho side, occurs aleo in 
a text (the Brahmāņdapurāņa) which has 
hitherto been regarded as somewhat 
| older than the Adiparwa. Even if this 
purāņs should not da:e back to the Xt? 
century —and this is nob beyond the 
bounds of possibility, the arguments in 
favour of the opposite view being main- 
ly derived from the mutual structural 
and stylistic relations of those transla- 
tod’ OJav. texts (see my edition of the 
Old-Javanese Brabmandapurana, Ban- 
1932, p.17ff.) —there remains an- 
dung know for certain that 


o OJN'BAtlagieyuddha which is gene- 


gne qx 


316 


Baie -—— 
rally considered as posterior to the 
parwans, was put on the stocksin 1157. 
n Dr. Lokesh Chandra was 50 kind as 
to draw my attention to this passage. 


12 As js a matter of common knowledge | 


- the numeral 18 is often used in Indian 


literature when a number of texts, the : 


parts of a discipline, a multitude of con- 
crete objects, a group of abstract ideas, 


etc. are summed up. ‘See O. Stein: ‘The : 


numeral 18', in the Poona Orientalist 


1,8 (1936), p.1tf. i 
13 Gonda, BKI. LXXXIX, p.25dff. 


14 In my above paper I also discussed 


the occurrences in the Calon Arang (see 
p.257f.). Other texts are e.g. Nagara- 
krtāgama XVI,1;2;4; 54,2; 64,2; Pararaton 
13;14 otc. 

15 Seo my paper in Acta Orientalia XN, 
p.826ff. 


16 T refer to my remarks in Lingua I | 


(1948), p.3691f. 

17 Sund. kasar answers to Jav. ngoko. 

18 Wilkinson, Malay-English Dictionary, 
I, p.159. 

19 Wilkinson, o.c., p.159. 


20 In his book ‘De Loetoeng Kasaroeng ; 


(being an edition, translation etc. of a 


Sundanese ‘mythological’ text), (The | 
Hague 1949), Dr. F. S. Eringa discusses | 


a remarkable Sundanese application of 


the word (or of a word ?) d(h)ujaiga (p. ! 


43ff.). In the Lutung Kasarung the 


bujangas are a group of (commonly | 


four) semi-divine beings, dwelling above 
the region of the gods, skilled in varioug 
crafts (especially smith's work) and 
willing to come down in a supernormal 
way in order to render such services to 
men as building beautiful dwellings 
clearing & terrain, procuring COE 


tural implements etc. Without suflici- | 


ent reason Eringa considers this word 
identical with Jav. bujaiga, pujanga 
student, court-scholar’ : if both terms 
should be identical he would be right 
in saying that this Sundanese meaning 
o 


Digitized by Arg Remaj X oysdatiaeOSibAnai and eGangotri 


| does not constitute the missing link 
| between ‘serpent, serpent-demon' "a 
| feourt-scholar'. I am under the impreg 
sion that this Sundanoso bujaiga Bono 
| aflinities with the beings of tho same 
|name appearing in the older Malay 
literature (seo above) which are some. 
times said to be ablo to fly or to be the 
children of a divine king ‘in the clouds? 
; Which is an expression suggestive of 
; height or nobility. For the time being 
any connection of these beings other 


=; than their name with the Jav. bujaiga 


seems uncertain. They may be regard- 
| ed as reminiscent of Indian serpent- 
| demons transferred to celestial dwell. 
ings. With reference to this it seems 
worth mentioning that the Indian 
Ramayana (7,23) enumerates a number 
of worlds, of which the second is that of 
the clouds, the fourth that of the saints 
, and holy singers, the fifth of aerial 
| Ganges and nàgas; further, that nàgas 
| are repeatedly said to dwell on moun- 
tains, e.g. in the Himālaya. But it ro- 
mains for us fo ask why those Suhda- 
nese beings are called bujaigas and not 
| nagas or otherwise. 

ļ 

1 


?! See Wilkinson, o.c., p.160. In the 
Malay Hikayat Raja Muda (ed. Win- 
stedt), we find, at p. 68, the words: 
laksana indéra dari kéyanam sipatnya 
enum bujaiga muda waisa, which has 
been translated by H. Overbeck, In- 
' sulinde II (Jena 1925) like this: Er 
| glich einem Gotte, der vom Himmel 
| herniedergesticgen ist in der vollston 
| Schönheit seiner Jugend’. 

?? See „Wilkinson, o.c., p.444. 

** D. C. Sircar recently (Indian Histo- 
rical Quarterly XXVII, n? 1) discuss- 
ing the epithet Bālavalablābhujaiga-like- 
wise tries to connect it with the Jav. 
bujanga; he thinks that there can be & 
possibility of its being a loan-word in 
Sanskrit from Javanese. Even then 
the semantic problem remains unsolved. 


| 
i 
i 
| 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


tied (N INDON TM ! 
_ —-Uigitized-by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai an 9 ango ri 377 


— SU 5 


c — 


SECTION 7 
COMPLICATIONS AND PROBLEMS 


The semantic evolutions of a word are not untrequently capricious and 
complicated to such an extout that a thorough knowledge of the word’s history— 
and this presupposes a thorough knowledge of the literary history of the language 
concerned —is du" for everyone desiring to have a chance to trace the 
conneoting links. Yet loan-words often facilitate this dificult tagk when their 
origin and original meaning are incontestable facts. That the three meanings 
siyen for the lit. Jav. krida 1eally belong to one word (the term ‘word’ taken in 
the etymologic sense) can only become clear if we take into consideration the 
meaning of the Skt. original krida XXI ‘play, amusement, amorous sport. The 
laet meaning is preserved in Jav. “amusing oneself (amorously)’; the general senso 
of ‘playing’ appears to have shifted to ‘being engaged in, oceupying oneself with, 
cultivating’, and the third meaning, to wit ‘labour, course or trend of labour’ is, 
as far as can be seen, related to this. 

Skt. šīrņa- Wot ‘broken, torn’ is at the root of līt. Jav. sirna ‘multified, 
perished, disappeared’, a derivative of which sirnakake is a base for ‘destroying’; 
tho ka-an derivative kasirnan regularly expresses the idea of ‘suffering a loss’; 
henco, I think, the regional nyirnani ‘to exempt, dispense a person from’ (by way 
of ‘boing without..."). 

A curious semantic development is that of Skt. firna- siti "worn out, de- 
eayéd, digested" (jīrņašakti- Htorats is ‘the faculty of digesting’): the meanings 
of the word in Old-Javanere are ab first sight so irreconcilable that the lexico- 
Sraphers have assumed the existence of a homonym beside the loan-word. Yet, 
they seem to be in the wrong. In the senso ‘decayed, digested’ jirna was well- 
known to OJav. authors, but with the latter meaning ‘decayed (of the food) they 
associated tho idea ‘satiated (of the person who has eaten the food)’: to a-njirna- 
alni they gave the senso ‘to satiate (somebody)’; and plants which have enjoyed 
enough rain were also said to be jirna ‘refreshed’, just like a mind (manah, Skt. 
Mana}. W:) which was ‘arid’ suska (Skt. suska- BH). In Malay the same word 
„PPears as cérna, which has been incorrectly derived from Skt. cūrņa- JÌ 
in ground, powder’. Being applied to the digestion of food, the word also 

"ves to denote a rodent ulcer eating into the body. 
topu Teteles In yor Tis se seis nos any 
2 s and the future; he can make his body invisi E ķi e pe dut. pM 
s. 1€ concealed, the cosmic spaces and the hour pes à kai: AE 
(M longer exist for him. In the Old-Javanaso n s aen x ade 
tes ive vinoga (infix -in-) is used in the sense wee d "s e n o 
teang kaitē like this; H. Kern translated ‘ owe C. hiie ette 
in th yoga’, which may be correct. In the Tantu E i HE ae 
° 80-called Middle-Javaneso idiom, we come across the fo 


M probability conveys the same meaning: God Brahma be ae QR s 
i ood ti : aa in some connection or 
tho by the object of yoga, or popfarmed KA Shasi Gpleeifeson ted by u and the 


Sod. As in this idiom an original 0 18 repeat 


ams Digitized bydgyesganīai RounEBUSe X Hērai and eGangotri 
EE rir tnt : BEES. 
Anu -— 
tly tally we may connect yi u 
meanings of the two passages anota CU od p te,') ; N ; nuga with 
Skt. yuga- JT ‘yoke : generation otc.). Now, in the Tantu 
rgo number of rākgasas; 


TU UN oo of Brahmi’s yoga is a la there. 
CREMA DEO to ontrival him, says: yan san hyan Brahmuyuga Tülsa. 
E magyugā eum (a-yuga and mayuqa are yerba genet ves) : "when Brahma 
creates rāksasas by yuga (yoga), I shall create gods (by y oga) È This passage is of 
some moment, because the conuvetion of yoga and tho creation of living beings ig 
here perfectly clear. As in lit. Modern-Jav. kan a-yoga denotes the father (a “to 
be in the possession of etc.'), the chancas are that a-yuga in tho Middle-Jav. Para. 
raton (1 and 2) also moans : ‘to beget a son’ and not ‘to have intorcourso witha 
woman’, from yuga in the sense of ‘pair or couplo’, though both words may have 
been identified. In the same text yuga repeatedly means ‘son’ : a-yuga ‘to creato, 
to possess a son >yuga ‘son’, like Mod. Jav. yoga in lit. usage and as a regional 
krama form. An argumont against the supposition that Skt. yuga- gT is the sourco 
of the word can be derived from Agastyaparwa p.383 (55), whoro Aurva, who cast 
tho fire of his anger into the sea and thus goneratod tho submarino firo without 
the co-operation of a woman, is also called saù maka-yuga ‘he who oreated (in a 
supernormal way?). 

A puzzling word is tho Javanese rna. Although Van der Tuuk? marks part 
of tho occurrences as representing a Sanskrit word, Juynboll? is silent about its 
origin. Now,in a number of OJav. tests, and among them are all the Ramayana 
occurrences, this réna, rua is doubtless identical with Skt rra- RT ‘debt, obliga- 
tion, anything due’. Wo have, however, to remembor that in lator times two obli- 
gations were added to the three owed by a brahman, viz. benevolence to mankind 
and hospitality to guests. It seems that this social aspect of tho rna concept had 
come into prominence in the ancient Javanese circles, to which tho authors belong- 
ed. "My obligation (rza) to you is equal to the Meru’, Rama says to Laksmaņa 
(Ram. 21,101); Jatàyu declares that he is obliged to help Rama because ho isa 
friend of his father : rna ‘obligation’ (6,18). Sita writes to hor husband that sho 
will always obey him on account of her great obligations (rua), Requital, recom- 
ponse, that is tho reason why Sugriwa end his companions fought for Rama; their 
debt is called rza (21,116), and tho next verto comments upon these words by 
adding that they paid back love. In the same poem 15,3 and 5 rna means 'dobt of 
n, which prompts a man to requital’.* In the 
/L TG means ‘to bo grateful’ (lit. ‘to know one's 
rua proved groat because they have rendored ser- 
S. Bháratayuddha 8,7 Krsna after having assu- 
Ppeased; ho took pity on the people addressing 
e reāssumed his former appearance. In my opi- 
to man when he was praised' >) "Wo vie s s un ak bs 
he was praised’. Tho native interpreters f VEM Rooms (ar please ja 
"pleased, glad? (Skt, tusta- GE) ‘satisfied’ Ar red fe Pogras € 
atid enak when explaining ra, and Van du R iarey E S aking 2 
lated by ‘find Pleasure in take delight ig? A Tuuk and others accordingly is 
by Mod. Jay. (obeol es B dn. The semantic developmont evidenced 

y y eto) rëna, (regional) rénah ‘to ti 3 sefied 
pleased’, and by Sund, rëna ‘satisfied l 3 P find Plonsure in, to be satisfied, 
be considered gs sufficiontly clear a AC v suka-rēna ‘vory glad’, may, therefore, 

"The Moa. Jav. karēņan ‘well-contonted, well 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
- Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 319 
: j to my mind, be explained from such == —= 
, god’, CAU» R 2 uch texts as O i 
digpoEe" > Laksmana that ‘he is karénan (i.e. ka» Jav. Ram. 21,88; here 


P gay3 to i E J rna-(am b : 
© follows his elder brother : karēnan means ‘undor ki kari = ho 
Wale hag 


been interpreted aa ‘pleased, well-contented?,é Tho 3 
a dingly, W33 dahat tusta i.e. "highly pleased’, The use of nē: explanation, 
"1easure, delight . 

for pl In Malay sénjala means & ‘weapon’; in the technical usage of grammariang 
m word is employed for a, vowel-sign or Vowel-point'. Min. samjato also de- 
notes & Weapon » and in J us” sēnjaiā is a krama term for ‘rifle’, but the now 
aisused hybrid dvandva sea (p. is & native word for 'aid') is equiva. 
lent to the Engl. aid and assistanco or something like that. Old-Javanese sañ- 
jala as 8 rule means weapon , and sometimes armour’; however there is another 
moaning to bo found: armed man or men, soldier(s), troops’. It would be rash to 
hold the gupposition sañjata ‘armed man’ <a-saijata (the native prefix a- expresses 
such ideas a8 ‘being furnished with, using, having’) to bo the only expianation 
possible. As to the etymology of the word, Van der Tuuk” gives us the option 
between Skt. samyata- dAd (ho probably means samyatta- AAF ‘prepared, ready’) and 
sajjatā ATAT ‘the being equipped or prepared, readiness’ (from sajja- Asi ‘prepared, 
dressed in armour etc.’ which survives in NIA. ‘dressed, prepared, armed’). In 
hoth cases the meaning ‘armed person’ would be the primary one; then, the Bug. 
sanjata ‘ready’ would represent the more original usage. 

No detailed history can for tha time being be written of the Mal. dasahan.? 
The phrase kain basahan applies to either "everyday wear or *bath-clcuts; as a 
rule it is a "loin-cloth' or some simple dress like that (kain ‘cloth, untailored gar- 
ment’ is Indonesian). In Acbohnese and Karo Batak tha came word occurs. As 
Mal. basah means ‘wet’ tho customary interpretation of basahan is “worn even in 
the bath’ or ‘what may become wet’. However, this may be due to popular etymo- 
logy, for a géla (Mal. "bracelet') basahan is a ‘state-bracelet’, although the sonse of 
bracolets for everyday wear’ is also given. In lit. Javanese basahan, moreover, 
means state-dress’. Ancient tests, however, show that a more general meaning: 
dress, clothes, article of dress! must have been far from unusual. These facts 
- to suppose the Skt. vāsak- ata: ‘clotb, clothes’ to be the source of this 
ord, 


term 


E curious group of words is that formed by the lit. Jav. drigama or dir- 
Jama armed, being on one’s guard, cautious (of persons who try to secure them- 
Selves fiom all sorts of dangers, and therefore resort to denial and elyness)' —a 
now obsolete meaning is ‘danger’, and iz regional usage we still find the sense of 
ch Uncasiness’—, jčigama ‘uneasiness, fear; cautious’, and cēigama ‘fear’. In 
tndanese (lit.) dirgama expresses such ideas as ‘harbouring a suspicion, keeping 
ip mind open to the wickedness of one’s fellow-men’, and, in addition, ‘considera. 
:Opinion'. These last meanings lead us to suppose Skt. adkigama- afta "the 


act of discovering; knowledge’ to be one of the roots of this group of words, which 


May e S D 
ty hayo undergone tho influence of Skt. durgama- ZUA ‘difficult to be traversed 


S in lit. Jat. means «danger? It is not clear whether the Skt. jagama. SEA 
ing boing’ has anything to do with it. : Y va 'mistert d 
Vergi Tt is highly improbable that the lit. Jav. cintata, cintraka us or ur 
SIL owes ita origin to Skt. Goce Pent garasa Noge OF Te dati 


380 Digitized by A) Fo a a ERERRA and eGangotri 


EM a form cuntaka'" in OJav. texts hich, as a sā term, in Bali 
means to bo impure, being under & curse; cure Skt. ee ace "Ba, SU 
‘deprived of, fallen, degraded and sutaka- gas pM vof de considered to 
he possible sources. To the genesis of the Jav AREE W or cinlaka Skt. jura. SUE 
‘nativity’ (hence Mal. jēniaka ill-luck, misfortune cf. lit. Jav. ka-jantaka ‘m 
ble’) has, howover, in all probability contributed. reins 

A word which was destined to spread widely over Indonesia was the proto. 
type of the Mod. Jay. prakara, which now convey ube) following meanings, tho 
firat of which is obsolete: (i) ‘paragraph’, (ii) Unten (iii) eh affair’, (iv) ‘caso’, 
(v) in case of, in the evont of”, (vi) ‘lawsuit, cause”. While roferring to provioug 
remarks in conuection with the third and the last meanings, we should romembor 
that the Malay pórkara, which represonts a naturalized form of prakara, meang 
‘matter, affair, concern, business’, and evon very vaguely thing, point, respoct’; a 
pērkara hukum (< Arab. hukm jurisdiction") and, olliptically pērkara alone meang 
‘a lawsuit. Now, the Skt. prakara- AET means theatrical dress’ and, in addi. 
tion, according to Wilson who did not give references: ‘aid, friendship, custom, 
usage, respect’. "The longer word prakarana- ARM, however, denotes ‘a troat. 
ment or discussion, a chapter or monograph, a topic or subject, a matter, question 
or opportunity’, and in later language it also expresses such ideas as ‘affair, cir- 
cumstance ctc.. The supposition that this word which 18 incidentally found in 
Old-Javanese (in the sense of ‘section of a book or narrative’) hag exerted influ- 
ence on the IN. meanings of prakara, pérkara cannot therefore be regarded as 
absolutely wide of the mark : the Jav. senso of ‘paragraph’ corresponds to praka- 
rana- ‘chapter’, and "lawsuit, case’ may easily be conceived as derivod from 'dis- 
cussion, question’. The question arises whether the shorter form could, in Sans- 
krit, also express those, or somo of those, meanings which belong to prakarana-. 
This etymology of Jay. prakara was however, not given in Gericke and Roorda’s 
dictionary" which supposed the Skt. prakara- HEIR ‘sort, species, class, way, 
manner, mode’ to be its origin. It is worth while to consider the use of this 
word. In Sanskrit kena prakareza eA ABN means ‘in what way ? how?, pra- 
karatd 8871 ‘speciality’. The ancient Javanese authors were acquainted with 
these meanings (sa prakara ‘of all sorts or kinds” ete.), bus while the Skt. meaning 
of the word when used as the final mombor of a compound is ‘kind’ (e.g. tripra- 
kara- A2 ‘of three kinds’), they tended to give it the sense of Skt. adi- mfz in 
the same position : landulatilamudgaprakara- (Skt. aes, faz, HX» XFN) ‘rice, 
gosam, beans and so on’ (or : ‘all sorta of fruits, 
Inscriptions wesi-wesi prakūra is used to 
iron’) <‘various things (viz, tools) ( 
have lent its form to the meanings 
needed to settle the question. 

Kern" suggested deriving the Jav, 
the Javanese or Javanized element, which 
It is true that Cheka-, on one hand 


igera. 


such as rico, sesam, beans). In 
denote ‘tools mado of iron’ (Jav. wési 
made) of iron'.'2 Although prakdra- may 
of prakarana- further investigations will be 


” DE (of authors ete.)'. We may, however, ask 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN 
E. ^ INDONE 
— — -— Digitizedby Arya Sama Foundation GHénnai and eGangotri 38 
: i 


Js jp pratyeka "detailed descriptive stat - z 

. sle ) has co-operated in creati ement’ (< E 

‘gach sins OA TW the Jav. and ae Es pralyeka. mA% 
: V 30 means ‘separ AP dk ms. But 

uld complicate tt Parately, re; Li on the 

vo matters, spectively etc.) this 


ans 4s 
gupposi iion Ww P 
So, ib may be gaid that the semantic develop: 
nob bē dealt with in accordance with the above r ME of many loan-words 
ing facts and ideas in definite groups. m her simple principles of ar ae 
pistorical processes underlying the Exe = ying does not explain th rang- 
Feat) establish the Been We change of which os 
often at bost) esta ish the beginning;jand the end, P 9^ we can only (and 
moro complicated history or suffered semantic bif Á Ert of the loans have had 
more and somotimes divergent meanings. Parti ureations and even divisions ista 
i š Ds S 
ostensions Or narrowings of meaning, the NEC connotations and caprici s 
BE Miko «bot annone WM WE of whieh often remains in d 
* H . . : 1 i À e 
‘continuity, lineage, family, progeny’ is not o i OJav. the Skt. Samtana- aaa 
We RR ge 8 nly : As 
ato. but also of retinue, and that the word y denotative of 'child offspring 
S " : ķi ; now - c ? 
meanings; Mod. Jav. ‘relatives of lower rank ol a wadays has various Spende 
‘attondants and also relatives of a village-he usc or nobleman’, (regional) 
WN caso semantic deviations come s: z l. But how have these special 
In his Javanese-Dutch Dictionary es a 
ET a: i ' Dr. Pigeaud vives fi s 
gati which is beyond any doubt the Skt. gati p gives five meanings for Jav. 
march; manner’; (ii) (lit.) ' 9 Skt, gati- Wea to wit: (i) (lit.) "goi 
; ; (ii) (lit.) ‘earnest’; (iii) (obs.) ‘i 16.) going, course, 
sexual intercourse’; (v) (res.) aim s.) importante, important’; (iv) (lit.) 
; ; 2G, ie : = aagi L. 
meanings as ‘difticult, M p icult; exaching In Sundanese we find such 
the iden of ‘looking bs e e; Important and the derivative g-um-aii expresses 
x £ aro T f jūs Ši t SE 
conscientiously, drain y after something, watching over..., practising 
` nese, How are these g the greatest care ete.; ka-g-um-ati-an means ‘ ful. 
ese meanings afliliated witl h r E rac 
Whereas Skt. sambaddha- da » cach other, ard HOY 
attached to', Jav. and Sun R 3 Hag means connected, coherent, combined with 
proportioned? ane Sund. sëmbada is an equivalent of our "well-shaped 1 
suitabl » esp. of a tall and at the same ti i SEE 
li able, proper, becoming, just’, and, ì ime stout physique; another sense is 
slightly easy Gino canhals a and, in colloquial Javanese, also ‘neatly, in 
are identical, but how did th e may be sure that the IN. and the Skt. words 
How must we aceou s ces Mee 
n 4 n 3 
tt; to suspect’?: th or the obsolete Jav. cakrabawa ‘having a presenti- 
ad Su P : e M does not, as far as I know, exist in Sanskrit 
n wheel, multit E ` k E : 
( "BY be suggested that the J tude etc.’ has no meanings to which we may refer. 
Which hag CRM - 19 Jav. sense of cakra ‘the sign for 7 after consonant’ 
eo : : 
vards uns traki; Es hattot a wheel) is at the root of a development to- 
en 1 enclosi Jui af : > 1 
ta , ng’ (which actually occurs), and, hence, ‘grasping 
o lit. Jav 
Ww «Jav. susra!? i = . t 
vas therfore Si susra’ is explained by words for well-known, famous' and 
ous" D 18 true, not unbesitatingly —derived from Skt. susravas- S9 
Eo is also Dīns original meaning probably was ‘to honour’, and as the form 
pation ier : Van der Tuuk’s supposition'* that the word, by way of abbre- 
Š leas i CSS : 
Preferyog. alysis, represents the Skt. susrüisa BAA ‘obedience, homage’ may 


_ OJay . 
authors use the compound bahuraksa, which is ‘given by Indian 


lexi 
Cogra phe 
r 
Upper arm’, SH balwraksa- UST, jn, its original genso of 'armour for the 
sin addition, that of brace ya Vrat gres falledip’eome to convey the 


Digitized py fayarSamaNr dus Bai RS hénnai and eGangotri 


n z es 


382 

a ing of ijas genius (of a desa etc.) ? Perhaps the intormediary meaning 
ean ae s a S AR 

x *protecting' in general, which is actually mentioned in Cordi and Roorda's 


ictionary. dE 
Diet m Vm proceding chapter wo have dwelt at some length on a number of 
those words which for semantic reasons may, or must, bo regarded as Sanskrit 
loans without being completely clear in respoot of the changos of sounds they have 


uffered. Let us now turn to a still moro difficult group, comprising words of a 
M üxlgacubs character whioh while rosembling an Indian form, do not, or nof 
sufficiently, tally with a'Sanskrit word in buth form and sense to consider it an 

1 


unequivocal Sanskrit loan. 
One may be tempted to connect the Ol 


3 
word musna ‘to disappear, to fade away, esp. ) i ; 
for ever’ with Skt. mukta- HT in the sense vanished, disappeared as far as the 


meaning of the word and the initials mu- arc concorned, or ilā Blu mocana- Ata 
‘(Ginal) deliverance’ or rather, tho NIA. (Hindi) mocnā atdaī id. if ono should Or- 
phasizo the occurrence of the n or sn in tho word; another guess was at tho timo 
ventured by H. Kern: Skt. moksana- ATA liberation, giving up. Matters aro 
complicated by the lit. Bal. musna ‘facial expression . 

What is the origin of Jav. mérsudi "applying oneself to, cultivating, practi- 
sing’? It must, to all appearance, be connected with sudi, which serves as a 
base for colloquial terms expressing such ideas as ‘being willing’; aa an obsolete 
meaning of sudi is ‘benevolent’, Skt. sudh gt ‘wiso, sonsiblo has tentatively beon 
suggested as the source. The form mérsudi may have arisen ander Malay influ- 
ence: in that language sudi ‘acquiescence’ is likewise usual. Anyhow, the words 
in all probability have nothing to do with Skt. suddhi- fg ‘purity, justification’. 

A difficult word is tho lit. Jav. nawala (nuwala) or nawala-patra "letter, 
writing, certificate’. As patira- VA ‘loaf, paper, letter, document” ofton forms part 
of Indian words for "diploma, certificate, record’ (ef. e.g. jayapaitra. HAVA ‘record 
of victory’) we would expect to find a Sit. etymology for nawala also. However, 
the forms suwala, sawala, siwala, suwana, sēwana, aro also found to denote the eame 
objects. Further, Skt. $aivala- tau 'Dlyra octandra (a kind of green moss-like 
plant) was borrowed by the Javanese : OJav. šaiwala, sewala ‘moss’ but the same 
word (or a homonya) was also used to denote the lontar, a tree the bark of which 
served for writing paper. So, Van der Tuuk’? asked himself whother sewala was 
the original form du letter, writing’ (cf. also tho Jav. dorivativo siwalan ‘the lon- 
tarpalm and its fruit’). The word sewala, however, admits of othor intorprota- 


tions : the JOE explain it by "broken off, torn’; “dressed (in sombre colours 
and without finery)’; ‘negligoat’ etc, 


d- and lit. Jav., Sasak, Sundanose 
of objects or persons ‘disappearing 


A Although a Skt. mahambara- is not known to me, Skt. ambara. AFAT 'eircum- 
erence, compass (which in Old- and lit. Jav. has preserved its other sence of 


[1 

atmosphore') may be supposed to | i s | 
be not alien to th A extraordi- 

nary? (<‘of a great compass’), SUUS el 


NOTES 


' By Wilkinson, MED, Ma : 
= KBW. I peg ele Juynboll, Wāl., p.466. 


4 A jn 
: ^ Stanza 15,4 may bo considered an 10 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Colléction. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


=== —Digitized-by-Arya-Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 383 
ak commentary: TI, p.998. BENE — 
gtru ko Poorbatjaraka and Hooykaas, '2 Compare also KBW. IV. 575 
pee sa- Yuddha (translated), (Datavia- '? Kern, VQ, x 161. gos. 
ot Bhāreta- Yuddha 11,10. ** Bee Gericke-Roorda, o.c. T, p.809 
; gpw. III, p.315. '5 KBW. IIT, p.188. B 
s Bec NY remarks in BKI. C, p.163. '7 In Gericke-Roorda, o.c. TI, p.499. 
, Of, alo KBW. I, p.172. ķi See Gericke-Roorda, o.c. IT, p.791. 
» (t. KBW. I, p.574. ° KBW. IIT, p.229, 


" Goricke-Roord a, Handwoordenboek, 


SECTION 8 
SPECIAL SEMANTIC CHANGES IN THE LANGUAGES OF 
LITERATURE AND COURTESY 


Part of the semantic and etymological puzzles can, however, be solved if 
we succeed in finding Ariadne’s clue in a particular section of the great Iabyrinth 
of the Javaaeso literary language and in penetrating tho devices used in forming 
Krama-terms. 

Javaneso and Malay poets and copyists, who were, generally, fond of 
learned and high-sounding terms committed such mistakes as ambruhmaga or 
ambrahmarga (which has of course nothing to do with Skt. brahma) instead of Skt. 
ambüromárga- AAAI ‘moving in the sky’. T5Sy sometimes confounded or blend- 
ed such Skt. words as prasista- ANE ‘ordered’ and pratistha fī ‘steady’. In 
this these Indonesians held their own with other peoples, for half-cultivated Ruro- 
pean people mistake bascule for capsule and even Voltaire used the high-sounding 
Spanish word alfange ‘sword’ when he intended to write phalange ‘host’. Not in- 
frequently, such malapropisms, by being repeated, become usual: in English 
slang elocution is used for ‘dying in tho electric chair. Thus, in Jav. literature 
Tananga<Skt. raņānga- YU ‘sword’ is veed instead of the likewise occurring 
fanañgana < Ski. ranaigana- waa "battle-place'. Beside Jav. suguh ‘reception (of 
A guest)’ sugai, sogat, sugata occur ae regional krama, which are, probably, as to 
their form heirs of OJav. sugata < Skt. sugata- JAA ‘who has fared well. who has 
i good timo’, The Jav. suguh may have exerted influence, and the loss of the final 
4 hus Javanized the word. 

The Skt. avicarita- aama "unconsiderod, certain; unhesitatingly’ was also 
sed in the sense of ‘discussing’ in OJav. texts; no doubt because of wicarita 'ex- 
Patiating’ < Skt, vicarita. faxnfia ‘deliberated’. In lit. Jav. awicarita even means 
na many tales’, ‘tale, narrative’ being carita < Skt. carita- pos — E 
"ben res. Other meanings given to the word by authors viki aaE 

Utiful, pleasant to tho eyo or to the ear’ and well-contented : H 
N Sanskrit udaya- Sea moans rise (of the sun eic.) and also ihe centeng 
een (behind which the sun is believed to rise). pens secon? sl 
Word nds udayagiri- sqai ond. Aa aaa peat alae M C 


& 
for Mountain’ are likewise well known. 


Mounta 


nS 


Digitized by ANS FARA RPUPRAVON rient and eGangotri 
384 ad C 


mean "nountain-top'. It is moreover, in a curious Way algo 
dadhi- sz). The native phenomenon of Auslaut=varja. 
be foreign to this change of meaning. 
The Sund. banawasa "forest, esp. a large forest P by wany wild 
‘mals’ is doubtless the Skt. vanavüsa- 44414 dwelling in a onest This ori. 
anima > A, PES n Oav texts. In this connection the sense given 
ginet M Tay came Sundaneso is worthy of mention : 'a strap with two 
M RE teh deer’: cf. Mal. bélantara "forest" < Skt. 


Jav. udaya alone can 
, - 

used for ‘ocean’ (Skt. u i 

tion’ can hardly be supposed to 


io balantara ; 
R ū i rest to ca 
noo:ee, stretched in a fores : 
Baa: qarat forest (in oblique cases, the plur al ote.). xe 
The lit. Jav. wiwat(i) ‘ogling may have originated in a misunderstood 
siaa, ujjivali ssi tad! ‘returning to life, a process which NEE 
3 


Skt. ujjival- S A de: 
» z The lit. Jav. wéreita ‘worm’ apparently 


a rule, attended by opening the EXC: 
represents Skt. vricika- gare ‘scorpion’. 

Such mistakes and confusions also arose when a loan-word and a native 
element resembled each other in outward appearanco. : Thus in medieval Java. 
nese wilasa or sih-wilasa is found in the sense of favour, mark of favour, 
affection’. In older texts, as in Sanskrit, wilāsa- ASIA means ‘sport, play’. Tho 
change of meaning may have taken place under the influence of the native wélas 
‘compassion’. 2 

‘Semantic rapprochement could also occur when a lcan-word came to be 
used as a courteous substitute: Skt. icch@ g*8I means ‘wish, desire, inclination’, 
in OJav. texts it stands for ‘wish, glad; rejoico, to one's heart’s content’, the krama 
Mod. Jav. eca<pref. aticcha expresses such ideas as ‘at one's ease, nice, agree- 
able etc. which already belonged to the OJav. enak which is now ngoko beside eca. 

À curious instance of complicate development possible in the Javanese voca- 
bulary of courtesy concerns the Skt. loan wande. In Sanskrit vandhya- 4*9 means 
‘barren, unproductive (of women, female animale, plante), fruitless, defoctive, use- 
less etc.'. Hence Jav. (reg. kr.) wande in the sense of ‘being abandoned, failing to 
come off or to take place. As‘the Jav. equivalent wurun, which is the common 
ngoko term, tesembles the word for ‘booth, stall’, waruù, wande came to serve also 
as a krama substitute for this idea. The common krama besido wuruù, however, 
is sande which in modern Javanese is reg. krama for ‘cloth, woven fabric (as mer- 
cbandise); in ancient texts a sasande (redupl.) is a ‘shopkeeper’ (cf. warui). Tho 
pord sande=wurui iteelf may probably be connected with Skt. asadhya- ATWA 
nof proper to be accomplished’. On the other hand, Jay. kr. sade which means 'ecl- 
ling, crying merchandise’ may represent Skt. sadhya- RIT ‘to be propared, effected, 
brought about”. i 

In rewriting and adapting ancient epic legendary and mythological narra- 


mā S 
tives the Javanese authors could not; always avoid committing mistakes. We al- 
ready mentioned the more or ]e 


F ss accidental creation of new persons, bearing 
Banskrit names, from misappreh x 


ensions of an older text: Sagotra was born of the 
Skt. sagotra- A ‘bei A k PRIMAN, 
gotra- anta being of the same family, kinsman ete.. A curious change of 


C mn p of the Skt. padåti.- qarfa ‘pedestrian, foot-soldier’, which in Balinese 

in modern regional Javanese means ‘ox-cart ox-waggon’. Hore misunder- 
standing of tbe well-known enumerations of the Dr of an adian army may have 
E E giving this word tho cense of ‘war-chariot? In Malay, ioo, pēdatt 
or even kēndati) denotes ‘a cart’, i.e. ‘a solid-wheoled vehiolo'. ia Barce the 


meaning has even shifted to ‘a 
wheel of a Waggon’; and ‘a spool on which thread 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
——-- Digitized by-Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 885 


E “ae That in lit. Javanese andakara (antakara) 


came to denote ‘th ; 
g wou istake : Skt. kara. Seq 9 the sun’ can 
i y be due to 8 mistake : Skt. andhakara- AISIT means "dark; darkness”, 


akt. kūtara= BIA ‘cowardly, timid, faint-hearted, discouraged’ w 

i Old-Javanese authors in its original sense. To MS vas often 
used bY = META S cre S Our surprise later literary 
Ronsistently give 16 bhe sense ot visible, obvious, apparent; to appear’. We 
«an only account ton this È assuming that the native was, waswas, uwas undecided, 
positating which was used EE a Sy eight of katara ‘faint-hearted’ was identified, 
or brought into connection, with OJav. was, awas; Mod. Jav. awas ‘seeing, visible 
ote, or ÉO expross ourselves otherwise, that katara after being considered equiva. 
lent bo was, ULAS, was also used as a synonym for was, awas. 

Skt. wpadhi- gufa porgi of view, aiw’ and upaya- ITA ‘approach, expedient, 
stratagem, means of success have, etymologically speaking, nothing to do with 
each other. In Jav. literature the former served as a substitute for the native 
golèk *to look for'; beside this loan-word aroso a now obsolete krama” form upados, 
which was, however, also brought into connection with upaya(< Skt. upaya- S971) 
‘expedient, artifice, ruse’. The latter in its derivatives likewise assumed the sense 
of ‘looking for, trying to find’. Nowadays ‘looking for’ is golèk in ngoko and pados 
(<upados) in krama. 

In limited speech-co:nmunities, e.g. in tho world of slang and in the circles 
who introduced Javanese court-terms the so-called ‘dérivation synonymique' is 
repeatedly resorted to. Availing themselves of the fact that a word may have two 
‘or more meanings the speakers like to regard the synonyms answering to each 
meaning as interchangeable : in Javanese probably in a limited community, rdadun 
manuk lit. ‘in the fashion of a bird’s cord’ means ‘at intervals’, because dadun 
manuk= kala means ‘cord’ (esp. ‘snare’; it was derived from Skt. kala S€t ‘inge- 
nuity’) and kala-kala (<Skt. kala- 418 ‘time’) ‘at intervals’. 

It would seem to me that the phrases guru bakal ‘raw materials, tribute in 
kind’ and guru dadi ‘product, taxes in cash’ are to be explained from the synonymy 
of guru (Skt. guru- TE heavy) and Jav. bwat ‘heavy’, anothéP word bwat meaning 
“materiale, product’. 

As a result of the above survey we may say that there is ample evideuce 
with regard to semantic leapings in the "special languages of Java. One of the 
methods used in Javanese krama and krama inggil, indeed, consists of semantic 
change : metaphors, euphemisms, specialized and other traneferred meanings. For 
instance, native word for ‘lay to rest’, nyarekake, came to mean ‘bury’. In official 
krama Skt. zoya- AA ‘water’ is, liko tho Lat. urina in Europe, used as a substitute 
for ‘urine’. 

à As the devices uged in these vocabularies of courtesy are, like those resorted 
$ ; &ànd ag, moreover, even in the normal speech of small oon Xm 
antic leaps’ are far from rare, and sometimes of a rather bold character, it is not 


Sürprigi 3 : X 
Drising to find them also in Javanese krama. 


ane 


mon 


NOTES 


According to : KBW. I, i top- A 
$ ing to Van der Tauku Eae del algabstharnopinermars in Lingua I, p.333ff. 


169 udadi was also used for mou 


c 


V ENTE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


. OHAPTER VI 
THE REACTION OF THE INDONESIAN LANGUAGES 
TO THE INFLUENCE OF SANSKRIT 


SECTION 1 
THE @TRUCTURE OF WORDS AND SENTENCES 


Let us finally consider the way in which the Indonesian languages adopted 
the Indian loans from the grammatical point of view and the way in which the 
former reacted against the influx of foreign elements." 

What strikes us most is that, notwithstanding the great difference in gram- 
matical structure, so many Sanskrit loans have not only tomporarily been admit- 
ted but also definitively incorporated into the main IN. idioms. Although details 
of this process can be found under the rolevant headings in tho foregoing chaptors, 
we may once more emphasize the fact that Sanskrit stems were easily transferred 
into word-bases : Skt. mūla- 4% ‘root, beginning was in OJav. used to derive ka- 
mula-(a)n ‘origin’; in Malay to form pér-mula-an ‘beginning (subst.) and mé-mula-i 
or mula-i ‘to begin’; derivatives of bheda- WZ 'differonce' already early served to 
convey the ideas ‘boing different, distinguishing’: OJav. ma-bheda-kin ‘distingui- 
shing, discriminating’; Mod. Jay. beda can, moreover, stand for ‘else, different’. 
Gayo mulo<mula (see above) is either ‘substantive’: ‘origin’, or ‘adverb’ : ‘first, 
for the present, in the first place’. In Old-Javauese mamūjū, apiga, kapuja, maja, 
pinūjā, pinuja-puja, pūjančn, Kapijan, pinüjakin are so-called verbal forme, pamūjā 
‘veneration’, pamītjān ‘tho place of worshipping’ so-called nominal forms derived 
from Skt. puja Wi worship. From Skt. vrddhi- atz ‘growth, increase! OJav. ka- 
wrddhy-an increase, prosperity", a-mrddluj-ak?n ‘to cause toincrease’, wrddhy-a ‘let it 
increase, increase!’ and other words wore formed. Many loans have naturalized 
de such an extent that any difference between them and the native basis in deri- 
ving new words has long since vanished. 

Another point to be discussed ig the influence exerted by Sanskrit word 
forms upon the outward appearance of Indonesian vocables. | 

Like other idioms spokon in the Archipelago Javanese makes a very freguent 
use of variations with regard to the word.ond. Poets and other authors often 
readily availed themselvos of the opportunity offered by tho general language to 
create new by-forms and variations. Some types of TORO and AIGNE 
ae ee a e.g. the type rasa ‘tasto, sentiment (Sit, rasa- Ta $35): ras- 
a pe Suae (333 Wee) i malswa; wisa ‘poivron’ (Skt. visa- (49) : wisya, wiswa. 

y surmise that at times the coexistence of two loan-words has formed a 
model for analogous new-formations : Skt, ma Dri R R ; 

é kb. manusa- AIST : manusya- HJA human; 
man. As, moreover, many words ending in ya and i » 
EIOS in fangkrit Uus bor P En ya and in some other sl have 
AT: bērtya ‘servant’ <Skt, bhrtya- FA, det 7 Bere nerons; RU Ets brags; 
leni < Bkt, divya: faen ‘divine’ ois), o ouch won. i et RM, dibya ‘excel: 
literary and dignified and serve ag Am d 1.01 word-ends could easily bo folt as 
miréi ‘to hear’, tulya beside t a0 el for new forms : mirya besido the native 
» Aa beside the native tuli ‘i i ] 1 
Ammediatoly, at once’, and kamodya 


AEn Vaits amas dur in Middlo.Jav. texts. It stands to reason 
2 1 H 
"IO EB Seis and, tha SnaatGotetidunc y to variations of 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
381 


- — Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri. _ — 
~. kind have cooperate a croating such secondary forms: we also find din 
AREE gido by side with the same word tuli. E 
an Tn a comparable way pralampita which in literary usage occur hes 
; ‘allusion, prediction seems to be a literary Sanskritized form Bus ie 
; which stands for any figurative speech, such as allusions Ke 3 s Jav. 
rate’ is apparently a Sauskritized form of OJav. gunëm; Mal. EM 


delled on such pairs as Skt. prakampa- W&*1 “trembling (subst. : pra- 


were mo TE bling ( d y; Su tc 5 

kampita- qaqa trembling ladj ); mūrcha- A swoon’: mūrchita- ata ‘fainted? 

48 which continue to exist in literary Javanese. As IN. languages do not 
vy 


restrict them to the functions of substantives or adjectives, they were considered 


to be synonyms. 
Similarly, Sanskrit sets like anta- AFA : antaka- A-a% "end, death’ and the 


Ienglhoned stems in -ka- may have given rise to such forms as kurdaka beside 
kurda<Sktb. krodha- ta ‘anger’. 

The mere addition of a final a could, however, suffice to give a native word 
a foreign or dignified appearance : compare Mal. birama which was regarded by 
Wilkinson? as ‘a variant (for rhyme’s sake) of biram ‘elephant’ (in literary and 
postie diction). In the same language the form sékara is a still more poetic form 
than sčkar, the Javanese loan for ‘fower’. Such well-known Indian s-ts as 
mahānta- AZIA beside mahant- ARTT ‘big, large’, and vidyutā faerat beside vidyut- 
(iua, ‘lightning’ may, in part of the cases, be considered as models. 

When we come to examine the processes of derivation, occurring in eon- 


‘nection with loan-words as well as with native elements we find that some of 


them are, from tho point of view of the grammatical function of words and of 
thejr classification according to the principle of *word-classes', especially interest- 
ing. In the Middle-Javanese Kidung Sunda 2,201 it reads: kadyanga mii yon 
anabrai iù samudra norána kamodya...awasananya karëm madhya ni pasir? "just 
like a junk which crosses the sea without a rudder (etc.), the end of it (Skt. ava- 


' $üna- AAATA ‘termination, conclusion’ and the native personal suffix -nya) is : she 


sinks in tho midst of the sea’. Such locutions are characteristic of the Old-Java- 
nese period : Arjunawiwaha 18,2 ‘the sky is obscure and has lost its charm, sam- 
bandhanya huwus katon sai asurddhipan lumuruga its inberence is: it is evident 
that the king of the demons (Skt. asuradhipa- agun) marches upon (it); Nagara- 
krtāgama 79,2: ‘the oficials performed their task with unflagging zeal, hetunya ù 
Java learned to behave with His Majesty’s orders. It will be noticed that the 
above examples show various gradations in general meaning of the locution under 
discussion. They have, however, in common à tendency to become fixed, and to 
lose, to a point, their original (etymological) value. Translations are dangerous 
to go by, but awasdnanya in the first passage admits of the interpretation etone 
tually’, sambandhanya in the Arjunawiwaha can be considered equivalent to "it 
Comes about, because’, and Aetunya: which is very frequent, may be yum. 
by : for which reason, that's why, therefore. The Mod. Jav. mulane one -nya 
hat is why, therefore ete.’ (see also further on) must be mentioned in the same 


Connectio 
a yntactic function to a word 


Another device resorted to in giv « 
i à 8 soon 
Consists in prefixing the native element sa- in the aang sā cis M eat 
& : : i QUOT 

8 has set in ote’, or rather inche. frr SAA AU N m 


ing a special 8 


dv" 


le 


388 Digitizàà BPAB US daj ORGAN Chennai and eGangotri "i 


Bios, Mod. Jav. DM ‘as goon AS possible, and ‘at all times’ (notice the 
i isa) : the underlying loan-word is Skt. māsa. HIA month’, in OJav, 
d ` e Malay së-kčtika, however, sč- (i.e. sa ) expresses the idea of 
SS ra RE  dēnan sēkūtika "at once! : Tus ed od a periodi of 
time, 94 (minutes). Tho prefix appears jn E thirc S ion, ec as, 
according to’, in Jav. saupama, or PISIS in peel m 1e eyen of : Upama 
means ‘instance, simile, comparison < Skt. wpamü SIRT comparison, similarity, 
gimile.* à m" er 

Hybrid phrases are sometimes also instrumental in transposing words‘ 
(i.e. in putting them in another class, or, rather, in ielejā their original syntac- 
tic value. In combination with the native apa what, how’ the originally Skt. bila 
(<vela 391 time, time of day, hour’) and kala (<Skt. kiala- ig al (fixed or right) 
time, point of time’) are, in Malay, used to convey tho as when?': apabila; 
apakala *when(ever)?; manakala means ‘when, as soon as (Mal. mana where, 
which, what, how, why?); dila-mana ‘when’ or ‘if’; we also find bila-masa ‘at what 
time’ (Skt. mūsa- see above). It should be observed that as a result of syntactic 
shift, bila aloce can express tho same sense of ‘when’, or ‘time when’. The loan 
Kala has, on the other hand, kept its nominal sense and requires the addition of 
mana, apa etc. to act as an equivalent to our ‘when’. Similar locutiona in other 
IN. languages correspond to the above Malay instances: among the words or 
phrases for ‘when’ we find, in Javanese, wayah apa: wayah ‘time, time of day, ago’ 
(OJav. wayah ‘age’<Skt. vayas- "UH. ‘prime of life, age in genoral’). 

The above observations lead us to discuss a highly important class of loen- 
words, constituted by those which, apart from other functions, carte to bo used as so- 
called grammatical words, prepositions, conjunctions and the like. As is well known 
intricate poriodz, composed in the ‘classical’ Latin or European way of several 
clauses or sentences are almost entirely wanting in the natural speech of most unedu- 
cated people. Those Indonesian: peoples who are backward in literary culture 
likewise prefer a series of rather short and simple, moro or less independent, sen- 
tences to complex syntactical conatručtions, They can often do without conjunc- 
tions and the number of these words is in this idiom and the other comparatively 
limited. It may safely be assumed that at the beginning of Indian penetration 
into the izlands the Malay and the Javanese languages were characterized by the 
same syntactie structure. Tho process of speaking chiefly consisted in producing 
rather short uttorances which we might call by the Greek name: cola.” A colon 
not necessarily coincides with a sentence which ig complete in construction and 
expresses a thought which forms a wholo in itself; it is often no moro than a 
clause. It is characterized by the pauses before and after. Thus, in Old-Javanese, 
matapaa wiprayd sai, Ambilikasuta lit, "to porform ascebism (< Skt. tapas- AQQ) was 
17) of the son of Ambilika (i.e. Dhytarāstra”)', 
m tapas’, forms a colon; mahārāja Dhrtaras{ra 
pwa ri dampa sphatika, inastuti de sa Pandawa, on 


dhāri, they were seated on the crystalline (Skt, s 


. stuli- tēlā) to them’. Many cola are independent of 
ments of the utterance. As a rule, however, two or 
i 8 together, constituting a whole in themselves: the 
above-mentioned threefold mahtraja Dh, ete, may be given ag an instance. In 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA x 
p—— - ` Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Ghennai.and eGangotri 289 
om liko this the cola are often connected in the asyndetic wav y 4 — 
di tions. Thero are, however, many passages in whic 7, ve- ME 
conjunt rales £l. NE ae Which this simple juxtaposi. 
san was nob guflicient; then a conjunctive particle’ was used: wus pwa ya ka di 
n manik de bhattara Brahma mwan bhatļūra Wisnu, arp pwa E wann ruhan 
akah ikai manik ‘when Brahma andan had found out that it Sc Er Me 
W. wanted to see the lower end of it . Here yon connects two cola. Alfhoues 
Es particlo may often be renderad by that’, it can also stand for our ‘if, while, as 
to eto: Tho word wus, which in itself expresses, the idea of completion annie 
process)» can, in a sense, likewise be considered as serving as a conjunction : wus 
ķaruhān...arčp pwa: they had found out...he wanted” 7 when they had found out... 
te vanted'.'” The number o! native elements used to express relations between 
the cola is rather limited. But Old-Javanese and other IN. languages have greatly 
profited by the opportunities offered by the Sanskrit vocabulary to enlarge their 
stock of ‘conjunctions’. ‘ 
The history of Mal. karéna (or karna) is very instructive.’ It is the Skt. 
kāraņa- FIT ‘cause, reason, motive, agency. In classical Malay texts it can 
serve as a noun in the same sense. But when used in this way it can be followed 
by more than one word, or tosay thesame thing somewhat differently, it can intro- 
duce an explicative clause: ‘the princesaid : "karēna beta bērjanjilah sudah, jikulau 
„the reason that I made such an agreement was, if... '. In this way karēna could 
introduce a noun or a nominal group as well as a verbal group. In the first case 
(e.g. ‘he hated the princess karéna pérbuatannya jahat "because of her wicked con. 
ducj” > ‘(for the) reason of her wicked conduct’; or karēna tuankw patik digusari 
‘on account of you they are angry with mo’) the loan-word has undergone a 
development towards a regular preposition. In modern Malay karéna means 
beoguse of’: karina itu because of that’. When put before a verbal or predi- 
cative group the word came to play the róle of a conjunction : "the people regarded 
the prime-minister as the most influential man, karēna ia tiada taku akan raja, 
karéna raja lagi budal: ‘because they did not know the king, since the king was 
still a boy’. Aa karéna kept the meaning ‘reason’, i.e. as it continued serving as 
a noun, the group oleh karina ‘because of = karéna (Mal. oleh ‘by, by reason of, 
by means of, owing to’) is easily understandable.’ It has already been remarked 
that the so-called word-classes in Indo-Huropean languages are far from tallying 
with the Indonesian classes, a definition of which has required much racking of the 
brain. If, however, we compare such English instances as: after his arrival : after 
he had arrived; he laughed for joy : he laughed for he was glad, we can obtain an 
insight into the character of the corresponding IN. words which may be regarded 
à8 approximately correct.'? In the English instances, too, the only difference is 
that the complement of the introductory word in one case is a substantive, and 
in tho other a clause or a sentence. Hence Jesporsen called a conjunction a 
Sentence preposition. In the words uuder discussion matters are, however, often 
Complicated because of the original charactor of karéna and other such words. 
Originally it was a substantive, and in Old-Javanese the various functions of the 
Word wero distinguished by ‘grammatical devices : beside karana- BRT e. 
ronson? the derivative a-küraza oocurs to express th id bs Nee E Jo „a 
Y reason of, on account of, because of : in the OJav. law "text d y Jonker 
3 34) it roads : ‘if a person hews down a tree a-karana saking walat aving as a 
otira Es e nh intent to use. force, and maka-küraza 
notive : with intent to use forest, Pet saibi SR Collection. 


390 


Digitized ty gia PONANA Edna and eGangotri 


3 
means because Of. 
the word karana, krana: which 
parts by itself. Tn a limited group 


3 à y survived as & 
likewise obsolete, krana 5u ane tājā am fa 

HT a ; : villingly (Jav. alus ‘sof a ma 
krana alus or krana bēcik with a good grace, V gly b, fine”; bici, 


hapa ' ?by what caase?” (Jav. ñ « 
; "Bon? krana napa why ? by W a Jav. hapa ‘whe 
‘good, in good condition ); krana nay y pa why, 


through what ?’). 
It is clear that 
which at the time Sanskrit w 


exactly the same result as the analysis 
similar words occur. Thore has heen a shift, a moro or less important change in 


function which is not always easy to ascertain for modern Woestorn scholars who 
are often unvoluntarily apt to rely either on their knowledge of the modern phage 
of the language or on preconceived ideas as to tho structure of ancient Malay or 
Javanese. It will no doubt be of use to comparo the history of similar construc- 
tions in other languages, and English examples aro nob wanting. In such senton. 
ces as he turned pale the moment he saw her, and il is a disgrace the way he drinks 
the words the moment and the way came to play tho part of conjunctions'*, Yet tho 
question may arise whether the Sanskrit loans under discussion attained to their 
IN. function under exactly the same circumstances as tbe English parallels men- 
tioned. How far and how long did they, when used in this way, belong to the 
written language? How far were they naturalized at the moment of their taking 
the role of ‘prepositions’ or ‘conjunctions’? What phrases and constructions havo 
facilitated this change in function? Is would, indeed, not be surprising if, for 
instance, the very co-existence of such phrases as masa mana ‘ab what time? when” 
(Mal. mana "where, what, how etc.?), which as such could be used as correlatives 
in connection with words or phrases for ‘then, at that momont’ (Mal. pada masa 
itu) ete. should haye added to the connective force of masa alone; beside dari-mana 
‘whence’ dari alone means ‘from’, beside Xē-mana ‘whither’ kë alone means 
towards, and beside masa mana ‘at what time! and similar phrases masa aloue 
may have been taken as ‘at the time that’. No structural or descriptive analysis 
can be a substitute for the complete inventory of historical evidence which has 
gone for ever It is true that masa (<Skt. māsa- ara ‘month’, in Malay ‘time, 
geason, epoch’) serves as a connective element in masa saya masih bérusia émpal 
tahun, ayah saya blah wafat when I was only four years of age, my father had 
already passed away »* but such terms as ‘syntactic shift? (to wit from a ‘main 
COITU URBEM ae elo 
plain the ver 
the living language. 
M i uisus anto i te 
adverbial or conjunetive element : m i CMM dit): end ji ‘ho 
remembered that advice (which was gi sea a ee m AA B d qe 
‘beginning’, seo further on) at the yeh his V B un Ese m it d) 
Here the question arises as to how far tl Meng fore een no ee 5 ai 
a particular usage which had already cis ERROR V A Belo 
It is interesti Ras, 
less correspond hacia io E Words which in Javanese or Malay more or 
; Onjunetions as e.g. for or because. If, in Java 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


o profixes G- and maka- wero siy 
As in later Javanese the profixes : W ero given up, 
has now fallen into disuse, had to fill the P 
ofphrases, which, excepting the first, are 
ES : n DTE 
‘preposition’ : krana Allah ‘for God's ec 
; 


a close structural analysis of the first IN. sonteneos in 
ords of this description were uzed doos not lead to 
of a modern text in which karana and 


y processes which took place in 


former 


SANSKRIT IN INDONE 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation. BS and eGangotri 391 


- reasonable argument ig 
ng HE ad 
art of the utterance, the originally Arabic sabab ied asa Mes b 
s ion. 


r, the idea of causality (our ‘in consequence of) is emphasized 

;| is rosorted to. The original sense of this word, which M 
al usado; i8 ‘beginning’ : ef. OJav. ma-muvit (base wwit) ‘to begin’, Nu 
(subst-) etc.; Mod. Jav. wiwitan beginning (subst. The phrase awit 
qika which Konene meant huc from, originating with' came to express 
in consequence of (the last meaning is now usual). Isit surpris- 
de that the Skt. müla- A7 root, beginning which was frequently used in the 
ane meanings in OJav. texts, came to perform similar duties? Whereas the 
hybrid combination mula-buka origin» beginning (the native buka expresses such 
notions as ‘opening, introducing, breaking (the fast) ) has preserved a purely 
nominal function of this loan, tho likewise hybrid wiwil-mula stands for : ‘starting 
from’ (wiwit *besinning, begin’). Tho adverbial mula-ne (-ne often forms words 
corresponding to our adverbs) means ‘for this (that) reason, therefore. The same 
form, like mula itself, can also answer to the English '&he origin of i5 is...; that is 


— M 


e referring to a sound reason or 


why... In regional usage the word helps to form sentences or clauses expressing a 
matter of course (‘of course’), a fact or statement which is readily admitted (‘cer- 
tainly, sure, indeed’), or astonishment (how would it be possible?). Although in 
neither of these cases mula (and its krama equivalent mila) has the force of an 
English causal conjunction, there is often a causal element (this term taken in a 
wide sense) in the clause or sentence introduced by it; it emphasizes such an 
element which resides in the nature of the statements following one another. 
(It should bo remembered. that a word expressing such an element is not requir- 
ed). In part of the cases we can even translate it by ‘therefore, that’s why’: 
bapak lara, mulane cra téka ‘father is ill, that’s why he does not come. In other 
examples, however, another translation is needed : mulane bapak ora tēka, awit 
lara ‘the reason for which father does not come : in consequence of his being ill’ 
ie. the reason why father does not come is: he is ill’.t¢ 

Another ‘word figuring in a dictionary after ‘because’ is the Jay. jalaran, 
which before now meant : ‘the way leading to’; the transferred sense of immediate 
cause, motive’ is, however, extant. When itis found at the beginning of a sentence, 
it helps to express the idea of ‘in consequence of, on account of, in view of (a 
condition or circumstance). In Java the Skt. loan for ‘way’, mürga- At which in 
Old-Javanese kept its transferred meanings of ‘expedient, means, manner, method’, 
came to express also the idea of ‘cause, motive’. In Middle-Javanese texts margaha 
nira (i.e. mūrga+ the Jav. suflix -æa which expresses possibility etc., and mira the 
Personal sufix of the third person) can sometimes be translated by ‘in order that, 
that? (French ‘afin que’), but the original meaning of the phrase is clearly retained 
in such instances as kinon sira amérana ron ih tal pinakahēlara nira---margaha nira 
Gilayaia (Pararaton 5) : ‘...gave him orders to cut off palm-leaves which would 
Serve him as wings, which would be his means of flying..."7. Of course the 


Instance also admits of the translation : *...gave him orders... wings that he might 


dy..." Further examples of this use of marga however show that it can also 
ip adigakéna patih wurtwīt, 


answer to other English translations: Ranga Lawe dr A 
margane andaga marii Tuban, sira---(Par. 25) “Ranga Lawe wanted to be appointed 
Patih; he dia not got (this appointment), that was why he became disloyal and 


Went to Tuban’. In Modern-J@¢ah exe. she SORES oto PRO ue o s 


ection. 


a did Arya Saadi Ra R Poe pd eGangotri 
892 o a MM 
"a a strong reason) has won. The older form amčrga show 
x BN in m ( he: a- ‘boing with, having etc.) 
Javanese derivative Apred^ © £ i 
modern conjunction. 
The Englisb 
Malay, Madurese (sopa7a 
the first language, a8 & kram 


S à 1 was alread 
gya- STAT ‘approach, means DES ; "em 
ad in tho Archipolago, but avother loan, to wit Skt. upadhi- warty ‘aim 


ew’ did not fail to exert influence, as appears from the semantic dove. 
auch literary synonyms as supadi and supadya. Now tho 
Skt. compounds sopaya- atqui and sopadhi- anfa mean with an expedient Nc 
fice’, ‘accompanied by--.’ and ‘having fome aim, pein pley or condition, restrict. 
ed or qualified by some condition’ respectively. ‘Tho following line quoted from 
the OJav. Bhārata-yuddba (36,14) is an example of the uso of sopūdhi : sukama- 
tyaprai sopadin ucopēn atyanta kujana'? which, though rendered by "I would prefor 
to be slain in battle rather than being ealled an extraordinarily contemptible 
man? (in Dutch ‘ik sterf nog liever in de strijd dan dat men mij cen bijzonder 
verachtelijk man zou noemen’), properly consisted of two co-ordinated clauses: 
‘T would like to be killed in battle’, and ‘restricted by the condition (that): they 
should call me a....?" As sopaya and sopüdhi have apparently been regarded as 
equivalent, such examples of the use of the former words as tho following may be 
explained by referring to the original meaning of the latter : Sund. gös kakupinkon, 
supaya hilap dii ‘I have heard it, but I bave forgotten it’ (< ‘T have heard it, ‘and 
now one might suppose ine to know it, but there is a restriction : I have forgotten 
it’); boga karép rek hibér, supaya dicaùcai sukuna ‘he wanted to fly away, only 
(were it not that, German : ‘alleiu’) his paws were tied up’. Honce also the func- 
tion of Sund. supaya?' as an equivalent of our ‘if? when it implies uncertain con- 
ditions : ari dagan kajón lotik modal, supaya jalanna hade ‘it does not matter if in 
business the working-capital be limited, if only the way (followed) is right’. In 
regional Javanese the words supaya, supadi, supados can state that there exists a 
difference b&tween propositions which are placed side by side. As to the word 
supaya,” the original sense of Skt. upaya- is still apparent in such ancient locu- 
tions as lan wriù supaya "he (she cte.) did not know what to do (did not find a 
way out)? and in such an idiomatic use as is seen in Mod. Jav. caļētana: ilu 
supaya (kowe) aja anti kalalen?* ‘write it down : that is a means not to forget it. 
If, however, the utterance runs as follows : caļētana supaya aja tanti kalalèn, the 
translation is : ‘write it down, that you will not forget iv. A Malay oxample is: 
katakanlah supaya kita ātiar ‘speak that we may hear’. 
vāni Javanese, two propositions are stated in sucoession, tho originally 
Skt. bheda- (ÀZ ‘difference’) can sery 
hand, if however’, 


8 that 
was ab the root of this 


‘in order that? can be translated in Juvaneso, Sundaneso 
(n) or sopaya) etc. by supaya, the variant supados acting, 
a substitute.'? At the root of this locution is the Ske 
(of sncecss), expedient, artifico’, whic] b 


point of vi 
lopment as well as from 


e as a means of expressing our if on tho other 
j In regional language bedane (<bedanya, -nya being tho pte 
nominal suffix belonging to the third person) is also current : in tho OJav. Wirāte- 
parwa (p.287 .) it reads : amčkasakën raksasa ta sira, bhedanya tan kalon "ho sent A 
ab ('demon' Skt. UTA, with the difference that ho was not visible’ (lit: * 
Es his difference (was): he was not visible’). It would be a ureful under- 
ti PA <olleot a large number of passages in order to trace the semantic evolu: 
on of these words and of other loans of this category. 


A very interestin ee E 
g method of ; Kāds. ais A AoD 
CC-0. Prof. Satya: dicating causalify ix, in Gayo and / 


Digitized b AS RHIF Gadi cose and eGangotri sm 
- a 9 


to make use of the word Que ore ata, and, in Gayo, rüa)/* The word is ādā 

‘hod 88 eguivalent to our callss conjunctions, and to karéna, sébab etc. in Mal 
orl The dictionaries give such translations as: ‘as, because, for' (Datch 4 = 
ian) omdat toch, ja EU toch etc”). Thus, in Gayo : tari; Te d» 
jimbóm. we the frog droppe 2 e ind, for ho was not able to run’. As already 
appears from the rendering iod. toch’ (Engl. *whereaz), the word is also used in 
contrasting two statements —the Vaguenoss of these so-called conjunctions! —; 
thus: hana kati góró blūh we, atra no mokot kukedni why does he not go» whereas 
J had ordored him to do so long ago (notwithstanding my orders) ? An Achehnese 
instance ig : ‘why does that mat lie in the mud ? :: atra hana guna lé "because it is 
no longer of any use’ : here the original meaning ‘thing, object’—for this meaning 
and that of ‘property, possessions’ are also Achehnese, the word being the Skt. 
artha- ar ‘ching, matter, object—may perhaps, and to a point, be found: ‘the 
thing is no longer of any use. We may surmise that ‘the thing ig’>‘as to the 
thing’ developed to ‘the fact is that’, ‘as to’ etc. 

By another curious semantic development the Skt. loan bicara "a dat, customs, 
usage, practice, manners’ (<Skt. vicara- fait ‘procedure, mode of acting’) has, in 
Karo-Batak, come to have a certain conjunctional value. Without going into de- 
tails it may be stated that bicara is equivalent to our: ‘supposed that, in case, if: 
bicar a la kam mindosa, la ku-bére lit. “if (it was) not you who asked for it, I would . 
«not concede’. : 


R The Malay séraya has two ‘meanings’ : (i) ‘appealing for help, asking for fa- 
"vour or assistance’, and (ii) ‘along with, with, during’ e.g. in: ia bērkata séraya tër- 
sēnyum ‘he said with a smile’. Nowadays these meanings are so widely divergent 
that they practically form a couple of homonyms. In the latter sense séraya may 
be styled a ‘clause-connecting’ element,”* because it is, as a rule, followed by a 
division of the complete utterance in which the subject is not explicitly expressed ~ 
(see the above instance)" The clauses introduced by sēraya and similar words 
may, to a certain extent, be compared to such French utterances as apres avoir 
pris congé (il sortii) or ù la voir (on ne la dirait pas malade). Now the Skt. asraya- 
WISUT., which is at the root of both words séraya in Malay, was often used in OJav. 
documents to express the sense of ‘having recourse bo, asking’ for help, depending 
on’ (which is original). The clipped form séraya, sraya is retained in Balinese : 
a friend or helper, a friend in need; auxiliaries’. In Malay the sense of having 
recourse to’ has apparently been extended >‘resorting to’ (in a general sense) : ‘he 
said resorting to smiling >‘he said with a smile’. But in Minangkabau a more 
original use survives : sarayo ‘to help each other, to be partuers, to go shares. 
The history of the Skt. substantive saraua- A runs, to a point, parallel: 
the original moaning of ‘shelter, place of refuge, protection’ was preserved and 
extended : the author of the Nagarakrtagama wrote (7,2): lwir hyan Bāyu sixdatumere 
sakalaloka makašarana dita nityata?* ‘like the god Vayu he penetrated into the 
Whole of the world, always resorting to secret agents’; or ..- El pis 
ciems fieran of ‘by means of doveloped: and sarana came to be à 
The Skt. jati- MÍ ‘birth, form of existence, position assigned by A ra 
Pears in OJuv. documents not only to express similar ideas but also to rende 


« A ial. Besides, Jati-nya 
senso of ‘the nature of tege bros mary damen 838%"! ta ena the nature 
"t/a helps to form adverbial phrases) can act as an expression for 


£ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundati nnai and eGangotri 
394 Serer ASR RIT IN INDONESIE g 


—-— 


of things. The word jati itsolf can, however, express a similar sense : majara tq 
patik haji gopāla rahadyan saihulun riù usāna pindkanhulun, jūti sai prabhu gorg- 
wanumata (Wirātaparwa 12 J.) ‘T shall say that I formerly pas your herdsman. 
Quite naturally the king will treat mo respectfully and kindly’. In places the 


^ 3 A " y E *4* 
word even admits of the translation ‘so that’, the consecutivo element residing in 


the nature of the statements connected, 

As has already been pointed out, it is, in IN. languages difficult to draw ^ 
line between words answoring to our conjunctions and words serving ag go. 
called prepositions. In classical Malay terts séria was mostly used in such g 
way, that it admits of boing translated by a conjunction. Beforo a verbal group 


it expresses the idea of simultaneousness (simultaneous action) : séria aku datay ` 


ku-tiarapi sultan ‘as soon as I (shall) come (there) I shall lio prostrate beforo the 
Sultan’, or: ‘as, whilo'. It can also be used to suggest combination: A dan B 
sirta CA and B and O'?*; rajin sēria usaha ‘diligont and industrious (< Skt, 
utsaha- State 'exertion'). Besides, sēria malam means ‘by night’. As pērgi sērtu 
means going with, accompanying’ (Mal. pērgi ‘going’), and sérta, in combination 
with other.words serves ag a word for ‘with, along with’ (tho meaning expressed 
by the Skt. proverb sam- Ñ, the Latin con-, the German mit-) and ne, moreover, 
the derivative bé-sérta stands for ‘being in company with’ —-tho Min. sarato and 


saio <*sarta®® expressing similar ideas ?' —we may be tempted to join Van der’ 


: zu S c 5 
Tuuk?? in deriving the word from the Skt. sartha- WT "having property, wealthy; 
travelling company of traders or pilgrims, caravan; company or collection in 


general’; cf. tho instrumental sürilhena ‘in the company of’. This meaning was’ 


not entirely unknown in the Archipelago. It must, however, be remembered 
that the change of meaning and function supposed by Van dor Tuuk has, perhaps 
in the main, or at loas to a certain extent, occurred in India : in Hindi tho post- 
position and advorb sath M14 < Skt. sartha-, Pkt. sattha- means ‘in the company 
of, in company with, along (with), in connection (with). with, together, besides 
ete; cf. sath denā ‘to join, associate, co-operate’. "The Nop. sath or satha bas 
similar meanings : (ad v.) ‘together, as woll’, (nedod A) 
of, sath jānu to go with’; cf. also Panjabi sath ‘company, with’ otc. It is, how- 
over, often assumed that the Skt. samstha- čit "standing together, being with, 
partaking’, which in Hindi likewise developed into sūtha «18, has co-operated 
P pe such meanings ag ‘concomitant, (being) with’, Putting tho history 
RR. re Ru ee we may conoludo that they may havo en 
also; with, along with’. opnent of Mal, sērta??, lit. Jav. s¢rta, sarta and, 


ki As may be soen from the above exposition Sanskrit nouns and other words 
which in their own language did no 


: t act as conjunctions havo, in the Archipelago, 

T: : . E 
ise eacee opad 4 conjunetional significance. Now the rica arises whether 
nd v conjunctions among tho Sanskrit loans. As far as Old-Javanese 
' ar 18 positive. The Skt. yadi afg ‘if, in case that’ is repos- 


tedly found in OJav. d ā, in 
sig PS . cocuments: Nāgarakrtūgama, 32,6 taineh yadi caritan ila 


forest (Skt, garu)” m. us too far if we should deecribo the hermitage in the 
vadyapi, yadiyapi, lik 19 Bkt. combination yay api gata ‘even if, although’ is, 28 
» zewise rather often used to convey the meanings of ‘even if, 


even, whe p 
ja, ca C Pork EES bo followed by tho ligative olemonts a OF 
; ' RONGA, and 16dugpín Some SHEGE an indication of th? 


- 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


^ 


on is neoded yad YAE R Sed WP you tthe Oyun roan 

bination < Skt. yadi and astu ag, tho imperative, pu regarded 
is added it conveys tho idea of ‘oven ip, Later on it was abbr 

qyastton In Balinese yodin has beon Preserved in the meanings: 

although; or". A LRL CO of she semantic development j 

Javanese literary meager eR ove words Were likewise retained. 

The OJav. vad that you, if you eic. must be explained aa the native gya+ģ 

(beside which wo find yals that 1, it and the very frequent yan 'that (he, she), 
ibat, if, why» while, concorning ete.". As far as I know the Skt. yad ag ‘that’ was 
not adopted. Skt. yath@ «41 is often found in borrowed compounds: yathasukha, 
‘according to caso or pleasure, agreeably : Skt. yathasukham ZY1 959 ‘id.’ yatheccha 
‘agroeable to desire':Skt. AAJA id” etc. Whereas the native ya ta "this then, this, 
he (she) accordingly; (indeed, etc.), then, etc.’ is most usual, the Skt. yatha 'accord- 
ing 88, 23; that, so that, in order that ete.’ seems to have been rejected. So were, 
to all appoaranco, yada AFI whon’ and such conjunctions. 

As to the San«krit connective particles, the dissyllables atha X4 ‘than, fur- 
ther, thoreupon’, api ‘also, though’, iva Z3 the particle of comparison ‘like, as it 
wore, as if^, and also ‘just’, and sometimes tho emphatic uta were in contradistinc- 
tion to the monosyllables ca, và: tu, hi adopted by the OJav. literary men. Side by 
gide with them Skt. asmat a«Wiq, ‘therefore’, anyat TAF, ‘further, moreover, athava 
aqal ‘or, or rather’, tathapi ats ‘nevertheless, however’, sāksēt INTA, ‘plainly, 
exactly’ (in OJav. also ‘as if, in accordance with’), punar api Farts ‘even again, on 
‘the other hand’ rendered ropeatedly useful services in connecting clauses, or intro- 
ducing, or emphasizing parts of the utterance. The word atawa was, as utuwa 
(ng.), utawi (kr.) preserved in Mod. Jav. usage: ‘or, and (presently)’; in Malay i 
survives as atawa, utawa and in all probability also in the most usual atau "or, 
either, whether. In Sundanese atawa is the common, utawi the polite (lémés) 
form: ‘or’. 

What has been written above applics mutatis mutandis to the prepositions, 
passing mention of which har, indeed, already been mado. Focussing now, for a 
momont, our attention on these words we do well to begin by stating that some of 
the Skt. prepositions were early adopted. In OJav. we find saha Mg in its origi- 
nal senso of “with, along with’; it has survived in lit. Mod. Jav. to convey the 
sense of ‘together with, as well as, and algo’. The indeolinable adkas AYE "below, 
down, beneath, under’, which serves as an adverb and as a preposition, is likewise 
Tepeatedly used in the sense of ‘under, low’, but it had no future before it as a 
Proposition. Other well-known Skt. indeclinables, though frequent in compounds 
(upa., Prati- eto.) have, as far as we aro able to sce, not been borrowed as words. 
The Very small number of native ‘prepositions and the other devices resorted to 
for indicating the relations which aro often expressed by prepositions, could appa- 
Tently meet all yeguirements. j 

Other worda, however, which originally were no prepositions at all camo 
to be used as such. The Skt. sarva- «4 ‘all, entire, whole, every; completely, 

"Mtogother*, which in OJav. ofton almost exclusively appears as tho first member 
HR Compound, ig retained in Balinese poetical usage: sarwa all, altogether, sim- 
Bly and solely, general’. As saruwa it is in common use to convey the sma 
Menninga, The Mod. Jav. sarwa now moaus ‘completely, entirely, altogether; in 

9 senne of ‘all’ it is ont-of-date. The variant sartvi,?* besides being a synonym 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


T8 
gnd ix 
as 2 co 


Jigative ? eviated to 


[n c 
if, In care; 
8 needed. Im 


o 


‘rendered by ‘among (them), 


N 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


. Digitized by Arya.Samaj Foundation Ghennai and eGangotri 


396 


of sarwa, stands for ‘also, and, and the same time, furthermore" in Balinese and 
old-fashioned Javanese. It may be considered a copulative element but can also 
‘pe used in the sense of sarta, sérta which has already been dealt with. 

In Sanskrit antara- AFAT means, inter alia, interval, intermediate space’, 
Apart from this, the Malay antara, which is a loan, can stand for while; and ‘bet. 
ween’. In the latter sense it is spreading in modern times. —The preposition? 
guna may be described as a word whieh has only recently found admittance to 
literary texts. As a noun it means use, ‘utility (<$kt. guna- WM ‘virtue, merit, 
excellence’). Before a mé-form (a verbal form corresponding, to a point, to the 
English ‘progressive form’) guna can serve as a final index: ‘thoy (the English) 
fomented the quarrel guna mémpértahakan kekuasaan Ingéris "(in order) to maintain 
their own position of authority’. Besides, it is equivalent to our ‘for, on behalf 
of. —As a ‘preposition’ bagi was not entirely unknown to classical Malay writers: 
in the Sja'ir Bidasari (a poem) it occurs in connection with a verb for ‘speaking’: 
lalu bérkaia bagi mēntēri ‘thereupon he said to the ministers! (<Skt. mantri net 
'eouncillor In Modern Malay bagi introduces the person on whose behalf (or 
the thing for which) a process happens. In general it answers to the Dutch ‘voor’, 
Engl. ‘for’ in various connotations. We may compare the word’s funetion in the 
“bazaar Malay’ of Penang (Malacca) ‘to give’ and standard Malay bahagi ‘to allot, 
apportion. As hag already been mentioned the Skt. bhaga- Wa ‘portion,-share’ 
«and bhage att ‘sharing in, partaking of? arc at the root of this loan-word. In 
this function bag? also spread to other IN. idioms. 

Finally the very usual Malay pada the origin of which constitutes a crucial 


point. When the group ké-pada ‘towards’ is considered by itself, wo might "bo. 


tempted to interpret it as ka-, which is a very usual native element for donoting 

the idea of ‘towards, -ward’, and the Skt. pada- YZ in the sense of ‘site, abode, 

position’ because, in the first place, this meaning may often be supposed to occur 

in such phrases as the class. Mal. datai képada nēgēri ‘to go to(wards) the town’ 

<'to go to(wards) the place of the town’. In this instance da£az Lkénégáriis more 

‘common. When, however, the action is directed towards a person (to go, give, 
bring, seud etc. to a person, to ask a person etc.) tho turn with kēpada is, on the 
other hand, most usual in classical Malay. As we have already observed in con- 

‘nection with other loan-words, such 'periphrastie? ways of speaking as fo Your 
Highness’ feet (or shoes)’ instead of ‘to your Highness, to you’ are well-known 

In Malay, and an original ‘to your place, or position” might be conjectured as 
"underlying these long since vory common and general phrases. However, this 
etymological supposition encounters serious difficultios: pada alone has in Many 
USER the same function 28 képada. Although pada may often bo considered a 
extent (eg dudul pada rts s ETE e Dol valont proposition to such an 
aja Loth caen bin Rai Lus place’; pada saūka-ku? "n my 
Do uds that memi E 26, properly"; tahu pada ‘knowing about’; pada 
- that it fits in with tho wide-spread polyvalent IN. 


‘prepositions. The Sanskrit eliymolog i i 
: y would invol i lo- 
“spread semantic evolution of thia word. amm 


- Some Sanskrit words &re i . 
A a uaed, in I i j i 2 
ideas as plurality or "proceeding in lik eim iren o ext 3n 


: em 4 í i : 
sama is worthy of attention, When Am ra E t adden 


Ore a ‘substantive’ it must be 
between (them); th 


at is to say, the ‘substantive’ 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


— 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA ; 
397 


|p —  . ^ Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 3 
= oF plurality of persons on things : marhata ma sama bapun i ‘il = 
rofers <Skt. hatha SAI narrative ) among themselves”. This use he cats were 
M to the Malay phrase sama séndirinya ‘one another, RA E. c dā 
ps TBat. sama serves as a so-called pluralizator, often occurring in Nc 

:t ig emphasized that the process refers to all persons who "ec t 

"ag collectively and individually, that all these persons are engaged 2 Ws 
ing tbe pzocsee: In Maray da word also O WERO such ideas as ‘being te 
gathot, acting jointly or in a body, all and sundry lalu sama birlayar ‘thereupon 
they set sail together’. In such phrases as sama pēsēgi equilateral’ (pēsēgi from 
sli ‘gorner ), sama padan equals, peers’ ( padan ‘filling, concordant’ ) the word 
conveys similar meanings. The idea of sameness, parity, equality also appears in 
such sontences as sama kaki kudanya ‘their horses’ (kudanya) hoofs (kaki "teet) 
kept time together’ and in the derivative ményama? "being equal,coming up to. 
In Javanese sama is regional krama (and the secondary sami standard krama ) 
beside pada which, besides performing similar functions (it helps to express the 
ideas of identity, of having, doing etc. among or between themselves, of being 
together (with), of acting at the same time otc.) also acts as a pluralizator. The 
plurality expressed in tbis way, however, implies the idea of ‘in like manner, 
equally, all and sundry’.°? Moreover, Jav. pada, sami and sama can also stand for 
‘equal, of the same size, appearance, value etc.. In Old-Javanese we come across 
such meanings as: equal, identical, likewise, all persons concerned, ( all and 
sundry)’; besides sama acts as a base for ‘comparing, being equal’. This wide- 
spread sama is beyond any doubt the Skt. sama- WW ‘same, equal, similar, like, 
eonstant, complete, whole’, cf. also samam HHA ‘equally, in like manner, together 
with, at the same time’. Has the Sund. sasama jalma ‘fellow-man” (jalma <Skt. 
janma SFA ‘birth eéc.’) been modelled upon Sanskrit compounds like samakanya 
RREI ‘a maiden of the same rank’, samarajju- AAW ‘an equal cord’, samavesa- 
TAAN ‘a similar dress’ etc. ? Curiously enough, the Malay turn is samanya kawan 
lit, ‘fellow-companion’, which corresponds to the Jav. (kr.) sa-sami-nipun manwisa 
fellow-man’ (cf. Skt. manusya- AIST ‘human being’ etc.) .?? 

The Malay ‘substantive’ is indifferent as to number. There are, however, 
some devices which enable the person speaking to refer to plurality. The arigi- 
nally Indian ségala ( <Skt. sakala- ASS "whole, entire *”, which in Gayo ( sigölö ) 
can be taken to mean 'of all sorts, all-kinds of, all possible’, is used in Malay as 
an index of plurality: put before a word it indicates that the object denoted by the 
Word is plural *' : sēgala rumah ‘houses’. Now and then such a phrase admits of 
the translation : ‘all houses”. 

In this connaction some casual remarks ma 
bub hitherto completely noglected point, to wit the influence of 
devices, of Indian stylistics, on the mode of verbal expression of the Indonesians. 
aan in one of the foregoing sections of this Book ihanay 5 vhi ae 
chis: ed through the medium of written texts was dines awe iE ea 
os] ve that the learned and artificial style of composing re igtous an a z x i 

„Poems, of laudatory and commemorative inscriptions» was early adopted an 
body cultivated by the Indonesian colleagues of the Indian Me 
men of letters. The composition of these texts and their versification wer 


modelled on the Indian examples, and many well-known devices of the Indian art 
of Writing "tans in tho elevated style whioh had become 
Poems and prose corngpasibignasln. WS Šhastri Collection. 


[S 


, 
y be ventured on an important 
Sanskrit literary 


598 Digitized BANSEBMR NINO Chennai andeGangoti o 
à d in Indonesia. Similes of a moro or less elaborato 
ier, l ad allusions fo mythological persons cum TOY A ap to religions 
character, EXE Kods long enumerations and dosoriptions of military exploits, 
C M o NES B une landscapes; natural phenomona eto. wore over 
M. and BUM successfully, wees by the poets of the Old-Javanese 
mer : ionted works. 
akawins in their lons um. 7,3 reads : wwantēn wëltik nikan wrëita 
quee in cüra core pracara, lit. "there Brag nay uuretine d p! tho news 
communicated by & BPY of thievish proceodings , 1-8- M E. kirdik through 
; who behaved like a thief’, tho series of four words beginning with w and the 
a spy who +. Ski, caurya-prakāra- At4-AR) in suc- 


position of cara core pracūra (ie. lit. : 
cession cannot be 2 mere coincidence. Here 2 conscious tendency to apply the 


so-called ‘figure’ of alliteration has led tho poet to choose these words and to put 
them in this order. Alliteration is not entirely foreign to native Indonesian 
poetry, and to the spoken Innguago it is far from unknown,*? but complicated in- 
stances, such as the ono which has been quoted, must be considered as having 
been written down under the influence of Indian examples. Sometimes a poet does 
not even shrink from modifying the form of a word in order to make it agree in 
sound with another word in the same line: Harivaméa (XII century), 34,3 the 
king Bhismaka secms to have been called Bhismi in the quarter of a verse in which 
the word bhasmilria (Skt. ARFA) ‘reduced to ashes occurs. 
One of the most favourite devices applied by the Indian poets is the Slegd 
ÆT ‘the junction or connection’, consisting in a combination of words having a 
double meaning, or of contrasted ideas. This ‘merit of artificial composition" was 
also readily imitated by the Javanese authors. Their lesa add no little to the 
difficulties presented by many passages in their works. Not infrequently wo 
grope in the dark as to tho poet's intentions : did he mean to express himself in an 
ambiguous way or to express two ideas, to relate two occurrences, ab the same time, 
or do we not understand what he wrote because of our incomplete knowledge of tho 
Old-Javanese idiom? Thus Barivamša 2,10, where a high audience-hall is, in a 
long simile, -compared with a mountain of fire —its roof consisted of gold and 
jewels were used as building-stones —tho poot takes the liberty of adding that 
the clouds constituted resting-places in tho realm of tho wind : rantun-rantunan iñ 
ghanajajar anifigilis i nagara nin samirana (lit. ‘tho rosting-places of the clouds 
can SA 
ix c M A dA no. q4 cloud and Skt. gana- NN crowd, retinue 
nq RM i N ich for reasons of slesa or other stylistic devices might 
> mur . à 4 can interpret ghana also as gang and conclude that the 
75 ved E or i ia ee pus audience-hall had osting.placos for 
which' words must be dei GS of Dwārawatī.'* Very often it is not clear 
is free from premeditated de à double entente and what portion of a verea 
the name of the well-known Da A Dic tke ora aioka Git. ks x ? 
the idea of "being freo from a. Ane peus Ramo ol SER An 
other polyvalent words in the samo real tiji6l0!d panpe, doce ib menn 
author, when speaking of a ‘ ate form part of the élesa ? And does a 
golden terrace’: suvarnabhūmi, hint at tho well-know? 


geographical name Suvarnabhumi, thi i i 
double interpretation 245 mi, this Sanskrit term (gadaf) being capable s 


traditional, were reproduce 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


ļ 


Digitizedby &yg Rena), Reungejio gennai and eGangotri 


M. 399 


Anobher &nd equally difficult problem is the following : how far were th 
javencs? dependent on a uc in resorting to such stylistic a 
"m found in mas M peg all over the earth, and how far did 
they follow lno E. pe "o ee ané in b eir own linguistic usage and in their 
irary traditions? A pan liko: yon ere nothing like a, patih (high functionary’) 
you are just like a head (patik) of cattle ** and similar witty instances show that 
tho Javanese ware able to mako the most of the opportunities offered by their own 
language Is thero any room for the supposition that tho Indians were their 
toachors in this art? Or that they, at least, helped them in cultivating it? Before 
an anewor can be given to these questions, the unknown province of Indonesian 
linguistics must be explored in all directions. However, as matters stand at pre- 
sont, it cau be said that those syntactic and stylistic devices which are of a more 
or less universal character : i.c. which use to oceur in many languages —and among 
them aro e.g. various typos of repetition or of variation, epexegesis, explicative 
epiphora, analytic and emotive constructions etc.*” —are, when found in Javanese 


documents, most likely to have sprung from našive roots. 


NOTES 


‘Mention has already been made of the 
influence of Sanskrit orthography and 
sandhi on the way in which Javaneso 
words were spolled or combined, and of 
the importance of a thorough examina- 
tion of the relations between the Sans- 
krit compounds and the word-combina- 
tions fonnd in O!d-Javanese texts. 

* Wilkinson, MED. I, p.144. 

* This word samudra- WHZ ‘sea’ and 
madhya- AT are Sanskrit too. 

* The samo mesning is conveyed by 
sambandha alone in Bhomakāwya 37,9. 
The semantie evolution of this word 
mould be worth investigating. 

„This element sé-, sa has already been 
discussed in chapter IV. It may be re- 
ls that it recurs in Malay sa- 
x MM as for instance’ <Skt. upama; 
4 -cara "in the identical way, as, in 
Soordance with, in the...way (cara< 
» ` Mare- ATAN ‘conduct, behaviour, 
; zi » hence sécara etc. ). 

oM this term see Oh. Bally, Linguis- 
DA SE et linguistique francaise, 
EA 44), 179ff., and J. Gonda, Pro- 
Ea tot een theorie derayperd-. 

2 in Yndonesiache talon, BKI. 


CV (1949), p.289t. 

7 In like manner the combination apa 
sēbab (< Arab. sabab "reason, motive) 
came to mean ‘why, wherefore’. 

| ? The reader may be referred to my 
| papers Opmerkingen over Oud-Javaanse 
| zinsleer, in FKI. CV (1949), p.25ff., and 
| Universele tendenzen in de Indone- 
| sischo syntaxis, PKI. CVIT (1951), p. 
| 179ff. 

| 9 In tbe Korawaérama (from which 
| this example is quoted : p.42) and other 
| Javanese texts Ambilikātmaja and Ambi- 
likāsuta is Dhrtarástra, whereas in the 
Indian Mahabharata he is the son of 
Ambikā, and Ambālikī the mother of 
Pūņdu. Seoalso A. B. Cohen Stuart, 
Geschiedenis der Pāņdawa's, in VBG. 
XXVII, (Batavia 1860), and Swellen- 
grebel, Korawásramas p.216f. 

10 Western scholars are no doubt too 
often inclined to regard such words as 

OJav. wus as regular conjunctions ! 

11 The reader may be referred to R. . 
Roolvink, De voorzetsels in klassiek en 3 
modern Maleis, (Thesis Utrecht, 1948), 


.TOL., 189f. and 235. 
di VĒLAIS! Gplestthetimes find Mal. sébab 


| 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


400 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


karēna "because": Arab. sabab "cause, 
occasion, motive, reason'> Mal. sčbab 
“cause, reason, because’ and karéna. 

13 See also Roolvink, o.c., and O. Jes- 
persen, The Philosophy of Grammar, 
(London-Now York 1924), p.59. 

14 See A. A. Fokker, Inleiding tot de 
studio van de Indonesische syntaxis, 
(Groningen-Djakarta 1951), p.168, and 
R. W. Zandvoort, A handbook of English 
Grammar’, (Groningen 1948), p.231. 

15 This example is quoted by Fokker, 
o.c., p.167. c 
16 It may be added that tbe Malay mula 
(<Skt. mida- HS) is either a 'substan- 


H v - [n 
tive’ or a verbal base (mié-mula-i ‘to ; 
commence’). In the phrase apa mulanya | 


(lit. “what is the origin or reason of it^); 
however, it helps to form sentences 


answering to our why-sentences: apa | 
mulanya datan kémari ‘why did he come | 


here ?' 
17 Compare also the use made of this 
word in Pararaton 90;16;1. 
12 Tt is interesting to notice that after 
& prohibitive sentence a native word 
can serve as an equivalent to our ‘lest’: 
mundak. 
™ In this line suka, atyanta and kujana 
are also Sanskrit (resp. from Skt. sukha- 
ga “comfort, joy, ease; happy’; atyanta- 
sped ‘continual, throughout’, and 
kujana- BAA a ‘bad man’). The 80- 
called-ligative element n usually appears 
in constructions of this description. 
*° Apart from sopádi we also find the 
forms sapadi and sapadya (sec KBW. 
TIT, p.286), and, in Sundanese, sumadi. 
27 Supaya is the common form, supantēn 
and supados being used 
lemes ( —Jav. krama), 
22 The etymological explanations given 
by Gericke and Roorda, Jav.-Ned. Hd. 
wdb., I, p. 847 and by H. N. Kiliaan 
Javaansche Spraakkunst, (The Hogno 
1919), p. 253, are not correct. 
p I aleo refor to KBW. TII, p. 299, 
* € , S 5 
The word iku means that, T howe. 


in speaking 


‘you’, aja ‘not’ (prohibitive), anti re- 
fers to the future, kalalèn means ‘hay 
forgotten’. - 

25 Seo also C. Snouck Hurgronje, 
TBG. 37 (1894), p.62%1f. 

26 [ refer to my paper ‘Prolegomena, tot 
een theorie der woordsoorten in Indo. 
nesische talen’, BKI. CV (1949), p.399 

ff. : 

27 M, G. Emeis has styled these clauses 

‘short constructions’ (Iuleiding tot do 

Bahasa Indonosia‘, (Groningen-Djakarta 

1950), p.2011t. 

28 The words lwir, hyan, and sira an 

tama iù are Javanese. 

29 Tu modern Malay the uso of séría 

usually implies the idea of close connec- 

| tion between two ideas. 

?? Min. sarato «sarta by way of svara- 

bhakti (ch. IV, s. 1). 

3! In modern Javaneso the word only 
; occurs in literary style ( ‘and; along 
with’). F 
>* KBW. III, p.78. Van der Tuuk draws 
attention to Mal. dean ‘with, along 
with’, which is cognate to the Batak 
donan ‘fellow, mate, companion, servant’. 
22 The assumption that the Min. sato 
beside sarato would reflect a Hindi 
form would by no means be necessary, 
for an original r is.left out in Minang- 
kabau in such cases : Min. tako ‘guessings 
conjecture’ : Mal. térka id” <Skt. tarka- 
aR conjecture, opinion’. Of. also Min. 
badiri and baradiri (svarabhakti) by the 

side of Mal. bérdiri ‘standing’ ote. 

** Svarabhakti; seo chapter IV, section 1. 
2 See chapter -1V. 

** Mal. saika ‘suspicion’ < Skt. saika AF1 
‘apprehension, suspicion’. 

*7 See Roolvink, o.c., p.69. 

*? Sec e.g. A.H.J.G. Walbeeln», De woor- 
den als zinsdeelen in het Javaansch, 
(1897), p.917 ff. 

*? See Roolvink, 0.6., p.68. 

*° See chapter II, section 5. 

"' The more original sense of ‘tho whole 
eff van nresthasjestipmever, been presorved- . 


n 
i 
i 
| 


ing 


in 


cU 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA "n 
, USA MR Samaj —— O 
imbul téngélam float- . 43 x ; 
„tho Mal, imbus ignit foule | ag Tho word savana is the Skt. rk 
‘aking; manis menaera languid- | breeze, wind”. 
7 b Gs AED » 
i woot (méndéra listless <Skt. man- | ** See also A. Teeuw, Harivamša VKI 
IX, 2, p.7. j > 


A Horhalingefiguren in het Maleisch, | *5 Bhomakāwya 28,26. 

T avgansob en Soendaasch, (Thosis Ut- | ** Sorandaka 3,99. 

rocht 1943), p.68ff. Henco alec tho fre- | *7 See my paper Universele tendenzen in 
| 


de Indonesische syntaxis, in BKI. CVII, 


| (1951), p.179 ff. 


quent OJav. sewa sogata "Saivists (Skt. 


SECTION 2 
LOAN-TRANSLATIONS 


We vow come to the interesting process of loan-translation. As is well 
known many learned or technical terms of modern Western languages are merely 
translations of Greek or Latin descriptive terms, or often even of a Latin term 
. which itself already was a rendering of a Greek word. A much-quoted instance is the 
English word conscience and its synonyms in other languages. The Greek suneidesis 
(cuvetSnots) being a derivative of the verb eidenai (eidevat) ‘to know’ with the pre- 
position sun (dv), the Romans translated this philosophical term by a compound 
of con ‘with’ and scientia ‘knowledge’, to wit conscientia, and German and Slavic 
languages proceeded on the same line: Old High German giwizzant, Old Norse sam- 
vit, Dutch geweten, Danish samwvittighed, Russian sovest contain prefixes meaning 
‘with’ and a word for ‘know’ or ‘knowledge’. In all modern European languages 
the more literate and elevated style very often uses such ‘loan-franslations’, 
French, German or other languages sometimes serving as intermediaries in ren- 
dering the original Greek, or Latin, models into the modern tongue, and in non- 
European idioms the same process is repeatedly resorted to: when foreign ideas 
have to bo given a name. Many modern loan-translations are so to say inter- 
national: the American and English sty-seraper has literally beea rendered into 
French as racleur de ciel, into Russian as skrebnica neba, into German as Wolken- 
kratzer, into Malay as pēncakar lant, etc. . Lo 

Modern Indonesian authors have sometimes been obliged to add the original 
Dutch in parentheses to their loan-translations.' To understand, in the Bahasa 
Indonesia, pēnyiar radio ‘(radio-)jannouncer’ people who hear the word for the 
first time must either be given a definition or know that it has taken the place of 
the Dutch (radio-)omroeper; from the sense of the Malay base star ‘to go round, to 
eo round with a grievance, with a rumour, to proclaim or publish’ the sense of 
Penyiar is not immediately clear. This is caused by the fact that the process of 
tra- translation involves a semantic change of the native carg ES us pu 
teres undergo an extension of meaning. The use of the md z s 
Ao x for the purpose of attraoting attention), summons E NE 

» inward conviction that one should undertake a certain oiloa ig an 


of that of : ; ich i betract noun of vocare ‘to. call. 
t L which is an abstrac : 
he late Latin vocatio, whic meaning of a word is gradually 


4808 are not raro in which: tdreoarigiaal nel Xp, Collection. 


—— M: 
— 


402 Digitze BA SFRES E DOR. Chennai and eGangoti 
CI WM sord given to it under foreign influenco: origi 
driven back Pre od iy Christianity (such as Old High ec 
Y nm EM s Heiland which underwent the ee ‘ia EAR Salvator 
‘Saviour, and riuwa pn grief" which mes used io translate poenitentia 
« E stitute fine insbances. 
sa aina or even artificial character of many loan-translationg 
art of them soon disappear: an olā High Gorman zwelfboton lit, 
kvelve-messengers" instead of the Latin apostoli apostles has been no more 
capable of living than the Dutch purism vernufteling lit. a person characterized by: 
genius or ingenuity (Lat. ingenium)’ instead ‘of ingenieur (from Lat. ingenium in the 
lato sonse of ‘implement of war’) engineer. The last instance, the author of which 
was a well-known man of letters, at the same time shows that such transferences 
sometimes involve & misunderstanding of the imitated word or phrase. Faalty 
loan-translations are even found among time-honoured liuropean grammatical 
terms : the Roman grammarians wrongly translated the Greek aitatiko (utriacuaj) 
‘the case pertaining to what is effected’ (derived from attiatos (airtards) "effected" ) 
as accusativus (Latin accusare ‘to accuse’), deriving it from aitia (atria) in the 
sense of ‘fault, blame’. 

We must bear in mind these facts and this character of such transferences 
in general when studying the Indonesian loan-translations from Sanskrit. Thus, 
the OJav. ikur asu (ikur ‘tail’, asu ‘dog’) which is, as far as I know, found only 
once in a poem of ingenious and elevated style (OJav. Ramayana 25,101) to 
translate the Sanskrit plant-name svapuccha- AJT, is, to all appoarance, no more 
than one of the numerous devices or oven witticisms of tho author to show his 
skill or to diversify his wordings. In a similar way the author of the OJav. poem 
Smaradahana has modelled tho quasi-bahuvrihi tigamata (tiga ‘three’, mata ‘eye’) on 
tho well-known Sanskrit epithet trinetra- FIÑA ‘id.’ which he uses as well. As has 
been noticed in other sections of this work many proper nouns and similar terms 
are found in a Sanskrit appearance as well as in a Javanese or hybrid form. 

According to Van der Tuuk? the TBat. na i dakka may represent a loan- 
translation after the model of Skt. sakhamrzga- TATA "hranoh-animal, i.e. 
‘monkey’. i 

Suoh combinations as Jav. lan pégat ‘not interrupted’ (cf. Skt. nirantara- 
feat uninterrupted') probably owe their existence to tho necessity of trans- 
lating the Sanskrit compounds. When & member of tho compound was already 
nlrb conn al ac lg reve thot aro ev 
Proceeding with this meee ae pee: aes ana peplery, flevonrlese : 
sing (from earthy life)’) was pee re the Skt. niraya- ma bell? (lit. RO 

NU Erb of tho « m y translated by botën latinal not vieible. 

type of phrase, group or Soren « a M ion Ei garais pz E 
` éoneista of a foreign and.a native bi, d Bane based Beer p genot Ee 
OR UP Us anderstona x ent. Thus, OJav. unikālu (in elevated sty es 
which also occurs in ancient ce e after the Skt. pūrvakūla- has 
times. An interesting instance is m res MM S R E pus 
the hybrid compound ekaturida is ex "E T ae Lon i m (11 
"having the samo heart (< Bkt AM through tho OJav. apisan manah ar 

[M Yet, manas- Ts), loving’; okaturida (after Skt. ekaoitta- 
having the same mind’ etc contai e 
2 ina the Skt. eka- wa ‘one’ and the non 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


not a small p 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
__ —- —-Digitized-by-Arya-Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 403 


ās ont A freguent phrase in Javanese literature is wotsari the literal 
git, uri ng which is ‘an offering of flowers (sari cf. Skt. sara. aR ‘essence’. It 


ning 
» T. considered to have been modelled upon the Skt. puspūūjali. INST "pre. 
"ng flowers in both hands opened and hollowed’ and kusumanjali- guae * 
ge zi x VIG a 


ul ot flowers" and came to be used for "making a (Javanese) reverence, testi- 
‘4g one 8 respect’. Indulging in their inclination to vary the form of «ond the 
Javanes© : i 
mous with sari. The former element wot, which properly means ‘bringing 
was ro-interpreted under the influence of the homonymous wot ‘plank 
tho expression was explained as ‘a bridge of flowers’. Other instances 
aro : OJav. wekirana ‘sun-boam? (we ‘sun’) : Skt. ravikirana- xfafzwm ‘id’; OJav. 
rahinakāla "early morning (rahina *day'):ef. the Skt. ratrikala- UATE ‘night? ete. 

Tt is not always possible to establish whether a definite Skt. compound has 
been at the root of euch an IN. new-formation. Anyhow, in an instance like 
OJav. riwutpata ‘violent gust of wind’ a well-known Sanskrit type of composition 
has been reproduced (ef. agnyutpāta- a-geaa : the word would regularly have been 
riwul-utpata (OJav. riwut ‘storm’ and Skt. sd ‘unusual phenomenon, calamity 
as meteors, earthquakes etc.); at the same time the word was haplologically 


ny qu. 
offering , 
pridge’ : 80, 


shortened. < 
In OJav. damarga ‘high-road’ (Nag. 88,2) the Skt. mūrga- Hi which is 
often to be found in ancient Javanese texts, is combined with the Javanese prefix 
dù- ra- which adds the idea of honour and illustriousness to the word. 

. * Inasimilar way Jav. tan ‘not’? has been combined with Skt. bhara- WW to 
form the word tambhara ‘not difficult, of no moment’, which is also the base of a 
derivative a-tambhara ‘light’ (a- is an OJav. prefix). 

The proper name Lohgawe which occurs in the OJav. Pararaton or "Book of 
Kings’ may probably be explained as a half-translated Lohakarya which is like- 
wise used as a name: cf. Skt. lohakara- wlanit ‘smith’; Jay. gawe means ‘working, 
making’ : Skt. kara- GR.“ < 

An interesting group is formed by half-translations of binominal phrases or 
compounds. Side by side with the OJav. ayam alas ‘woo@-cock’ we find ayam 
ana in which the native alas has been replaced by the Skt. vana- 4a, —unless both 
phrases are imitations of the Skt. vanakukkuta- ddgāše Sungle-fowl’. OJav. 
tandagra (OJav. tanda ‘banner’) has been modelled on Skt. dhvajagra- “AMA “the 
top of a standard’. After the model of Skt. paūcadhātu- qzadlg etc. we find 
paūcataņda ‘the five tandas (function aries), and so on. 

A vory interesting word to be ranged in this section is the OJav. nusan- 
lara which I have already dealt with in 1937. The Sanskrit compound dvipan- 


lara- MFAT, which is not given as a separate entry in the Pet. Dict. bas, in 


Tawney's well-known translation of the Kathüsaritsigara, incorrectly been 
d' (Kathās. ch. 25 and 26). 


translated by ‘foreign island, other island, distant islan 
Sylvain Lévi was perfectly right in remarking* that dvipantara-, wbich has been 
Used as an equivalent of the Chinese Kuen-luen (‘all the countries and islands in 
the ‘Southern Seas’, Indonesia and Southern Indo-China’), must LEME denoted a 
Indonesian Archipelago and the regions near by (‘l'Archipel indien et les pays 
Voisins’). Kālidāsa, Ragh. 6.57 already has this name: RRR «e | 


Arrian $ ith him on the sbores of the 
augutu wart Rafe: "You should sport with bi : 
SIE we yed by breezes wafting clove 


805... while the drops of perspixatinn. SAY basan Collection. 


Digitized PRAN Baia FBSRONJRSIMennai and eGangotri 


404 


flowers from the Indian Archipelago’ : ‘him’ of the Br ug to Hemäbgada, the 
lord of Kalinga, which country, as we have seen, man ang commercial relations 
with the Archipelago; and the cloves have, with their voy aa lavanga- ws 
DU i itsported from the regions where thes „were indigenous (the 
Moluccas in the Archipelago) to Indian sea-ports. 7 Asie UTE SIUS which 
can be translated by 'foreign countries , antara- GNER has, in dvipantara- atem, 
become a sort of suflix. If T am right in interpreting some ur of the Nāgara- 
kytāgams,* the Javanese of the Middle ages did not use dvipantara- as complotoly 
equivalent to the Chinese word mentioned above, but in a moro limited sense. 
From the Javanese point of view the name seems to have especially denoted the 
islands of the Archipelago outside Java, or the Archipelago outside Java, Malacca 
included. Sometimes it seems to be used as a quite comprehensible synonym of 

. detūntara= ZAAT *foreign countries’. Now, this word haa been Javanized by 
translating its first part: nusantara (Jav. nusa ‘island’) already occurs in the Nāg.: 
a won sunantara (wor ‘man’, sun.<nus.) is ‘a foreigner’. —Half-foreign is also 
paranusa (Nāg.) which may be synonymous with nusaniara : Skt. para- WW in the 
sense of other, foreign’. 

We occasionally come across & curious product of blending Sanskrit and 
native elements. On the ground of Skt. apti- ata ‘obtaining, etc.’ the OJav. kapti 
‘desire’ has been formed by means of the native prefix ka- which can be instru. 
mental in forming substantives; to this kapli this foreign element nij has, in its 
turn, been prefixed : niskāpti "without lust”. z 

Some Sanskrit words, on the other hand, seemingly assumed a new or 
extended meaning in the Archipelago on the model of a partly synonymous 

' native term. I donot know whether Skt. putra- YA ‘son’ could ever express the 
idea of ‘interest’ in India proper, but in Old-Javanese and Balinese it could. In 
an ancient text, to wit the so-called law-book edited by Jonker, we come across 
the combination putra kalantara in,$ 73 (as against kalüntara alone in $$ 74 and 
98: Skt. erat interest). As the native anak ‘son, daughter’ can convey tho 
meaning of ‘interest’ the Sanskrit word may be held a translation.” In Javanese 
putra can also apply to a ‘counterfeited object of art ete/; this moaning may 
likewige bo regarded as a ‘translation’. 

Apart from these and other sporadical instances of loan-translation and 
similar phenomena in former times, there are others which definitely prove that 
even today part of the more or less naturalized Sanskrit loans is still so vital as 
to furnish the Indonesian vocabulary with new loan-translations on the model of 
western modern words. Doferring this subject to cne of the following sections we 
draw attention to a single instance: the ultimate origin of Malay usaha ‘assiduity, 
industry, exertion, care, labour’ is the Skt. utsaha- Beale ‘strength of will, perseve- 
ranco'; in modern times tho derivative pēr-usaha-an was created to denote ‘(manu- 
facturing) industry’: pérusahaan tēbu (Mal, tēbu ‘sugar’) ‘sugar-industry’; pérusahaan 
air water-company , eto; 


NOTES 


1 Bee also my rcmarks in BKI. C, p.168, 


Woord ! , p.661. 
2 Van der Tauk, Batslech-Nedordnitsoh ordenboek, (Amsterdam 1861), p 


> The render might be referred to H. 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


405 


- SANSKRIT i M i 
... Digitized by Arya Samaj SUAE hai and eGangotri 
— ERE Lx = — 


m BKI. CII (1943), p.41f. Le nom de F ielā, 
Nus | i5 thie. 9 larchipel indien on Sanskrit, 
Oyo my remarks in BRI. LXXXVI | Actes du XVIII *me Congrès 


1881. nati : + 
(1980), p. P | ional des Orientalistes, 1931, p.13 
s Geo & paper on Skt. -ania-, -antara- ete. | 7 See my remarks in Acta me - 


a BEL XOVII (1937), p.4531., and | (1939), p.396. 


especially p.499 and 496. | ° BKI. XCVII, p.495. 


— | 
«g. Lévi, BKI. LXXXVII(1981),p. | * Beo also J. O. G. Jonker, Ben Oud. 


621f., esp. p.627. See also the game, | Javaanech Wetboek (Leyden 1885), p.180. 


inter- 


SECTION 3 
THE RECEPTION OF SANSKRIT LOANS INTO THE STANDARD 
LANGUAGE AND SPECIAL VOCABULARIES 


From the explanations and instances given in the preceding chapters and 
sections of this volume, it may be already sufliciently clear that Sanskrit elements 
not only penetrated into almosé all parts of Indonesia, including the most remote 
islands, but also came to practically any circle and any class in society. Yet, it 
goes without saying that those loan-words which are really common and used by 
the largest number of individuals are comparatively few, and bear upon such 

i subjects, processes and ideas as are common property of the masses. Such words 
"as guru. US, mantri REAT, guna- QT, jūla- MS, saksi awii, bhünda- AIZ, rūpya- 
€T, and others enumerated among those that are wide-spread in the Archipelago 
belong to this category. They teach us something about the Indian ideas and 
objects which were introduced into the Archipelago and about their vicissitudes 
over an extended area. Quite otherwise is the character of the loans in the older 
Javanese literary idiom : here not only a host of the commonest Indian terms are 
to be found, but also numerous rare, or a6 least unusual, words and learned ex- 
pressions. It is, further, nob surprising that that special form of the Javanese 
language which is used as the vehicle for literary expression should also have pre- 
sorved a largo amount of correct or almost correct Sanskrit words, whereas the 
vocabularies of the spoken idioms contain a considerable numbor of changes as to 
sounds or other. elements of the outward appearance of the loans. Cases are not 
rare in which such doublets are divided along the lines between literary speech 
and common parlance. Thus the correot šāpa MIT ‘curse’ in Javanese literary 
Works from the beginning up to recent periods, but sérpa, sérapa, sérapah in col- 
loquial Malay; agni “fa ‘firo’ in Old-Javanese and later literary usage, but gēni 
VS agēni) as the common modern form; mülya HET “value, estimation” in high- 
style Old-Javaneso works, but mule ‘care’ already in a somewhat more ‘popular’ 
Style, and many other instances to be discussed under other headings. 

Similar remarks can be made in connection with the literary vocabulary of 
those IN. communities which have undergone the influence of the Javanese cul, 
ture, As a largo number of secondary Sanskrit loans, to be found in Malay 
literary works and introduced by way of Javanese, have already been enumerated- 
it may suffice to add a small collection of Sundanese poelīcas vocables: ads 
"noble, best, beautiful’: Sanskrit adi- ante "iret"; badra cloud S Skt. bhadra- Wz 
‘the raining month Bhadra oF "pite Seale" Peur eplecwoeapon SSK OE 


1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
406 SANSKRIT IN ONS a oe 

EXT n nen strong, robust (also applied to persons who 
‘thunderbolt, Indra's weapon; Jay stxons; EAE Ta | us 

ama young) eminent, best’: Skt. Jays- SEI victory 5 E d à popular, on- 
joying the favour Of one's fellow-men’ : Skt. Janapriua- pu d = E s 
"battle, war’: Skt. yuddha- JE ‘battle’; maruta wind’: Skt. poro. maruta- AR, 
mez ‘id’; nalika time» when, at the time of * Skt. padaka; iš ‘a measure of 
time, half-an-hour; neira eye : Skt. nelra- a id; propia coming, arriving’: 
Skt. prapla- Ata ‘arrived, having reached; wanara monkey : Bkt. vünara- aa 
wibawa ‘rich, wealth’: Skt. vibhava- faxa ‘powerful, rich; wealth, in- 
Balinese authors have already boen dis- 


‘monkey’; 
fuence. Many literary words used by thors ; dis- 
cussed. Let us, to end up with, add some more: tarjani ‘forefinger : Skt, tarjani 


agd id”; sarkara ‘honey, sugar and overything sweet’ : Skt. farkara AEU 
‘ground sugar’; sudira ‘horo, brave’: Skt. sudhīra- A very courageous or con- 
stant; sēdagati ‘wind’, in Javanese kāvya Usage sadaga : Skt. sadagati- waWifa 'al- 
ways in motion, wind’ (sadaga- nob in Pet. Dies. or MW.); sitarasma ‘moon’: Skt. 
titaraimi- faarka "white-rayed. tho moon’; sawa ‘corpse’: Skt. sava- AA ‘corpse’; 
sima "boundary, border or bordered place, village : Skt. sima ata ‘border, frontier 
etc.; soma ‘moon’: Skt. soma- ata ‘id’; samprili ‘love’: Skt, sampriti- ari 
‘affection’; sēitkara sun’: Skt. samkara- Amt ‘causing prosperity, Siva’; wanodiya(h) 
‘princess’: Skt. manojīā Tats ‘lovely, princess’; lana, lélana ‘to rove, wander 
about’: Skt. lalana- 19% ‘fondling’ (from the root lal- ‘to sport, dally, behave 
loosely’). As may be geen from these instances, part of those now, and long since, 


literary words are among the most usual constituents of the Sanskrit voca- ` 


^ 


bulary. 


former periods of the IN. languages are concerned, based on the evidence of their 
literatures. For their history the Javanese literature is the most important. "It 
o would, in the future, be an interesting task to study the interrelations between 
the loan-words and the native elements of the vocabulary, to attempt to establish 
their interrelations, to depict their symbiosis, their rivalry, their struggle to escape 
from extinction. For the multitude of Sanskrit elements in Malay and especially 
in the languages of the Java group, and the co-existence of many loans with their 
native counterparts only seemingly contradict the undeniable fact that part of 
the loans succeeded in extirpating native elements, while others wore ousted by 
their IN. competitors. 

Let us first focus our attention on the latter category. It is by no moans 
surprising that loans which were above all used by learned authors in convon- 
tional written languages are apt to fall into disuso as soon as the desiro to con- 
form to accepted standards and to display learning begins to remit and people try 
REC en mo Paes their thoughts to paper. Liko hosts 
Ene ER on dissppontod i GM E ir any Sanskrit words in J avanese 
is too little known to csl of & dotaile x a V id tei piace 

pee? ed exposition, for it would be interesting 
to know exactly why, and how, many loans which were usual i Old-J oe 
texts have disappeared from the modern vocabulary: e.g. tra Rr ren va 
WX ‘ray’; pasa- WWW ‘snare, trap’; timira- fafīru cuf NEL MU M M 
sesamum plant or seed’. In som cet AR arkness'; tila. fā ‘the 
a ERN © cases & provisional and rough answer can be 
given : for many of the concepts concerned the Indonesi £ A 
ian possessed words of his 


own which had never f 1 ; 2 
never fallen into dianae, gutajdevet shaulinaiteidoeiroles of literary 


Our knowledge of the Indian words in the Archipelago is, as far as the 


$ SANSKRIT I ; 
-Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation eGangotri 407 


RÀ —— 
p There is no doubt that such native words as kali ‘river mu 
oat, 


"sol: continued to be tho only terms used by the mass of t 

H adt and plava- YA > Jav. palwa romaining learned and mx 
Tbe well-known phenomenon of the disappearance of words unde h 
influence of konon when it leads to troubles of communication, map 
played & role in sug M OJav. mesa- ‘ram, sheep’ (Skt. mesa- 89 "id," but Mod. 
Jav. (reg. kr.) mesa ‘buffalo’ «Skt. mahisa- ART ‘ia’, 

Vory numerous are the Sanskrit words which the Javanese have abandoned 
—or always rejected —in common parlance, though a large part of them survive in 
literary usage and in written language. Among them are many of the most usual 
constituents of the Sanskrit vocabulary, words fcr the commonest objects or 
concepts, and also original Sanskrit forms of words which in an adapted appearance 
continue to be used, e.g. agni ‘fire’ ATH beside gēni, adri ‘mountain’ «f£ beside rēdi 
<*arčdi (now krama). 

‘Complications, in such problems, only add to their interest. In manuscripts 
the naturalized Jav. siwasa "trust, confidence! (<Skt. višvasa. fāzata id.) is often 
replaced by tho likewise Skt. pratyaya- Wa ‘id.’. 

It would be an attractive task —but one which must be postponed to later 
daya when tho Javanese literature will have been edited as completely as possible 
and the spoken and written language recorded in exhaustive lexicons —to research 
into the causes of the abandonment or, at least, into some particulars of the pro- 
cesses leading to it. If there might be some sense in guessing, one might suppose 
that one of the factors contributing to tbe loss must have been the rise of other 
words with mor modern connotations and admitting of those applications, which 
under changing conditions were needed. Formerly the feudal nobility had their 
bhrtyas (bērtyas; Skt. S1), who were dependent subjecte, servants and soldiers. 
The batur (the word is native) was, and is, the companion and assistant, in general 
the helper in a specific occupation. In modern usage the wage-paid servant or 
mate of an artisan is a kënèk (< Dutch knecht) "(man-)servant, man’. 

Factors connected with the history of civilization have, indeed, often 
contributed in bringing about the loss of a Sanskrit loan: part from the native 
Délajar ‘pupil, student’, the Malay (Indonesian) language uses the Arab. loan murid 
to express the idoa convoyed by tho Skt. sisya- fea. As pupils usually wore reli- 
gious students, the substitution of the Indian term by the Muslim one may easily 
be understood. In OJav. ‘the flag, standard or banner’ is, inter alia, called dhwaja 
(Skt. dhvaja. “aH id); in modern times the Port. bandeira is the most usual word 
in Malay and Javanese. It denotes the flag of the European type. The native 
Words were preserved for native standards or pennants. The Skt. word was 
Ousted, : 

While tho Skt. dūta- qa ‘messenger’ has maintained its position in Malay 
to convey the meaning of ‘ambassador’ —in Javanese it is a literary word, native 
Words being commonly used for these functionaries—, such words ag Skt. bhiksu- 
RJ, bhiksuka- fiy ‘religious mendicant’, and the Pāli form bhikkhu which deno- 
ted typically Indian phenomena or institutions, have long since disappeared and 

ĉen replaced by terms of Muslim or Western. origin. Mt 
. It is worth remarking that some Sanskrit words for e or concepts 
Which cannot be expressed by a single Javancre word, have na d pe in 
tdinary parlance. Tho (hon6$diēte.isevaNed stastoootaady. konoy-tawon (tawon 


men. 


408 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

C OM n J D. Jt ES 
boing a collective word for ‘beo’), humble-bce, and wasp; the foreign words bhra 
mara- AR, ali- SE, madhukara- AGS, dvirepha- fiw, bhriga- WE ana satpaq, : 
qzqa, though found in Old-Javanese, or in tho literary vocabulary of al] period 
have not been utilized to supply an easy and unequivocal term. "The^gkt. loans 
daridra ZZ and (hina «ta ‘indigent, destitute, necessitous’ are literary or 
obsolete, but sarwa kecinkranan, given by Pigeaud as the usual expression, though 
long, won, probably because of its own emotive value and of the polysemy of the 
term ina (it contains Skt. sarva- dā ‘in all respects’). 

In connection with those Sanskrit loans which do not occur in modorn 
standard Javanese, we should remind ourselves that wo cannot, as a tule, prove 
such words to have boen actually used in the general spoken Ianguage. A food 
many of them were, in all probability, nover adopted by tho ordinary man. Yet 
not a small number of words, though now unfamiliar in the standard Speech e 
the Principalities, are usual in other parts of tho Javanose area. Thus Skt. dhüpa- 
HS survives in the regional dupa ‘incense’, which in standard Javanese is con 
sidered as obsolete, and, in the same way, dursila and durc ra 'eriminal, VIDET 
(Stb. duhsila- g:site, duscara- Z0. Tho word biyasa (Skt. abhyāsa- siepe) whine 
had great success in "Malay to express such ideas as ‘habitual, accustomed to 
acquainted with’, and ‘ordinary’, persists in regional Javanese Chabitual accu 
tomed’). In a similar way: Malay and regional Javaneso bicara TOMA ic 
discuss, talk’ (Skt. vicara- fram). No less than threo loan-words guni e K 
mentioned here : the z-variant (kr.) of guna (Skt. guna- JM) which BEOS bsol m 
in the Principalities (‘ingenuity’); a word for ‘trusty, reliable ae (in s. 
and customary law)' which may be considered identical with ae ie Ee. 
endowed with good qualities, auspicions eic, and guni (Mal UNE í "I 
guvny-bag' which is the Hindi yoni atot ʻia.. The interesting mā, UR bu 
Fa) is a regional krama, substitute of gēni ‘fire’, The Skt. J n ies RU ahma 
in ‘dialestical’ use: kacan 0 kind of RU Thef kt. cacchapi- agf survives 
UE ù „and so Skt. karya- 14 kerja ' 
work, (to) labour.’ To denote an eclipse of the sun or : NEM Nr 
has adopted the form grahana (Skt. FM 'eclipge?) ei, p PRA Ta YApon 
‘eclipser’ (Rabu), ‘planet, eclipse or seizur Ho graha (Skt. Nē ‘seizer’ or 

: I : ure of the sun and moon’) survives i 
regional usage; the Malays have introduced the longer : ? survives in 

Even synonyms and variants of undeni meee ord a as: 

undeniable Javanese origin are, in s 
gin are, in some 
Woman, female as krama 
V uses estri (<Skt. siri xt), 
race, people’ is a standard 
original shados of meaning: 
hile Surviving in regional or 


but still current in regional u 
Z > onat usage. Whereas pgs. 
word, wansa (Skt. vamsa- 331), which pres d cum 
family; relatives”, is regional, Some loan words 3 
litera 8 o b aby 
ry usage, have „been replaced by derivatives in tho gt i ; 
saran need, distress’ : lit. sansara "being in dist sac standard dialect: hasan 
existence’; reg. sa; ‘ PSOE: ross <Skt. s ibe € ‘ 
ms (F Pie d desa "the Civic chest of the fie eara sojas 
; nu d Obs. sewa ‘id.’ <Skt. song Bat service "dudas (<sewa + an) 
© substitution of simple word b Service, uae eto.". 
he i 8 DY one of their derivativos ja ingniati 
cur em es A Occurrence gnd cer "jā I 
out definable value. inn D. as "tā- was alroady Bice E eee Ts 
TT ‘far’ Although ots o PR Words: dhenukg PRCA 3 a : cures a J 
[^ f ac d m A . 371 D 
a more or less emotional Sin 0 no doubt that the longer f s ae a, duraka 
value of their own, a SP C A pu had 
à ed more . ponderous 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


em SANS ] " 
p . Digitized by Arya sa dO RS and eGangotri 409 


. YDOS , 

ee 
eo : i ords from their former position. And 
.lü- C&D, already in classical Sanskrit, be instrumental in forming d = 
vatives like vaikalyaia kājas weakness, frailty’, which do not differ faa the 
pasē vaikalya- Smau id.. 
In a comparable way the now usual word for news, tidings’, pawarta has 
dern Javanese, replaced warta (Skt. varita- TW), which is regarded as dis- 
Tod. The, now literary, term rumpaka ‘poem’ ( <Skt. rūpaka- GAR AGA by 
figurative language, figure of speech, etc., OJav. embellishment, ornamont’) was 
substituted by rumpakan (< rumpaka+-an) ‘poetical description, poem’ and yasa 
tpuilding' by yasan (yasa+-an) or the reduplicated yéyasan. 

But derivatives are also subject to obsolescence. . In an ancient period of 
the Javanese language the prefix pi- served in the formation of a number of nouns, 
which either conveyed a causative sense or were more or less synonymous with 
tho base. Kern's* supposition that pi- is preferred to pa- (the functions of which 
aro much the same) if the derivative applies to a single case, seems to hold good 
in part of the instances. In modern usage many words beginning with this prefix 
are out-of-date, and among these are pidosa ‘crime’; piguna ‘profit, use, benefit’; 

c 4. , . 3 ‘ , > ‘ , 

piroga illness ; pisuka approved ; pituna ‘loss, damage (from Skt. dosa-, guna-, 
roja-, sukha-, tunna- «t9: TN, WT Fa da respectively); dosa excepted, the bases 
are, nowadays, likewise old-fashioned or no longer in use at all. Other deriva- 
tives share their destiny : pérsapa (< pra- + Skt. sapa- 3UW) ‘imprecation’; pakérii, 
pakértya "work, labour’ (pa-+Skt. krii- Ha, kriya- FA). Now and then the case 
presents itself that a derivative, though common in ons of its applications, is out- 
of-date, literary or regional in other meanings : Mod. Jav. kasukan 'card-playing, 
game at cards’; in reg. kr. ‘dancing-girl’; lit. ‘amusing oneself’ from the obsolete 
suka (reg. sukal) ‘glad’ <Skt. sukha- YU ‘pleasure, ease; easy". 

Part of the words (be it native or borrowed) marked as ‘obsolete’ in 
Pigeaud's Javanese Dictionary, are not altogether out of use, but still preferred 
or habitually employed by fashionable and old-fashioned people. That is the 
reason why other people are apt to regard them as dignified. Comparable pro- 
cesses must have been at the root of the well-known fact that quite a coneiderable 
number of borrowed words, apparently not admitted to general usage, are now 
krama or krama inggil equivalents of native terms. A 

It would not be out of place here to go into some particulars. Linguistic 
horrowing is far from being always a necessity. Very often words and phrases 
are, occasionally or by force of habit, adopted, when native expressions for the 
Same ideas are available. The actual or supposed superiority of a foreign people 
ln some sphere of knowledge or province of civilization, the spread of erudition, 
and the desire to display it, and, last but not least, the desire to imitate mora 
civilized or prominent people are frequently the reasons for using foreign words, 
—not to mention that mere laziness is not always absent. But a borrowed word, 
especially when not completely incorporated into common usage, 18 also and even 
readily preferred where an indigenous term could be indocení, uofashionable, 
Bhooking. In Dutch many young ladies pronounce no swear-words but tho Engl. 
900d gracious or the French mon dieu, and in the same language 8 (Er.) déconfiture 


4 . S 
‘84 much more fashionable ingolvenoy than a (Dutch) bankroet (‘bankruptcy’). So 


it need hardly be said that CO. Prof. Rtétgttet Basis bellectbnt also Arabic, Persian 


p— 
and adap 
the cours 
pho guflix 


in Mo 


> 


410 


Digitized DEARER PLR INSA ai and eGangotri 


have, in thə opinion of the Indonesiane, a) 
dignified character. The Javanose official of bigh rank, who on behalf of one of 
his guests, a very highly placed Dutchman, who wished to leave the room for g 


dly ordered his wife to go for the pispot (a vulgar or low colloquial 
considered this borrowed word to bo 


and even Dutch) words had, or still 


moment, lou S i 
Dutch term for 'chamber-pot ), obviously 


fashionable. 
In Malay the Skt, svamin- aafaa ‘master, lord, king, husband’ bas, as suami 


‘congort, wedded Jord’, become a courtly equivalent of the less rospectful laki 
‘hu band’; and istēri (< Skt. siri Wt ‘woman, wife’) has in courtly usage become 
its feminino counterpart ‘wife’. In the same language miürka (<Stt. mürkha- aa 
‘stupid, foolish’) bas come into use to express the idea of cholor Or 'wrath' of 
God or of a prince; karunia or kurnia (<Skt. kūruņya- PI&I compassion, kind- 
ness’) to denote the ‘grace or bounty (of'a royal person and a superior in general)’: 
anugēraka or anugérah (< Skt. anugraha- GHZ favour, kindness’) ‘the bounty’ or 
'gracious gift’ of a prince (as a literary form it is even more pretentious than 
kurnia, and the derivative anugéraha-kan is a frequent term to signify the best- 
owing of favours). In Gayo the loan-word kata ‘word, utterance’ (<Skt. katha 
<a ‘story, narrativo’) has rotained a dignified character : in contradistinction to 
tho native pri itis used of important, dignified or solemn speech. Tho Sasak 
yuga is likewise a ‘high’ term for ‘child’, one of the Javanese meanings assumed by 
the Skt. yoga- Ata ‘yoga’. 

In a comparable way the Javanese vocabulary includes a number of ‘court- 
terme’, co-called krama inggil words,” which are, etymologically speaking, Sanskrit. 
The kr. i. for ‘head’ is mastaka (Skt. mastaka- Atā, other menninga of which aro 
preserved in literary usage: ‘top, upper part, summit’); for ‘back of the neck? 
griwa (Skt. griva- ta); for ‘hand’ asta ( «Skt hasta- 4x3); imba is used for 'eye- 
brow’ (<Skt. bimba- fata ‘disc, orb’); rema and reg. kr. i. rikma means ‘hair of the 
head’ (<Skt. roma. wa ‘hair of the body’); soca ‘oye’ (<Skt. Sauca- tīfu ‘purity, 
cleanne+s'); prana ‘clitoris’ (<Skt. prana- AIM ‘principle of life’); salira, slira ‘body’ 
(<Skt. sarira- ut 'jd”); surjan ‘to give one’s face a wath’ from lit. surya ‘sun, 
face’ (Skt. sūrya- QA 'sun'^); sedato decease’ (<Skt. siddha faz 'porfeot, beatified’); 
swarga F; deceased" (< Bkt. svarga- Tašī 'heaven!5); sewaka ‘being in sesrion, hold- 
ing court* (<Skt sevaka- QAF ‘dwelling, attending’); suwita ‘to +ervo' (<Skt. 
sevita afaat ‘one who honours; sorvant'7) for ‘angry’ we find duka ( « Skt. duhkha- 
£:d uneasy, unpleasant; uneasiness, trouble, sorrow’). These words are used 
when ee ruler or speaking of him. 

Not a fewiBanskrit terms are now considered as krama» i.e. used when speak- 
ing to high-placed or older people, to persons belonging to a higher class, to per- 
T me ae pot know, or to Whom ono wishes to behavo politely : griya 
3 Kt grha- qe; the numeral dasa ‘deoade’ : Skt. dasa Z7 in sé-dasa ‘ton’, 
kalih dasa twenty eto; toya- ‘water’ or ‘urine’ (which, by the way, is a Latin term 
pee peer de) i d toya- ata; pëksi ‘bird’ < Skt. paksi TH; wana ‘forest, 
MEE E an Bi ae ae ee nae "TH; manah ‘the heart as the seat 
, . „at; Oesme get on fire’ <Skt. bhasmi- in bhasmibhi- 

ta- aaa reduced to ashes’ ete., which alread n d 
in Old-Javanere; menda "(he. or zm & uziet an autfonomous wor : 
sirah ‘head’ : Bkt, sirah far: ; suka 't 9-/g0at» sheep, ram’: Skt, mendha- A; 
(and kalane) in the senso «die P 0 Bivo <Bkt. sukha- Ga ‘ease, casy’; kala 
„em during : Skt. kala- 15 ‘timo’; sela ‘stono’ < Skt. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


i, SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA j 
.. Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 411 


3 3 UU ——HÉ 
gna dream < Skt. - tau" 

imila- ar; red a ‘delicious EA. f x Bio op, dream’, and also čstri ‘woman’ 

Ns ; éc ious, nice : cf. Skt. iccha Feat. Krama, but not used in 


k . . + 
(of: B dud langusge of the Principalities aro e.g. the follow 


e o > «gkt. rddhadhana- ear 'abundant wealth' (not in 


Ing words: rēdana 


MW.)? or rather 
6 ib. 3 s ther 

Skt. vardhana- ada prosperity; further such modified forms as E dogs 
l d + 


«t OJav. srgūla ‘jackal’ (Skt. $rgala- AMS). 

Some Sanskrit words, however, are so-called ngoko terms, that is, they are 
pxeluded from tho vocabulary of a person who behaves well and adheres to tradi- 
tional habits when he addresses his superiors etc. Thus the common word for 
gay’ is dina (Skt. fa), for ‘tidings’ warta (Skt. AAT), for ‘colour’ warna (Skt. varna- 
añ), for ‘woman’ wadon (derived from Skt. vadhit- aq ‘bride ete.”). The loan sasi 
(<Skt. sasi ait "moon') is ngoko, the native wulan is krama for ‘month’; gēni 
(<Skt. agni- afa) is ngoko, the native latu is krama. 

In a limited number of cases all vocables concerned are of Sanskrit origin: 
ng. rupa (Skt. rūpa- €), kr. wérni (from warna) kr. i. warna (Skt. varņa- dui) 
‘ontward appearance; ng. bula ( € Skt. bhüta- Wa), kr. dénawa ( « Skt. danava- e144) 
‘demon’. 

But here another phenomenon comes in.. We had already occasion! to 
make mention of the notable tendency in Javanese (and cognate languages, 
which may be put on one side here) to vary or modify the outward appearance of 
words. Instances of the variability of word-ends in native Javanese words aro 
‘almost numberless, and in first syllables of bases, too, such phenomena as the 
„sčund-symbolism or symbolical value of vowels ete. hes often been productive. 
Now, parts of these variations, which are not seldom found in two or more sets 
of words, came to be infused with somo definite value, and, as such, became creas 
tivo of new-formations. From this process loan-words were not excluded : beside 
carita ‘story’ (Skt. «fta ‘adventures’) carios came into being; beside dina ‘day’, 
dintón; beside warna, wérni; beside wedana ‘chief’ (< Skt. vadana- 343. face, front ', 
widani and wédantin; beside sida ‘come off’ (<Skt. siddha- fag ‘accomplished’) siyos; 
beside prakara ‘case, law-suit’ (cf. Skt. prakara. IER, prakarana- TR), prakawes; 
beside rasa ‘taste’ (Skt. rasa 38), raos ete. 

Although a good msny of these variants belong or belonged to the every- 
day speech of the uneducated, in which these tendencies had, and have, full scope, 
there exist also many ‘by-forms of words belonging to the standard language: thus, 
9.., the regional karèk ‘stay behind’ as against the standard Kari; the reg. coll. 
Untara (and the ‘polite’ untawis) ‘interval’ beside the standard antara "id. (Skt. 
antara. wear ‘id.’). A 

As is well known a hypertrophical development of certain types of word- 
Variation, especially with regard to certain word-ends, can be witnessed in manā 
languages, In the so-called slang, argot, gibberish eto. of Western languages à is 
Variation is one of the most striking devices. Not seldom definite communities, o ten 
limited in number and characterized by solidarity, common habits or orija 
have a special liking for a rather small number of word-ends or other variation 

ional speech and tabu voca- 
types, —just like the speech of the lower classes, emotional sp M if 

: ; -uche, -alie, -óme are we 

Uleries. In France such ' endings! as -ique; -og U6, aque, , , 


E '. Com- 
; =camaradē ‘comrade. m 

Down: ille js ‘small coin’, camerluche S ied i 
n i monouille =monnate smat | »vioes of word-formation applied in these 


Pared with the standard languageg the devi E h 
ies AB Prof. S t hical, In Javanese the 
Speolal vooabularies” are not abnormal; bu? Ghtstriāaiertap. : 


‘tire’ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj j h i ad eG A 
412 gitzed PARĪT AN” NVR ES Gennai and eGangotri 
E d = me 


essentially social vocabulary' called krama represents a similar hypertrophioal 
development. We may suppose that such sots of words ag the abovo, found also 
outside the Island of Java, and very frequent in Indonesia (Mal. piama : piantan 
‘sight time’; Dyak. undan : undik shrimp), have served ag models on which the 
krama phenomenon, which in all probability has developed in comparatively recent 
times, has been founded and analogically extended. 

In this process some other factors have, we may suppose, co-operated, 
Although written language does nol as a rulo clearly reflect all particulars of every. 
day parlance and usually tries to avoid that exuboranco and variety of word-form 
which is natural to the epeech of the uneducated or the vocabulary of limited 
communities, poets and prose-writers often like pithy and vigorous exprossions 
and unusual variants. They aro eager to exhibit their skill, and were, in Java 
and elsewhere, often much influenced by the ordinary languago of thoir contem- 
poraries. It is, in my opinion, apparent to a scrupulous observer that Javanese 
authors in borrowing dovices from that ordinary usage and in developing them in 
conformity with the requirements of their literary activity, have added to the 
number of variants now existing or already discarded. 

So, whatever has been the exact value, function and connotation of such 
Old-Javanese ‘by-forms’ as sarintën (not found in the modern language, as far as I 
know) beside sarira ‘body’ (Skt. sarira- UN ‘id.’), the texts of ancient origin we 
possess already contain several formative elements which aro frequent in tho 
modern language, and a now usual ‘word-end’ -néén was well-known at tho time: 
guntén teacher’ beside guru (Skt. guru- TX); wihantén ‘monastery’ besido wihara. 
(Skt. vihara- fag). A Middle Javanese text gives us mahari ‘canopy, throne' 
which, of course, is identical with the Hindi mahari agit ‘edifice, palace, stately 
dwelling; upper room’; but mahantén already occurs in Old-Javanese kakawins. 
And in Modern-Javaneso part of these devices were utilized in developing and 
extending the ngoko-krama system and many words ending in some sound-group 
of this description were included in the special vocabulary called krama. Thus, a 
form dintén, derived” from dina ‘day’ (see above), is now its regular krama sub- 
stitute; swantcn is used instead of the ngoko form swara ‘sound’ (Skt. svūra- AN); 


karanten is regional krama beside the now old-fashioned krana "reason, cause; 
because’ (< Sk: karana- 171) 


(Gist, sie a i gunten regional krama beside guna ‘ingenuity’ 
: . M , 


„kēpantēn beside the likewise regional képala ‘village-head’ (Skt, 
Z „kapāla- raz skull ); aksantēn is an obsolete krama form beside aksara ‘letter’ (Skt. 
aksara- 33); bēntēn is an optional dignified substitute of bēda 'difference' (Skt. 
bheda- 312) as gapuntēn is of the literary gapura ‘gateway’ (Skt. gopura- mgd. 
Even proper names are drawn into this analogical process : Gintén beside Giri (cf. 
Skt. giri- faf mountain. Besides, raos is krama beside rasa (see above), carios 
beside carila; pracados and pracantēn are obsolete or reg 
faith, trust’ (< Skt. pratyaya- AAA ‘trust? etc.) etc * 
When describing the outw 


krama boside pracaya 


ard appearance of the borr ; 
i 4 ) orrowed words and 
Pa e di they underwent, we already discussed the productivity of the 
Ps peu -pairs ending in -@ and -¢ respectively : nagara : nagari; dewa: 
ewi, Re other types, which are Sanskrit, and to manian oe drm qu 
was a ready early coexistent with marga (Skt. marga- arā tā) Tn a similar way’ 
ad) region appears beside desa (Skt, us ne & eft D 
an). ini j j warga (Skt. p 
an). A fominine dewati was formed to mean 'goddess (fr ipse Ern 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat aod dent (from . REVMA S 


desa- qq), 


SANSKRIT IN INDONE 
— Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 413 


ee era ————— 
EY 4 - 
c) |”, qq ri 9 s H 3 
«i god ), whereas apsa d a female deity’ (from Skt. apsaras-, apsara Agra, 
dapsara wore used indiseriminately. If is, in general impossible t 
a à 3 o 
«tory of these words in detail. Let i j ; 
M gi) is a krama he f x M puso to mention that today 
rā mērgi (< margt) 18 a krama form for ‘way’, and a-mérgé (beside ng. marga 
° oaea d I H , 
v ‘because’; that krami is optional krama beside krama ‘good order’ (Skt 
is . rangem nt : 1). Y? v E sā : + 
„A sitamie ge e m i ae (Skt. already had nagari ‘city’) 
"az Y ES EC 6 
krama besi e nëgara resi ence o the prince, kingdom, state’, —just like 
um if, when 1s krama beside the native ménawa, and so on. Thore are, how- 
1 v : 23:3 Y - ; . 
avor, complications w hich we cannot, of course, discnss in an exhaustive manner. 
To mention only some words of Sanskrit origin : today, the already mentioned 
form rupa outward appearance ; which is the Sanskrit, rüpa- €, is ngoko, its 
prama equivalent is wérni (from warna i.e. Skt. varnd- a ‘external appearance’); 
warna itself, fallen into disuse in ordinary usage, is krama inggil and rupi regional 
As tae . . 
krama. Beside the word antara (ng.) ‘distance, interim’ a form antari does not 
ist (as far as I know), its krama is antawis. Similarly, in courteous s 
exis : , peach desa 
teillage' is replaced by dusun, not by desi, which occurred in ancient records. The 
substitution of -? as a krama word-end has, to wind up with» remained a livi 
à p & living 
A T - . € 
factor in modern times: ng. (w)landa: kr. (w)landi ‘Netherlands, Dutch’, and 
also been extended to other words than those in -a : ñelmu (Arab. ilm) ‘wisdom’ : 


prama- 
rogulat 


helmi. 

In and outside Indonesia not only variegations of sound, but also different 
ideas of greatnoss, distance, weight, exertion can be expressed by e variation 
affecting the vowols of the word concerned : cf. Malay ankit ‘raising up with little 
effort : aùkut ‘transporting, removing : aikat ‘lifting up’. Formantia, especially 
suffixes, sometimes have a comparable expressive value: the French -asse in fem- 
masse ‘a large-limbed woman’ (in contradistinction to femette "a woman of slight 
figure’) : femme ‘woman’. As against u (o), which is appropriate to express dull 
and deep sounds, to suggest long distances, a heavy weight, coarseness etc., 
the ‘symbolic value’ of the vowel i is repeatedly found to be quite another: it is 
often found in words imitating, denoting or suggesting shrill, high, small or near 
sounds, small or pointed objects etc. Engl. tiny, slim, little, thin etc. It is there- 
fore not surprising that an i: ulo) variation is also found in Indonesia, not only 
in such evident cases of onomatopoeia or sound-symbolism as Jav. gatik ‘to tick, 
to tap (at plates otc.)' and gafok-gatok ‘to chop wood’, but also in such pairs as 

Jav. ginēm : gunčm consult with’; Bimanese ika<"risak: Mal. rusak ‘spoiled, 
broken’, Already in Old-Javanese loan-words were affected by this tendency to 
vary vowels : beside OJav. guha (Skt. guha- &l) ‘cave’ we come across giha; be- 
side OJay. guna (Skt. guna- UN) ‘quality, ingenuity etc. gina (astagina is mod. lit. 
for ‘eightfold’). Tn later usage giha, giya (<giha) and gina were krama substi- 
tutos as mila ‘beginning, cause? (beside ng. mula, Skt. mila: 39 "root, ete.”); kita 
‘own’ (ng. kuja: Skt. kūļa. $2); like the native giném (‘to speak’, see above) 
‘Tak “not enough’ (beside ng. kurai) ete., thoy are used till the present day. 

In dealing with the phenomenon of the Javanese vocabulary of courtesy 
We havo to foous our attention once more on the wide-spread linguistic device of 
substitution. When, among the Toradjas and other IN. peoples, for some reason 
9 other g word, e.g. kola ‘spoon’, has to be replaced by & synonym, e.g. tankait 95 
tendu, the word sikola ‘school’ (&Dateh school ‘id.’) ig also believed to be mu 
henoe sitankaii or sisindu school Pitara et Sanya rovedianglishman ngéris, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
414 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


Rd tor ‘Englishman’ borrowed from the Port. Ingléz) the Dutch 
- scholar Adriani heard : kabuürësi : tho element anga, whieh in itself means ‘ghost?, 
was replaced by kabuii *bug.bear.'? The same tendency to play can be observad 
among schoolboys, students and in the slang of other social groups : instead of 
Dutch bliksem(s), which is a rather coarse intorjection (hang it! tho deuce!’ lit, 
‘lightning!’) weerlichts is sometimes used, weerlicht being a moro refined torm for 
ihe said natural phenomenon. Liko the Toradjas under a linguistic tabu, and 
like the speakers of slang in many countries, autbors and poets, especially those 
who preferred to express themselves in an artificial or at least unusual way, have 
often availed themselves of this opportunity offered hy normal speech and fur. 
thered an hypertrophical development. Whereas such modern Javanese substitu- 
tions as botēnnuškrus — which in places seems to have been looked upon as tho 
krama. or courteous form of Or anjekruis (a Dutch name for an institution like the 
Red Cross, lit. ‘Orange Cross’), because the kr. botën, which means ‘not’, corroponds 
to the ng, ora —may be considered as bordering on slang or buffoonory, the 
tendency 5o substitute words or parts of words in this way is deeply rootod in the 
Javanese genius. Most readers of Javanese toxts have been puzzled at finding 
curious instances of this prodilection. Thus the lit. Jav. sēdarum ‘all’ boside kr. 
sidaya may be explained from an interchange of the synonym arum 'fragrant and 
in literary usage ‘sweet, lovely’, and ayu ‘handsome’. Skt. sātmatā AKAA ‘com- 
munity of essence or nature with’ > Jav. satmala ‘visible, perceptible through the 
senses’, which originally is an abstract noun in -i@-, derived from sūtman- (sa at 
aiman- ARAT the self’) was reinterpreted by the Javanese as sat (whatever that 
may be) and Jav. mata ‘eye’; hence tho now obsolete krama saimripats mripat 
being the krama term for ‘aye’. As the Skt. dvarapati- gata ‘door-keeper, porter’, 
when taken a3 Javanese, edmitted of the reinterpretation dwara and pate which 
means ‘dead’, the latter member could be substituted by péjah ‘deceased’: thus 
dorapējah (o<wa) was considered a courteous synonym of this loan word. 
Complicated cases are not rare: in Bali the namo of tho famous monkey 
Hanumān (Skt. qx8T4,) was, aud is, pronounced Hanoman, Anomun. As thig form 
is capable of being interpreted ‘rather young’ (the nativo anom extended by the 
suffix -an), the word mrutt, the Balinese form of the Skt. Maruti- ntefa ‘the son of 
the Wind god’, and the compound Marutasuta (Skt. MIZAR 1 ‘id.’) wero put into uso 
to denote the nativo metre sinom which was etymologically connected with anom. 
Now, this device became very popular in those circles which endeavoured 
to speak as politely aa possible when addressing their superiors. Honce such 
krama forms as ségawon ‘dog’, (‘derived’ from the Skt. $rgala- AMS ‘jackal’) : ala 
and awon are synonyms in the sense of ‘bad’. In an analogous way Skt. OJav. 
kevala- 4% alone, more was changed into “kewawon, kemawon, which is now 
regarded as krama for only, merely. A moro complicated instanco is the Skt. 
samudaya- 8934 collection, multitude, aggregato’, which was borrowed by the 
OJav. authors and used as a base for words exprossing tho idoa of ‘total, totality, 
all etc. Nowadays samudaya is retained in regional usage as a krama form for ‘all’. 
Tho standard krama sédaya, which in its turn is at the root of the reg. kr. stdantčn, 
may be considered an abbreviated form of samudaya. In literary language sam- 
udaya came to mean all...possiblo, everything possible’. As tho native barañ is & 


very usual word for "thing, object, goods, luggage’ a ng. term samubarai could be 


formed, beside which a kr, samukawi še hai "f 
CC-0. Prof. Satis Vel Rts Boing. by-form of kara (in ora 


astri 


* - 


. have the Seafarers and merchants oontributed in bringi 


SANSERIT IN INDONESIA 

i pozā by Arya Samaj FayiatbChsmsHam eceran CEN 

;5 = ora kara-kara "no unpleasant) event or incident happening), which 
, whic 


4 form of prakara ‘cause, topio, law-suit eto. (cf, Skt praka 

qz qzn). In literary language kara and barañ wate ae a 

aly: Finally tho forms sumabaran and sumakawis, which e si 
ey of metathesis, are also found. ie: 

by To what extent the tendency to vary the outward appearance of words, nay. 

y with them, can manifest itself, may be shown by the above d 


js b olippe 


to pla ` E tā. 6 C . 
gpsarā : apsar?s which, nowadays, is, in all ita variants, only usual in literature 
Beside theso forms apsantun arose, santun being a variant (and now a regional 


rome substitute) of sari ‘q intessence’, (which itself already occurs in Old-Java- 
pose texts and can hardly be anything else than an -i variant of Skt. sara- UN 
'gegential part, quintessence, etc.). In addition to these forms apsékar and apsinom 
mado their appearance: sinom denotes the young leaves of certain trees, sēkar means 


“lower : they are capable of being used instead of sarà because they all refer to 


flowers. 
Tt has already been observed that part of the Sanskrit loans in Javanese 


are ngoko, or ngoko as well as krama. There is indeed a considerable number 
of Javaneso words in common usage which, historically speaking, are completely 
naturalized loau-words from Sanskrit, boit without a change of their central mean- 
ing or in a modified function. The problem why these words remained and why 
they often succeeded in expelling native rivals from common parlance or from the 
Javanese vocabulary in genoral, though not yeb touched, upon or even formulated, 
is of outstanding interest from the point of view of the historian of civilization. 
Original Indonesian possessed a word for ‘fire’ "apuy, which survives in Mal. 
api (the only word for ‘fire’ in general), in Tag. apoi, Bar. apu, etc. In Old-Java- 
neso-apuy is still quite common, but in Modern Javanese it has, as an autonomous 
word, entirely disappeared; ‘tire’ in generalis ng. gënt <Skt. agni- Sft How 
are we to account for this remarksblo fact? Was the original word tabooed? One 
might believe it, if one could explain the use of the krama equivalent of gēni, latu, 
which originally meant ‘spark, gleam’, in the same way. The Orig. IN. word for 
‘soa, the open soa’, la'ud, survives in Mal., TBat. laut ‘soa’, Tag. laot, etc. ete. In 
Old-Javaneso texts (kakawins) lod,'* which etymologically corresponds to Mal. laut, 
expresses the samo meaning,'5 but in modern usage only ng. sēgara (< Skt. sagara- 
ANT) and kr. sēgantēn (from sēgara) aro found, some phrases excepted in which 
laut-an (which has probably been borrowed from the seafaring Malays) appears. 
For what reason? Was the sea, for many centuries, mainly known to the majority 
ofthe Javanese from poems and poetical tales proferring the Sanskrit word? Or 
ng about this result? Or has 
linguistic tabu been a factor in this process? 
The Old-Javanese wat, we ‘sun, day’, sprung from the same Orig. IN. word as 
al. hari ‘day (mier of the dayligbt hours only, but usually of the natural 
day)’, TBat. ari ‘id.’ eto. has disappeared;'^ ‘day’ now being ng. dina (Skt. dina- 
RT), kr. dintēn (from dina). Here it seems possible to M. CECT of 
à i ; i :on, viz. the OJav. wwai, wai, we 
CUN dii. salā oe grace dere occasionally ends 
in the Mi nee ved rds condemned or even of both of them.'* 
ent of one of the wo 


i somewhat more complicated problem. 
MAL e rah’? but they omit defining the 


Šoholars admit an Orig. IN: tomo. tax. Sentra Geet Collection. 


416 


Digitized ay Aryx Ramaj Rour BON ESētnai and eGangotri 


en —-— > MEL ect 


Iu Malay /ànah means ‘land’, that is: ‘surface of soil with regard to its 
bard land ete.) or to ownership, the 


. concept. 
character (level or open ground, vesie UOS 0v SAS ; 
soil itself and its character (olay, friable carth etc.). In Javanose the various moan- 


ings of earth, ground aud soil are expressed by some five words, ianah commonly 
referring to the region with regard to someone's origin, to land in general when 
the question is where something belongs, to origin with respect to an object’, 
manufacture. The loan-word bumi (< Skt. bhimi- afa) means ‘land’ with regard to 
individual or communal ownership, and ‘earth’, i.e. the world we live on regarded 
as a separate planet or as contrasted with the sky. Considering that the same 
loan-word is used in Malay to denote the ‘whole earth’ fearth and-heaven, encom. 
pass the earth, big as the earth), but also the ‘soil’ (e.g. when referring to burying, 
to be interred), or to large countries euch as India, in Gayo to denote our planet, 
especially as contrasted with the sky, we may for the time being conclude that the 
Skt. word, which covers a broad range of meanings in India, has ousted the native 
terms only from part of their functions aud was by preference used in those 
meanings for which the Indonesians had no special word of their own. 

Is it more than a curious coincidence that in Javanese both ‘friend’ and 
(personal) enemy are expressed by Sanskrit words only : mitra AF and satru 
(Satru- aa)? Did there once exist native words for the same meaning and connota- 
tions ? Is this question related to the appearance of loan-words for the same con- 
cepts in other IN. languages ? As to the last question there oxists an IN. torm for 
‘enemy :mu(n)?xh*" and mētak: TBat. musu‘, Jav. munsuh, Mal. musuh ote., 
Jav. mésah, but it denotes ‘the enemy in war or in battle; tho national enemy’; the 
TBat. derivative ha-musu-an means ‘war’. And the common Malay term for ‘friend, 
companion’ is sahabat, sobat, which is originally Arabic. Other IN. languages - 
possess words for this idea, but they often convey special connotations: Gayo 
töndölön properly denotes "friends who use to enjoy each other's hospitality’, the 
Bol.-Mong. yobayat ‘who is kind to another person’; some words apply to ‘friends 
and relatives’, others are only used in addressing other people etc. So it may be 
surmised tbat the special connotations of the loans, their very semantic value, 
made them succeed in obtaining a firm footing. 

In many languages words for parts of the body form an interesting 
class. "They often increase in number or differentiate from their former func- 
tions, because — to mention only this — there is-a frequent shift of application 
between terms for parts of tho body which lio near to each other or aro assoointed 
in function. So between ‘shoulder’: 'shouldei-blade': ‘arm’.2 Moreover, not 
all languages coincide with cach other in giving names to these objects. ‘Chere it, 
for instance, no special word for the "upper arm’ in English and Dutch, arm denot- 
ing the upper limb of the human body between the shoulder and the hand. Tho 
Eus Paci een arm’ (>Fr. bras) has been borrowed from Greek, 
wherebrachion (Gpuxtav) sometimes means ‘upper arm’, but mostly ‘arm’ in general. 
Although wo cannot concern ourselves here with unravelling tho semantic and 
etymologie mysteries of the corresponding words in IN. languages, it may not 
be out of place to notice the pier part played by the Skt. bahu- ag in some of 
them. Būhu-, in Sanskrit arm” and, often, especially ‘the fore-arm' ‘between the 
PX Pew; ys Mns iezi the medical texts use the word for the wholo of the 
bija Sa ah nda ee Oi eros td by tha Sit 

xlcographers ig equivalent to bahu- ale 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
= - Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangot SA 
or pailt- qii, kara. 5% band’ —, the Skt. kagļha- U5 ‘throat, 
ima ben 
adays bat 


, 
d^, lēnēn ‘arm’ (in modern usage 'fore-arm") and ue 7 and the nativo 
is the only word for 'upper-arm' in Jav., for Ne AA a p 
ip Malays the latter part of the body being called pundak in avere ai MN 
int R avanese 
Malay: In Sundanese bahu likewise designates the ‘upper arm’, but only its 
upper parts the part lying near to the elbow is denoted by pöpötöyan (base pētēy) 
which may be a ‘young word; pundak is ihe part of the neck adjacent to the 
ulder, 050" (u Jav. lénén) the hand, the (often metaphorical) use of tañan is limit- 
mpounds and phrases. In Balinese and Madurese baku means ‘ahouldere 
plede'; in the latter language there are, however, several traces of the meaning 
upper arm”. The success of bahu.in these languages is remarkable, the moro so 
ag other IN. tongues (e.g. in Celebes) have a common word for "upper arm” of 
their own, and languages w hich are nearly related to Malay —such as Gayo — 
exclusively use native words, without denoting the "upper arm’ by a special term. 
In addition to the observations already made in the section on linguistic 
change due to tabu attention may be drawn once more to the fact that words for 
parts of the human body are often liable to be substituted because people avoided 
pronouncing them. Words for ‘chie? are also often under a tabu: the Orig. IN. 
dutu, which we will discuss immediately, was e.g. in northern Celebes, often re- 
placed by ‘the Lord’. 
The range of meanings covered by euch words as ‘king’ considerably 
diverge. This title has been, in the course of history, applied to absolute rulers 
of great independent empires, to constitušional monarchs of democratic states, as 
` well as to petty chiefs of clans, tribes or villages. Before tl riso of greater poli- 
tical units the peoples of Java and Sumatra like other Indonesians till modern 
times only had headmen of the latter description, in part of the area called (Orig. 
IN.) datu : Mal. dato’, datok ‘head of a family, elder (also as è term of distinc- 
tion)’,?? but in the Sri-vijaya inscription of Kota-Kapur (A.D. 686) the old Malay 
govereign bears the same title: datu. The ancient Javanese rulers were ratu —the 
word is etymologically identical —but nowadays ratu is only the ‘king’ in 
games (leaving out of consideration the usage of old-fashioned literature, meta- 
phorical use etc.). Tho modern Javanese word for ‘king’ is raja, which already 
occurred in Old-Javanese toxts (<Skt. raja wail), and has ousted ratt from that 
function. Sundanese, however, employs both words. Malay, though having also 
borrowed the Arab-Pers. malik and skāk, sjāk,** has completely adopted raja 
in the central senso of ‘king’ and a host of secondary meanings and connotations, 
which we have referred to elsewhere. By the way of Malsy the word spread to 
other langnagos, mainly to denote such ‘royal’ persons 88 are peculiar to the 
community borrowing : thus a Gayo 70/0 is & patriarchal chief of clan and poli- 
tioal chieftain of a village, or even of a subdivision of a clan or village, & heredi- 
tary upholder of customary law in a petty republic. Ib deserves a passing notice 
that nata ( « Bkt. nūtha- ATI) has become the common Jav. word for ‘prince, ruler, 
Monarch’, 
1 Like the Engl. smell, the Orig. IN. and wi 
DA with reference to odours in pupa 
easant. Sad alay and Sundanese. x 
has ENT CELER i EARS. of bad smelling, ganda (<Skt. gandha- 14, 
) being adopted eape- 


« t 
odour, smell’, but also (ragcunoe SABER A eee ett on, 


gho 
ed to co 


de-spread Austronesian bau (ba u)?* 
whether pleasant, neutral or un- 
In Javanese the native ambu 


as M emm 


cially to denote a "good smell' and enriching the vocabulary in .a felicitous way. 
In Malay, Sundanese, Madureso ganda is found in names of flowers, plants, BW eēts 
and perfumes only. Iu Balinese ganda, though expressing the idea of ‘odour’ in 
general, especially applies to ‘musky smell. . 

To denote ‘the honey’ IN. languages often use suc 
of (the) beo’s)’ (Macassar Ze'ne bani; Busang), molasses on emoes stuff of (the) bee(s)" 
(Gayo manisón ni lébah); sometimes the word for honey etymologically moans 
‘sap and became specialized by elliptical shortening of the complete phrase 
(Baróe) However, those languages which are richest in Sanskrit elements as a 
rule use madu (Skt. madhu HF) : Javanese, Malay, Sundanese, Balinese, Madurese. 
This loan-word bas also found its way to Sasak (island of Lombok), Ngaju-Dayak, 
etc. As the phrase manisan lébah still occurs in regional Malay (Penang), the 
chances are that the short and easy loan-word has displaced it from common 
usage in those tongues which have it. 

In olden times the elephant was not found in the Indonesian islands other 
than Sumatra. There isan old Malay name for this pachyderm, liman, derived 
from lima, ‘five’, elsewhere also ‘hand’ (cf. Skt. hastin- gf), which, as liman, 
aliman, also occurs in Old-Javanese and some other cognate languages.- In modern 
times Jav. liman still oxists as a so-called optional krama-word for gajah (< Skt. 
gaja- 3tst), which, after being introduced in olden times, is nowadays the Javanese 
word for ‘elephant’. Malays, the Gayo people and Achehnese, Sundanese, Bugi- 
nese, Macassars and other peoples introduced the loan-word into their vocabulary 
whether they were acquainted with the animal or not. Likewise the Skt. matanga- 


h phrases as ‘liquid or sap 


Hag, which ocours in Old-Javavese texts, is nowadays a literary term and has ' 


probably always been such in Java. The curious OJav. dwipaiga has disappeared 
altogether. = j À 
It would bo an attractive task to trace the mutual connections between 
these loan-words and ‘tho native words with which they were more or less 
synonymous, with which they competed, by which they were superseded, and also 
how these processes of suporseding, differentiating and semantic shifting took 
place. Which factors have, for instance, been influential in tho distribution of the 
native and foreign words for ‘human being’ in tho languagos of Sumatra? - In 
Achehnese the originally Sanskrit ma’nusia, manusia, manucia (<Skt. manusya- 
aga is ured for man, human being’ in contradistinction to other beings, tho IN. 
trččn (cf Mal. oras) means ‘man, men, person, someone’ and ig very often used in 
many phrases and combinations; the likewise IN. drūč (cf. Mal. diri) acts as a word 
pace Deane, one’s self’ and as a classifying word in counting; moreover, the 
. msdn was, as’ énsan, introduced. vcri ; i 
ginally Arabic Mal, kabar, khabar, kaba, qum osse » E S E n 
but &lgo story, romance handed down by oral braditio *h jā QUPD T $ diss : 
bérita (in Mal. and Bat., Skt. $ Beo croripinally kt: 
ā , vrita- TA ‘what hag ha ened’) distributed, and: how 

they came to supersede native words, or zi = 
» or at least to expel them from part of their 


processes which have led to the re 
fortunate, pr p P i 
Ji D SM ule "Sit. — i RA = Ts fortune” must bo trenslated:into 
welfare’), when referri bg to. psychidal or «g "m e E Skt. bhagya- ARA ‘lucky, 
taining thé Skt. svarya- vad ‘hegyen’ ('wwito sual happiness by a periphrasis con- 
šo nó has gone to heaven’), whon used in 

: CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


———————MSÀ— 


——ÓÀ— S S 


Roorda, De wajangverhalen van 


Digitized BANK RA aiu RSSONENSa! and eGangotri n 


< i If i i 

connection with we e ws by a native word (kr. wil 
nally Arabic eae E met Ke salamat. "being secure from danger ae 
present state of Inc oiediiā studies does, however, not permit of entering into 
articulars, and many particulars are needed if such an intimate history of words 
d be written. 

Yet, such rough observations as have already been madein connection with 
the Sanskrit loan képala in Malay can also be put forward with reference to celum 
Indian words whieh became current in Indonesia. Whereas Skt. satru- Wz, for 
instance, Aenotes ‘an enemy in general, and especially ‘the victorious enemy’ and 
‘, neighbouring king who is considered a rival’, tho Malay sétéru (<éatru-) stands 
for tho personal enem y’, the ‘national foe’ being denoted by the native term musuh. 
The same distinotion (satru : munsuh) is mado in Javanese, but in Sundanese both 
terms are, as a rule, synonymous, although satru is often considered more polite, 
Native words are used for ‘clean, pure’ in various material applications (pure or clean 
objects; clear water ete.), the Skt. loan nirmala- fis ‘spotless, clean, pure', expresses 
tho idea of ‘stainless, immaculate’, and the likewise Skt. suci (Skt. Suci- Blū ‘pure, 
unsullied, holy') applies to persons or objects which are pure from a ritual or religi- 
ous point of view. The Javanese ‘glass’ is, in general, kaca < Skt. kūca- set ‘crystal, 
quartz etc." but for 'drinking-glass' the Dutch word glas (> Jav. gélas) was introdu- 
cod. Whereas for the modern ‘waterworks’ the Dutch lēdeit (< leiding i.e. water- 
leiding ‘waterworks’) has become usual in Javanese and for ‘gutter’ the native 


ujči) or an origi- 


ghoul 


‘talah renders good services, an ‘aqueduct or artificial conduit for water (made of 
bamboo for the purpose of irrigation) is called jalantara. As far as I know the 


word ie, in this sense, no Sanskrit; Skt. jalantara- dēttat means ‘in water’, and 
in OJav. texts it is several times used to denoto the idea of ‘walking on the surface 
of the water’. Whereas ‘affection,.love (of one’s children, filial love ete.) is, in 
Javanese, denoted by trēsna <Skt. trsta FEM ‘desire, avidity’, a ‘loved person’ is 
kasihan; the latter word is native. 

All meanings and connotations of the Dutch ‘begrip’ are to be rendered into 
English by loan-words : idea, notion, conception, concept, comprehension, apprehen- 
Sion, In Javanese this is much the same: budi<Skt. buddhi- gfe ‘intelligence’ 
stands for ‘way of thinking, mind’; cipla<Skt. citta- fat ‘thought’ for ‘idea, notion’; 
Danérti : of. Skt. artha- å ‘sense, notion’ (native prefix) for ‘comprehension ete.’ 


NOLES 


' In Javanese literary usage we find , sara etc. (The Hague 1869), p.385). 
badrahirawan which is traditionally | ^ Kern, VG. VIII, p.224. 

explained through ‘sun-cloud covered by | * The reader may find a list of the krama 
clouds’: the correct interpretation was | inggil vocables in A.H. J.G. Walbeehm, 
given by Kern (see VG. X, p.146.) <Skt. De taalsoorten in het Javaansch (Bata- 
bhadra. and irüvan WX, FWA ‘cloud’: | via Solo 1896), ch. XII. ! À 

a ‘cloud in the month Bhadra’. The | * The word suryakanta ‘lens, , magnify- 
Meteorology of Java being greatly diffe- | ing-glass ete. ( SER süryakanta- q- 
rent from that of India the original sense | Wq ‘sun-orystal’), however, is krama- 


of : oko, that is to say : it can be used 
S lost. (Ce a ejās azad Qgieanh, as well as in daily 


Digitized by Arya Samaj 


490 SANSKRIT I 


Foundation C liene) and eGangotri 
INDONESIA - 


parlance. 

5 The word swarga ‘heaven, heavenly 
paradise, bliss’ is krama-ngoko; swargi 
in this meaning obsoleto krama. 

5 The idea expressed by this word is 
only conceived in conneotion with the 
prince; hence ngoko or krama equiva- 
lents of pasewakan (tho affixes pa- and 
-an) ‘the locality where tho prince holds 
court’ does not exist. 

7 According to  Pigeaud, Jav.-Ned. 
"Woordenboek, p.549, this word is only 
used in literary language. The authori- 
ties — like the Javanese speakers them- 
selves —havo ropeatedly disagreed as to 
the sphere and circle in which such 
words are used. Tho range of thoir ap- 
plication is, indeed, subject to modifica- 
tion. 


? In the senso of ‘glad’ suka is, though 


old-fa*hioned, krama-ngoko. In regional | 


language the derivative suxan-sukam ‘to | 


amuse oneself, to mako merry’ still sur- 
vives; it is likewise kr.-ng. The regional 
suka in the sense of ‘rather, it would be 
better or preferable’ 
: word. 

? Thus, Gericke and Roorda, Jav.-Nod. 
Handwoordenboek, I, p. 395. 
19 Seo chapter I, section 1; 
elsewhere. 

" Another guntēn serves as reg. krama 
of kuli in the sense of ‘peasant, village’, 
12 uŭ means: the vowel % pronounced 
twice. 

13 Words otherwise abandonod frequent. 
ly survive in derivatives, compounds, 
phrases etc. Thus, in Javanese, api- 
api is still a regional word for ‘to warm 
oneself at the fire’; prapèn is generally 
used for ‘fire-place, kitchoner’ (base api). 
14 I refer to O. Dempwolf, Verglei. 
chende Lautlehre des aurtronesiachen 
Wortschatzes, (Berlin-Hamburg, 1994) 


IV, 9 &nd 


is the identical : 


| 
| 


! church); 


|Ip89f. 


15 Tt still survives in lod-an “whale, 


sperm-whale. The otymologically re- 


lated lor means ‘north, northern! < ‘tho 
direction of the main soa’. 

'6 The word survives in Mod. Jay, 
srénéie ‘sun’ «sah hyait we ‘tho divino 
gun’. 

17 Which hes beon abandoned in oom- 
mon parlance, but for the first elemont 
of wedai "hot water, coffee (drink), 

18 I refer to my paper Zur Homonymie 
im Altindischon, in Acta Orientalia, 
XIV (1936), p.161-202. 

1? See Dampwolff, o.c., ILI, p.130. 

20 Seo Dempwolff, o.c., IIT, p.106 and 
107. 

21 See e g. O. Schrader -A. Nehring, Real- 
lexikon der indogermanischen Altertums- 
kundo, (Berlin:Leipzig, 1917-1993), 
1, p 634(I. s.v. Körperteile; C.D. Buck, 


A dictionary of selected synonyms in’ 
the principal Indo-Earopean languages, . 


(Chicago Il., 1949), p.196ff. 

** In modern times even lower-grado 
officials have themselves addressed by 
this title. Words of a basic meaning 
like this are apt to convey the rense of 
‘priest’ : Eng. priest < Tat. presbyter, Gr. 
presbuleros (zpexGirepos) ‘elder (of tho 
Lithuanian kunigas ‘priest, 
pastor’ < general Germanic ¥kuniñas = 
Old High German kuning ‘king. In & 
comparable way Tag. dato means ‘high- 
priest’ and TBat. datu ‘magic priest’. 

* Malik is, however, peculiar to Mus- 
lim texts and usage; shah is found in 
court.terminology as an honorific added 


q 3 . H 
| to the kings name, in literaturo as an 


occasional prefix to the namos of kings; 
and as ‘the king’ in chess. 

** See Dempwolff, o.c., TIT, p.26. 

** The word is also found in continental 
Austrie languages. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


=. 


— 


Digitized yM yalindi oberigtign senai and eGangotri 


421 
SECTION 4 : 
SANSKRIT LOANS AND MODERN TIMES 
In the cocopd half of tho XIX" century printing-presses, newapapers and 


magazines began to spring up in the Indonesian Archipelago, and in the fir-t halt 
of this century thoy gradually but rapidly grew in number, enlarged in circulation 
and gained in importance. Schools and the circulating-libraries, railways aad 
other moans of communication came to be established in quick succession. The 
influgnce of the West became firmly established in many branches of culture and 
literary activity; i6 was largely inspired by European models, and embraced 
subjects which were unknown informer days. The adaptation of Indonesian 
languages, and first and foremost of Malay, to meet the requirements of the spread 
of western eulture —and in recent times those of the contact with the whole of tha 
world and with the international spiritual life in general—, the rapid growth of 
written and so-called moderh Malay which is developing in the Behasa Indonesia, 
and its being promoted to an official and literary language in 2 modernized society 
havo entailed an enormous need for new words, names and expressions. Add to 
this that the last century has witnessed an unprecedented progress of scientific 
resoarch and its technical application to publie and domestic needs, the amazing 
proportions assumed by industry, commerce and their marketing facilities, a weild- 
wide influence of the spoken and written word with its popularizing effects in 
many countries of the earth —and some of the main factors contributing to the 
enlargement of the modern international vocabulary have been enumerated. Many 
of them came to Indonesia. Malay and Javanese became, in the last decades, flood- 
ed by new words, almost innumerable borrowings from Dutch (and mainly in the 
Straits, from English)» which, however, largely consisted of international, more 
or less technical, terms in their Dutch form, and a multitudo of loan-transla- 
tions were introduced and hosts of native words adopted new significations. 
Part of these new torms are thoroughly deliberate imitations, proposed by lite- 
rary men or vonturod by journalists and sometimes destined to ephemerality. 
Many neologisms did not yet go beyond the limits of comparatively small groups 
of educated people or specialists, but a considerable number has found its way 
Into the general currency.’ 

A complete registration of the stock of words, traditionally or "theoroti- 


‘cally’ considered as Behasa Indonesia and in actual usage with all groups and 


Communities using this recent development of the most ‘inter-local’ and ‘inter- 
Communal’ idiom of the Archipelago would, etymologically speaking, comprise à 
motley group of entities, among which hybrid combinations of native, Arabic, 
Patch, Portuguese elements with modern pseudo-Greek or pseudo-Latin technical 
Apart frem such simple borrowings as 
kongres ‘congress’, kolése ‘college’, 
konsep ‘draft’ and derivatives 


9r commeroial terms are not wanting. 

a 3813, ekonomi, jurnalistik ‘journalism’, pepsin, k 

omponis < Dutoh componist ‘(musical) composer, | 

[rom foreign words : pér-ekonomi-an ‘economics’; kč-ahlt-an e. d quem 
i S eG 

“Xperience” (<ahli ‘expert’ : Chralrrof sage villis REFERER oh E. e e^) d 

beside loan-tranglations and other semantic adaptations : #apa (ship) génrus 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


499 SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 

‘destroyer’ (< Mal. rusak destroying); pandu (pioneering, testing, guide, pilot 
etc.) >'boy-soout'; ké-duduk-an (situation, position, seat’) a sent in a represen. 
tative body’, we find such hybrid and complicated neologisms as zat-ičlur sëmpurna 
» ‘egg’, Skt. sampūrņa- IÙ ‘tut, 


o9, 


| z alur 

(Arab. zai ‘essenco, substance’, Mal: tēlu 

complets richly furnished with’, naturalized to oxpresa such meanings as perfect, 
"E X 273 3 


complete’) for ‘albumin of full value’; Dyéstase kérja for the Dutch arbeidsprestatie 
i.e. ‘performance, achievement, work done . f 

Theso terms may often look queer and foreign. to tho character of an 
Indonesian idiom, tho alternative, viz. borrowing on a still much largor scale and 
incorporating more and more long and often totally incomprehensible pseudo-classie 
compounds, is apparontly a still less attractive escapo from the difliculty. Tor under 
present-day circumstances words and a technical terminology must bo created or 
introduced. Tho long and clumsy makeshifts of the kapal pēnankut minyak typo,? 
which often aro real paraphrases or definitions, and in the beginning ronderod ugo- 
ful service, will not long sufiice in a community which is in tho procoss of being 
rapidly modernized. Although it cannot be part of my business to givo advice to 
those Indonesians who have an harmonious development of thoir languages at heart 
it wouldappeartome that the existence of a rather large number of more or lesa 
obsoleto Sanskri& words in the main Indonesiau languages provides possibilities 
which are nos yet fully utilized. A revival and adaptation of part of the ancient 
scientific and technical Indian terms, achieved in a prudent and intelligent manner, 
would, in all probability, prove to be not altogether fruitless, espocially if the reform: 
ers of the Indonesian languages should maintain relations with tho Indian lin- 
guists who so successfully accomplish the task of giving their compatriots a modern 
scientific and cultural vocabulary of their own. However, it cannot be denied 
that a number of very successful neologisms or received words of thia description 
have already been put into use. Let us only mention the Indonesian Garuda air- 
ways, called after Vigņu's bird (Skt. 1€); the lit. Jav. gagana (Skt. TITA or six) 
restored to life in connection with aeronautics; and also the word prasasti for 
‘inscription’ because the father, or fathers, of the term havo r. ndered an account 
of their choice : “Lhe word prasasti has been chosen as an Indonesian translation 
of 'inseription(s)' since it has beon used in a similar sense in Old-Javaneso litera- 
ture. As it is derived front Sanskrit ( : Skt. prasasti- vafa) ‘glorification, (metri- 
cal) eulogistic inscription’ it has the advantage of being understood by indianists 
in general.” It has, moreover, the advantage of heing short and not alien to the 
structural system of the language. 

Let us, meanwhile, consider the part played by Sanskrit in the recent stago 
of development of the Indonesian languages. Putting on one side those naturali- 
eju Md re used in common parlanco withovt suffering 
of the borrowed serlo: E ont d fogun EE epee cots i 
living and developing in modern scr AM s TENE "i E Tu E 
of geientifio or technical terms, iodin dorming equivale 

Some old loan-wordg ; A f 
dergone 8. slight Ah were ‘A eee neve d 
(Skt. vamia- 47 ‘race’) ja en ents of modern times. Tho Jav. bans 

> &B0 an equivalent of Xing. nation and Latin 


genus; in the sense of ‘line of pedi i i 
Pedigree, lineage, race, succession or collootion of 


similar things’ >Mal. baisa * i igi 
"ed Beef Biyvarisinrictowscisine same Skt. word now 


——————— 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
 — EKA Sama] Fo ion C Land eGangotri 
«der in biology; J x £ 
order’ in biology; Jav. rasa (Skt. Ta) ‘tast i i 
E. ito ‘ord E c í ) ‘taste, feeling, sentiment ete? 
tonto I osish sentiment and sensatie or sensation; Jay 
E 


ui 
igan ea ja a. qiu; * ; 
I pūrā (Skt. parampara- TXT "one following the other, successive’) 
ig 


493 


ea er LEE 


Jav. 


; wees o eei s „in literary 
‘anide, protector, go-between', or ‘adviser’; guna-sēkti ( « Skt. g; mec 
style gu R RE “ai Me, Yt. É E - muna- TW ‘qua- 
d akti- AEF ‘supernormal power) : ‘superhuman powers’ or ‘inagic?- 

atrama- AVA 'hermitage can be used to translate the Disi be 
paai. a boarding- or residential school (Javanese Seems to prefer the meg 
Ja); wherens acara (<Skt. actra- AIAR ‘(good) behaviour’) in Malay for a long 
ne conveyed such ideas as rule of conduct, manner of life’, it can nowadays aleo 
pe used as an equivalent of our thame, subject, programme, agendas order-paper’: 

tho Jav. jagat (Skt. jagat AN world, universe’) can also denote ‘the sphore or d 

doin which one moves’; in modern usage (Beh. Ind., Jav.) mulia («Skt. mūlya- 

gaa) to be bought for money; worth, price’ which also survives in Jav. mulya 

‘lofty, glorious, noble, exalted, illustrious’) is also the equivalent of ‘Excellency’: 

in Javanese the same idea came to be expressed by wicaksana <Skt, vicaksana- 

Raan ‘wise, experienced; lit. Jav. dibya ‘highly excellent! (<Skt. divya- feq ta 

vine) now also stands for ‘highly gifted; brilliant’; Mal, maharaja (Skt. maharaja- 
WAU great king’) can be used to translate the western title ‘emperor’ (Pigea- 
ud's Javanese Dictionary prescribes the Latin kaisar); Mal. indéria (<Skt.indriya- 
az ‘sence etc.) denotes the modern concept of ‘organ of sense’ (Pigeaud hasnot 
entered it); Mal. Zilina (<Skt. janma. Gea ‘birth, existence (in the samsara)’) ‘as- 
sumption of human forny, is the Eng. 'metamorphosis, incarnation’ (in Javanese 
pangalma is used for the Incarnation of Christ); Mal. dana (Skt. 214) ‘donation’ : 
fund(s)’; cf. also Mal. u£ama ‘eminent’, but also chief, principal, first-rate’<Skt, 
ullama- SAR ‘highest’. Mal. and Jav. négara (<Skt. nagara- ATI "town eteJ) can 
now.also express she western idea of ‘state’; Mal. and Jav. sayémbara, sayambara 
(«Skt. svayamvara- TAAT ‘tho election of a bridegroom by a princess) nowadays 
mean ‘prize question’ or ‘contest, match’. An instance of happy and suitable mo- 
dernization is Jav. (not unknown in Mal.) (kaca (‘glass’) suryakanta (<Skt. and 
Old-Jav. süryakanta- JAFFA ‘sun-stone, sun-gem, crystal’) which is nowadays used 


€ 
: for lens, burning-lens or sun-glass', and "magnifying:glass. Some words by becom- 


ing equivalent to modern western terms won & connotation : Jav. artawan ‘rich’ 
(<Skt. arthavan adang 'id”)> ‘capitalist’; the Skt. jīvētmā Sawat ‘the individual 
Soul of the living boing’ bas been put into use to denote our ‘souls (in connection 
With a census)’; the Skt. pungava- «3 ‘bull, eminent person’ > Oday. pungawa ‘lead- 
"i commander’, lit. Jav. 'a highly placed courtier’ nowadays conveys such meanings 
ag functionary, omployee, office-olerk, staff, establishment etc.'; for ‘preface’ Jav. 
Purwaka (< Skt. pürvaka- qå% 'previous') has been put into use, whereas Sanskrit 
hag frastacana Nargar, 
A number of derivatives, too, assumed a wider sense or showed 5 
n ability of being adapted to modern use: Mal. sé-bansa-nya 'and such-like 
TIN, tog above); ké-bisa-an ‘intoxication, virulence’ (Skt. visa- fat ‘venom, 
Poison’, Mal. bisa ‘anything that gives a septic wound’); the international, but Pe 
nae origin Latin, virus has been left untranslated, apparently to avoid mib- 


é 
n ?'Slanding, bisa being quite common; pér-wsaha-an (from wsaha "industry, 
* ? & L 
‘Bence’, from Skt. utsūha- salg ‘continuous exertion" ) formerly exertion, 
an ‘humanity’ (Mal. manu- 


fort? n ‘ S : X Ls 1A 
ig *, ? POW also '(manufacturing) industry’; ké-manust 


^ man” < Skt, manusya. HASA IY Seite Vraisšadaamilthšarv" (Skt. Mal. pustaka 


the base's 


494 Digitized by Aryg SR8HjFEbUnā tid NĒM2Y13PĀrld eGangotri 


gas book’); ké-gémbira-an ‘enthusiasm, animation, inspiration’ (from Mal. gimp; 
J 2 : ir 
‘ardour, excitement < Skt. gambira- aii profound ete.’); Mal. ke-susastéra xi 
a Skt. word susüsira- which I have i 
o 


and Jav. ka-susastra-(a)n ‘literaturo’ (from 
g ‘well’ and sastra- WIA ‘book of (divino) authority’); M i 
> Mal, 


A O (< et 
Tho Jav. pahar TE SE Ski. arghya- yey 
guest ) has extended its 
U 5 1 
moaning 


como across : Skt. st- 
mén-utama-kan fto emphasize. 
‘what is offered at the respectful reception of a 
to "festive honouring, jubilos, feast; pamupajiwa denotes ‘the means of subsistenco? 


<Skt. OJav. upajiva- sqsita ‘subsistonce’s Jav. pamrayoga which stands for Bude 
ment; advico’ is now also used for requisitory' «S56. prayoga- Fata ‘applicati ES 
undertaking. The Jay. pa-priksa-(a)n is nowadays an equivalent of Engl Ty 
spection, check’ (Jav. ‘to inquire, examino from Sk. pariksa- Ti ur); nme His 
(alı ‘company’ which formerly denoted a ‘meoting’ or ‘feast’, of ‘parish? ee 
= ‘ . E à 4 i 
OJav. samūha- RAE collection, multitude’). Side by side with the foreign nasiyg: x 
Ka-baisa (a)n serves in Javanese as a word for ‘pertaining to a, vran 

; Nas. sāk. toristic 
ono's own nation”; Jav. pa-ngraita (graita, OJav. grahita "vo understand? zr oi 
grhita- Yara graspod etc.) is equivalent to ‘mental grasp’, or leomproventt ue 
EOM K SE y , Dr ansion”: 
Jaw. (ACTEM words spoken, eloquonco' (in literary usage; from Skt. vicürg. ru 
deliberation, discussion’, OJav. ‘to discuss, discourse’) to ‘syllogism’ A i K 
tous neologism, as compared with tho clumsy (Jav.) sétasétik < Dutch M 
statistics’, is Mal. pér-astka-an ‘id.’ frox wink nt LN BU, 

S meaning : ; : 

nite context, or forms part of & mode HE p^ when the word is used in a defi 
aksara (Sk e FA DEO combination. ‘Thus tho Ma! 
sara (Skt. sq) ‘syllable, letter eto.” has, in ak smia rā 
du oit , « has, in aksara kémia‘h), been introduced § 
note the symbols and formulas of chemistry: Ü i pe 

peer iR ee stry; Mal. béhasa pér-anlara-an i 
ot instruction or intermediary language’ : kāja 
spaco; Jav. nata (ruler, king « Skt. nath E X Mal: antara sav fintor 

, . . y 7 CP, \ Rael . 
OJas. vitesa- TAN "excellence, superiorit a m) kai; ( who (is), ‘tho’) wisesa (Skt. 
with the highest authority’) ee NN ca ; Mod. Jav. "being invested 
Menrotuliertninats reign’ (in the modern sense). 
3 ation of the vo "c ; 

definite senre is given to words or P E shows that sometimes a more 
promisevously. Nowadays the Jav. J A which could formerly be used 
alone, a paramasastra is a ‘grammar’ and | «is made to apply to ‘dictionaries’ 
words have al-o found access to the B h ae ueteres to literaturek Wks 
sūstra- WA, however, denotes ‘any a Ert ones (Kžsusastēraan). The Skt. 
ads expressed , Tellgious or rcientific book’, and susastra- Fara 

: the sense of ‘well furni-h a S 
old-fashioned Javanere usage sasira a li epit ed with šūstras, learned’. As in 
to the traditional Javanese do MM to literature in general, and especially 
somethi 5 ù ‘a trained and mew NM aab soarta ibani 
mething lik iting i alized handi 3 , A ; 
riti Thu " E writing in a perfect way or m udisratt man ), susasira meant 
ature, but also ‘knowledge acquired Mi OE etapa ea 
quired by reading books’ and even ‘good 


ture and refioem 
‘ ent, By para 
knowledge of writtei masastra the J 3 
ritte 5 m &Vanese in E eel $ 
P Ei especislly as far ag tho ar times E 
* The 8 bearing upon 
n to me QN Paramasastra- (Skt. parama- TA 
iati FEUA “many sci anskrit. As to bahusastra, it represents 
Viation, Y sciences’, but 2 M 
: may owe its existence to an abbre- 


As weh 
ave already occasionally romarkei 
CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat SRSA CARB! the above words were 


+ (from yasa ‘building, piece of engineer's work’ «Skt. yas 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


— —Bigitized-by-Arya-Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 425 


———À 


spsolet® or only in EM usage before they were modernized. TI add a few 
instsn098 of felicitous c its from old:borrowings of this kind: Jav. panitra 
and Bob. Ind paniléra, pënilëra (honorary) secretary (of a society ete.) from lit 
0 write, base eia Skt. citra- faa "picture, sketch, mode of writing" 2d 
Jav. texts also writing, letter’ (in traditional Javanese a juru (irained 
worker at some occupation other than a handicraft’) citra is a ‘clerk’ or ‘copyist’); 
Jav. pa. nilya and Beh. Ind. panitia is a committee, standing committee’: lit. Jay. 
ga permanent, lasting’ :Skt. nitya- fe ‘perpetual otc; Mal. (Beh. Tod.) mēntēri 
pir. bindahara-an Finance Minister? from béndahara which in old literature denoted 
‘tho ‘royal treasure, ete’. : ef. Skt. bhundagarika- wists ‘treasurer’. Pseudo- 
Sanskrit compounds are not wanting : Jav. kalawarti ‘periodical, magazine’: Skt. 
Jav. küla- BI time and Jav. warti ‘tidings, news’ <Skt. vartia- ata ‘news’; Jav. 
| padayantra ‘bicycle’ (lit. Jav. pada ‘foot’ Skt. 412, and yantra ‘apparatus, engine 
| ote’ Skt. A77), which found no acceptance beside its rival pit (<Dutch fiets 
| *biko”). z 
Not a few Sanskrit words, however, figuro in more or less elegaht loan- 
translations : Mal. (Beh. Ind.) képala bagian ( modelled on Dutch dfdelingshoofd 
'head of department, departmental manager ): Skt. kapala- -89% ‘skull’ > Mal. 
kēpala ‘head’, which was already metaphorically used* in kipala desa 'village- 
headman’, képala koisi ‘head of a (secret) society’, ktpala sēkola(h) “school-head’ 
and similar combinations, and Mal. béhagian, bagian ‘share’: cf. Skt. bhaga- AUT 
‘ids képala pér-usaha-an (after the Datch bedrijfshoofd) ‘acting manager’ (see above); 
, duia istimewa ‘ambassador extraordinary’ : (Skt. diia- ga ‘messenger’) > Mal. duta 
‘envoy’, and istimewa ‘even more so, special, applying to special cases < Skt. 
üslüm eva AAA ‘be it enough, let there be no more talk about it; mēntēri negara 
(after Dutch minister van staat) Minister of State’; tata negara “constitution (in the 
political sense)’ from Mal. tata ‘order, system” «Skt. tata- aa ‘spread ';? beda muka , 
difference (beda <Skt. bheda- 17) of level (Mal. muka ‘surface (of water) from 
Skt. mukha- Wa ‘face ete.)'; Jav. palwa (Skt. plava- ga) udara (Sst. udara- 34H 


‘rising fog or vapour’)® ‘air-ship (Dutch luchtschip), aeroplane';” yéyasan nēgarā 
šas X9") ‘public works- 


[i 
piira b 
ancient 


(Dutch ópenbare werken)’. J 
E Other words, again, are instrumental in forming hybrid combinations which 
also often constitute loan-translations : Mal. (Beh. Ind.) surat bér-kala ‘periodical 
(subst. : Mal. surat ‘writing of all kinds’ and kala ‘time’ (Skt. kala- ae id^ 
doktor istiméwa ‘specialist, consulting physician’ (see above); acara radio broad- 
cast-programmoe’ : Mal. acara ‘(rule of) conduct, manner from Skt. acara- ma 
zaman kéncana (beside zaman kéémasan in which the sécond member ja native) 
golden age’: Arab. Mal. zaman (:zamān) ‘time’ and Skt. kancana- edd gold s ronan- 
an mérdeka "free stylo (in swimming) : Mal. rna to) swim(ming) and Nel. 
mérdeka “fre from Skt. maharddhika- nate ‘great prosperity, very prosperous 
Ot powerful eto); kaca air ‘water-glass (for preserving eggs) : Mal. kaca glass 
from Skt. kaca- #1% ‘glass’ and Mal. air ‘water’: “ilmu jiwa psychology : Ar. Mal. 
ilmu ‘knowledge’ and Mal. jiwa ‘soul (in the Hindu sense), life from. ae ee 
Wa; “lmu basisa Seghnolosy? (Dutch volkenkunde); ké-bijaksana-(a)n politik states- 
manship’ (Dutch politiek beleid): Mal. bijaksana ‘skill’ from Stt. vicaksana- D 
‘experienced eto.; Jav. tigawarna ‘trio olour’ : Jav. tiga threo and Skt. e A 
colour’; Bala or bala-tantdi GOH astaawenatSaevation chan y Mess 


4926 Digitized by APANHA F ola dd D ONAR Aand eGangotri 


a 


tantra- arā ‘army’ and Arab. Mal. eto. sēlamēt ‘peace, safety”.? 

Some of these neologisms are decidedly un-Ind onesian in character. A com. 
pound or gnasi-compound Mal. ( Beh. Ind.) sérta-kuasa (from Mal. sérta "with, 
along with’: Skt. sartha "T ‘travelling company ^ and kuasa Power, authority’)n 
‘right of speech, employees’ participation’, which is foreign to tho Malayan (and 
J«vanese etc." structure of words, may be quoted as a case in point. In other 
ensea the neolozi:m isa product of rashly and mechanically translating a Dutch 
or European term; when Hindi naraja ata, cf. Skt. nürüci and nūrācikā Aw, 
sufren ‘a pair of small scales, such as is used by a goldsmith, ote.’ Which wag 
borrowed by the Malayans to denote a ‘balance for weighing (small articles)’, wag 
given the scuse of the Datch balans ‘correspondenco between debit and credit side 
of an account! the change of meaning was too abrupt to be understood without 
knowing the Dutch model, which is, practically speaking, closo on breaking up 
into a pair of homonyms. Osher terms may be of special intorost because thoro 
are ‘missing links’ in thoir etymology. In modern times thero has arisen in Java- 
hese usage a word artaka to signify our ‘treasurer (of a society)’. It looks a regular 
Sanskrit derivative from artha. zr "money, etc.” but is not given in the diction- 
aries. Is it a learned analogie new-formation? A pretended Sanskrit word, at 
least in the sense and function given to it ncwadays, is, further, kiriya which 
stands for the Dutch stichting ‘foundation’: comparo OJav. kirti (Skt, ofa ‘renown’) 
in the sence of ‘meritorious foundation? 


NOTES 


' The reader may bo roferred to C. Spat, | patilasanó jaman kuna’ (epeoialiet „In 
Aanpassingsvermogen der Maleische taa], invostigating into the remainders (ruins) 
in Ko'oniaal Tijdachrift 13, (1924), p | of anciont times’); naturalization: ‘dadi 
251; H Koot, De invloed der moderne | kawula nin négara in keno’ (‘the bocom- 
Water cha beschaving etc, "Utrecht | ing a subject of this country (state) ), 
Univ, 1929; G.WJ D ewes, The in. | etc. 
fltence of western civilization on the | ? Juynboll's Wdb., p 389, incorrectly 
la guage of the Bast Indies Archipelago, | has prašūsti, 
in The Effect of Western influence on | * See chapter V, section 4, 
native civilisation in the Malay Archi- | 5 Hence ké-tata-négara an (i) *constitu- 
Pelago, (Weltevreden 1929) ; | tion’, (ii)! ibuti itical’. T 

» i949], p.160; C. | tion’, (ii) constitutional, political”. There 

Hooykaas, Modern Maleisch, in Kolo- | are Several combinations with tata in 
niale Studiën, (1939), p.27; J. Gonda, ' modern Indonesian: tata bahasa 'aram- 
see C, pising e: i mar’ (Skt. bhasa- AIG ‘speech, language’); 

A age Ship, pé-nankut ‘who or | tata adab ‘convention, good manners” 
peri pia or PH, minyak *oip) | (Arab. adab ‘courtesy, urkanity, good- 
sil 3 author of the first and”! breeding ete.’) and go Qn. 

Di - isi 
ME 0 a y modern Dutch Javanese i * This is the most probable etymology 

nary for practical use (Th. Pigeaud of this word hich i ld- 
Nederlands-Javaang Handwoordenboek, fashioned Jay i a KCN ķi : 

3 i E) D 4 
Groningen-Batavia 1948) Was obliged to | of Skt kās ve ee 
enter a considerable f (ES GREE, free SID FRACS: 

number of such ‘de. atmosphere’ i : i 
finitions’ : archaeologist - "juru iti | j PRE Seo Tni, tho Rons o belly 
paniti "it represents tho Skt. udara- 333; the 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by A ABSEBIT, Had RSlda eGangotri 497 


c3 and dara ‘id.’ may represent 


a ati ‘utorus, womb, though 

a may bave suffered abbreviation, 
er sot udāra, mentioned by Van der 
n. (KBW. J, p.159), sprung from Skt. 
Pirni IZ ‘vhe aet of relating, 
declaration, illustration’ (Van der Tuuk 
refers tO ityamadi instead of Skt. ity 
qvam adi gdiaWifz ‘and so forth’ which 
jg also found in OJav. texts; see also 
oh. IV, s.1). 


0. 
Skt. dhar 


1 The obsolete Jav. gagana *atmosphero” 
(<Skt. gagana- TTA "ič.) was retained ! 


in tho derivative 29ég4na ‘to fly (in an 
aeroplane etc.):, hence also kapal igégana 
‘airship’ (the native kapal means ‘ship’). 
5 T refer to chapter V, section 4. 

5 Tt cannot be denied that many of 


D 


| these words are still under the necessity 
| cf proving themselves vital enough to 
| come into general use. - Not a few have 
| been proposed by authors on` special 
| subjects or by specialists in linguistie 
j matters. The needs of daily practice 
| will probably prefer to abbreviate such 
phrases as Mal. (Beh. Ind.) tata-usaha 
| négara for ‘administrative law, pēr- 
| usahaan susu ‘dairy-farming’; Jav. cara 
| nin jaman purwa ‘epic’ (Jav. jaman < 
Arab. zamün ‘time’, etc.). : 
‘0 This word has been discussed in 
section 1. 
|" See ch. V, section 6. á 
12 For the word kirta ete. see chapter 
| V, section 4. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


APPENDIX I 
SANSKRIT LOANS IN INDONESIA, INDIAN SANSKRIT, 
AND SANSKRIT LEXICOGRAPHY 


We had alroady occasion repeatedly to intimate that a detailed examina- 
tion of the forms and meanings of the Indian loans leads us to the conclusion that 
now and then deviations from the Indian usage of part of ihe words concerned 
must have been current in the Archipelago. Although a complete lexicographical 
stook-taking of all Sanskrit words in use during the first twelve centuries of the 
Christian era would no doubt reduce the number of Javanese, or, in general, Indo- 
nesian, peculiarities in the use of Sanskrit words,' because the Indonesian docu- 
ments as well as the inscriptional and other usage in India proper give evidence of 
forms and meanings proserved by grammarians and lexicographers but not found 
in the texts oxamined by Boethlingk-Roth and their successors, it may not bo out 
of place here to dwell once more upon the fact that many vocablos hitherto mark- 
ed as ‘not current in the texts’ or ‘only given hy the lesicographors’ are found in 
Javanese or other Indonesian documents. 

Among ihem are, for instance, OJav. Bal. lawana ‘sea’: Skt. lavara- Tam 
‘saline, salted’, and, in lexicographical texts, the name of the particular salt sea 
which surrounds Jambudvīpa; phullita ‘blown, expanded’ (Skt. giga); dlwaja- (Skt. 
vas) in the sense of a ‘particular building-site’; bija (Skt. Aa) in the specialized 
sense of rice’;? the OJav. madhyapada is not given at all by Monior-Williams and 
other authors: Skt. madhya- 8*4 ‘middle, middlemost’ and pada- YZ ‘step, station, 
site, etc.; bhana TW lustre; manthara AFAT in the sense of ‘fortress’. 

In the Wirātaparwa (p.19 and 20 ed. Fokker) the aggregation malla-mosti, 
malla-mosļika is found in the general sense of Skt. malla- AZ alone: ‘a professional 
wrestler; Skt. mansaka aes, of which the second member makes us think in the 
first place, means rogüe' or goldsmith’, a word mausia- ate ‘boxing-match’, how- 
ever, occurs. Besides, mustika- alta is occasionally found to denote ‘a pugilistic 
encounter - However, in Pali mutthika (from muļthi ‘fist’ u Skt. musti- gíz ʻia’) 

C [ :] 3 . H 
means pen wrestler, boxer’, and the combination malla-multhika actually 
AUERS NOB Vinayap. 2,105). The OJav. expression must have been borrowed 
from Sanskrit (-s/- and not -//A.). 
1 E Ee . . 
m EE lit. Jav. basanta ‘moon’ is identical with the Skt. bhasanta- Aldara, 
splen ; ; Bud the gun or fhe moon or a star’ (MW.); the Sund. dopara ‘absurd; 
Pm exons, inconceivable with the Skt. dvapara- %147 in the senso of ‘doubt, 
Dor E eh is marked by MW. ag ‘Lexicogr.’, as is Skt. kuddāla- Su ‘a 
pase Ornoey which, or, rather, the feminine by-form of which (not given by MW.) 
must be considered the origin of tl a pus S 
gin of the TBat. hudali ‘a kind of rake with th teeth 
made of hard wood used to di ; ind of rake with three teot! 
cocci E ig up the field’, The Tag. upasaladn "flatterer, traitor; 
688 presupposes the existence of a Skt. u »acára- STAI in a related 
sense, now «/pacüra- often occurs t 1 7. AV E 
A 5 8 Lo express the idea of ‘obliging or polite behaviour; 
the meanings of "offering, bribe, solicitati , obliging or polite behaviour ; 
of the Tag. sence as well, "tes ict eto”, which can have been the qrigin 
, &ro marked ag lexicographical’. 


Whereas th Fila an 
E sr ae rines & ven to parachidra- mízz by MW. is ‘another's 
"LEX 8 Have the word in the sense of ‘inflicting losses on the 


enemy, betraying: traitor’. whi 
4 8; traitor , Which g4xbeagantai sbāstfrCnkeetītt. chidra- faq in the 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 
Digitized.by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 429 


cc senu? 

nse of ‘voak point + = II | 
gà On the strength of Mal. dur e Tag. duluhaka ‘io inter. 
Bre false woy © Skt. drohaka- zig ‘injuring ete.’ (as a second member f 
i» vnd) was «upposed by Kern;* later on this form as a single word fo 1 S 
dq Malay inseriptions.* g ma 
ancien As we already remarked, the Skt. saddga- AZT ‘wind’ is not mM. 
ograd Dictionary pos Monier- Williams : it occurs in Jav. literary ien 
naa e. sadana NOE azīatā) is found in Indonesia; a third sada- 
gma- GZTA is given in Schmidt's Nachtrāge. 

Jn obher cases a thorough knowledge of the history of Indian loans in 
Indonesia is of interest for the Sanskrit philologist because of the fact that a 
meaning which is rather seldom found, or which occurs in special texts in India 
proper has come into prominence in the Archipelago. Instances of this have 
aleady been given in the previous chapter. Sometimes a meaning which might be 
expected in Sanskrit is found in Javanese; thus the lit. Jav. sudarma moans father’, 
whereas Skt. sudharman- GANT as far as I know, applies to a ‘maintainer of a 


Pott" 


family or house-holder’. 

In other cases we cannot be completely sure of the Indian origin of a word 
which looks Sanskrit as long as it is not found in Indian documents. The lit. Jav. 
durmala ‘criminal, wretch, enemy’ can, for the time being, best be regarded as a 
Javanose product after the model of the synonymous dursila <Skt. dubsila- gae 
üll-behaved, durcara < Skt. duscara- ZAT ‘behaving wickedly’ ete., mala convey- 
ing, inter alia, the sense of ‘sin, impurity’. One of the OJav. terms for ‘elephant’, 
dvipāūga, may be considered a blend of Skt. dvipa- fzq ‘id’ and such animal's 
names in -a/iga- as in the first place the synonymous mataiga- Hd and, further, 
turanga- HX ‘horse’, which occurs in OJav. texts. A curious instance of 'Sans- 
kri made in Indonesia” is found in the Jav. text Tatwa nin wyawahara’ : after a 
pun tai sila dadya sūlakrama ‘the honest way of behaving (i.e. Skt. sila- We ‘custom, 
moral conduct, integrity’) will become villainy (ripeness for the gallows, ie. Skt. 
Sùla- YF ‘stake for impaling criminals’ and Skt. krama- ÆA ‘proceeding, method 


* ele)", in which the opposition i : u plays a part, it follows tika dirgghtyusa dadi 


durgghayusa ‘a long life (Skt. dirghayusya- aga *long-livedness') will become a 
bad dod ee zi ‘difficult of access; danger, distress’, also introduced 
Into Old-Javanese). 


NOTES 


' As is well known, even such texts as | ' ‘a buffalo’, Lexic’? ( MW. ); kririma- 
® larger or minor purāņas contain | mfi in the sense of ‘incense, olibanum 
many words and meanings which are | (73,144 ) puspüsava. JAT honey 
not sufficiently explained in Monier-Wil- | (67,93); vagmi ant instead of vagmins 
‘ams and other dictionaries, or which | is also found Kāl. Pur. 79,63. 
àro held to occur exclusively in lexico- | * For these two words seo K. C. Crueq, 
Štāphionl works. In the Kalika-Purana | Bijdrage tot de kennis van het e 
We for instance como across: kaphoni- doodenritueeļ, (Santpoort, 1998) p.4 


€ 
«| elbow* (78,179); kasarát PRESS Vnd Hd tri Collecti 
biki buffalo! (71,58): of. Küsara- quc ^3 Gf. Gručg, 0.6 p.124. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


APPENDIX II 
gANSKRIT IN THE WEST BY WAY OF INDONESIA 


Words are often much-bravelled. The study of their journeys over large 
tracis of the eartb, tho exact determination of all facts semantic and chronolo- 
qjoal connected with their spread, is not seldom of the utmost importance from 
tie point of view of tho historian of civilization. Take for instance the word for 
‘peach’. In almost all languages it comes eventually from ‘Persian’, indicating 
the oriental source of this fruit : the precise statements about the chain of borrow- 
ings’ (Greek > Latin > Old French > Middle English etc.) are, howevor, needed in 
order to establish tho history of the word as well as tho bistory of thefruit's spread 
over tho world. Nearly all the words for 'pepper in European like the article 
itself ultimately go back to India, but it is nob sufficient to show the phonetical 
resemblance between Greek peperi (xévept), Latin piper and Skt. pippali-, pippali 
fief, fāegēt ‘berry; Piper longum’. We would also like to know tho ultimate 
fatherland of the word and tho way by which it reached Greace. The home of sugar 
and its wostern names is India, but tho majority of European forms of the name 
have come through Arabic by way of Spanish or Italian. 

The commercial relations which other Asiatic peoples and after them also 
ancient times maintained with Indonesia caused 
many Indonesian words to fravel westward, some of which were already known 
fo sncient Sanskrit authors e.g, the Eng. camphor, Fr. camfre. Another is 
the Eng. lemon, Fr. limon, Span. limon, which, by way of the Arab. laimun, was 
borrowed from Indonesian : Mal. limau etc. Afterwards, however, when the Indo- 
nesian idioms had adopted Indian terms, some of thom were, side by side with 
native elements, introduced by western merchants and travellers into their own 
countries. In some cases it iz certain that a Sanskrit word came to Europe tbrough 
Malay. But in some other cases a difficulty arises : as the Portugueso, the Engli-h 
and the Dutch not only traded with Indonesia but also with India, and settled on 
the many islands of the Archipelago as well as on the extensive coasts of the penin- 
sula, it ia not always easy exactly to establish from what source they borrowed 
2 definite word which was current in both regions. 

Yet it may be safely assumed that a rather considerable number of Indian, 
and even of Sanskrit words, which were introduced into the Dutch language came 
there by way of Malay. The intensive contact the Datch maintained with the 
Indonosian world for 350 years led them to introduce many Indonesian words, 
and among them loans deriving from other Eastern languages. If such words have 
not been received into English, and if they denote Malay or Javanese objects or 
institutions, they may be considered as having travelled by way of the Archi- 
pelago, even when the old Dutch records are not sufficiently enlightening in this 
Yespect. : 

m A random collection of these vocables m 
ue „Such terms for Indonesian officials 
(s & chieftain’ <Bkt. raja U king Jav. jaksa | bet a 
: Valgas avag 'suporintendent J av. patih WLS Svan, avan 3 B 

ervant” : of. Skt. pati. af Io. andi vhi. exeo" io Jeva, and a Bish 


European countries from very 


ay suffice to illustrate the above 
and dignitaries a8 Mal. ote. raja 
jaksa ‘judicial civil servant <Skt. 


430 Digitized byr x ss R i FbNndatiBOBHeBhAi and eGangotri 


+ The word was discussed by Kern, VG. | ” Juynboll, Catalogus, IT, p 187. The 


X. p977 | title of this text moans "The essence 

X 3 x 

= Korn YG. X, p.264. The word is not | (Skt. tativa- WT true stato, reality’) of 
in the Pet Dict and MW. : ' the adminiatration of justice’ (vyavakāra. 
6 Viz. in. tho inscriptions of Karang vqagW ‘id.’). See aleo G.W J. Drewes, 
Brahi (Jambi) and Kota Kapur (Bangka), | Drie Javasnsche gooroes (thesis Leyden, 
ces G. Coedàs, in BEFEO. 30 (1930), | (1925) ), p-1571. 
pil. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


—— 


439 Digitized by AryacSemai rawndgtiory Nimon and e Gangotri 


title in Madura < Skt. bhüpati- wate ‘ki prince s méntéri in tho cd gi "func. 
tionary’ <Skt. mantra Heat ‘a king’ oounsellor, were, of course, early Introduced 
into the spoken and written vocabulary of the Dutch merehants and settlors, and 
henco in literary and other works dealing with Indonesia. The Javaneso word for 
‘village’ desa « Skt. deša--ŽU *place, region' may, as dessa, in the sense of ‘Tado- 
nesian village’ be regardBd as naturalized in the Dutoh language. Tho wide-sproad 
Malay eto. pérkara ‘matter, affair, business, concern’ (cf. the Skt. prakara- NT 
and prakarana- THM, roferenco to which has ropoatedly been mado in tho fore- 
going chapters of this book) is, especially among old Indians’, a favourito term for 
"point at issue, controversial issue, affair; in old documents it also denoted ‘a 
section or clause of a contract. Objects, persons, beliefs or institutions which 
were felt as typically Indonesian, or at least, non-Buropean, were, quite natu. 
rally, often called by their native names. Thus Mal. guna-guna ‘charm, philtre’ 
«Skt. gura- IT ‘the virtue in anything’; Jav. pasaigrahan in the sense of ‘night- 
shelter, inn, especially when founded by public authorities on behalf of their 
functionaries’ < Skt. samgraha- HA3 in the sense ‘kind treatment, entertainment’, 
and hence in Java ‘hospitable reception’; Jav. Mal. etc. santri ‘travelling studont?.? 
pēdai ‘cart, solid-wheeled vehicle’? and other words which are also to be found 
in Dutch novels and more or loss scientific books on Indonosia. In old documents 
we also find kutika in the sense of ‘local era or calendar’: cf. Mal. kētika "period 
of time’ <Skt. ghalika TÎÈFT '24 minutes’; laxamana ‘admiral, high official’ i.e. the 
Mal. laksamana ‘a honorific title associated with the position of warden of the 
coast’ from Laksmana- GA, the brother of Rima.‘ Some of them have succood- 
ed in naturalizing to such an extent that they are in common use, many of those 
using them being ignorant of their origin. The Dutch negorij, negerij (in the 
XVII" century also negrij) applies to ‘an insigaificant village, situated in an-out- 
of-the-way place, the inhabitants and state of society of which are backward’. It 
has, incorrectly, often been —and perhaps is still by way of popular etymology— 
connected with the Dutch neger 'negro'. Its origin is, however, the Mal. négéri 
‘settlement, city-state’, Indonesian town, colony otc.’, Jav. négari (kr. négara ng.) 
“court-capital, capital, country, state ete., which represent the Skt. nagari anft 
(beside nagara- 71%) ‘city, town’. 
A curious word is, as to its origin, the Dutch doerak (oe: pron. «, or in 
Engl. orthography : 00) ‘rascal, Scapegrace, a base man, blighter’. Two obymolo- 
gies have been proposed : (i) < Russian durák ‘blockhead’, but the different accon- 
tuation (Dutch doérak) presents difficulties;> (ii) < Mal. durhaka (which must be a 
Skt. drohaka- Bes ‘injuring, doing wrong etc.').* I would prefer tho latter etymo- 
logy, for the objection raised against it,” viz. the diversity of meaning, is nob very 
valid: Mal. durhaka, durahka, dérhaka eto. moans “disobedience to the lawful 
authority of the prince, the ‘state’, a superior, a husband ete”. People of this 
description are, however, often put on á par with criminals or scoundrels. Besides, 
the Dutch doerak is, as far ag I remember, 
dient children. Finally, the Javanese duraka, which is the identical word, does 
not only refer to recalcitrance but also to guilt or wrong.doing in a more general 
rense; the Sund. doraka applies to ‘wickedness, injustice, criminality’. 
: One of the most interesting borrowings from Sanskrit in Dutch is the word 
idi Damn: Krasu, tho Berundive or ‘participium nooessitatis” BA 
D, 8 to be forgiven or pardoned’, Tho word has been borrowed, 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


in low-colloquial also applied to disobe- ` 


"g sanae 


gg an inb 


5 amanaskara ad 


` SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 433 


santawya, santa ya, m -Javanese. We find it for instance in the 
„hort prose version of the ASEEIDSSNBSSDRDADUS (the name of the 15th book of the 
yfababharate in Old-Javaneee®), where it follows a welcome and, as often, serves 
roduction to a proposal or a request : ‘pardon me for addressing you, inter- 
troubling you; excuse me(us) : bhagyanak ni nhulun, santawya ùhulunr 
. Happiness (to you), my son, pardon me for troubling you, I should 
o administer the consecration to you...' The Javanese derivative ksamakzna 
(trom Skt. kgamā- THI ‘patience, forbearance, indulgence’) is often used as a syno- 
nym of (k)santawya, e,g. ksamakéna ta wacana ni ranak mpuiku ‘pardon me for 
addressing you, my Lord’. Another, as good as equivalent, term is sējītā, which, 
though nob known to me from Sanskrit, must contain the Skt. ajna- «s ‘order’. 


Digitized by Arya Old Foundation Chennai and eGangoti ^ 


supting YOU 


like t 


In this way, at the beginning of an address, or only as a courteous preliminary to 
opening & conversation, the expression saniawya became common: ‘excuse me, by 
your leave; cf, e.g., Nag. 39,2. A younger form is santabe (:e<ya), which, in 
the course of time, was abbreviated to tabe. The Balinese often resort to this 
dissyllable when apologizing for mentioning facts or performing deeds which might 
be considered impolite. When, for instance, a man points at limbs or a pari of 
the body of other people, or even of himeelf, or when an inferior has to stand on 
a level higher than the head of his superior, they pronounce this word. In regio- 
nal (and in Surakarta in old-fashioned) Modern-Javanese the expression, like 
Engl. ‘excuse me’, is especially used when troubling a person for a moment. For- 


-merly, Muslims used to pronounce it once or twice before mentioning the name of 
Alteir Prophet or other holy men. The locution has also come to the Batak people 


in the heart of Sumatra? : santabi, said when passing in front of & person, or pro- 
nouncing words which might be considered as impolite. In Gayo séntabi indicates 
tha apologizing for saying or doing something which can be taken as a breach of 
good manners, and also the ceremonious and obligatory greeting of a special group of 
relatives; besides, if denotes a special sémbah (the Indonesian añjali- «sat or gesture 
of homage or worship) during the wedding-ceremonies." In this language there 
is also a short form tadi. In such Celebes languages as Buginese and Barče tabe 
is also frequently heard, the Christians using it as a form of addressing or greeting. 
In Tagalog we find saūtābi and the altered form sintab; besides, this language 
and Bisaya have tabi. Now, in addition to the above-mentioned meanings Jav. 
tabe is also a synonym of the English ‘good-bye! or ‘so long; in this language, 
Sundanese and in Javanese Malay it is, in this way, especially used when greeting 
people other than Indonesians. "The Dutch, hearing and using this greeting in 
Java, introduced it into their country, where it is now usual in lower colloquial 
and familiar speech (among soldiers, schoolboys, employees etc.). il 
It goes without saying that the Indonesian words borrowed, or ati least inoi- 
dentally used by the Dutch, did not always escape being re-interpreted or modi- 
fied. Thus the Dutch sailors and merchants of the time produced such fine in- 
stances of popular adaptation as passeerbaan (trom the Dutch verb passeren to sā 
by’, and the Dutch baan ‘path, way, court, course, track’: a court or course w E 
People pass by’) instead of the Jav. paseban ‘meeting-place, rallying-point , esp. the 
A Ives ( < Skt. seva 
Place whore the men dependent on a prince had to present themselv : 
Wl ‘frequenting, service, attendance’), the gallery or place to which Rha: gonara 
public is admitted when a sovereign holds court’. The nusa (a native word for ‘is- 
land") Pandita (<Skt. pandit C feet Sayana hesther? of an island near Bali, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


434 2:55: 2 lp NN 


was called the Bandieien-eiland, ‘the island of the bandits; the English sea-farerg 


likewise chose to designate it as Bandit-island; this namo had its justification in 
sland, for it formerly was 8 place of banishment. -A 


(the IN. forms'of the Indian word for “box-car- 
riage, palanquin’ : Skt. paryanka- TĀS eto.) was interpreted a8 (Dutch) plankie, a 
popular pronunciation of plankje, i.e. ‘small plank, board'. Tho Jav. Mal. bicara 
‘deliberation’ < Skt. vicara- ATT ‘a mode of procedure, deliberation was trang- 
formed into pitcharinge in old Dutoh letters and documents : the Dutch suffix -inge, 
-ing helps to form abstract nouns : bespreking deliberation . The Mal. ete. mërdë- 
heka ‘freedom (in contradistinction to servitude), free < Skt. maharddhika- quf 
‘very prosperous, sage’ was used in the senso of freo Indonesian Christians’ and 
pronounced Mardijker, -er being a Dutch suffix in nouns denoting an agont or an 


"inhabitant of a town or country." 


the evil reputation of the i 
` plaūki, pélanki or pélankin, pélanken 


NOTES 


' This word has been dealt with in chap- . '? See G. A. J. Hazeu, Gajosch-Neder- 
ter IV, section 2. landsch Woordenboek, (Batavia 1907), 
2 For this word see ch. IV, s. 1. p.819 f. See also 889f. 

3 Seo ch. V, s. 8. 1 I also refer to H. Kern, VG. X, p.975 
* Of. A. Zieseniss, Funktion und Stel- | and 286. Kern may be in the right 
lung des Laksamana am Hofe der malai- | when ‘remarking that san. ( the first 
ischen Sultane, Acta Orientalia, XV, | syllable of santābi) was considered a 
11936), p.72ff.; see also ch. V, s. 2. : native element (the Tagalog prefix sai 
5 See Woordenboek der Nederlandsche ! forms nouns indicating the entirety of 
Taal, (The Hague-Leyden, 1916), III, 2, | what is expressed by the base: san-taón 
S.V., where it ie, moreover, considered | ‘a whole year (taon). Such formulas 
improbable that a Russian term of abuse are, however, as Kern. himself adds, 
was borrowed by the Dutch. But Dutch | often shortened. "It ig by no means 
and Russian sailors and merchants often necessary to follow the same scholar 


met: 3 j in assuming’ an ancient date for the 
This word has been discussed elece- origin of the short form because it occurs 
where. in both North and South Indonesia. 


i 2 the dictionary mentioned in n. 6. | guch form abbreviations are apt to arise 

S 3 be kai ee xo Drie | independently in more than one region. 
oeken van het Oudjavaansche Mahā- | 12 Seo a} , i t 

bhārate, (Leyden 1893), p48. : ae 80 my remarks in BKI. C (1941), 

A a . ed 
See H.N. van der Tuuk, Bataksoh- | 13 7 also refer to P. J. Veth, Uit Oost en 


Nederduitsch Woord 
De oordenbook, (1861), p. | West (Arnbein 1889), p.110ff. 


THE eno 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


INDEX 


(References of minor importance have been omitted) 


mc 16, 72, 105: 293, 
419, 424 

oki 943 

akhila- 353 

Agastya" 136f., 284 

agni- 34, 65, 217, 231, 407, 
416 

agnida- 271 

agra- 239, 339 

anka- 40, 72, 424 

ankusa- 328 

anga- 135, 160, 182, 320, 
322 

angara- 63 

angiras- 118 

dngustha- 136 

scala- 269 

atarkya- 117 

ati 806, 320 

atikasta- 117 

atithi- 272 

atita- 254, 283, 309 

atītānāgatavartamāna- 118 

atulya- 361 

atyanta- 234, 254 

atha 326, 395 

Atharvaveda- 196, 229 

atha và 58f., 72, 244, 395 

adri- 16, 219, 306 

advitiya- 361 

adhas 395 

adhi 214 

adhikāra- 255 

adhigama- 379 

adhipati- 34, 272, 332 

adhigreyas- 119 

adhyaksa- 34, 78, 186, 251, 
254, 333, 431 

adhyātmika- 161, 204, 251, 
254, 859 

ananta- 41 

*nantabhoga. 47, 71 


I SANSKRIT 


anantya- 30 

anala- 197, 254 

&navarata- 239 

anagata- 283f. 

anavila- 117 

aniccha- 254 

anindita- 361 

anugraha- 37, 48, 161, 239, 
255, 260, 339, 410 

anudatta- 105 

anunasika- 104 

anubbāva- 116 

anumāna- 803 

anuranjana- 181 

anurāga- 181, 289 

anusvāra- 68, 105 

aneka- 254, 290 

anekasah 230 

anta- 99 

Antaka- 135 

antara- 54, 269, 970, 311, 
318, 319, 396, 403f., 411, 
494 

antarā 192 

andbakara- 385 

anyat 895 

anyāya- 72, 84, 203, 261 

api 395 

apūrva- 360 

apsaras- 243, 980, 413 

abbaya- 218, 220 

abhicara- 175 

abhinava- 941 

abhiprāya- 254, 323 

abbimukha- 118 

abhigeka- 236, 954, 352 

abhyasa- 44, 84, 88, 116, 
117, 221, 255, 408 

amrta- 47 

amrtikarana- 170 

ambara- 862, 382, 383 


a6 h-P Saa Vrat Shastri Collec 


ambhodhara- 238 

amla- 259 

ayuta- 79, 199 

ari- 820 

arista- 247, 342 

argha- 53, 60, 231, 246, 247, 
954 

arghya- 424 

arcā 196, 254, 261, 358 

Arjuna- 238 

artba- 37f., 51, 54, 59, 61, 
72, 203, 913, 231, 239, 
947, 316f., 348, 393, 419, 
496 

arthavat- 384, 493 

arthin- 817 

ardba- 319 

arvan- 274 — 

alamkara- 241, 356 

alpa- 232 i 

alpaprāņa- 105 

alpayusa- 253 

av- avati 75 

avaghata- 344 

avatāra- 265 

avadhi- 182 

avasana- 122, 254, 270, 387 

avasita- 323 

avastha 269 

avighata- 370 

avighnam astu 120, 125 

avicarita- 383 

avici- 147 

adoka- 954 

asvalalita- 108 

Aávinau 140, 258 

astaka- 285 

astaguna- 35 

astagraha- 168 

astānga- 40 - 

asādhya- 384 

asi; 320 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


488 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


a ss SSS — 


asipatravana- 147 

astu (as-) 35, 243, 284, 306, 
864 

astra- 119 

astramantra- lli 

abambara- 204, 948 


ākarsa- 325 

akaga- 65, 260, 309, 426 

āgama- 16, 43, 46, 50, 176, 
944, 953, 330 

āgneya- 264 

&oamana- 265, 362 

acamaniya- 111 

acara- 46, 51, 87, 176, 254, 
957, 284, 319f., 370f., 
899, 423, 425 

ajua 259, 273 

ātatāyin- 175, 254 

&tman- 155, 158, 260, 274 

ādi- 255, 295, 346, 405 

āditya- 63, 69, 245, 254 

šdivamsa- 88 

anaya- 112 

apah 119, 976 

apadgata- 254, 284 

āpti- 404 

āpyāyana- 342 

abha- 116 

āyāsa- 244, 363 

āyudha- 119 

āyus- 274 

&yuga- 244 

ayusya- 326 

ayoga- 72, 77 

&rabdha- 254 

arambha- 241 

ārāma- 227 

aropana- 151 

arya- 34, 47, 136, 172, 218, 
215 

alambana- 206 

alambhana- 960 

&locita- 74 

avesa- 240 

aga 74 

aéiviga- 235 

agearya- 997 


āsrama- 218, 331, 423 

āfraya»= 61, 65, 220, 232, 
953, 264, 349, 393 

āgādha- 68 

ásana- 128 

āsannakāla- 122 

&sava- 229 

āsīt (as- 303 

astam eva 425 

astha 75 ' 

āsthāna- 37, 58, 169 


ingita- 237 

iccha 266, 384 

ijya 118 

ity evam adi 21 

Indra- 47, 130, 135, 943f. 

indra- 320 

indrajāla- 266 

indriya- 166f., 222, 240, 
807, 423 

iva 395 


Iévara- 131, 132, 179 


uoca- 192 

uccàra- 88 

ucchvasa- 236, 251, 269[., 
291 

ujjīvat(ī)- 384 

ujjvala- 861 

udumbara- 71 

uta 395 

uta va 59 

uttama- 203, 386, 423 

uttara- 37, 262, 85, 319 

utpatti- 54, 235, 286, 241 

utpanna- 241 

utsaha- 428 

utsāha- 62, 320, 404, 423 

udaka- 105, 270 

udakanjali- 111 

udadhi. 270 

udaya- 270, 383 

udātta- 105 

udāna» 259 

udāra- 495 


uddhāra- 174 

udyāna- 270, 807 

upakara- 259, 339 

upacara- 56) 255, 288, 919, 
339, 370f., 428 

upajiva- 494 

*upadüta- 256 

upadrava- 238, 253 

upanayana- 112 

upamā 62, 236, 360, 388 

uparāga- 971 

upavasatha- 78 

upavāsa- 49, 46, 73, 76, 
244, 255, 258, 330 

upastha- 254 

upādhi- 885, 392 

upāya- 122, 253, 385, 392 

ubhaya- 55, 73, 362 

Uma 131 


üha- 117 


rņa- 378 
rddha- 319 
rsi- 171, 248, 333 


eka- 49, 182, 402f. 
ekacitta- 107 
ekamatra- 104 


aisanas 65 
aisan 239 
*aisanya- 285 
aisvarya- 239 


om 62, 104, 160, 266 
omkara- 168 
ogha- 76 


aurasapatra- 239 
&ugadha- 192 


kacchapi 43, 68, 235, 408 
katuka- 253 

kentaka- 148 

kataka- 234 

katham api 261f. 


udāgīn 94% Vrat Shastri Collekifekhā. 87, 56, 67, 60, 78, 


Digitized by Auson ENFER Gaal and eGangotri 
i 439 


365, 410 kàrupya- 55, 262 krtayasas- 264, 305 
kanaka- 282 kārttika- 68 krtāñjali- 141 
yanigtha- 903, 256, 983, kārya- 38, 46, 48, 245, 251, krtārtha- 340 * 
938 355f., 408 krtin- 305 
Kandarpa- 235, 354 kāla- 43, 63, 72, 73, 94, krttikah 285f. 
kandala- 248 128, 135, 303, 314, 320, Krpa- 136 
kanduks- 248, 260 385, 388, 425 krgnapakga- 118 
kanyā 68 Kāla- 139, 135, 201 keyüra- 260 
kapála- 37, 49, 78, 85, 350, Ealadamstra- 289 kevala- 73, 414 
412, 425 Kalagni- 141 kaivalya- 239 
kamala- 370 kālāntara- 181 kokila- 343 
kampa- 60 kalpaka- 169 kota- 37, 73, 92, 241, 316 
kampita- 37, 248, 364 kimkarabala- 186, 153 koti- 43, 58, 68, 73, 199, 
kambala- 99 kirita- 260 249, 348 
kirna- 343 koga- 111, 306 


karasuddhi- 111 


karupa- 354, 359 kirtana- 358 kaupina- 239 
karkata- 63 kirti- 357f., 426 kaulavarga- 88 
karkati 60, 87 kunkuma- 291 Kaušika- 266 
karkasa- 360 kujana- 854 kaustubha- 240 
karņa- 48 kufici- 38 krakaca- 38, 51, 87, 291 
„karņikāra- 211 kuncika 78, 87 krama- 72f., 176, 204, 305, 
karty- 105, 176 kuta- ‘house, hut’ 49, 197, — 341 
"karman- 105, 120, 274 219, 413 kriya 343 
karmika- 21 kuti-, kuti 77 krīdā 266, 366, 377 
kala. 76 kugumbini 275 krodha- 54, 387 
kala 358, 385 kutumbī 151 klega- 7S 
Kalinga- 43, 140 kupapa- 235 klešamāra- 116 
kalpa- 147f. kundi 38, 78: 90, 92: 249 —— kgatriya- 119, 171, 252, 
kalpaka- 169 kudāla-, kuddāla- 63, 428 332 
kalpataru- 118 kupya- 53 ksantavya- 489f. ~ 
kalyāņamitra» 199 kubja- 172 kgamā 269, 309 
kavandha- 244 kumāra- 58 > ksaya- 54, 119 
kavi- 9, 48, 56, 106, 354 Kumāra. 131 kgiti- 34, 118, 195, 197f., 
kamsa- 38, 65f. 72, 209, kumbha- 64, 326, 350 959, 349 
248, 345 kuruvinda- 248 kgudra- 252 
kastüri 79 kula- 60, 80f., 239, 364f. ksura. 252 
kāca- 37, 38, 46, 53, 68, 78, kulagotra- 88 keurika 148 
334, 419, 425 kulapati- 21 kgullaka- 36 
kdīicana- 198, 425 kulavarga- 88 ksetra- 252, 341 
kànjikà 260 kulina- 354, 370 kgoda- 107 
kända- 179 kuša- 77 
katara. 820, 385 kuéala- 358 khatva 249 
Kama» 258 kusuma- 35, 41, 51, 269, khadga- 334 
Kāma- 131 351 khapda- 179 
kāya. i : kbala- 314- 
ya- 320 krt- 322 khyāti- 283 


isvikāvrāāki. 174 krta 219, 217, 919, 221f., 
Arana. 16, 48, 64, 305, 245. 9Hot$4lya Vrat Shastri SA t 
810, 326, 389/., 412 krtajfia- 341 gaganá-, gagana- 422 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


440 


Gangā 71, 105 

gaja- 37, 48, 72, 75, 77, 197 

Gajāhvaya- 137, 142 

gaņa- 75 

Gaņa- 131 

gaņayitrikā 209 

gaņitrikā 167 

Ganesa- 131 

gaņdīva- 47 

gati- 275, 370, 381 

gadā 47 

gadgada- 232, 845 

gandha- 55, 207, 4171. 

Gandhamādana- 136 

gandharvarāja- 119 

Gandhavati 137 

gambhira- 117, 204, 368, 
494 

Garuda- 16, 37, 40, 46, 51, 
137, 139, 149, 237, 422 

garjita- 136 

garbhiņī- 238 

gala- 38, 209, 347 

galū 272 

gāņdiva-, gandiva- 34, 240 

gali 54 

giri- 47, 412 

gunja 49 

guda-, gula- 38, 51 

guņa- 36, 37, 47, 48, 60, 
309, 347, 396, 408, 493, 
432 

gunavat- 348 

guru- 41, 46, 51, 72, 89f., 
104, 174, 262, 334, 351, 
385 

Guru- 130 

guruņtaka- 248 

gulma- 356 A 

guhā 60, 72, 78, 241, 373, 
418 

grdhra- 68, 176, 201, 233 

grha- 197, 217, 243, 410 

grhastha- 178 © : 

grhita- 203, 338, 494 

go- 239, 273 

gopala- 90 

gopura- 196, 240, 419 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


govraja- 238 
gosala- 365 

gosthi 185 

Gauda- 25 
grantha- 90 

graha- 64, 408 
grahaņa- 60, 408 
grahītā 338 

griva- 410 

glàua- 60, 231, 311 


ghata- 76 

ghatikā 43, 63, 132, 201) 
985, 388, 432 

ghati 76 

ghaņtā 38, 60, 72, 95, 168, 
3920 

ghota-, ghotaka- 323 

£hosa 104 


cakra- 03» 75, 78; 97, 333, 
339, 381 

cakravartin- 233 

cakravāla- 16, 97, 288 

cankrama- 263f., 346 

cancala- 248 

candakirana- 195 

caņdāla- 173, 344 

Candi 198 

caturanga- 39, 256 

caturangula- 111 

caturveda- 110 

candana- 37, 39, 189, 190, 
207 

candra- 36, 69, 119 

candramās- 273 

Candravaméa- 141 

Candrasara- 36 

candrahāsa- 139 

capala- 36 

camara- 81 

carana- 67 

carita- 74, 383 

catitra- 59, 264 

carmayasti- 28 

caryà 191 

calita- 56 

Cāgakyas. S8tya Vrat Shastri Coll 


c&taka- 964 

camara- 81, 191, 29) 

cara- 121 

caraka- 354, 369 

cārin- 947 

citta- 44, 66, 156, 933 
285, 844, 419 

citra: 53, 246, 338, 494 

citrakāra- 132 

Citragupta- 132, 135 

cinta- 156 

cintaka- 379. 

cintā- 59, 65, 75 

cintāmaņi- 59 

cihna- 59, 177f., 985 

cukra- 58, 260 

cumb- cumbati 366 

cüdà, cūda- 37, 44f. 

cüdàmani- 965 

cürna- 66, 107, 377 

cülika- 36 . 

-celaka- 368f. d. 

caitra- 68 

codya- 75, 339 

cora- 175, 271 

Cola- 25 

colikā 245 

caura- 271 

caurikā 36 

caurya- 245 

cyuta-, cyutaka 172, 3791. 


chattra- 263 

chalaka- 45, 47, 58 

ch&ya 44, 49, 76, 169, 161, 
247, 292 

ohidra- 204, 347, 4281. 

chudra- 63 

churikā 191 

churī 269 

cheka- 380f. 

cheda- 57, 78, 182, 188 


jagat- 423 

jaūgama- 379 

Jatāyu-, jetāyus- 71, 234 
jatala- 71 


Faia? 76 


Digitized DYNKET Feundatigo RES PA! and eGangotri 


441 


Mariya- 304, 406 
ürdana- 4* 
tuo 60, 64, 233, 244, 
498 
japa” 194 
jaropana- 197 : 
jaya 35, 47, 209, 214, 406 
jarat- 119 
jaladhi- 937 
jalāntara- 419 
Jahnavi 258 
jataka- 934, 306, 354, 380 
jāti- 41, 75, 98, 161, 210f., 
339, 342, 393f. 
jāla- 39, 46, 47, 51, 54, 72, 
919 
jihma- 56 
jima- 189, 248, 377 
jiva- 73, 75, 195, 161, 425 
jīvadāna- 174 
: jivàtman- 334, 423 
„Jīvita- 162 
Jaimini- 229 
jīāpita- 64 
jyut- 100 
iyaistha- 68 


tīkā 845 


Takgaka- 149, 343 

tatāka- 19]f. 

tadāga. 53,62, 73, 93, 121 
f. 

tata- 904, 495 

tatkala- 69, 73 

tattva- 111 

tathāgata- 113 

tathāpi 78, 191, 253, 395 

tantu- 190f. 

tantra- 68, 303, 495f. 

tapas- 11, 16, 42, 73, 117, 
162, 204, 220 

tāmomaya- 118 

taru- 34, 236 

taruņa- 50, 68, 74, 173 

tarka- 69, 64, 362 

tarkaņa- 64 

tarjani 406 


tala- 50 

tasmat 395 

tāma- 54 

tamra- 147 

tara 915 

taragana- 258 

talavrnta- 236 

talavya- 104f. 

tikta- 20, 361, 362 

tithi- 63, 118 

tiryak- 238 

Tilottamā 134, 136 

tīksņa- 261 

tīra- 119, 219, 271 

tirtha- 148, 152, 308 

tīvra- 66, 236, 322, 353, 
362 

tunga- 278, 320 

tuttha- 91 

tunna- 189, 345, 354 

tula 64 

tusara- 259 

tusta- 378 

trna- 243, 362 

*trpi- 322 

trpti- 242, 322, 362 

trsna 243, 944, 419 

tejas- 943 

taila- 66 

toya- 50, 159, 385 

tyāga- 143, 252 

tri- 73, 220, 221, 303 

triņetra- 402 

tridbātu- 289 

tripada- 111 

tripurusa- 1341. 

trimātra- 104 

trimūrti- 134 

trivamsa- 88 

Trivikrama- 335, 344 

truti- 362 

tryantaka- 135 


dakgiņa- 77, 244 
daņda--51, 66, 138, 
230, 232, 233, 236, 959» 


c99978105339:at Shastri Collec 


dadhi- 89, 246, 366 


danta- 35, 72, 286, 303 

dam- dàmyati "9f. 

daridra- 408 

dasa- 72 

dahana- 192 . 

daka- 76 

dàna- 51, 949, 307, 340, 
493 

dānava- 351, 411 

dantya- 105 

dàra- 175 

darah 321 

dārikā 54 

dàha- 260 

digjaya- 204, 233 

dina- 2, 49, 309, 415 

divaea- 49, 940, 281 

divākara- 259 

divya- 231, 368, 493 

dīksā 172 

din&- Oe 340 

dipa- 2138. 

dirgha- 104 

dirghàyu(s)- 246, 247, 274 

duķkha- 55, 367 

durācāra- 256 

durātmaka- 342 

Durgandhinī 137 

durgama- 379 

durjana- 253, 334 

durbbikga- 142, 231 

dusta- 60, 252, 342, 343 

dus- 182, 293f., 408 

dūta- 49, 82, 425 

düra- 16, 76, 351 

drsta- 176 

drsti- 175 

deva- 4, 42, 82, 133, 172, 
213, 279 

devaguru- 131 

devatā 42, 82, 132, 133, 245 

devana- 161f. 

devaputramāra- 116 


devarsi- 118 
181, Devanga- 39) 343 
devāmsa- 97 
Agvābāra- 161 
devi 42, 182, 279 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


a43 


dega- 65, 81, 102, 196, 342, 
419, 439 

dešanā 117 

daitya- 231, 236 

daiva-4 

daivata- 107 

dolā 99, 97 ` 

dolika 29 

doga- 42, 46, 55, 77, 117, 
240, 330, 338, 409 

dyut- 100, 273 

drava- 189, 938, 289 

dravina- 336 

dravya- 35, 59f., 78, 238, 
261 

drohaka- 49, 55, 190, 240, 
429, 432 

dva- 320 

dvapara- 355, 428 

dvārapati- 414 

dvāravatī 137 

dvi- 320 

dvipa- 252, 429 

dvimātra- 104 

dvirada- 252 

dvirgpa- 119 

dvīpa- 118 

dvīpāntara- 403f. 


dhanada- 21, 272 

dhanu(s)- 272 

Dhanesvara- 240 

dhara- 54 

dharma- 51, 65, 86, 135, 
192, 203, 242, 268, 304, 
357 z 

dharmagala- 86 

dharmistha- 240 

dhánya- 110 

dhānyarāja- 110 

dhāra- 54 

dhāraņā 157, 163 

dhi 272 

dhtipa- 42, 48, 65, 75, 209, 
247, 408 - 

dhūli:, dhūlī 65, 107, 247 

dhrta- 64,66 - 

dhairyamà&nin- 122 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


dhvaja- 197, 245, 407, 428 

nagara- 73, 243, 423 

nagarī 61, 432 

nagna- 353 

nada-, nala- 159 

nadi 119, 241 

Nandaka- 283 

nabhas- 273 

nabbastala- 278 

naya- 361 

nayana- 344, 961 

nara- 194, 355 

naraka- 49, 46, 49, 74, 
147, 351 

naramamsa- 253, 259 

Narmada 335, 343 

nalikera- 240 

navan- 132, 310 

nàga- 37, 41, 51, 56, 77,134 

nagapasa- 150 

nagabandha- 160 

natha- 212, 242, 417 

nana 320 

naman- 61 

nayaka- 21, 333 

naraca: 77 

naraci- 99, 426 

nala- 159 

nitya- 445 

nityasah 266: 

nidrā 61, 234 

nidhana- 230 

nipuna- 230 

nimitta- 258 

niyata- 61, 73, 258 

niyuta- 199 

niraya- 402 

nirācāra- 950f. 

nira&ig- 119 

nirāhāra- 119 

nirbhagna- 361 

nirbhita- 141 

nirmala- 326, 419 

nirviga- 396 

nive&a- 169 

niģciti- 329 

niskala- 3 


CC-0. Pri 


53 
f. i 
Sisprabha: abe. Shastri Colle 


nis- 294 

nīti- 178f., 305 

nīra- 67 

nīla- 39, 46, 49, 134, 190 
nilavat- 275 

nīlavatī 210 

nūpura- 241 

nrpa- 242 

nairrta- 229 

nairrti 65, 77 


pakga- 142f., 371 
paksin- 76, 361f. 
pankaja- 236 
pankti- 251 
paficakona- 288 
paficadhātu- 149 
patican- 91, 150, 153, 157, 

174, 180, 191, 287f., 403 
palicaloka- 70 
paficastina 287 
Paficala- 136 
paūcendriya- 41, 287 
panjara- 66, 73, 251, 259 
pahji, panji 322 
panjika 322 
pata- 242 
patala- 75 
patola- 40 
patta- 90 
pathala- 246 
panita- 256 
pandita- 77, 83, 96f., 330, 

433f. 
pati- 21, 42, 212, 272 
patni 370 
pattra- 90, 93, 382 
pada- 75, 396 
padāti- 39, 384 
padārtha- 48, 254 
padma- 92, 209, 232 
Padmā 370 
padmasana- 135, 196 
padmini 276, 370 
Pampa 229 
para- 320, 404 

achidra- 428 

Midaira 299, 225, 860 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


mesvara- 131 
de gs 
parampara- 423 
paravaba- 2 
parājāY8” 258 
parārtbam 117 
Parāšars- 31 
peri- 299 
parikarman- 110 
parikrama- 110, 357 
parigraha- 50, 61, 190, 248 
paricāra- 275 
paritoga- 234 
pariprsta- 54 
paribādhā 54 
paribhāsā: 46 
paribhoga- 54 
parilekha- 201 
parivàra- 343 
parihara- 61 
parīkgā 42, 47, 51, 52, 57, 
203, 205, 938, 943, 951, 
259, 953, 258, 990, 308, 
316, 424 

paryanka- 39, 97, 251, 434 

parvata- 238 

palyanka- 97 

palyāņa- 39, 260 

pallava- 88 

pavitra- 172, 217 

vascima- 64, 259, 282 

Pāņdu- 31 

Pàndya- 25 

pàtaka. 180, 243, 985, 319 

patala- 190 

pāda- 109, 132, 306, 425 

pādapa- 235, 344 

Pādarakga- 196 

pādukā 78, 393(. 

bādyārghya- 111 

papa- 49, 77, 116, 305, 306 

Parada- 53 

Pārāpata- 99f. 

bārāpatī 99f. 


pārāvata- 93, 291 

pāsa- 65 

Pasupata- 143 

pàmáu- 107 

pitaka- 92 

pinda- 182 

pitarah 134, 239 

Pitāmaha- 131 

pitr- 273, 346 

pitta- 92 

pisuna- 48 

pīdana- 122, 362 

pungava- 41f., 
941, 332, 423 

punya- 122 

putra- 48f., 174, 231, 281. 
333, 351, 404 

putri 37, 40, 66, 73, 190, 
902, 231, 244 

padgala- 172 

punar api 191, 396 

pura- 196, 219 

purahsara- 232, 345 

puri 197 

purcga- 73, 178, 256 

purohita- 260, 360f. 

pustaka- 47, 65, 244, 285, 
319, 423f. 

puspa- 36, 91, 303 

pusparaga- 91 

puspasara- 36 

pūjā 42, 107, 306, 316, 386 

pürna- 73, 358, 362 

purnamas- 51, 61 

pürva- 65, 78, 238, 305, 317 

purvaka- 423 

purvakala- 335 

pūrvāgni- 210 

prthivi 41, 65 

prthivitala- 108 

Prthu- 118 

prsatka- 234 

pota- 9lt. 

pautraka- 240 

pausa- 68 

pra- 996ff., 380f. 

prakata- 360 


46, 


190, 


prētar 8% Sāfļa 880 shastri Collektion. 


443 


prakara- 42, 46, 50, 111, 
187, 232, 233, 243, 253, 
380, 411, 432 

prakasa- 282, 394 

prakrti- 61, 238 

prakriyà 105 

pragalbha- 933, 365 

praja 348 

Prajapati- 185, 192 

prajna 116 

praņava- 160 

prati- 809 

pratikūla- 348 

pratibhū- 272 

pratistha 150, 383 

pratipa- 361 

pratyanantara- 237 

pratyaya- 38, 51, 77, 238, 
959, 267, 990, 315, 316, 
333, 360, 407 

pratyeka- 179, 252, 381 

prathama- 61, 200, 290 

pradhana- 135, 162, 173 

pradhanamantrin- 41 

prapatica- 353, 362 

prabhā 47f., 222, 340, 343, 

363 V 
prabhāva- 49f., 116, 343 
prabhu- 32, 264 
pramaya-, pramaya 64 

pramans- 159, 160, 176, 
967 

pramāda- 54 

pramukha- 118 

prayatna- 204 

prayoga- 51, 205, 244, 424 

prayojana- 122 

pralaya- 259, 267, 362 

pravaralalita- 108 

pravāda- pravala- 91 

pravira- 251 

prasasti- 422 

prasista- 383 

prasiddha- 348 , 

prastarana- 943, 287, 328 

prastāva- 261 

Prāgjyotisa 139, 140 

rādvivāka- 251 


Digitized by ARtekstemrei 1 PLINBONE BēAnai and eGangotri 


444 
NENNEN EEEMMMMM MM D 


prāņa- 48, 156, 344, 410 
prāņāyāma- 111 

prāpti- 233 

-pràya- 355 
prayascitta- 178 
prāsāda- 997, 987 
plava- 407, 495 


phala- 41, 73, 91, 206í., 
210, 946, 247, 317 

phullita- 498 

pheru- 323 


bath- 76 

badva- 16 

bandha- 89 

bandhu- 260 

bala- 51, 65, 75, 94f., 121, 
250, 303; 356, 425 

balātkāra- 180, 251 

bali- 161 

Balin- 223 

bāla- 244 

bālaka- 171f. 

bālya- 184, 244 

bahu- 16, 307, 362, 416f. 

bahurakga- 381f. 

bāhya- 161 

bimba- 72, 217, 259, 339, 
410 : 

bilesaya--183 

bilva- 208, 251 

bija-“45, 46, 189, 200, 351, 
366, 498 ~ 

buddha- 72, 333 

Buddha- 31, 72 

buddhi- 56, 59, 83, 156, 
167, 195, 205, 256, 319, 
342, 361, 419 

budha- 63, 66, 247 

Brhaspati- 63, 183, 140 

bodhi- 217 . 

bodhicittotpāda- 122 

bauddha- 239 

brahmacārin- 53, 173 

Brahma 41, 130, 1311., 201, 
249, 248,408, 259 

brebmanga- 168 


br&áhmana- 25, 78, 171 


bhakta- 338 

bhakti- 159, 176, 368 

bhaga- 229, 256 

bhagavat- 243, 342 

bhagin- 200 

bhanga- 57 

bhattara- 42,47, 113, 130f., 
133, 246, 339 


_ bhadra- 352 


bhaya- 60, 218, 220, 247, 
307 

bhasman- 170. 

bhasmī- 151, 255f., 410 

bhāga- 200, 947, 818, 396 

bhàgin- 44, 46, 48, 84, 396 

bhāgya- 59, 66, 72, 73, 
239, 245, 261, 317, 386, 
418 

bhāgyena 56 

bhājana- 98 

bhànda--47, 57, 334, 349 

bhandagara- 41, 3321. 

bhāņdāgārika. 246, 
425 

bhandari 246 

bhadrapada- 68 

bhana- 428 

bhara- 67, 97, 199, 246, 
311 

bharata- 264, 

Bharata yuddha- 335 

bhàva- 218, 808, 309, 396 

bhasa 37, 44, 46,- 67, 79, 
246f., 292, 307, 309; 359 

bhāsita- 393 

bhāsanta- 428 

bhikgu- 87f., 171, 407 

bhinna- 85, 367 

bhukti- 176f., 285, 305 

bhujanga- 371ff. 

bhuvana- 111 

bhüta- 42,47, 189, 194, 411 

bhütala- 234 

bhūti- 75 

bhūtendriye- 118 

bhūpati- 241, 939 


383, 


„bhūmi- 18, 37, 48, 59, 197,. 


218, 232,.246, 416. - 
bhüvalaya- 79 
bhüsana- 352 
bhrtya- 243, 386, 407 
bheda- 59, 317, 326, 360, 

386: 392, 419,495 
bhairava- 148, 162, 239 
bhoga- 240, 340, 366 
bhojana- 380,.340 
Bhauma- 51 
bhrasta- 252 
bhrānta- 84f., 353 
bhranti- 84t., 858 


makara- 310 

makuta-, mukuta- 41, 265, 
266 

mangalagīta- 109 

mafica- 287 

maiioaka- 253 

mani- 39 

mandapa- 198, 252£. 

mandala- 56, 131, 218, 927 

matta- 9241 ` 

matsya- 986 

madhu- 418 

madhura- 299f. 

madhyapada- 265 

manas- 48, 156, 273 

manastūpa- 256, 306, 326 

manugya- 44, 46, 70, 73, 
78, 237, 386, 418, 423- 

wanojna 406 : 

manobhava- 337 

mantra- 56,64,73,191, 231 

mantrayana- 112 

mantrin- 37, 43, 47, 78, 262, ; 
332, 483 

mantbara- 298, 498 

mendakranta 109 

Manmatha- 285 

mayüra- 244 

mara- 370 

marakata- 258 

martya- 993 ; 

mala- 210, 285,:381 

Malaya- 998f. . -- 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


— 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


„paugtika- 428 
3 i-s magi 87) 64, 13; 936, 


traka- 991, 410 

" aparādbika- 42, 262, 309, 

933, 425, 434 
mab&- 294 
pab&jana- 327 
mahājīāns- 111 
mahātman- 334 
mahādeva- 131 
Mahādeva- 132 
mahapralaya- 116 
mahāprāņa- 105 
Mahāmeru- 121 
mahayana- 155 
mahārdja- 20, 66, 258, 423 
Mahasiva- 135 
mahiga- 240, 248, 265, 407 
Mahesvara- 201 
mahodaya- 161 
mahaugadha-, mahavgadhi- 


160 


_ "māgha- 68 


manikya- 39 

māty- 346 

manasikaputra- 118 

münuga- 70, 237, 354 

maya 49, 160, 191, 218 ` 

māra- 60 

māraņa- 49 

marga- 48, 73, 116f., 122, 
280, 360, 391, 403, 412 

margagira-, mārgaširus- 68 

mala, malya- 91, 192 

māsa. 48, 60f, 75, 234, 
388, 390 

māmsa- 49, 75, 360 

mitra- 49, 174, 181; 416 

mithuna- 63, 201, 234, 
284, 369 

misra- 263 

mīna- 47 

mukuta- 265, 266 

mukta- 240f., 271, 382 

mukta 285 

muktika 235 

mukha- 16, 37, 56f., 66, 
78, 807, 808, 425 


Digitized by Arya SagighFoundation Chennai andeGanaatriog, 


mutyahāra- 325 

mudita- 121 

roudra 260, 290 

muraja- 260 

musta- 323 

mürkba- 204, 356f. 

mūrehā 189 

mūrta- 857 

mūrdhanya- 104 

mūrdhā 31 

mūla- 16, 44, 46, 57, 66, 
78, 78, 181, 200, 209, 
218, 227, 805, 310, 391, 
413 

iūlādhāra- 146 

mūlya- 61, 73, 78, 82, 204, 
291, 423 

müsgika- 201 

mrga- 286 

mrtasamjīvanī 286 

mrtyufijaya- 169f. 

mrtyumāra- 116 

mrdanga- 258, 344i. 

mrdu- 230, 243 

megha- 41, 75 

Meru- 196. 343 

Maithili 234 

moksa- 56, 157, 940f., 290 

mokgaņa- 382 

mauktika- 325 

maudra- 811, 401 

mleccha- 231, 344 


yaksa- 134 
yajnopavita- 167 
yativara- 236 
yatna- 257, 346 
yathā 395 
yad 395 
yadi 394f. 
yady api 394 
yantra- 78, 190, 249, 963, 
339f., 425 
Yama- 135 
yamana- 267 
Yamavilaya- 147 
yava- 225f, 887 


445 


yasas- 357, 425 

yatra 348 

yukti- 257, 319 

yuga-.77, 8771. 

yuddha- 72 

yoga- 11, 48, 56, 121, 257, 
410 

yogin- 129 

yogya- 260, 303 

yojana- 11, 303 

yauvana- 268, 353 


rakga- 122, cf. 49 
rakgā 49 
ranga- 198, 241, 871 
racana- 248, 262 
rajasvalā 315 
rajjuvāla- 78 
ranangs- 383 
raņāngana- 230, 383 
raņdā 173, 252, 253 
Rati- 131 
ratna- 209, 260, 351 
ratha- 76 
rabhara- 54, 362 
ramya- 204, 230, 354 
rasmi- 369 
rasa- 36f., 39. 45, 48, 51, 
54. 56, 78, 158, :90, 230, 
245, 986, 308 
rasaniala- 87, 39 
rehas- 359 
rahasya 45, 158, 248, 262, 
367 
rākgasa- 27, 41, 47, 239, 
952 S 
rāga- 49, 234, 304f., 315 
rāgin- 39 
rajan- 37, 38, 43, 47, 51, 
54, 73, 815, 346, 417 
rājanīti- 178f, 203 
rajasa- 362 
rājaeimha- 189 
rajavarta- 293 
rājšī 110 
rātri- 232, 235 
ragi- 61, 81f, 335 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


446 


Digitized by Arya BANSEFBERo Ron CRAT AM eGangotri 


Rāhu- 65, 61, 63 f 

rikta- 76, 260 

rudira- 345, 362 

rudhira- 232 

rükga- 55. 362 

rüpa- 45, 46, 66, 161, 266, 
811, 318 

tüpaka- 409 

rüpya- 39, 46, 51, 73, 884 

rekha 55 

reņu- 107 

roga- 49 

romsn- 48, 119, 236, 241, 
410 


ļ 


lakga- 37, 88, 45, 55, 78, 
121, 199, 238, 243, 349, 
354 

laksana- 286, 308, 342, 371 

lakgita- 855 

Laksmaņa- 835, 432 

lakgmi 251, 367 

laghu- 104, 191 

lata- 249 

latāvimana- 55 

labdha- 340 

lamb- lambate 79 

lambita- 64 

lalana- 862 

langala. 80 

lābbs- 39, 44, 63, 78, 85 

` lālana- 406 

lālā 75 

lavana- 498 

likgā, līkgā 86, 265. 

likhita- 176, 244, 981 

linga- 55, 164, 196f., 223, 
223 

lingagarira- 169 

līna- 240 

lekha 55 

lepa- 39, 48, 851 

loka- 841 

lobha- 49, 65, 182 

loha- 90 

laukika- 182 


vao- 848 


vacas- 44, 48, 51 

vajra- 65, 197, 219, 231) 
250, 356, 405 

vaiieana- 44, 250, 354 

vath- 76 

vanija- 290f. 

vanijà 275 

vatre- 75 

vadana- 251, 844, 350, 361, 
411 

vadha- 199 

vadhu 272 

vanavüsa- 984 

vanaspati- 152, 192, 323 

Vanaspati- 135 

vanāvtara- 282, 250f., 269, 
308, 384 

vandita: 369 

vendhya- 351, 384 

vayas: 49, 388 

varaka- 118 

varàstra- 362 

Varuna- 250 

varga- 60. 66, 74, 174, 369 

varna- 50, 64, 75, 249, 251, 
269, 396, 495 

varnasrania- 118 

vardhana- 411 

-yarman- 212 

varga- 840 

varsah 68 

valaya- 79 

valgita- 353 

vasa- 324f, 

vaméa- 16, 34, 49, 51, 80, 
239, 250, 408, 499f, 

vamsapatra- 108 

vaméi 75, 77f., 250, 260 

Vasentatilaka-108 - 

vastu- 70,161 

Vastra- 111 

vahā 76 

vahitra- 248, 259 

vākpārugya- 180 

vakya- 259. 

vāc- 273 

vacana- 950 

vaca 44, 51 


vàni, vàni 75 

vāņija- 37, 975 
vāņijaka- 990f. 
vāņ'jvā 46, 53, 264 ` 


'vàni 75 


vàda- 50, 64, 338 

vanara- 237 

vama- 250 

vayavya- 65 

Vayu- 181, 132 

vayu- 75, 250 

vara- 293 ` 

vāraņa- 160, 252, 258 

vāri 267 

varttà 44, 262, 409, 425 

valukarnava- 148f. 

vüsag- 879 

Vāsuki- 72 

vāstu- 75 

vahana- 159 

v&hini 348 

vighātin- 370 

vighna- 8692 

vicakgaņa- 255, 286, 423, 
495 

vicāra- 38, 44, 46, 64, 83, 
178, 187, 288, 319, 366, 
367, 383, 393, 408, 424, 
484 

vioitra- 191 

vijaya- 61, 951 

Vijaya- 20 

vitàna- 55, 198 

vidāra- 181 

vidyā 162 

vidyādhara- 119, 254, 256f. 

vidyādhanī 41, 46, 47, 184, 
254, 256f. 

vidyut- 75 

vid vat- 41 

vidhàna- 174 

vidbāyaka- 956 

vidhi- 136, 160, 174 

vinü$a- 16, 44 : 

viparita- 119 

vibhava. 362, 406 

vibhu- 161, 272 

vimà&ne- 189, 152, 289 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


yilápa- 340 

vilāsa- 34, 384 

vilva- 20 

yiverana- 117 

vivüha- 248 

viveka- 204, 269, 362 

viģegn- 116, 203, 305, 93/0 
353, 424 

viģvāsa= 407 

viga- 35, 44, 59, 70, 72, 88, 
84, 94, 236, 251, 310, 
886, 423 

vigaya- 117 

vigā 83, 84 

vigāda- 199 

vi$ti- 307f. 

Visni- 180, 135, 201 

Vigņa-Kysņa. 131 

vicargasandhi- 105 

vihāra- 290, 412 

vrkg3- 197, 908, 248, 252, 
262 

vrtta- 44, 75, 78, 107, 262, 
418 

* vrddha- 938, 264, 339 

vy ldhi- 122, 174, 386 

vr8olka- 64; 384 

Yres« 197 

vrāti- 259 

Vreni- 335 

vela- 9, 110 

vodhya- 75, 240 

Vena- 118 

vela 240, 388 

vesinan- 240 

vesya 90 

vesta- 167 

vaidürya- 89, 235 

vaivartika- 117 

vaisakha- 68 

vaigya- 171, 245 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


447 


vyakta- 360 

vyakti- 176f., 252, 319 
vyanga- 253 

vyanjana- 104, 105 
vyaya- 59, 66, 75, 84, 209 
vyavahara- 248 

vyāpāra- 117 

vyasa- 363 

Vyasa- 31, 137 

vyoman- 187, 251, 269 


' vrata- 42, 56, 107, 163, 


171. 204 
viag- 148 


gakti- 16, 49, 65, 77, 116, 
134, 191, 347, 423 

ganka 61 

gankha- 43, 63 

gatru- 36, 62, 416 

šapatha- 43, 48, 70, 77, 
944, 259, 269 

Sabara- 343 

gabda- 73, 260, 343 

Sambhu- 131 

gara- 335 

šaraņa 347, 398 

ģarīra- 34, 77, 161, 222, 
410 

Siriramantra- 111 

ģarkarā 406 

$ava- 183 

SaSadhara- 119 

$agin- 337, 362 

šastra- 76 

sastrī 76 

Šākakāla- 194, 237 

gakha 198 

gana- 90 

s&nta- 282 

šānti- 62, 70, 338 

gantika- 352 

tūpa- 61, 235, 315, 405, 
409 à 

ģārdūlavikrīdita- 109 

ģāsana- 116, 259 

faatra- 50, 263, 424 

S&strin- 234f. 


Digitized Py PA SIR Foundation Chenngj aad eGgngelti. 305, 363 


sikbarini 108, 109 

sikhin- 132 

Sira-- 34, 68, 350 

suà 70, 84, 148, 218, 219, 
, 906 

Siva- 131, 135 

sista- 118 

gisya- 66, 172, 318, 407 
&ighra- 56, 61, 65, 75, 244, 

247 

sirpa- 977 

siia- 37, 84, 338f., 359, 429 
sukra- 63 

guci- 75, 95, 311, 330f., 419 
guddha- 210, 223, 229, 338 
guddhi- 54, 58, 382 
Subha- 338 

gugrūgā 381 

suska- 377 

ģūira- 171, 252, 360 
$üaya- 45, 241, 365 

$ūra- 218 

$ula- 75, 181, 210 

$rg&la- 231, 411, 414 
Srhkhala- 391., 53, 314 
Srnkhalā 53 

$rhgavera- 69 

Srūgāra- 362 

&ega- 45, 48, 68, 240, 317, 
Sailendra- 20 

$aivala- 382 

goņita- 236 

sauca- 358, 410 

sinagana- 241 

$raddh& 113. 942, 273 
srānta- 56. 282 

&ri 48. 64, 76, 286, 336 
8:1- 35, 212 

Šrī 132, 201 

Sripada- 132 

Srivijaya- 22 

flesman- 86f., 189, 291 
$loka- 109. 231 

$van- 245, 974f. 
$vapuacha- 402 
gvana- 274f. 


gat 119, 175 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


[3 


448 Digitzehbx Ang SamaNTmuUNIslim Chennai and eGangotri 


sadabbijria- 139 


sakala- 90, 261, 320, 397 

sakhā 50 

sagaņa- 75 

sagotra- 141, 384 

rāgaurava- 113 

ramkala- 194 

sahketa- 182, 948 

tamksipta- 153, 951 

samksepa- 111 

samse- 366 

samgati- 370 

famgama- 217, 366 

S2mgr- samsirate 284 

samgraha- 35, 432 

sanghata- 148 

sajja- 48, 75, 85, 282 

Fajjata 379 

Sxjjana- 203, 285, 343 

Rajjana 343 

sajjī- 255 

sajya- 989 

sañcaya- 107 

satata(n1) 78, 290 

sati 152 

sattrin- 235 

sattva- 35, 73, 231, 945, 
366 

ratya- 77, 318, 343 

sada 85 

sadākāla- 85, 989 

sadāga- 406, 429 

sadāgati- 406, 499 

sadān:va- 135 

sadyas 85 

sadyarkala- 85 

sadbana- 75 

s8m'āna- 84, 178t., 346f., 
381 

santu 35 

Famtosa- 203, 205, 354 

£amdhana- 54 

samdhi- 61, 68, 105, 362 

samdhyākāla,- 38, 142 

Baparyā 54 

Babhā 197 

sama- 37,45, 75, 184, 310, 


897 

samata 323 

samanantara- 54, 73, 237 

samam 397 

samaya- 55, 78, 75 

samara- 319 

ramatta- 243, 323 

samagama- 366 

samādhi- 107, 116, 157 

samāna- 290 

Famapta- 125, 260, 339, 
362 

samigra- 191 

famirana- 237, 401 

samudaya- 414f. 

samudra- «1, 65, 994f. 

samübha- 56, 331, 836, 355, 
494 

sampanna- 281 

sampūrņa- 45, 162, 218, 
241,243, 981t., 292, 331, 
370, 429 

sampratyaya- 56 


- 


sambaddha- 203f., 217, 


381 

sambandha- 387 

sambhava- 865 _ 

sambhrama- 204, 951, 345, 
367 

samyatta- 347, 379 

samrabdha. 361 

Sarasvatī 133 

saroja- 209 

rarpa- 64, 365 

sarva- 61f., 218, 270, 395t., 
408 

Bavayas- 344 

samvista- 76 

gamvrta. 94] 

Bavega- 369 

samsaya: 258, 269 

S8mMm»āra- 43, 48, 54, 116, 
152,189, 305, 811, 859, 
408 

samskāra- 11], 118, 168, 
231, 257 

sam-krta- 957 

samstha. 394 


sasmita- 361 
sahakārin- 120 
sahakarita 179 
sahaja- 254 
sahasa 290 
sahüya- 248 
sahya- 365 
sakgat 251, 395 


eaksin- 47, 48, 51, 75, 85f,, 


176, 241, 261, 342 
sāgara- 78, 196 
sātiaka- 50 
satmata 360, 414 
s&dhaka- 116 
sadhana- 146 
sādhu- 181 
*sādhukāra- 21, 341 
sadhukarin- 341 
radhya- 73, 384 
samdhya- 73 
såra- 86, 415 


eartha- 50, 78, 311, 342, 


394, 496 
sarthena 50 
sardhakara- 91 
sāhasa- 57 


eiddha- 73, 120, 168, 218, 


229, 819, 410, 411 
siddhānta- 142, 143 


- siddhi- 35, 54, 56, 136 


siddhiyatrika- 121 

sindūra- 77 

simha- 37, 40, 47, 64, 65, 
66, 197 

simhapura- 37 

siman- 990 

su- 214, 295, 368, 424 

sukula- 365 

sukrta- 371 


sukha- 86, 190, 218, 221, ' 


222, 340, 352, 878, 409 
Bukhaoitta 191 
Bukhàsana. 198 

Sugata- 383 
Sugandha 134 
sujana- 904 
suta- 2, 281 
sudharma- 908 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


—— — 


p — 

udbarmaD- 

spdbápa- 107 

sudbübhuj- 107 

gud bálih- 107 

puđhãgan a- 107 

gudhasin- 107 

gud hi 382 

gudbira- 406 

sundari 50, 140, 194, 210 

gupatha- 999f. 

Suprabhà 184, 140 

Subhadra 134, 965 

subhagita- 204 

sumanas- 279, 286 

*sumabra- 225 

sumitra- 365 

gura- 125 

gurata- 369 " 

eurabhi- 287 

Surabhi- 149 

surasa 95 

guraei 9d 

sura 125 

guvarna- 71, 239, 286 

' guvásas- 71 

susravas- 881 

sūkara- 244 

stkena- 71, 155f., 158,161, 
251, 304 

sūci-, rūcī 40, 97i.. 324 

sūcikā 98 

sūta- 2 

sūtaka- 3791. 

sūtra- 40, 51, 55, 73, 9'Tf., 
281, 239, 317, 324 

stitrapatha- 151 

sūrya- 16, 47, 135, 143,410 


499 


II. MIDDLE AND NEW INDO 


akās- akas (Hindi) 260 
utta- (Pkt.) 73 
ūht (Hindi) 73, 87 


kaoca- (Pkt.) 88 
kaņikāra (Pxt.) 211 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


449 


eüryakànta- 419, 423 

setubandha- 141 

sonāpati- 41, 42, 48 

sevuka- 198, 410 

sevā 34, 40, 67, 197; 318, 
408, 433 

sevitr-, nevitā 244, 410 

gevin- 168 

saindhava- 40, 287 

sodara- 87, 45, 65, 346 

sodarī 280 

sopadhi- 392 

sopana- 40, 46, 234, 244, 
982, 351 

sopaya- 392 

soma- 63 

somav&ra- 63 

saugata- 401 

skandha- 116 . 

stati: 257 306 

etüpa- 227 

strī 48, 210, 258, 266, 408, 
410 

cirip:maa- 256 

etrisamgrahana- 181 

sthapaka- 150 

sthiti- 163 

sthuia- 116 

sthülasarira- 159 

sphatika- 238. 328 

smara- 35» 161, 196, 257, 
286, 306, 319, 369 

syandana- 936 

sragdhara 108 è 

svacchandamarana- 110 

svapna- 234, 245, 339 

svapnavighna- 122 


kapās (Hindi) 321 
kal (Hindi) 314 

kalā (Hindi) 29 

kāmsā (Hindi) 38 
kāmjī (Hindi) 260 
kufijī (Hindi) 38. 87, 239 
kuņdī (Hindi) 38, 92 
kud(djàl, kudālī 


p————-— Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


svayamvara- 352, 428 

svara- 45, 73, 77, 78, 104; 
105, 179, 264 360 

svarga- 40: 48, 62. 86, 231; 
945, 246, 326, 410, 418 

svastha- 122 

svācāra- 256f. 

svāmin- 410 

svāra- 412 

svīkaraņa- 183 

svīkāra- 70, 251, 371 

sveccha 264 

sveda- 231 


Hanumat- 142, 414 

hantum (han-) 322 

hari- 68f , 76, 320 

harga- 325 

hargina- 119 

hamsa- 37> 72, 75, 78, 262 

hasta- 62, 72, 86, 248, 251, 
969, 342, 410 

hastin- 418 

Hastin&pura- 27 

hingu- 72 

bita- 90 

hitasukha- 116 

hima- 248, 358 

himsaka- 182 

bins- 181, 948, 305, 340, 
408 

hinacakgus- 340 

hrdaya- 56, 238f., 244, 258 

hetu- 387 

Hemakūta- 254 

hemanta- 63, 353 

hoina- 248 


-ARYAN LANGUAGES 


63 
khattā (Pkt.) 37, 249 
gaņettiyā (Pkt.) 209 


guda-, gula- (Pkt.) 38, 72 
gula (Pkt.) 289 


(Hindi) gul-gulā (Hindi) 46 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


450 
geddha- (Pkt.) 176 


gon; gon, (Hindi) 393 ^ 
goni (Hindi) 408 


ghanta (Pkt. etc.) 38 
ghar (Hindi) 268 
ghara (Or.) 268 
ghorā (Hindi) 323 


carkhā (Hind.) 59 

carn& (Hindi) 39 

ciņha- (Pkt.) 59 

oukkā (Pkt.) 58 

outaka- (Pkt.) 172 

cūk, cūkā (Hindi) 53, 260 
corikā (Pkt.) 36 

coln& (Hindi) 78 


chandi (Hindi) 98 

ohīmt, chīt (Hindi) 54 7 
churika (Pāli) 39 

chulla (Pkt.) 36 


jaggati (Pkt.) 48 

janta- (Pkt.) 249 

jalam (Hindi) 60 

jaga (Hindi Beng.) 39, 48, 
. 51,54 

jālī (Hindi) 39 


īāta- (Pali) 78, 258 


doli (Hindi Mar) doli 
(Gvj.) 16, 29 


tamba- (Pkt.) 37, 39 
tarēzū (Hind.) 39 


tbāņa- (Pkt.) 247, 268 


III. INDONESIAN LANGUAGES 


acara (Jav., Mal.) 87 

amrtesamjivani ( OJav. ) 
986 

andam (Mal.) 99 

ahgota (Mal. Jav.) 822 


Digitized Wy? Hea Domes Chennai and eGangotri - M 


SS a 


- . n eis = 39 
bnà (Hindi) 148 muttia (Pkt.) 37, 
iu murava- (Pkt.) 128 
āharmātar (Hirdi) 86 mūlia- (Pit.) 61 


dharmárth (Hindi) 78, 87 moonā (Hindi) 382 
motthā (Pkt.) 823 
naraja (Hindi) 426 


virà (G ij. Mar.) 77 raņģā (Pkt.) 173, 252, 253 
nila- (Pkt. ote.) 39 rāsi- (Pkt.) 61 
rupeya (Hindi) 39 

paik (Hindi) 29 , roti, roti, ruti (Beng. Hindi 
patta- (Pkt.) 90 etc.) 39, 73, 87 
patrī, patri (Hindi) 78 
pattharana- (Pkt.) 243 lakkbā lākba (Pkt,) 54, 323 
pattharo (Pāli) 822 līha (MIA.) 54 i 
padam (Hindi) 92 lep (Hindi) 39 
pavasatha- (Pxt.) 75 leha Pkt.) 54 
pāņdss  p&mre , (Hindi, 

Beng.) 96t. vattà (Pkt.) 44 
pālkī (Hindi) 97 valañja (Pāli) 29, 89, 46 
pet (Hindi) 92 valaiijeti (Pāli) 29 
potta- (Pxt.) 92 vāņia- (Pkt.) 87, 43f., 46 
posatha- (Pkt.) 78 viza- (Pkt.) 59 


baņivā, baviya (Hindi) 891. sañkhalā (Pkt ) 267 
banyain (Hindi) 37 saraga- (Pkt.) 62 
būzār (Hind.) ^ s&mkal (Hindi) 40 
bāzū (Hind.) 3 sith (Hindi) 394 


bis (Hindi) 59 
bruhmassara (Pāli) 122 sutta- (Pkt.) N 
suddhi- (Pkt.) 58 


bhaņdārī (Hindi) 246 supino (Pāli) 232 
bharāla- (Pkt.) 42 gurag (Hindi) 40, 62 
bhasmī (Hindi) 256 su vina (Pkt.) 232 


sūt (Hindi) 40, 97 
mahārī, mahàri (Hindi) sendhava- (Pat ) 40 


29, 412 sevàla- (Pkt.) 382 
mār (Hindi, Guj.) 60 4 
muktika- (Pkt.) 395 hartāl (Hindi) 37 
mutthika- (Pāli) 428 Hindū (Hindi) 38 


(See also the other indices) 


aniaya 84 286 

ankara (Jav.) 204 agno (OJav.) 140, 258 
ankua(a) 323 astagina (Jav.) 96 
anugérah (Mal.) 87 &ataka (Mal.) 285 


asmara 95, 162, 166, 257, astam (OJav.) 278 ` 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT 
- | IN INDONESIA 481 
astana (Jav. Mal Pige by Ave Sap Tepr deeg Siew) and Gane 1o 
astuti (OJuv. Bal.) 257 biduan (Mal.)41,100 euei (Mal) 95 


atgata (Jav.) 283f. bijak léksana (Mal.) 286 cuka (Mal.) 960 
atra (Gayo, Ach.) 899f. biji (Mal. etc.) 200 
awadi (OJav.) 182 bila (Mal.) 240, 388 dama (Jav.) 254 


binatarana (Juv.) 399 danadri 
: .) 322 yah (Jav.) 307 
baca (Mal. ete.) 44, 250 binna 85 dara (Mal.) 391 


bage (Jav.) 317 birahi 169 darta (Bal.) 954 
bagi, béhagi 84, 200, 247 biram (Jav.) 99 darya (OJa v.) 938f. 
bahara (Mal.) 97, 946 birawa (Jav.) 162 data-tita (Jav.) 283, 309 
baita, baitra (Jav.) 248,252 bisa (Jav. etc.) 35, 83t. daya (OJav.) 253 € 
balai (Mal.) 79 biseka (Jav.) 236, 352 dēhaga (Mal ) 260 
banaspati (Bali) 135, 159 bisi (Mal.) 90 dérawa (Mal.) 189 
banija (OJav.) 275, 990 biyoh (Bal.) 182 dērbe (Jav ) 59f., 238 
bansa 80 blagadaba, blēgdaba etc. dērhaka, durhaka (Mal. 
bara (Mal.) 97 (Jav.) 148 eto.) 49, 55, 240 
basaban (Mal) 376 bodoh (Mal ) 268 dérma 86 
bastu, bēstu (Jav.) 161 bragalba (Jav.) 233, 365 desa 81 
bēja (Jav.) 261 bratayuda (Jav.) 385, 344 dērti (Jav.) 75 
b5jana(h) (Mal ) 98 budi 83, 156, 205° dēsti (Bal ) 175f. 
bēkti (Jav.) 176 bukti 176f. dewats 82, 133 
bélaka (Mal.) 172 digdaya (Jav.) 938 
bēlanja (Mal.) 29, 39 cacaya (Jav.) 292 dirgama (Jav ) 379 
bēlantara (Mal.) 232, 250, cahya (Jav) 161 dite (Jav.) 245, 254 
303, 384 eakéra (Mal.) 97 diwarga (OJav.) 281 
bēncana 44, 354 caniēti (MJav.! 28 dola (Mal.) 97 
bēnda (Mal.) 47, 57 canai (Mul.) 90 dopara (Sund.) 355 
béndahara (Mal. etc.) 41, eandakya (Ma! 98 drigama (Jav) 379  , 
246, 333 candi (Jav.) 198 driya (Jav.) 156 
bēnduhari (Mal.) 246 cara (Mal. etc.) 46, 254, druwe (Bal.) 187 
bēndara ' Jav.) 339f. 284, 370 duaja (Bal.) 197 
bēnian (Mal.) 89 catur (Mal.) 39 duli (Ma1.) 97 
bēntara (Mal.) 190, 194 cawáli (OJav.) 93 durhaka 432 
bēraksa (Mal.) 208 ceda (Jav.) 67 duruwiksa (Sund.) 231 
béranta (Jav.) 341. cēhari (Mal.) 247 duta 82 
bērhala (Mal)  barahala célane (Mal. etc.) 39 duwe (Jav.) 35, 261 
(Bng eto.) 49 eómara 81 
bērita (Mal.) 44, 262 cēndērawaseh ( Mal.) 50, eca (Jav.) 411 
bérniaga (Mal.) 37, 43f, 141 ēmpat 329 
2908. cēriga, curiga (Mal. etc.)39 èstu (Jav.) 248 
béami (Jav ) 410 cérna (Mal.) 189, 377 estu (Sund.) 977 
bētara eto. cida (Mal.) 57, 78 
beya (Jav) vA cihna bēkti eto. 176f. gabo (TBat.) 239 


biasa (Mal. ote.) 44 255 cilaka, cēlaka (Mal. eic) gs (RIGA 

biaya ‘Mal, etc.) 59 84 45, 47, 58, 368t. gandi (Bug ) 38 

bicara 88, 178, 366, 393 cina buta (Mal.) 285 EU (Bug. Mao.) 88 
bicitram (Mal.) 191 cinta ‘Mal.) 156 gēhar 5 
bidadari, bidiadari (Mal. oipta (Jav. Sund.) 156, 233 géhara (Mal.) 268 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


gosali, gusali 365 


griya (Jav. Bal.) 197, 243 
gumi (Bal.) 182, 232 

guni 323 

gorda (Mal.) 139 
gurindam (Mal.) 90 

guru 89f., 130f., 334 

gusti, gosti (Bal.) 172, 185 


hantn 322 

hari (Mal.) 69, 320 
hatte (Mal.) 326 
hingu (TBat.) 239 


idam (Mal.) 90 

imba (Jav.) 259 
irama (Jav.) 109, 259 
irsanya (Jav.! 65 
istana (Mal.) 58 


jakea (Jav. etc.) 34, 78, 
954, 338 

jampana (Jav.) 197 

jampi 191, 194f. 

jati 98f., 161, 210, 339, 
393t. 

jelita, jnlita (Mal.) 232 

jelma (Mal.) 60, 64, 98 

jenaka (Mal.) 145 

jendéra (Mal.) 234 

jénitri (Jav.) 167, 209 

jentake (Mal.) 234, 380 

Jēntayu (Mal.) 71, 284 

jentera (Mal. 78, 949 
8391. 

jétmika Jay.) 204, 254, 359 

joli (OJav.) 29 


juli (Mal.) 29 
jumantara (Jav.) 251 
juru-jana (Mal.) 253 


kabhinawa (OJav.) 341 
kajantaka (Jav.) 354 
kala (Jav.) 314, 358 
kalasa (OJav.) 154 


kali 320 

kalimahosada (Jav.) 160 

kalpaka, kalpika (Jav.) 
168f. 


kalpakand aga (OJav.) 147f. 

kanda (OJav.) 179 

kapas (Mal.) 321 

karēna (Mal.) 321 

karsa, kērea (Jav )325 

katara (Jav ) 385 

kēluarga (Mal.) 80, 88 

kemawon (Jav) 414 

kēndi, kuņģi 90, 92, 249 

kēpale 85 

kērat (Mal.) 322 

kērja (Jav.) 408 

kerjo (Gayo) 336 

kērta (Jav.) 841 — 

kērtiyasa (Jav.) 254, 305 

kētika (Mal. etc.) 43, 63, 
985. 

kota, kuta, 43, 92» 197 

ksamēn (Bal) 184 

knds (Mal.) 323 

kula 80 

kulita (Jav.) 370 

kumala (Jav.) 370 

kumbala (Jav ) 99 

kunci, gunci ete. 87 


laba 85 

lakea, lakea (Mal. eto.) 55 
laksamana (Mal.) 335 
lalawa (Tag.) 258 

lastri (Jav.) 235 

légéna (Jav.) 353, 354 
lēkita (Bal.) 176 ' 
lenkara (Jav.) 356 

lēpa (Mal.) 232. 

lisa, linsg etc. 86 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


aj Foundation Chennai, 


AEREN.) 91 
lukita (Jav.) 244, 981 


mahari (OJav.) 29 
mala 831 
malai (Mal) 91 
mala pataka (Mal.) 285 
maleca (OJav.) 231 
manah (Jav.) 164 
mani (Mal.) 92 
manjapada (Mal.) 198 
,mayanga, miyanga (Jav.) 
160 
mémpelam (Mal.) 91 . 
mērbaya, mērbahia (Mal.) 
60, 811 
mercapada (Mal.) 193 
mērcika (Jav.) 64 
mērdeka (Mal. etc.) 42, ef. 
962, 309, 338 
morsudi (Jav.) 382 
mosa (Jav ) 407 
mēatika, mustika elo. 235, 
825 ` 
moterai etc. (Mal. 260, 29 
mintuna (Jav.) 284 
mita (OJav.) 253 
miyanga (Jav.) 253 
mota 323 
mottama (Jav.) 283 
mraja (Jav.) 258 
mudabile (Sund.) 944 
muksa, mukga (Jav.) 56 
murawa (OJav.) 260 
murwakala (Jav.) 335 
musna 382 ae 
muthala (Tag Ķ 
mutiara (Mal. 37, 39, 926 
nara (Jav.) 355 
nastapa (Jav. eto 
nastiti "Jav.) 322 
nawala (Jav.) 382 
ndupara (Jav ) 355 
neks. (Mal.) 254 


) 266 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


SANSKRIT IN INDONESIA 


0. QY- e ign chennai and Ganoon R 
nista (Jav.) 152f., 203pg Ged ppalea Batata puedatign Sergei and eGaņgotri 


338 
nita (OJav.) 256 ; 
piti sawārā, niti swara 
(Bal.) 179 
nur 326 
nuroja (Jav) 283 
nyadukara (Jav.) 341 
nyata (Mal.) 258 


pacara (Sund.) 255 

pada (Mal.) 396 

padam (Mal.) 92 

padéma (Mal.) 92 

padgata (OJav.) 254 

padmi 172, 276, 370 

paduka (Mal.) 144, 333 

paduraksa (Dyak) 51, cf. 
196 

palamarta (Jav.) 355 

panca- 287f, 

pancaka 253 


* pancalogam (Mal. ete.) 39, 


* 90 
pandam (Mal.) 89 
pande (OJav. etc.) 96f. 
pàügraita (Ja v.) 908, 338, 
494 
panji 399 
panjut (OJav.) 100 
parapati 99f., 291f. 
Parumbana (Bar.) 46 
pasamuwan (Jav.) 331 
Pasangiri (Jav.) 284 
pasar 99 
Paseban 197, 433 
Pasraman (Jav.) 331 
Pasta (Jav.) 254 
patam, pētam (Mal.) 90 
patih (Jav.) 49, 146 
Patrēm (Jav.) 919 
Patrom (Mal.) 90 
Pawarta (Jay.) 409 
pēdati (Mal.) 39, 384. 
Deka (OJav.) 99 
Pškērti (Mal.) 932 
Pélam (Jav.'Mal.) 91 
Pēlana (Mal. etc.) 39 


pélihara (Mal. eto.) 50, 61 

péndita 83, 97, 330 

pēngawa (Mal.) 190 

rénuh (Mal.) 244 

pērada (Mal. etc.) 53 

pērana (Sasak) 48 

pērbēhaca (Mal.) 46 

porca ya (Mal.) 38, 259,315, 

pēristewa etc. (Mal.) 261 

perkara (Mal.) 50, 380 

perkuasa (Mal.) 989 

pétara (Dyak) 133 

pët“ rana (Mal.) 243 

pétcri (Mal.) 190 

poti.91f, 

pi- (Jav.) 409 

piara (Mal.) 248 

pijana (Jav.) 270 

pirata (Bal.) 939 

pitam (Mal.) 99 

pitaya (Jav.) 238, 360 

plaksana (Jav.) 371 

praceka (Jav.) 381 

pracima (Jav.) 989 

pradanga (Jav ) 253, 299 

prakosa, prekosa (Jav.) 
8241. 

pranagata (OJav.) 308 

prateka (Bal.) 179 

praya (Jav.) 254 

prayitna (Jav.) 204 

priksa (Jav.) 203 

pualam (Mal.) 91 

puasa (Jav. Mal. etc.) 42, 
73, 244, 255, 330 

pujaùga (Jav. etc. 266, 
371tf. 

pulasara (Jav.) 345 

purus (Jav. etc.) 256 


raga (Jav.) 815 

ragam (Mal.) 91 

rahi (Mal.) 258 

raja (Jav.) 315 

raja-wórdi (Jav.) 289, 315 
raksi (Mal.) 61 

rambu (Malag.) 79 


453 


rame sv.) 204, 354 
rana (Jav.) 958 

Tanaca (Bug.) 39 

rasa, rahsa (Jav.) 158f, 
rasi 81f., 335f, 

rēca (Mal.) 254 

rēga 254 

rejasa (Jav.) 911, 362 
rokasa (Jav.) 360 

rena (Jav.) 378 

rēsi (Bal.) 146, 171 9 
rēsmi (Jav.) 251 

restu (Mal.) 35, 284 
roti 87 

rupiah 334 


sabaya (Mal.) 344 

sadana, sēdana 146 

sade (Jav.) 384 

sadu (OJav.) 181 

sae (Jav.) 365 

sajji (OJav.) 255 

saksi, rēksi 85f., 176, 342 

sakti, cēkti 134 

sambarani (Mal.) 29 

sankala, sēnkala ( Jav.) 
103, 124 

sankara (Mal.) 244 

sankēla (Mal.) 267 

santri 234f. 


- saranta (Sund. etc.) 282 : 


sarēsmi (Jav.) 367 

sari (Jav. Mal.) 35, 367 
sarjana (Jav.) 203, 235 
satmaka (Bal. Sas.) 50 
sato (Jav.) 35 

saudara (Mal. eto.) 346 
saya (Jav.) 253 

saya (Mal.) 248 
sayémbara (Jav.) 352 
sayogya (Mal.) 303 

seda (Jav.) 410 

sēdēkala (Mal.) 85, 282 
sédia (Mal.etc.) 48, 85, 282 
sēgala (Mal.) 90, 261, 290 
segawon (Jav.) 414 

s9jati (Mal.) 41 

sēkaha, skaha (Bal) 50 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


IN INDONESIA 
454 rasas ms Era 


: E ation cennar and LOR 
. KBat.) 78 timbra . Bal.) 66 
sön (Mel ) 861,189, sore e d Bais ENDIJU 


e | Siem tita (Jav.) 254 
ira. : . i (Jav-) 245 ita 
Em Cen (Bat.) 132 rm add 344 
sēmbada (Jav.) 203f. sraya-(Jav.) 253 apos ua asi 
sšmbrana (Jav.),204 gridanta (OJav.) 149 A 8. ae ne 
sēmburns. (Mal.) 939, 286, suase (Mal. eto.) 40, 992 Aga m ud 

999 — suba (Jav.) 338 S aa? 
sēmēdi (Jav.) 157 suci (Mal.) 95 ēkā de i 
sēm'na-mēna (Mal.) 290 auda (Jav.) 338 " da wi s 
sāmērdanta (Mal.) 35 guji E RCM 97f.,328f. tu Hal. 
lj .) 56 sulasi 
pe e 50 sundari (Sas.) 50 udaya (Jav.) 270 


ujiwat(i) (Jav.) 384 


ry ta (Jav. etc.) 70, 944, 
scndawa (Mal.) 40, 981 supata (Ja Rm 


ponjakala (Mal.) 38 269 s 
IKT IOS STS Gar are d5 200 
svakala (Jav.) 237 sura (Jav.) 270 SR (Bal. ) dus , 
séneara (Mal.) 189 surga (Mal.) 62 G ) 959 
sentana (Bal.) 173f. surjan (Jav.) 410 pear M Sy 
sšrapa(h) (Mal.) 316 susra (Jav.) 381 usia (Mal.) 326 
sŠraya (Mal) 61, 65, 232, suta (Min.) 97 usyasa (Jav.) 236 
393 sutéra 97 utama (Mal.) 155 
sórpa (Mal.) 315 sutra ‘son’ (Jav.) 281 . 
gērta (Mal. etc.) 50, 311, suwala 382 wagyut (OJav.) 76 ` 
342, 394, 426 suwita (Jav. Mal.) 244, walat (Jav.) 180, 869 
sēsantūn (Bal.) 192 410 wande (Jav.) 351, 384 
gota 62, 86 swaudana (Jav.) 236 wasita (OJav.) 323 
„ sētangi (Mal) 40 swanita (Jav.) 236 — weca (Jav.) 343 
setra (OJav.) 341 swara (Bal.) 179 Weda (Bal.) 110 
setu (Mal.) 35 swarga (Jav.) 86 wedam (Mal.) 91 
getya (Jav.) 204 wētara (Jav.) 270 
siddhanta (Bal) 143 tabe 432 wigati (Jav.) 370 
siji (Jav.) 200 tahana (Mal.) 247, 268 wiku (OJav.) 871., 171 
tikara (Jav.) 70 . tali datu (Sund.) 289 wilmana (Jav. Mal) 199, 
sila 84t., 338f. tamah (Mal.) 79f. 152, 282 
siloka (Sund.) 109 tamana (Malag.) 79f. wirama (Jav.) 109 
sinapati (OBvg.) 41 tapi (Mal. KBat.) 78,953 wirasa (Jav.) 368 . 
sipta (OJav.) 168 Taranjans (Jav.) 215f. wraksē (Bal.) 197 s 


sisantana (OJav.) 149 tayura (OJav.) 260 
eiti (Jav.) 34, 125, 1971. tega (Jav.) 204, 245 
sokma. sukma (Mal,Sund.) tēlaga (Mal. etc.) 98 


wrósni (Jav.) 895 


vēkti (Jav.) 176, 252 


156 tēmbaga (Mal. etc.) 3 

s Y . etc.) 37, 39 yuga (Jav.) 8771. 
sonti (TBat.) 77 ēra (Mal) 290 yumana (Jav.) 2671. 
sopaya, SUPAYA 892 ttimah (Mal.) 399 


yumani (Jav.) 267 


CG-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA 


p. 2, 1. 13 f.b. id.s...hinstead off d..s c. 

p. 69, 1. 1 f.b. add: O. Chr. Dahl in his book Malgache et Maanjan (Oslo 1951; me 
volume appeared May 1952), to which we already referred p. 79, n. 106, upholds 
the thesis that Madagascar was colonized by Indonesians from Borneo. There is 
special resemblance between Borneo languages (Maanjan) and Malagasy. 

p. 77, 1, 1.14 them read: it 

p. 79,2, 1. 2 f.b. Mah. read : Mal. 

p. 108, 1. 21 add: Part of these Baline:e records deal with Buddhist themes. 
One of the largest of them contains interesting historical and religious details, 
but is written in a careless manner. , There are many mistakes : e.g. wisobane, 
wisodhane, wisodhani promiscuously; the $a I was clearly already pronounced 
in the Indonesian way as sa. "Whereas the most ancient records found in this 
island are composed in Sanskrit, a younger period stretching over nearly two 
centuries (end IX** century—end XI" century) produced inscriptions in Old- 
Balinese. Afterwards these Balinese documents were written in Old-Javanese. 

p. 132,1. 10 f.b. read: Sadabhijna- 

p. 140, 1.7 read: Bicitram Shah 

p. 201, 1. 27 add after Skt. ravivara-: but compare NIA. aitvār eic. <adityavara- 
MRAR 

p. 218, 1. 8 f.b. the OJav. sense of bhaya ‘fortification’ seems to derive from abhaya- 

. ‘security’ (7 bhaya by way of aphaeresis, p. 253 ff.) 

P. 226, end of section: Dr. Lokesh Chandra understands the name Yavadvīva- 
aagta from the configuration of the island (yava- *T4 *barley). So also 

` Amradvipa- MAT for Ceylon. 

p.228, n. 49 correct to: Geographiké 

p. 235.1. 19 add : The &àstrins (students of the sàstras) had, on the other hand, to 
stay with their guru, to perform work and to lead the life of a celibate. 

p. 235, 1. 23 add: of. Hindi sarap from Skt. $apa- MT. 

p. ae l. 1 Lb. paratra- read paratra; in the same way p. 60, 8 janma, but. p. 64, 

mast-, etc. 

p. 236, 1. 8 f.b. Instead of Skt. rasa- 3H...... read: Skt. rahasya- TZET ‘secret dE 
trine, mystery . 

p. 237, 1.11 add: cf. Hindi bandar a737 ‘monkey’. 

p. 244, 1. 7 read : sevitā 

p. 244, 1. 19 f.b. add : Dr. Lokesh Chandra cannot help thinking of Skt. mugdha 
IH. attractive or charming (from youthfulness), lovely, beautiful tender > 

P- 248, 1. 4 f.b. add: or, rather, compare Hindi cañcal sts ‘talkativ je € 

p. 261, 1. 14 fb. read: sūksma- ee 

p. 264, 1. 28 Lb. „should be read : one's own, only, simply’ the reg. and coll. J 
and Mal. saja ‘intentionally’ represents Skt. sahaja- oe 

D. 259, 1.5 replace Skt. prajaya- SSA by : Skt. pardjaya- TUTA ‘defeat? 

P. 268, n. 83 add at end: The word, however, aurionsiy reri ON 
buddhit- S ‘dullard, blockhead’. nes us of Hindi 


p. 268, n. 84 after ‘native place’ insert: Hindi gharānā Wi ‘noble fa 
P. 269, n. 101 insert: The form suma is also found in Skt 


must.be regarded as having arisen in Java. 
' CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


mily?. 
+ but the Jav. Word 


: p. 287, 1. 28 alter: the second part raja 


Digitized nA Randi EMBASE Chennai and eGangotri 
e d. 


eS 


————— 


456 
— : . 5 
ao words in -tih which may perhaps 
.b. inseri: there are other Javanes i 
4 ctos th patih ‘to arrange. Leb Dr. Lokesh Chandra may be right 
in surmising that patih originally formed pat of 2 word Dich denoted some 
pns or officer who #nter alia arranged troops : of. Engl. to marshal from 


i ivi ilitary officials. 
i d of various civil and mi official 
the noun which was ube diraja < Skt. rajadhiraga- QUA means 


t LH , 
ramount king - 5 Aus * 

p 295 194 alter: „such 88 adiraja ‘very royal’ < Skt. adhirāja- fas ‘a 
„295,1. B oec 


supreme king’, of. also Skt. adiraja- DES ‘first king’, a ina adi- m 

` having blended; compare iu addition to this Jav. Mal. adipati ormerly a title of 
the bighest rank < Skt. adhipati- aiaia supreme regent ; m : 

p. 303, 1. 18 and 19 the words sau and quls in Nàgari script are superfluous, 
the forms being Malay. A "me. ; 

p. 333,1. 22 add: of. also Skt. nayika arfas! the heroine in & drama ete". : 

p. 383, 1. 1 fb. add: of. Skt. devapada- ZANA ‘His Majesty’, and srzcaranesu MAT 
at the beginning of letters in Bengali add resced to superiors. i 

p. 338, 1. 4 read : Skt. grhita- g£td means *eeized, taken (away), accepted... eic. , 
and grahītā Weta ‘one who takes or £eiZ8x, one who perceives or observos’. 

p. 339, 1.31 In Hindi too the meaning of Skt. svapna- TAN is ‘dream’. 

p. 340, 1.6 Cf. Hindi bhoj ata ‘a banquet". 

p. 944,1.4 after ‘final battle’ add: as far as I know Skt. bhrata aa ‘brother’ does 
not occur in Javanese documents (so it is not probable that bhrata ial has 
influenced bharatayuddha’s becoming bratayuda; Jav. likes dissyllabic words). 

p. 845, 1.9 add: or to Hindi ‘intensely moved’. 

p. 354, 1. 13 f.b. after rame, rama? add : < Skt. ramya- 

p. 359,1. 32 add: Mod. Jav. and Bal. sila d 

p. 365, 1.3 read: identifying 

p.9366,1.20 add after * discussion’: which may be considered as having replaced, 
by way of popular etymology or by some tendency to euphemism, the Skt. 
uccara- ST ‘excreta’. 

p. 369, n. 111.9 add: Perhaps the Hindi grhalaksmī ‘bride’ can be adduced as an 
argument in favour of this etymology. 

p 369, n. 13 add: Cf. also the Hindi masik dharm siis TH ‘menses’. 

p. 371, 1. 10 f.b. read : sukara- PAE 

p. 383, 1. 12 f.b. add: and, by way of ‘contamination’ Skt. svagata- Yalta 'weloome. 

p. 409, 1.7 and 425, 1. 12 read : vūrttū. 

p. 419,1. 18 add: Dr. Lokesh Chandra draws my attention to the Hindi parallel: 


‘ ,1 
, glass is kac Và or kame t7» while a ‘drinking glass”, oven when it is made of 
metal, is the Engl. loan glas. 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


tb Z 


XO E 


9 


10 


12 A 


1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SARASVATI VIHARA SERIES 


dy ; 
Prof. Dr. RAGHU VIRA, M.A., PH.D., D.LITT. ET PHIL. ‘ 
- . Director 
International Academy of Indian Culture 
Old Assembly Rest House 
Nagpur (India) 


Atharvaveda of the Paippaladas, books 1-13, Emended text, manuscript 
corruptions; and references to other Sambitas in parallel columns. Edited 
by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. Big quarto size, 15'x11." Edition de luxe. November, 
1936, : Price Hs. 80). 
Jaiminiya-Brahmana of the Samaveda, Part I, ed. by Prof. Dr. Raghu 
Vira. Size as before, Edition de luxe. November, 1937. 

Samaveda of the Jaiminiyas, ed, by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. Octavo size 
11"x73". Complete with mantra-index. March, 1938, Price Es. 10]. 
Uddhara-kosa of Daksinamurti; being a dictionary of the secret Tantric 
syllabic code. Edited by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira and Dr. Shodo Tski, a Japa- 
nese State Research Scholar at the Academy. Text, introduction, English 
notes, appendices and Sanskrit-English glossary. Octavo size, as before. 
June 1938. 

The Buddha and the Bodhisattva in Indian Sculpture, Part I 
(Tables). By Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira and Dr. Chikyo Yamamoto, a Japanese 
State Research Scholar at the Academy. Big quarto size. Edition de luxe. 
August, 1988, ` Price Hs. 20/- 
Vedic Mysticism, by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. Vedic verses and their 
rhythmic English rendering appear on opposite pages. Illustrated. Octavo 
size. Second enlarged edition. January, 1938. 

Ramayana of Valmiki in all its versions, fascicule I. Critically editea 
for the first time from MSS. collected from all parts of India, by Prof. Dr. 
Raghu Vira with the assistance of numerous scholars. The completed work 
Will cost no less than five lacs of rupees. Big quarto size, as before. July, 
1938. Price Rs. 10]. 
Ramayana in China— 1. Játaka of an unnamed king, translated into 
Chinese from an original Indian text by Kang-Seng-Hui in 951 A. D. 
2. Nidāna of King "Ten-Luxuries", translated into Ohinese from an original 
Indian text by Kekaya in 472 A.D. GOhinese text, English translation and 
introduction, by Prof, Dr. Raghu Vira and Dr, Chikyo Yamamoto. Big 
Qvarto size, ag before. August, 1938. ` 
Atharvaveda of the Paippaladas, Part II books 14-18. February, 
1940. y 
11 The Buddha and the Bodhisattva in Indian Sculpture, Parts 
U, III (Tables). June, 1939 and January, 1941. Price Rs. 20/- per part 


tharvaveda zb the Paippaladas, Patt, IIT, books 19-20, with two 


13 


14 


15 
16 
17 
18 


19 


20 


21* 


22 


dices (I Conspectus of Saunaka and Paippalada, II Paippalāda Line. 
tā) Ma 192jze2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
RETO being a Sanskrit-Tibetan-Mongolian Abecedarium l 
by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. The original Ohinese woodblooks have been re. | 
produced photographically. June, 1941. dā Rs. 6[. kā 
Fan Fan Yu, by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, being a Ohinese Dictionary of i 
Indian Geographical Names compiled in 517 A. D. from literature and 
accounts of travellers. Chinese text transcribed into Devanagari and 
rendered into Sanskrit for the first time together with restoration of Indian 
names, both geographical and literary. Fobruary, 1943. 


The Great English-Indian Dictionary 


Vol. I: Inorganic Chemistry ... ... «+ + Rs. 10/- 
Vo'. II : Organic Chemistry (A to D) x es 108 3 
Vol. III: Scientific Apparatus. -e < ... Rs, 8/- 


* Vol. IV: Chemical Dyes and Colours, with an Appendix 
on Intermediate Products. ... ... ... <. «  Hs.20[- 
In these volumes each word appears in four scripts, namely, r 
Devanagari, Bengali, Kannada and Tamil, | 
A Consolidated Great English-Indian Dictionary, containing | 
about one lacof terms relating to accounts and administration, 
agriculture, anatomy, bacteriology, banking, biochemistry, botany - 
chemistry, civics, commerce and finance, constitution, dyes and, 
colours, economies, education, engineering, insurance, law, mathe- E 
matics, medicine, mineralogy, newspapers, optics, parasitology, "4 J] 
pharmacy, physics, physiology, politics, radio, railway, statistics, | 
zoology, and numerous other science as well as arts subjeots. | 
The Government of Madhya Pradesh has recommended this  . `i 
dictionary for the use of various Government offices and locaf 
bodies. The Government of Bihar has purchased 238 copies for 
distribution to its various offices. Directors of Education ol 
U.P., Bihar and Hyderabad have recommended it for purchase by 
High Sohools and Colleges. Third revised and enlarged edition, 
covering 1700 octavo pages. Price Iis. 25/- | 
A Dictionary of Indian Birds, giving the names of all the j 
genera, species and sub-species of birds found in India, Pakis- 
tan, Burma and Ceylon—Prof. Dr.. Raghu Vira, and Shri K. | 
N. Dave. Price Rs. 15/- | 
Gavamayana of the Jaiminiyas, being Jaiminiya Brāhmaņa | 
TI. 1-80 containing the year-long sacrifice Gavāmayana, oritically | 
edited with a long introduction and copious notes by Dr. Lokesh 


Chandra, D.Litt. January, 1950. *..> Price Rs. 10/- 
An Elementary English- 


Indian Diction d for 
the use of Matriculation s pours mre reparo 


Üudents of Indian Universities and 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


High School Boards The termi 

'Oatds. ne terminolo once 
ChemisbtgesFbyeiced farti fegra ; (jā cil one 
great part of Intermediate requirements, 


pA Price Rs. 4/12/- 
A Dret 0 of Administrative Terms, by Prof. Dr. Raghu 
ira. 


aM Price Rs. 8/19]- 
Hindi Terms for Topographical Maps of 


Hin the Survey of 
India, by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, and Shri B. G. Tamaskar, M. A. 


Price Re, 1/- 
Hindi-English Dictionary of Technical Terms, being the 
reverse of the Consolidated Great English-Indian Dictionary. The 
only dictionary that will help administrators, professors, techni- 
cians, journalists, and others to follow budgets, parliamentary 
proceedings, scientific and technical literature that is being 
issued in Hiudi, Marathi, etc. year after year in Indian technica! 
terms. Price Rs. 20/- 
Central Asia: the connecting link between East and West, 
being a series of lectures delivered by Prof. Dr. Joh. Nobel, 


Visiting Professor at the Academy. Price Hs. 5|- 
A Glossary of Logic, Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, and Dr. D. G. 
Londhe M.A., Ph.D. (Leipzig). Price He. 1/- 


Sanskrit in Indonesia by Prof. Dr. J. Gonda. The first book 
of its kind revealing the mighty role Sanskrit has played in the 
history and civilisation of Indonesia. Price Rs. 30/- 
A Dictionary of Mineralogy, Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, Prof. N. 
L. Sharma, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad and Dr. 8. D. 
Limaye, Ph.D., Poona. Price Rs. ds 
A Dictionary of Indian Mammals, Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, 
and Shri K. N. Dave, Member, Public Service Commission, 
Nagpur. Price Hs. 6/- 
Jaiminiya Brahmana, complete text reconstituted for the ur 
time after years of effort with the help of newly discovere 
manuscripts. Text followed by variants, a long rea n 
and several appendices. By Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira and Dr 
kesh Chandra. 
p Brahmana had already ak great atten ion U 
century. Professors Oer i 
n pu d but it was not found pe 
: hole. Now with the discovery of a te 
to edit tho aaa nd arduous search in the 
more manuscripts after a ae e icon moeni tlel IL E 
Jaiminiya families in Malabar, | pec eo 
a complete text. No amount of labo 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


-32 


to restore hgutext fite gafainal PU: hai and eGangotri 


. In importance it rivalg 


the Šatapatha. . Price Hs. 35/- 


Sankhayana BAS translated into English by the late 


Prof. W. Caland. The first English translation of a ritual 


text. Price Hs. 40/- 


An Exhaustive English-Sanskrit-Hindi Dictionary, by 
Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira. It will bave no less than half-a-million 
vocabulary entries and will extend over ten thousand octavo 
pages. 

An English-Pali Dictionary, by Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira, and Dr. 
Lokesh Chandra, D. Litt. About fifteen hundred octavo pages. 
The entire material is ready on oards Via number eighty 
thousand. 


v 


CC-0. Prof. Satya Vrat Shastri Collection. 


5 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation. 
n 


wis 


1 €; 
Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Foundation Chennai and eGan 


gotri 


kd 


„m 


Digitized by Arya Samaj 


3i ES 


ndation Chennai and eGangotri 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundat 


5 
V 


