# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1965-avalon-pandit-kularnava-tantra.pdf
# Total Pages: 380 | Direct: 0 | OCR: 371 | Blank/Sparse: 9
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:17:13
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 2 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

KULARNAVA TANTRA

--- PAGE 3 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 4 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

KULARNAVA
TANTRA

Introduction
ARTHUR AVALON
(Sir John Woodroffe)

Readings
M. P. PANDIT

Sanskrit Text
TARANATHA VIDYARATNA.

MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Delhi Varanasi Patna Madras

--- PAGE 5 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

First Published, 1965
Reprint, 19°

EMOTILAL BANARSIDASS
HeaS Offce Bungalow Road, Delhi 110 007
Prancker Chanwk, Varanast 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
6 Appar Swamy Koil Street, Mylapore,
Madras 600 003

ISBN: 0 £9S81-756-2

AN nphts teserved No part of this publication may be reproduced

eo taeeminted in any form without the written permission of the
pos ers

Pr -redan India by Shantifal Jain at Shn Jamendra Press,
AZG Phase t Narsins, New Delhr 110 028 and published by
Dares fra Prakadh Jain for Motilal Ranarsidass, Delhi 110007,

--- PAGE 6 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

Tantra is a major development in the evolution of
Indian spiritual thought inasmuch as it represents a
determined attempt at reconciling the apparent points of
conflict among the different schools of philosophy that
came up after the age of the Epics. Tantra seeks to
synthesize the monism of the Advaita with the dualism
of the Samkhya, enrich Jaana with the rasa of Bhakti,
join Nature to her Lord in the person of the human
individual, harmonize the claims of the Spirit with the
rights of Matter It recovers the lost heritage of the
ancient Veda which lays emphasis upon the commonalty
of man, Nature and God and the equality of status
between Mother Earth and Father Heaven The principle
of Tantra is to reject nothing that God has created, to
utilize every means to raise the human consciousness to
the Divine. Unlike many of the older systems Tantra
is highly rational in its approach; it asks for no faith in
advance. It is a self-verifying science of the development
of natural energies into their supernatural terms leading
to a cosmic enjoyment of life in a spiritual consciousness
In aword itis the highway of mukti and bhukti in the
highest sense. ‘

The Kularnava is an important text in one of the tradi-
tions of Tantra with a pronouncedly practical bent of
thought It calls upon man to wake up to the rare
privilege that has been given to him, e.g human birth in
which the being becomes conscious of himself and is
offered a choice: a choice between stagnation and rapid
progression towards his Godhead. He is warned of the
consequences of losing himself in the rounds of transient
excitements and pleasures He is also put on guard against
the many pseudo-paths that abound in this world. He is

--- PAGE 7 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

vi PREFACE

asked to purify himself and told how to do it. In un-
ambiguous terms he is told that a wine-drinker is different
from the drinkers of ecstasy; the union of delight is
between the ascending Sakti and the presiding Lord
above, and not between man and woman In issuing
these warnings, the adepts of the Tantra would seem to
have anticipated the modern turn of miaing up sex with
spirituality It is a pity that a text like this has not received
adequate publicity in the west where tantra-enthusiasts
are on the wrong track.

The Kularnava prescribes the modes of preparation for
the high quest; it draws upon ethics, religion, philosophy,
yoga to elevate human life gradually to the level of godly
life It comprehends the multiple personality of man and
provides for the healthy growth of his mental faculties,
purification of his emotions and passions, orientation of
his physical faculties through ritual, japa, mantra and
upasana. Who js fit for the path of Tantra? Who is
competent to guide the novice on the double-edged razor
path? What is the responsibility of a Guru to a
disciple? These and other relevant questions are raised
and answered in a satisfying manner.

An attempt has been made in the following selections
to present such contents as are eminently helpful to the
needs of the awakened man of today. Portions relating
to rituals, technicalities of special types of japa, etc have
been kept out of the treatment so as not to tax the aspi-
rant of the present times who has little time or energies
to devote himself to those practices, especially when it is
possible to achieve the same results by more psychological
means suited to the modern age and so elegantly presen-
ted in this text. Definitions of most of the important
concepts and terms in the Tantra Sastra, as given in the
text, will be found highly educative.

M P Panorr

--- PAGE 8 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONTENTS

PREFACE

I. Introduction
By ARTHUR AVALON
(Sir John Woodroffe)
Il. Readings
By M.P. PaNpir
Il. Sanskrit Text

EpITED BY TARANATHA VIDYARATNA

13

129

--- PAGE 9 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 10 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

I
INTRODUCTION

By
ARTHUR AVALON

--- PAGE 11 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 12 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION

The Kularnava is a leading and perhaps the
foremost Tantra of the Kaula School, It enjoys
a great reputation amongst works of its class and
as such is constantly cited as an authority. The
Chapters of the Text here published number
seventeen and the verses total 2058 according as
there are included or not vv. 123-144 in the tenth
Chapter. The Colophon however states that the
portion here printed is only the fifth part of the
whole Tantra consisting of 1,25,000 verses. Thus
the Colophon of the first Chapter runs—‘‘ End of
the first Chapter being the first portion of the
fifth part entitled Urdhvamnaya Tantra of the
great Mystery and most excellent among
Agamas containing, 1,25,000 verses entitled the
Kularnava Tantra.’’ If this statement be correct
Ihave not on enquiry been able to discover the
whole work. Every Ms. which I have come
across contains the seventeon Chapters only here
printed, Either then the rest of the book is lost
or possibly exists under some different names.
The Kaulavali which is a compendium by
Jnanananda Paramhamsa quotes long passages
as from the Kularnava which do not occur in
any of the texts consulted in the preparation of
the present volume. The work has been already
twice printed and therefore would not in the
ordinary course have found place in these texts
according to the original design of the publi-
cation. It was found however that the previous
editions of this and other Tantras were in
general so incorrect that the present edition is

--- PAGE 13 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

4 KULARNAVA TANTRA

not unnecessary. The former editions were
those of Rasik Mohana Chattopadhyaya and of
Pandit Jivananda Vidyasagara. The former
published at Calcutta the Tantrasara and
Tantras in parts, the first of which appeared in
the Bengali year 1285 (1878-79) and the edition of
the latter was published at the same place in the
year 1882. In Rasik Mohana Chattopadhyaya’s
and Pandit Jivananda’s edition of the Kularnava
there are twenty-one verses at the end of the
Tenth Chapter which do not occur in any of the
four Mss. which have been consulted, These
have been printed. Both these editions seem to
have been based on a single Ms. without any
attempt to correct obvious errors in the text. In
the preparation of the present texts four Mss.
have been consulted lettered = waa and the
texts above mentioned which are based on a
Ms. which may be identified ass. Of these # is
the property of Pandit Amulya Charana Vidya-
bhushana. a@ belongs to the Rajshahi College.
a and @ have been lent by the Varendra Anusan-
dhana Samiti of which I have the honour to bea
member, The Samiti obtained a from the
family of the Tantrik Gurus of Palasa in the
District of Malda and a from the collection of
the Bhattacharyyas of Yoshodal in the District of
Mymensingh. fas stated is the text used in the
previous printed editions. In the present edition
variant readings of importance have been given
in the footnotes. It is however not claimed for
the present edition that every difficult passage
has been made clear but the obscurities have
been so considerably reduced as to render the
present edition a practical working text.
Another inducement for its publication was the

--- PAGE 14 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 5

fact that there is in hand an English translation
of the present work and if it is found possible to
publish this the Sanskrit-knowing reader can
compare the English translation with the Text
on which itis based. For this reason the size of
the present edition of the Text is that of the
proposed translation, which, if published, will
be the same format as the Mahanirvana,

The Kularnava is worthy of a close study
by those who would understand the tenets and
practices of the School of which it is a Shastra.
Having however regard to the fact that it is
hoped to publisha translation of the entire text I
have not thought it necessary to give such a
detailed analysis of the Tantra as in the absenco
of such @ translation it would have deserved. I
therefore only here give such a summary as
under the circumstances stated seems sufficient.

The first chapter opens with some fine verses
(vv. 1-121). Devi tells Shiva of how men are
suffering and asks the means whereby they may
be liberated. Ishvara in reply speaks of the
Brahman and of the creatures who encircled by
Maya are like sparks of fire parts of him. Of
these man is the greatest. He is a self-killer
who having attained man’s estate yet seeks not
his true good. ‘He who does not cure himself
of the disease of Hell what will he do when he
yet suffering from such disease goes to a place
where there is no medicament?” (v. 24), The
Lord then dwells on the transitoriness of life
and of all things therein. ‘Prosperity is like a
dream, youth is likea flower. Life is seen and
is then gone like lightning. How can anyone
who knows this yet remain content?” (v 30).
Moreover the world is full of evils which arise

--- PAGE 15 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

6 KULARNAVA TANTRA

from attachment (v 55). Shiva says ‘ Oh Beloved
to sleep, to copulate, to eat and other such func-
tions are common toallanimals. Man alone is
possessed of knowledge. He who is devoid of it
is a beast’ (v 69). Shun him who is addicted to
the pleasures of the world and who yet boasts
Brahman knowledge. There are other impostors
also. Liberation is not to be got by merely
smearing oneself with ashes, feeding on husks
and water, exposure to heat and cold and the
like. “Donkeys and other animals go about
naked. Are they therefore Yogins?’ (vv 79-86).
No: then gain true knowledge and avoid idle
talk, Whatis the use of Vedas, Agamas and
Puranas if one knows not the supreme object of
life—(v 89)? ‘‘Renowned men dispute among
themselves—some saying the truth is ahead and
some that it is behind, others again say it is on
either side. Some say it is like this, others like
that” (v 99). All such bewilder themselves with
Scriptures and talk. They lack realization
(Pratyakshagrahanam) (v 100). The Sastras are
numberless: one should master their essential
truth and then put them aside just as he who
seeks the grain of paddy throws away the husk
and straw (v103). Real knowledge alone
liberates. Ritual and austerities are needful
only so long as the Reai and the true are not
known (v 113). Shiva concludes ‘What is the
use of many words? It is Kuladharma which
liberates. Beloved, I have spoken to Thee in
brief of the creature and how he should live’
(v 121).

Chapter II deals with the greatness of Kula-
dharma which Shiva has extracted after
churning the great ocean of the Vedas and

--- PAGE 16 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 7

Agamas (v 10) and which excels all others as the
light of the Sun surpasses that of the firefly (v 16).
The Yogi cannot enjoy; and he who enjoys
cannot know Yoga but in Kuladharme there is
both Bhoga and Yoga (v 23). But Kaula know-
ledge can only be gained by one whose mind is
pure and who has controlled his senses (v 33). In
v 8485 Shiva says that the six philosophies are
the six limbs of Kula. The Kaula Shastras are
based on Veda. “ Tasmat vedatmakam shastrang
vidhi kaulatmakang priye (v 85).’? Many however
being ignorant of the traditional teaching of
Kuladharma cheat people by their false know-
ledge (v 116). Moreover the Kula path is full of
dangers (v 122). So also the Buddhist Vajrayana
is (I may add) compared to a hollow bamboo in
which a serpent is placed. It must go up at
peril of falling down. He who fails on this path
is likely to go to Hell, The Pashu should there-
fore avoid this method (v 124). Vv 140, 141 cite
authorities from Shruti (Rigveda) in support of
the doctrine taught.

The third Chapter treats of the Paraprasada
mantra that is Hamsah which, as the great
Cosmic Breath, pervades the world, opening (v 4)
with the assertion that Vedas, Puranas and other
Shastras may be preached abroad ; whereas the
Shaiva and Shakta Agamas are mysteries (v 4).
V 10 refers to the four Amnayas or traditions,
some portions of which appear in the Tantra
Shastras, Urddhvamnaya is not to be learnt
by study of the Shastras but from its masters
(v 30).

Chapter IV which is a difficult one deals with
Mahashodhanyasa, From it as well as other
parts of the work may be learnt how rigorous

Lf

--- PAGE 17 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

8 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the Sadhana is which is required of those who
are entitled to participate in the Kaula rites.

The fifth Chapter treats of the greatness of
Kula. Itcontains a description of the Kaula
substances; the making of wine; the various
kinds of wine; its use as Chitta-shodhana-
sadhana so that the mind may become Bramagah.
V 48 enumerates the fundamental doctrines of
this school that “success is attained by those
very things which lead to fall’? (Yaireva pata-
nang dravyaih siddhistaireya chodita). V 50
refers to animal sacrifice: and vv 67, 68 to the
necessity of wine and meat in the various forms
of worship including the Buddha. V 90 Says
“ As soma has been ordained a Brahmana should
drink ;”? which other Tantras are said to deny.
If this however be done in the ordinary animal
‘way even a Vira will go to Hell (v. 93). Nectar
drinking is the union of Kundali Shakti with
the Moonchit (Chichchandra), Others are but
wine drinkers (vv. 107-108). The true meat eater
is he who has merged his Chitta in the Supreme
(v. 109). He who controls his senses and unites
them with Atma isa fish-eater. The rest do but
kill animals (v. 110), True sexual union is the
union of Para Shakti that is Kundali with Atma ;
others do but have carnal connection with
women (vv 111, 112).

The sixth Chapter deals with the characteris-
ties of the worshipper, of worship and purifi-
cation of Kaula substances Vv 37-46 deal with
the lunar, solar, fiery Kdles orginating from the
vowels, the consonants Ka-kha to Tha-da and the
Yavarga respectively ; the Kalas of Kavarga and
Chavarga, Tavarga, Thavarga, Pavarga and
Yavarga and Shavarga. Then follow several

--- PAGE 18 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 9

mantras. Vv 63-67 give the Gurus. Yantra is
defined in vv 85-86.

Chapter VII describes worship of Vatuke,
Shakti and others. In vv. 42-44 the eight kinds
of Kula Shakti are enumerated. Vv. 70-75 are
noteworthy for they refer to the 36 Shaiva
Tattvas and not the Sangkhyan 24 thereby
denoting the connection of this Tantra with the
former philosophical Darshana. V. 96 prohibits
drinking in excess so as to produce unsteadiness
of mind. V. 99 contains the oft quoted verse
“Drink and drink again’? which some erro-
neously suppose is an invitation to drunkenness:.
notwithstanding the previous injunction and the
warning that he who disobeys it is likely to go
to Hell. The verse refers to Yoga “ drinking.”

Chapter VIII deals with the Chakra and the
various forms of Bliss. The Sadhaka passes
through these from Arambha to Praudhanta in
which-state the Chakra is held to Unmana and
then to Tata. In Praudhanta everything which
is done is an offering to Bhairava (v. 59).
Unmana is the state in which the Sadhaka is no
longer affected and Tata is the very self of the
Supreme Mantra (vv. 83-84). The states up to
Praudhanta are waking (Jagrat). Unmana is
is dreaming (Svapna), Anavastha is dreamless
sleep (Sushupti). The seventh Ullasa is Libera-
tion (vv. 94, 95), (Turiyavastha),

Yoga is treated of in Chapter IX. Advaita
doctrine in its form Aham Brahmasmi is accep-
ted (v.32). Jiva is Shiva and Shiva Jiva: the
only difference is that one is in bondage and the
other not (v. 42). A noteworthy passage which
explains some acts which disconcert others say
“the Kulayogi behaves in such ‘a way that men

--- PAGE 19 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

10 KULARNAVA TANTRA

laugh at him and reproach and revile and shun
him” (v. 4). But himself doing acts of kindness
to all, he roams the earth (v.75). Kaulika is
defined in v. 88. ‘‘Oh Thou of beautiful eyes I
dwell not in Kailasa or in Meru or in Mandara
but I am wherever the knowers of Kula are”
(v. 94.).

The tenth Chapter treats of worship on
special days and the eleventh with the rules of
Kulachara which should be carefully concealed
(v. 84). The twelfth Chapter treats of the Paduka
Mantra. V.58 prohibits discussion with Atheists
or unbelievers in Veda (Nastika), The subject
of the Guru is dealt withat some length. The next
Chapter (XIII) continues the subject of Guru
(v. 41) and disciple (vv. 1-40) and their qualifi-
cations. Amongst other defective persons, men
who are lewd, given to drink and stupid are to
be rejected. The Guru should realise that he is
inseparate (avichhinna) that is one with the
Brahman which pervades the whole universe
(vv. 67-68). V. 82 refers to the Lingas in the
bodily centres and v. 90 gives the eight bonds
(Pasha) which bind the Pashu. The Guru is he
who by destroying the pleasures of the senses
gives Brahman-Bliss (v. 97),

Chapter XIV deals with the testing (Pariksha)
of the qualifications of Guru and disciple; and
Chapter XV treats of Purashcharana and other
matters. Pranayama is dealt with (v. 35 et seq).
Vv. 65-69 mention the “ defects ” of Mantras and
vv. 71-72 state the purificatory rites which
remove them. The various kinds of Mantras
Siddha, Sadhya and the like are described, V.9¢
classifies the letters according to the Mahabhutas,
When doing Japa a man should control his

--- PAGE 20 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION ~ i

animal propensites, eat sparingly, live hardly,
cultivate faith and devotion and fix his mindand
heart solely on “That” (vv. 110-113), Chapter
XVI deals with rites done for the attainment of
various objects of desire. Chapter XVII gives
the meaning of a large number of words such as
Guru, Acharya, Deshika and so forth and con-
tains a Dhyana of the Guru. At the end of the
seventeenth Chapter there is ‘a remarkable
passage (v. 103) prohibiting (ordinary persons)
from reading the portions of this work dealing
with Asavollasa. This prohibition doubtless
has been prompted by the desire that such per-
sons should not be led astray and take to
practices which might lead to their moral ruin,
For it is to be noted that according to the Shastra
the Rahasyapuja is not for all and any but for
such whom the Guru may consider qualified and
have been duly initiated. Except under the
conditions prescribed the Sadhana with wine
and so forth is prohibited and its accomplish-
ment is admittedly harmful. But under the
conditions prescribed this Sadhana is said to be
the practical application of the principles of
Advaitavada which the Agamas of this school
teach.

I desire here to express my thanks for the
loan of Mss. to Pandit Amulya Charana Vidya-
bhushana, Rai Kumudini Kanta Bandopadhyaya
Bahadur, Principal of the Rajshahi College and to
the Varendra Anusandhana Samiti.

The next volume of this series will be the
Kalivilasa Tantra which is now almost ready
for publication. There is also in preparation
the very important and previously unpublished

Kadimata Tantra or Tantraraja with its

--- PAGE 21 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

12 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Commentary called Manorama under the editor-
ship of Mahamahopadhyaya Lakshmana Shastri.
This I expect to publish in two volumes next
year, to be followed I hope by the Tibetan text
of a rare and unpublished Buddhist Tantra
which deals with the Mandala (Kyil-khor) of
Shrichakrasambhara.

I have already the offer of a large number of
Texts for this series, more in fact that I can ever
print; but I take this opportunity of saying that
I shall be pleased to hear from any one who has
Manuscripts of sufficient importance to justify
their publication. The field of selection will
thus be widened with, it is hoped, better results.

CALCUTTA :
13th April, 1916 ARTHUR AVALON

--- PAGE 22 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

1
READINGS

By
M. P. PpANDIT

--- PAGE 23 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 24 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

To
PANDITSI
(Pujya Sri Nilakantha Mahadeva Joshi)

IN

GRATITUDE

--- PAGE 25 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 26 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER I
HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE*

The Kuldrnava is the most frequently cited
text in the Tantra literature not only because
it is a leading authority on the Kaula Margat
which is the most important and daring
formulation of the Shakta school of the Agamas,
but also because of its comprehensive sweep
which takes in all the fundamentals of the
Tantra Sadhana, its underlying philosophy and
its many implications, ethical and social.
Written in the simplest possible style—as indeed
all the great dgamas are—with telling
metaphors and imagery, incorporating many of
the gnomic passages in the Tantras, this work
of seventeen chapters consists of a little over
two thousand verses ranging over a wide variety
of topics but always stressing the practical side
of the agamic wisdom and calling attention to
the urgency of following it in this very life.

The text opens with a question by the Devi,
the compassionate Mother of the universe,to Her

* Ulldsa i

+Of the many derivations of the word kaula, the
following cited by Bhaskara Reya (in his celebrated
commentary on the Lalita) seems to us the most happy: .
kulam Saktiriti proktam, akulam Siva ucyate; kule akulasya
sambandhah kaulamityabhidiyate. Kula, Shakti; Akula,
Shiva; the relation of Akula with Kula i.e. the harmoni-
ous relation of Shiva and Shakti is Kaula.

Thus Kaule Marga is that which accepts and leads to
the equipollence of Shiva and Shakti, not Shiva slone or

Shakti alone, not to the Static alone or to the Dynamic
alone.

4949—2

--- PAGE 27 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

18 KULARNAVA TANTRA

eternal Spouse, as to the possible way by which
all these creatures involved in an endless round
of suffering, birth and death, could obtain
release.

There is One Real, says the Lord, He is
Shiva the Parabrahman, Featureless, All-
Knower, All-Doer, Sovereign of All, Stainless,
One without a second. Self-luminous, without
beginning or end, without attribute, without
change, beyond the highest, He is the
Saccidananda, All the jivas, the myriad
creatures, are portions of Him, like sparks of
the Fire*, Attached to the Ancient Ignorance
and regulated by their own volition and action,
influenced by their environment, they go on
passing from birth to birth. Many are the
kinds of births taken by each jiva which passes
through the several gradations of life on earth
e.g. immobile creation, the mobile ranging from
insects, the egg-born, birds, animals, men in
_different stages of development, gods, to the
liberated beingst. Of these the human birth is
the most’ important for it is then that one
becomes awake, aware of his state of bondage
and the necessity of release and is in a position
to take steps for his liberation from its hold.
He has a self-will and is not totally subject to

*« As from one high-kindled fire thousands of different
sparks are born and all have the same form of fire, so,
© fair son, from the Immutable, manifold becoming are
born.” (Mundaka Upanisad II-1-1)

tMark the position of superiority given to the libera-
ted being over the gods, 1n the tantric evaluation.

The bodies assumed are of four kinds}; udbhtjja, born
from the ground (breaking out), svedaja, born of sweat,
andaja, of egg, jardyuja, of womb.

--- PAGE 28 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE 19

the impulses and drive of Nature as are beings
lower than him in the scale of evolution. He
has a mind that can see and organise.* The
Tantras have it that the human birth is got after
going through as many as eighty-four lakhs of
inferior births. And even beings higher than
man envy his birtht because itis only human
life on this earth, which is a field of evolution,
that holds the possibility of change, progress
and release. The Purana declares that the very
gods have to come down on earth and embody

* For man, below the god, above the brute,
Is given the calm reason as his guide 5
He is not driven by an unthinking will
As are actions of the bird and beast ;
He is not moved by stark Necessity
Like the senseless motion of inconscient things.
The giant’s and the titan’s furious march
Climbs to usurp the kingdom of the gods
Or skirts the demon magnitudes of Hell ;
In the unreflecting passion of their hearts
They dash their lives against eternal Law
And fall and break by their own violent mass:
The middle path is made for thinking man.
To choose his steps by reason’s vigilant light,
To choose his path among the many paths
Is given him, for each his difficult goal
Hewn out of infinite possibility.
(Sri Aurobindo: Savitri, VI-1)
+ “ There is no birth like the human birth. Both the
gods and the manes desire it. For the jiva the human
body is of allthe bodies the most difficult to come by.
For this it is said that the human birth is attained with
extreme difficulty......It is said in ell the Sastras that of
the jiva’s eighty-four lakhs of births the human birth is
the most fruitful. In no other birth can the jiva acquire
knowledge of the Truth. Human birth is the stepping
stone to the path of Liberation. But rare are the merito-
rious who come by it.” (Visvasara Tantra)

--- PAGE 29 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

20 KULARNAVA TANTRA

themselves here if they wish to go up the ladder
of Cosmie Existence. All other worlds in
creation, the worlds of the gods, of angels and
other hierarchies, are set to type; they havea
fixed mould and one can only stagnate in that
mould however perfect it might seem. It is
only on this earth—and that too in » human
body endowed with a soul—that one can choose
one’s line of development and take the means to
progress accordingly. It is the articulate soul
of man that holds the impulse to progress and
gives the direction that makes for his superiority
over other orders in creation.

But not all are aware of the precious oppor-
tunity afforded by this human birth which is
verily the ladder to liberation, sopdnabhuta
moksasya. The value of the human body which
is the base for progress and realisation is not
fully recognised. Wealth, merit and demerit,
visits to holy places, all these can be had again
and again but not so a happy birth and a sound
body. One who is so endowed with a noble
birth and rounded limbs and yet fails to avail
of it for his uplift is indeed a self-sleyer,
atmaghataka, This body is meant to be
guarded, nourished and built up with a view to
achieve the highest end, Liberation. This is the
impelling motive for the universal urge for
self-preservation which persists in spite of all
suffering and misery One should preserve
oneself with utmost effort in order to live
according to the right Law, Dharma. Dharma
leads to Jnana, Jnana to Dhyana and Yoga
which inevitably lead to Mukti, Liberation,

Therefore tend the body till you realise the
truth of existence,

--- PAGE 30 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

~ HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE 21

For the Truth is to be realised here in this
life. If here you do not find and work out the
means for your release where else is it possible?
It is possible nowhere. ‘Great is the perdi-
tion,” says the Upanishad, ‘if here one comes
not to the Knowledge.’* It is vain to expect
that things will change and improve after death
in worlds which are happier than ours. As
here sothere. ‘‘ What is in-this world, is also
in the other.” (Katha Up.)t The condition in
which you live here pursues you elsewhere
also; the change or improvement cannot come
from outside of yourself. It has to be worked
out by yourself from within yourself. The
state of your consciousness attained while in
the body is also the state of your consciousness
elsewhere. The world you reach after the body
is shed is determined by the level of the con-
sciousness reached while in the body. “Ifin
this world of men and before thy body fall
from thee, thou wert able to apprehend it, then
thou availeth for embodiment in the worlds
that He creates.” (Katha Up.)t So, as long as the
body lasts, exert yourself towards the goal of
liberation.

Remember, the body does not last for ever.
Age prowls like a leopard, diseases strike like
an enemy. Before the limbs lose their vitality
and before adversities crowd upon you, take to
the auspicious Path. Truly, it is a wonder how
men can be so complacent and unmindful when
everywhere there is thunder of crash. Time

* Kena Up Il. 5.
+ IL. 1. 10,
t IIL. 3.4,

--- PAGE 31 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

22 KULARNAVA TANTRA

flies without your knowing. Prosperity is like
a dream,* youth like a blossom, life-span
momentary like lightning. Even a hundred
years is too little; for half the life is spent in
sleep and the other half is made infructuous by
infancy, disease, misery, age and what not.
Lack not in industry for that which is to be
obtained, sleep not where you are to be awake.
Deluded by Ignorance, man looks not at what he
sees, grasps not what he hears, follows not what
he reads. He fails to see that with every moment
that passes his body decays. The Wolf of Time
rushes upon him when he is still prattling of
“my children”, “my wife”, “my wealth”,
‘(my relations *t. Death swallows him when he
is still thinking of what is done, what is yet
to be done and what is half-done. Therefore do
today what is required to be ready tomorrow,
do in the forenoon what is meant for the after-
noon; Death waits not to see what is done or not
done. Wise man, do you not see prowling
towards you on the route of age, the foe of Death
armied with the host of diseases? Cut into by
the spear of desire, moistened in the lubricant.

* “T know of treasure that it 1s not for ever; for not
by things unstable shall one attain That One which is
stable.?? (Katha Up. I. 2. 10)

Here on this mutable and ignorant earth,
Who 1s the lover and who 1s the friend ?
All passes here, nothing remains the same.
None is for any on this transient globe.
He whom thou lovest now, a stranger came
And into a far strangeness shall depart.
(Sri Aurobindo: Savitri, VI-1)

“ (They) childishly follow after desire and pleasure

and walk into the snare of Death that gapes wide for them.”

(Katha Up. 1-1-2)

--- PAGE 32 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

¢ sense-6D) yyment, cooked 1% the of like
a dislike, no is th and Death
Helpless! ¥ swings fr pirth to death an

again IT death to pirth He goes from here
to there 25 grom hous? to house What 1s sown
nere is * d elsew tree that 35
watered at the roots, the fruits or seen OF )
ranches ® Freedom rom desires no’

attachment, he only way to liberation ; a

evils are 2° n of attachm nit. Ever the Jnenin
is mo b ttachmen", hat t speak of lesser

no more than an animal. Only he who has
,nowledge ** aman. Be a man, pursue the true

object in life, acquire Knowledge of the Supreme
Truth.

* «Jp him whose mind dwells om the objects of sense
with absorbing gnterests attachment to them is formed 3
from. attachment comes desire } from desire anger’ Anger
leads to pewilderments from pewilderment comes loss of
memory 5 and by that the jntelligenc? is destroyed 3 from
destruction of ntelligence he perishes.”
(Bh. Gita. 11-62, 63)
4 «Even the mind of the wise men who labours for
perfection is carried away bY the vehement gnsistence fo}
the senses.” (Ibid. 11-60)

--- PAGE 33 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

24 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Engaged ceaselessly in the performance of
their respective class-duties and little else, men
do not see the Higher Truth. Engrossed in ritual
and austerities they know not their own self,
Content only with the name, these men delight
in the Ritual, are deluded by the repetition of
mantras, homas and elaborate sacrifices.* And
they hope to realise the Highest by austerities
emaciating the body! If the ignorant could
achieve freedom only by punishing the body,
the serpent should lie dead when the ant-hill is
struck. Beware of these pseudo-gurus. Intent
on amassing wealth, showily, attired in disguise,
they wander everywhere as Jnanins and throw
others in delusion. Attached to the pleasures of
the world, they yet proclaim, ‘I know the
Brahman’, Fallent both from works and from
knowledge, they are to be shunned. Are there no
asses and the like to whom home and forest are
the same and who wander about naked without
shame? Do they become yogins thereby? If men
could get liberated by coating themselves with

*«¢Come with us’, ‘Come with us’, they cry tohim,
these luminous fires of sacrifice and they bear him by the
rays of the sun speaking to him pleasant words of sweet-
ness, doing him homage, ‘This is your holy world of
Brahman and the heaven of your righteousness’. But frail
are the ships of sacrifice, frail these forms of sacrifice, all
the eighteen of them, in which are declared the lower
works; fools are they who hail them as the highest good
and they come yet again to this world of age and death.”
(Mundaka Up. 1-2-6, 7)

+“ They dwell in many bonds of the Ignorance,
children thinking, ‘We have achieved our aim of Paradise’;
for when the men of works are held by their affections,
and arrive not atthe knowledge, then they are overtaken
by anguish, then their Paradise wastes.” (Ibid. I-2-9)

--- PAGE 34 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE 25

mud and ashes, are all the country-folk who
live in mud and ash, freed? Denizens of the
forest like deer and other animals live only on
grass, leaves and water; do they become yogins
thereby? Frogs and fish live all their lives in
rivers like the Ganges; do they acquire special
merit thereby? Pigeons eat nothing but stone;
the Chataka bird does not partake of the water
on earth; are they too yogins thereby? Truly,
such privations and self-denials are only for
deceiving the world. The only means for
liberation is the knowledge of ‘the Truth, the
Divine., This Truth is not known by those who
are plunged in the discussions and debates of the

. philosophies of the Six Darshanas or caught up in
the subtleties of the Sastras. They who have read
the Veda, Agama and Purana and yet know not of
the Highest Truth of the Divine,—the true object
of life—are a fraud, cawing like the crow. With
their backs turned on the Real Truth to be
known, the Divine, they pore over books
ceaselessly, anxiously, saying-‘this is to be
known’, ‘this is knowledge’, and so on. Indeed,
it is to such that the Upanishad sounds the
warning: “If thou thinkest that you knowest it
well, little indeed dost thou know the form of
the Brahman.” *

Lost in the enchantments of poetry,
embellishment, style and other artifices, they
stand befuddled. The real Truth is one and
what they understand is quite other ;# one is the

* Kena Up. II.
t Our mortal vision peers with ignorant eyes 5
It has no gaze on the deep heart of things,
Our knowledge walks leaning on Error’s staff,
A worshipper of false dogmas and false gods,
(Sri Aurobindo: Savitri, X-3.)

--- PAGE 35 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

26 KULARNAVA TANTRA

purport of the scripture and other is what they
interpret * They speak of, high states of egoless
consciousness but what they live in is totally
different if not the very contrary. They chant
the Vedas and dispute among themselves but
like the ladle that does not know the taste of
the treacle it holds, they know not the Truth.
The flowers may lie on.the head but itis the
nose und not the head that gets their fragrance,
Many are they who chant the Veda-Scriptures
but rare is he who is one with their spirit.
Forgetting that the Divine Truth is within
themselves, they look for it in the books, like
the shepherd who searches for the goat in the
well when it is already in the flock. Verbal
knowledge is of no avail for the destruction of
the delusion of the world. It is only the man of
awakened intelligence} that can benefit from the
Sastra. Without this intelligence, prajnd, one
can only talk of the Divine Truth being in this

* It makes a cloud of the interpreting mind

And intercepts the oracles of the Sun. (J6zd.)

«‘ They who dwell in the ignorance, within it, wise in
their own wit and deeming themselves very learned, men
bewildered are they who wander about stumbling round
and round helplessly like blind men led by the blind.”
(Katha Up. 1-2-5)

+“ Manifested, it is here set close within, moving in
the secret heart, this is the mighty foundation and into it
is consigned all that moves and breathes and sees.”
(Mundaka Up. II-2-1)

“He who knows this hidden in the secret heart,
scatters even here in this world the knot of the Ignorance.’
(Ibid. II-1-10)

} Yet Light is there ; it stands at Nature’s doors:

It holds a torch to lead the traveller in.
It waits to be kindled in our secret cells 3

(Sri Aurobindo: Savitri X-3)

--- PAGE 36 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE a

direction OF that, of this kind oF another, but
there can be no direct apprehension» realization,
of that Truth. Cen you seize b mere talk?
You mey spend ® thousand years hearing of
knowledge in the Sastras, put you will never
reach their end. Endless is the expanse of the
Sastras, the lif e-duration isbut limited, obstacles
are legion; jt is wisdom to £° straight to the

truth and then leave them aside like husk after
collecting the grain.

Once this essence, this Truth is known all
other Knowledge js useless. Mukti, Liberation, is
not to be obtained by the chanting of the Vedas,
nor by the study of the Sastras 5 Jnane, real
knowledge alone cam give he liberation.
Neither agramas (prescribed stages in life) nor
philosophies nor sciences can give the
deliverance 5 only Jnane can give it. And this
Jnana is received through the Word of the Guru.
All other ways are deceptive, oppressive 3 the
Truth-Knowledge alone is lif e-giving:

Tb is a ster lighting #> ignorant Seay
A lamp upor our poop piercing the night.
As knowledge grows Light flames up from within :
Tt is a shining warrior in the mind,
An eagle of dreams in the divining heart,
An armour in the fight, ® pow of God.
Then larger dawns arrives
Man’s knowledge pecomes God’s supernel Rey:
(Sri Aurobindo? Savitri %-3)

The supreme Knowledge of the One declard
by the Lord, free from ritual and austerity, is to
be received through the mouth of the Guru.
The Word of the Guru, jt must be noted, is the

--- PAGE 37 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

28 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Voice of the World-Teacher that speaks through
him to the disciple. And on knowing thus
through the Guru, one is happily delivered from
the bonds of the world. Thisis the Para Vidya
lauded by the Upanishad as distinct from the
apara* which is of two kinds: knowledge
derived from the scripture and knowledge born
of mental reasoning. The Sabda-brahman, Veda,
is the first and the ideative conception of para-
brahman is the second. Some prefer non-dualism,
advaita, and some dualism, dvaita. But none of
them knows my Truth which is above both dualism
and non-dualism, dvaitadvaita-vivarjitam.

“Mine” (mama) is the term that acts for
bondage; ‘“ Not-mine” (nirmana) is the term that
spells release, True workt, true knowledge, is
that which frees; all other work gives only
fatigue, all other knowlege makes only for
artistry.

Talk not of the higher Purpose as long as
there be desire, attachment and activity of the
senses. Talk of it not as long as there be the
agitation of exertion, activity of thoughts and
the mind is not steady. Talk not of the higher
Purpose as long as you are identified with the
body, as long as there is the ego-feeling and so
long as there is no Grace of the Guru.

Austerities, observances, pilgrimages, japa,
homa, worship, the Vedas, Agamas and Sastras—

*«Twofold is the knowledge..the higher and the
lower. Of which the lower, the Rig Veda, and the Yajur
Veda, and the Sama Veda and the Atharva Veda, chanting,
ritual, grammar, etymological interpretation, and prosody
and astronomy. And then the higher by which is known
the Immutable.” (Mundaka Up. I-1-4, 5)

+ Ritual

--- PAGE 38 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HUMAN BIRTH AND LIFE 29

all these are resorted to only so long as the
Supreme Truth of the Divine is not attained.

So be minded of the Truth Divine, dedicated
to its pursuit, in all conditions, with all effort.
Afflicted as you are with threefold distress*,
take to the shade of the Tree of Liberation, on
whose branches flower Dharma and Jnana, the
Right Law and the True Knowledge, and whose
fruit is the World of Bliss.t In a word, the Way
of Liberation lies in the Kula-dharma, the
Royal Road of Shakti.

This is the truth, this the secret,

* Of body, life and mind or material, spiritual and
environmental,
+Only when thou hast climbed above thy mind
And livst in the calm vastness of the One
Can love be eternal in the eternal bliss
And Love divine replace the human tie.
There is a shrouded law, an austere force :
It bids thee strengthen thy undying spirit;
It offers its severe benignances
Of work and thought and measured grave delight
As steps to climb to God’s far secret heights.
Then is our life a tranquil pilgrimage, ‘
Each year a mile from the heavenly Way,
Each dawn opens into a larger Light.
(Sri Aurobindo: Savitri, VI-1).

--- PAGE 39 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER IT
GLORY OF KULA-DHARMA*

And what is Kule-Dharma ?

Handed down from mouth to mouth in the
long stretch of holy tradition, the Doctrine of
Kaula is the highest and the most guarded from
the profane and the unqualified. Seven are the
Ways for the liberation of man. The first is the
path of karma, the Vedic ritual; this is the
discipline for the man of ordinary metal, The
second, higher than the first, is the Vaishnava
path in which devotion to the Lord, bhakti, plays
a@ greater role than works and is meant for a
higher competence. Third, the Shaiva which is
more a path of meditation and jnana, knowledge,
than anything else. These three orders or
successive stages of discipline are meant for the
ordinary category of seekers, without any
special qualification, the pasu, creature who is
bound by the bonds of existence, pasa. The
fourth is the Dakshina, the path where karma,
bhakti, jnana are skilfully harmonised and
synthesised; the fruits of the first three are
organised and conserved. Higher than the
Dakshina is the Vama, the reverse path where
the natural turn outwards, pravritti, is turned
inward, nivritti, to the source of all and every-
thing in creation is looked upon and used as the
means for the return to the One Consciousness
that bases all and governs all. The process is one
of inner identification of oneself with the One

*Ulldsa 2

--- PAGE 40 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GLORY OF KULA-DHARMA 31

Divine not only in its poise of self-existence but
also in its movement of manifestation. These
two paths or stages (Dakshina and Vama) are for
the man who has evolved into a higher com-
petence, the man heroic who can struggle and
fight the nether forces of Ignorance in the battle
for the Divine, the Vira. Still higher than Vama
is the Siddhanta, the stage or path where things
are finally determined as to their real nature
and the direction of one’s own goal and the
knowledge so arrived at is prepared to be
embodied in all the parts of the being and in all
one’s consciousness. This stage and the one
that succeeds, the last, is for the highest type of
the seeker, the divya, the godly type, who is
superbly fitted to tread the highest path in a
consciousness that is rapidly nearing the divine
Consciousness itself. This highest of all is the
Kaula, the most secret, the most preeminent
Path. There is nothing higher than the Kaula
which is the essence of all essences, the very
Shiva, the Holy Doctrine that has come down
heard from ear to ear, It has been extracted from
the Ocean of the Vedas and Agamas with the
churning rod of Jnana by Shiva himself who
knows the essence of all. Into this Kula-dharma
lead all other paths. As the footprints of all
animals get lost in the footprint of the elephant
so do all philosophies get absorbed in this
Doctrine.

No doctrine, no path can really compare with
this Sun of Kaula. In other paths great is the
need of travail, struggle, strenuous study; but
not so in the Kaula. Here the result is direct
and swift. In the others a yogin cannot take the
enjoyment of the world created by the Divine,

--- PAGE 41 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

32 KULARNAVA TANTRA

he cannot be a bhogi; and one who is in the
midst of the world cannot be a yogin, an active
aspirant for the Divine. But here in the path of
the Kaula, both yoga and bhoga, union with the
Divine and participation in His manifestation,
have a happy meet. What is called sin, evil, is
turned into a force for good, the very round of
the world, samsdra, becomes a means for release,
bhoga turns into yoga, bhogo yogdyate. Even the
Gods of the higher worlds like Indra, Rudra,
Brahma follow this path of Harmony of Shiva-
Shakti, Pure Consciousness and manifesting
Power, what to speak of men? So, should you
aspire for Fulfilment, give up all other creeds,
all other ways, and take to the Kula.

But the Kula is not to be had by any one and
every one. There are certain conditions to be
ready before the truth of the Kula could be
revealed. One must have matured in mind and
nature as a result of study and discipline under-
gone in the previous lives. Only to such a person
does the Knowledge dawn without being taught
and explained by others. For one’s mind, one’s
inclination and proclivity depend entirely upon
what has gone before, what has been prepared
in the past births. According to that preparation,
that evolution, forms the readiness of man,
External instruction is of little avail. The
second factor is the degree of purification and
subtilisation of consciousness that one has under-
gone as a result of japa, repetition of sacred
mantras of whatever persuasion.* Third, the
extent to which one is freed from the deforming
elements of Ignorance and Ego as a combined

* Shaivite, Vaishnavite, Shakta, Ganepatya, Saura ete.

--- PAGE 42 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GLORY OF KULA-DHARMA 33

result of previous austerity, self-giving, sacri-
fice, repetition of holy names, observances and
similar acts aimed at ridding oneself of animal
propensities and the like. So too there must be
devotion and faith in the Deity, in the Guru and
above all, the Divine Grace should pour on him.

Thus to one of purified consciousness, calm,
active inthe ways of the spirit, devoted intensely
to the Lord and His Revelation of the Kula, of
high faith, humility, cheerfulness, dedicated in
life to Truth and obedient to the commands of
the Guru, does the Kula Knowledge reveal itself.
It is not attained by the undeserving nor does it
stay with them.

The Guru should first awaken the disciple,
prepare him and then reveal this high
Knowledge productive of the highest good for
both, and effective for immediate liberation in
this very birth, Alone by itself, unaccompanied
by ritual, observances of aSramas, the Kula-
Dharma is capable of leading to the final Release,
Even if you lack the full knowledge of this
Doctrine, faith and dedication to it is enough to
deliver. Break the Kuladharma, it will break
you; guard it, it will guard you; adore it,
revere it, it will show you the same conside-
ration. The right attitude for the seeker of the
Truth of this lofty Path is: ‘Let my people look
askance; let my wife and children forsake me;
let men deride; let the kings punish; butI shall
be steadfast, O Supreme Deity, I shall serve and
ever serve Thee with mind, speech, body and act,
T shall not leave Thy Law.’ Such a man whose
faith and devotion are unshakable even in the
midst of all adversity, is verily adored by the

gods and over there he shall become Shiva,
49493

--- PAGE 43 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

34 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Though constantly afflicted by disease, by
poverty, by misery, he who waits upon the
Divine Mother with ardour, he attains to the
high state. The Divine Law as promulgated in
the Kula shall not be forsaken whatever your
state, whether you receive praise or blame,
whether you stay rich or poor, whether you
depart today or at the end of the Age.

To live is in itself 2 small matter; the trees
live, the birds and the beasts also live. But
only he lives meaningfully whose mind is
settled in the Law of the Kula, Of him whois
away from the Kula dharma, days come and
pass; like the bellows of the smith he heaves
but does not live.

Who, then, is the Kaula? Bestowed with the
Grace of the Guru, shorn of his evil legacy by
means of the initiation, delighting in the worship
of the Shakti, he is the true Kaula. In such a
fortunate one does the Knowledge of the Kula
take root and grow luminous.

All the leaves in sacred waters, all visits to
places of Light, all performances of ritual lead
to entry into this Kula Dharma, And they who
once enter into the portals of the Dharma of the
Kula do not pass into the womb of birth again.
The supreme Knowledge is given ‘To those
who are dedicated to the Kula,?? says the Lord,
“to those great ones, I give the Knowledge
supreme at the final hour.”?

The glory of the Kule-Dharma is known
only to those who are devoted to the Divine
Mother, even as the taste of the moon-bliss is
known only to the Chakora bird and to no
other. Only those who know the heart of
things cherish the Kula-Dharma; the moon is

--- PAGE 44 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

held pigh en ry ive e sv e
moo’ come to b owe the ev}
Rebu (plan )
This A constit th Shiv® an
shekti, 1c; ciousness and wer stab-
ished 2 a orld is the & \a-D which
is therefore est of i. i pase tself oF
the tru poth, Shiv and pakti, em e-
fore it 35 ost true m _ wholeso™ a The
six Darsh® », says Lord,” y six
Jimbs A aifere™ ates ® g th cuts
across ™Y pody: For the § m the
Darshan® ( iving fr th ) constitute
the si* e Kula. wz th efore the
Sastre js DO’ other than stra
the Veo® wedat ak gast i kaulat
maka, is ¥ pivine W yiel )
fruit the divers© osopnies > 4 is the
came D ne that gives phappines yelease
jn this Kul ath 3s well. ‘The Kul needs
roving to tablish its xzoellenc? > yomedi-
te fruit it yields js 2S 4pfication for
jts cleim the nighest Sas js ope®

. 0
m. Whoever knows of what
is peyond OF what will happe> to whom? That

: : : Sug fruit Bh

0
all to verity its clei

realization is the pighest Teaching:
is i

This 18 nowledg outs! pale of
men in v ordinery run, the P u ther 15
xt for those whose ctions 1D the past pirth have
forged str’ g ponds £ si not for jpom 1S the
Grace © Guru oF the Know g th
Kula. A sinner, thoug directe the path
of the Kula does yn to 15 he man
merit resorts nt gh he be pr

vented from it. This is the one means Fre

--- PAGE 45 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

36 KULARNAVA TANTRA

by the Divine for the achievement of both
enjoyment and liberation, participation and
renunciation, spoken of by the Veda and the
Agama,

But it is well nigh impossible to understand
the Kula in its pristine truth unless favoured
by the grace of the Divine Mother. Even the
gods are deluded otherwise. ‘‘ Wine to be drunk,
flesh eaten and the fair face to be seen—this
indeed is the object, this the way to be
followed”, many wrongly think. Deluded in
themselves, bereft of the guidance of the Guru,
they delude others too.

If by mere drinking of wine one were to
attain fulfilment, all drunkards would reach
perfection.

If mere partaking of flesh were to lead to
the high estate, all flesh-eaters in the world
would come by immense merit.

If liberation were to ensue by mere cohabita-
tion with woman, all creatures would stand
liberated by female companionship

It is not the Kula Marga that is to be
denounced, but those who do not tread it in the
right spirit, One is the way that is laid down
for the Kula from on high and quite other is the
way followed by fools deeming themselves
wise. You may walk on the sharp edge of a
sword; you may hold to the neck of a tiger;
you may wear a serpent on the body; but to
follow aright the way of the Kula is much more
difficult.

Vain is the drink—drinking liquor. It is a
great sin forbidden to man. Similarly the
eating of flesh for its own sake. He who gives
and he who partakes are both guilty of heinous

--- PAGE 46 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GLORY OF KULA-DHARMA 37

act. It is only when things are processed
through the prescribed ritual and the partaker
undergoes the prescribed self-modification, tha‘
the right results accrue.

This felicitous and sure means for libera-
tion, while yet living, is there preserved in the
Kula Sastra which is declared by none other
than the Supreme Lord, Shiva. This is the
Standard, the Law to be followed unquestion-
ingly, without riddling it with doubts. The
Sruti stands testimony to the authority and
governance of this Law. The Veda is replete
with corroborations of the key-truth of the
Kaula : an utter consecration of the joy of-life,
in its myriad jets, to the Master-Enjoyer, the
Divine,

--- PAGE 47 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER II

URDHVAMNAYA AND ITS
GREAT MANTRA*

Eternal and universal is the Lord. So is
His Truth eternal and universal. To suit the
different times and different climes in the course
His manifestation, He has promulgated the
Law in varied forms. These are the Great
Traditions, admndyas, sure means of liberation,
spoken by the Lord through His Five Faces,
modes of expression suited to His different
moods of Being.

Facing the East was spoken the Purva-
amnaya whose central truth is that of creation,
srsti, Path that of Mantra Yoga, and whose
principles are twenty-four in number. Facing
South, was declared the Dakshina-amnaya
whose central truth is the maintenance, sthiti,
of what is created, Path that of Bhakti, and
whose principles are twenty-five in number.
Facing the West was declared the Paschima-
amnaya whose central truth is destruction,
samhara, of what has been created and main-
tained, Path that of Karma, and whose princi-
ples are thirty-two in number. Facing the
North was declared the Uttara-amnaya whose
central truth is Grace, compassion, Path that of
Snana, and whose principles are thirty-six in
number Facing Upward was declared the
highest and the best of all, the Urdhva-amnaya,
whose truth is Brahman itself, the Brahman in

* Ulldsas3 & 4

--- PAGE 48 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

URDHVAMNAYA AND ITS GREAT MANTPA 39

its utmost fullness. It is the most guarded
secret teaching. The Vedas, Sastras, Puranas
can be made public, but the Shaiva and Shakta
Agamas are not to be so done. Of these the
Kula Sastras are more secret and of these again
the most secret is the Urdhva-amnaya. All-
satisfying, it is the most direct form of Shiva
Himself .*

*Some of the Tantras speak of a further, sixth,
Amnaya, the lower and hidden adhdmnaya. Citing from
the Devydgama, the Tantra-rahasya says: ‘The face in
the East (thet is in front) is of pearl-like lustre with three
eyes and crowned by the crescent moon. By this face
I (Shiva) revealed (the Devis) Sri Bhuvaneshvari, Triputa,
Lalita, Padma, Shulini, Sarasvati, Tvarita, Nitya,
Vajraprastarini, Annapurna, Mahalakshmi, Lakshmi,
Vagvadin:, with all their rites and Mantras.

The Southern face is of a yellow colour with three
eyes. By this face I revealed Prasadasadashiva, Maha-
prasadamantra, Dakshinamurti, Vatuka, Manjughosha,
Bhairava, Mritasanjivanividya, Mrityunjaya, with their
rites and Mantras.

The face in the West (that is at the back) is of the
eolour of a freshly-formed cloud. By this face I revealed
Gopala, Krishna, Narayana, Vasudeva, Narasimha, Vamana,
Varahe, Ramachandra, Vishnu, Harihara, Ganesha, Agni,
Yame, Surys, Vidhu (Chandra) and other planets, Garuda,
Dikpalas, Hanuman and other Suras, their rites and
Mantras.

The face in the North is blue in colour and with three
eyes. By this face, I revealed the Devis, Dakshinakalika,
Mahakeli, Guhyakeli, Smashanekalika, Bhadrakali,
Ekajata, Ugratera, Taritni, Katyayani, Chhinnamasta;
Nilasarasvati, Durga, Jayadurga, Navadurga, Vashuli,
Dhumavati, Vishalakshi, Gauri, Bagalamukhi, Pratyangira,
Matangi, Mahishamardini, their rites and Mantras.

The Upper face is white. By this face I revealed
Srimattripurasundari, Tripureshi, Bhairavi, Tripura-
bhairavi, Smashanabhairavi, Bhuvaneshibhairavi, Shatkuta-

--- PAGE 49 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

40 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Each Tradition has its own God-given
Mantras and sub-mantras leading to Enjoyment
and Liberation, bhukti and muktt. The fruit of
each Mantra is granted by the Deity presiding
over that Mantra, And all these Deities that are
adored and waited upon are none else but the
emanations, portions of the Lord and his Spouse,
Ishwara and Devi. The truth of all the Mantras
is known to the Lord alone and it is only out of
His grace that man comes to know of it.

Any one of these * Four Amnayas is enough
to lead one to liberation And if one were to
know all the four he would become the very
Shiva himself. But higher than all the four
Amnayas put together is the Urdhvamnaya
which is so called because it is High, urdhva,
among all the dharmas, because it takes up, him
who is below, adhastah urdhvam, because it is
above the nether sea of samsdra and because it
ean be practised only in a higher way of being,
higher state of consciousness It is the direct
single means for liberation, yielding a greater
fruit than all the other Amnayas, supreme.
“Even as lam to be adored above all others,”

bhairavi, Annapurnabhniravi, Panchami, Shodashi, Malini,
Valavale, with their rites and Mantras.

The s)xth face (Below) is lustrous of many colours and
concealed. It is by this mouth that I spoke of Devatasthana,
Asana, Yantra, Mala, Naivedya, Balidana, Sadhana,
Purascharana, Mantrasiddhi. It is called Ishanamnaya.”?
(Sie John Woodroffe: Shakti and Shakta)

According to the Niruttara Tantra, the Purva and
Dakshina Amnayes are meant for the Pashu sadhaka, the
Paschima Amnaya for both the Pashu and Vira, the Uttara
Amnaya for both the Vira and the Divya and the Urdhva
Amnaya is for the Divya.

* The Purva, Paschima, Dakshina and Uttera Amnaeyas.

--- PAGE 50 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

URDHVAMNAYA AND ITS GREAT MANTRA = 41

says the Lord, ‘‘so is the Urdhvamnaya to be
cherished above all other Amnayas” “Like
Vishnu among the Gods, Surya among the
luminaries, Kashi among places of pilgrimage,
Ganges among the flowing rivers, Meru among
the mountains, Sandal among the trees,
Ashvamedha among the sacrifices, Gem among
stones, sweet among tastes, gold among ores,
cow among the quadruped, swan among birds,
Sannyasa among the Ashramas, Brahmana
among classes, king among men, head among
limbs, musk among fragrances, Kanchi among
the cities, Urdhvamnaya is the most excellent
among all the Laws.’

One comes to it asa result of merit won in
several births, It is not to be known from Vedas
or Agamas or Sastras or Puranas, however
exhaustive they may be; neither by sacrifices,
nor austerities nor visits to pilgrim centres nor
even by means led by Mantras or herbs. It can
be known only through the mouth of the Guru.
Look for him, the Guru who knows all, fount of
compassion, endowed with all auspicious signs
who knows superbly the Truth of the Urdhva-
amnaya, then from him receive the Knowledge.

Obtaining full knowledge of the Urdhvam-
naya from the Word of the Guru, you shall
attain liberation in this very life according to
the mode of the Scripture. You will be blessed.
Where you live there shall reign Plenty, the
victory of Sri.

The great Mantra presiding over the

, Urdhvamnaya is the Sriprdsddapard Mantra,
the Hamsa. In this Mantra, the Ha stands for
Shiva, the Purusha, the He and Sa for Shakti,
the Prakriti, the She. Both together make the

--- PAGE 51 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

42 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Creation and are so present in each form in
creation. Each breath of its life in its outgoing
movement, expiration, spells the Ha, and in its
indrawing movement, inspiration, spells the Sa,
thus automatically repeating * the Mantra of the
truth of its existence.
Hamkarena bahir yati sahkdrena viget punah
Hameett paramam mantram jivo japati sarvada. .
(Niruttara Tantra)
All life, all pulsation in creation throbs with
this mighty declaration of the biune Truth of
Shiva-Shakti, the eternal He and the eternal She
at pley in Manifestation. This Mantra is the
living form of the Shiva-Shakti. From Shiva
down to the worm, the lowest creature, it
pervades the entire creation through the mode
of the Life-force in all living beings, in the form
of inspiration and expiration. Without this
great Mantra-Rhythm the worlds would not be,
even as without wind the cloud cannot be in the
skies. All this Creation, mobile and immobile,
is textured by this great Mantra; itis insepar-
able from the Mantra like air from the fan.
Like sprout in the seed, oil in the seasamum,
heat in the fire, light in the sun, moonlight in the
moon, firein the wood, fragrance in the flower,

* Hence called ajapd, for there is no special effort to
repeat, to do the Japa of it. Hankarah puman proktah sa ttt
prakrtih smrta, ajapeyam mata (Prapancasara),

The Jiva comes out with the letter HA and gets in
again with the letter SA. This Jiva always utters the
mantra ‘*HAMSA” *HAMSA’. The Jiva always utters
the Mantra twenty-one thousand and six hundred times in
one day and night. This is called Ajapa Gayatri and is
ever the bestower of Nirvana to the yogins. (Dhyanabindu
Upanisad).

--- PAGE 52 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

URDHVAMNAYA AND ITS GREAT MANTRA = 43

moisture in the water, meaning in the word,
Shakti in Shiva, butter in milk, taste in fruit,
sweet in sugar, cold in camphor, like grace and
control in the Mantra, deity in idol, reflection in
the mirror, movement in the wind, is the
universe situate in the great Prasadamantra.
As the tree exists subtly in the fig-seed, the
whole Brahmanda (creation of Brahman) is held
in the great Mantra. Just as even things
excellently cooked and juicy’ are not tasty
without salt, so too Mantras that are not
conjoined with this great Mantra do not yield
fruit, as they are devoid of their own potency.
Bewildered by the great Maya, even the gods
wander without direction in the maze of the
varied Sastras, But he who develops firm faith
and devotion in the Guru, who is but the Lord’s
own form, and knows this great Prdsadapara-
mantra from him, gets sure release. For this,
indeed, he should have done the Mantras of the
several paths of the Four Amnayas in his
previous births and matured to wait upon the
command of the Guru, He is free from the
cloak of sin, pure of soul, dear to the Guru and
gets to know the great Mantra from the Guru.
Gods like Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra and Indra,
Guardians of the Quarters like Vasus, Rudras,
Manu, Moon etc., Munis like Markandeya,’
Vasishtha, masters of Yogalike Sanaka, liberated
beings like Shuka, inhabitants of the higher
worlds like Yakshas, Kinnaras,, Gandharvas,
Siddhas, Vidyadharas have attained to the fruit
of this Mantra and repeat it even today. To
him who repeats this Mantra comes capacity,
reverence, knowledge, lustre, happiness, freedom
from disease, kingdom, heaven, liberation; he

--- PAGE 53 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

44 KULARNAVA TANTRA

surpasses the very gods. Though he may dono
ritual, the knower of this Mantra, walks a happy
path which not all the followers of Dharma can
hope for. By the repetition of this Mantra,
pardprasada Mantra, the pasu becomes the
pagupati, the creature becomes the Lord. He
who knows the truth of this Mantra comes to
know the truth of both Shiva and Shakti. Even
a lowly man, if he knows this Mantra, can
instal the Deity in images and the like. What-
ever the knower of this Mantra does, wishes,
speaks, that becomes tapas, dhyana, japa.

“ Whoever knows this Paraprasada Mantra,’’
says the Lord, ‘loaded with the tradition and
received through Initiation, he becomes Myself.”
‘‘ All these worlds, fourteen in number*, with
all that is mobile and immobile, are stationed in
the body of this Mantra. The place where such
a knower stands becomes a holy centre up to the
distance of ten Yojanas. There is no distinction
of class with this Mantra. Whoever repeats it,
whatever his class, whatever his state, he gets
liberated. Whether done while walking or
standing, waking or dreaming, it is not without
fruit. Thousands are the Mantras which have

* In the ancient Indian system the Creation is conceived
in fourteen worlds: Bhuh (earth), Bhuvah (skies), Svah
(heaven), Mahas (World of Light), Janah (of Delight), Tapah
(of Consciousness), Satya (of Truth-existence) constituting
the upper hemisphere; and Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala,
Rasatala, Mahatala, Patala—making up the lower or nether
region. Below the lowest is the Lord holding up the
entire series of the manifested worlds: he is there in the
form of Sesha, the Mighty Serpent Power carrying the

Universe on his Hood. The Divine is there behind the
lowest as in the highest.

--- PAGE 54 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

URDHVAMNAYA AND ITS GREAT MANTRA 45

each its own single fruit;' but this King of
Mantras gives the Complete Fruit.”

“Know it,? says the Lord, “Sachi and
Indra, Rohini and Chandra, Svaha and Agni,
Light and Sun, Lakshmi and Narayana, Vak and
Brahma, Night and Day, Agniand Soma, Bindu
and Nada, Prakriti and Purusha, Support and the
Supported, Bhoga and Moksha, Prana and Apana,
Word and Meaning Injunction and Prohibition,
Happiness and Misery, all these manifestations
that go in pairs, the constant Duals of the
presiding and effectuating poises are forsooth
Ourselves. All forms male and female are but
emanations of Us Two. Embodying this biune
Truth of Ourselves is the Great Mantra that
courses everywhere.”

The One Truth, formless, beyond the reach
of thought, the Para Brahman, Eternal, void of
parts, void of taint, void of attribute, like Ether,
Infinite, Imperishable, Inaccessible to mind and
speech, shines forth in the conjunction of the
Great Mantra and its profound meaning.

This, then, is the crest-jewel of all Mantras,
being a form of the Supreme Reality, standing
for Sacchidananda, constituted of Shiva and
Shakti, yielding both Enjoyment and Liberation,
with and yet without Works, with and yet
without Guna (attribute),—this is the supreme
Mantra by repeating which man _ obtains
Fulfilment without fail.

This is the one Mantra without peer. This is
the supreme knowledge, this the supreme Tapas,
this the supreme Dhyana, this the supreme Wor-
ship, this the supreme Diksha, this the supreme
Japa, this the supreme Truth, this the supreme
Vrata, this the supreme Yajna, this the supreme

--- PAGE 55 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

46 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Beyond, this the supreme Glory, this the
supreme Fruit, this the supreme Brahman, this
the supreme Goal, this the supreme Mystery,
the Truth, aye, the Truth. Know this of the
Great Mantra and be ever dedicated to it.
Following the order laid down by the Agamas,
beginning with the prescribed way of worship,
repeat Sriparaprasada Mantra a hundred and
eight times.

The more you repeat this Mantra the more
extended are the fruits, temporal and spiritual.
Therefore with entire effort, in all conditions,
at all times, must you repeat the Sri Prasada
Para Mantra.

It is called prasada because it wins the
benign Grace anon, prasadakaranat ; it is called
para because it is above all other mantras,
parativat sarvamantranam. The Rishi of this
Mantra is the Supreme Shiva Himself, the Metre
is Gayatri which manifests the Unmanifest, the
Deity is She who is the Supreme Sovereign of all
Mantras,

There is no truth higher than the Guru, no
Godhead greater than Shiva, no Science greater
than the Veda, no Philosophy equal to the
Kaula, no Knowledge greater than the Kula, no
happiness greater than Jnana, no worship
greater than the Puja of eight limbs, no fruit
greater than Mukti. And Mukti, par excellance,
is obtained swiftly and directly by the Grace of
the Sriprasadapara Mantra. This is the truth,
the sole truth, the indubitable truth,

--- PAGE 56 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER IV

THE FIVE M’S AND THEIR
FULL SIGNIFICANCE *

The ingredients to be used in the worship of
the Devi are of many kinds. These comprise,
in the Kaulachara, madya, wine, mamsa, meat,
matsya, fish, mudrd, grain, maithuna, woman,
well known as the Five M’s, panca makaras
(each item+: beginning with ma). The Sastra
prescribes in meticulous detail, the types of
vessels to be used on different occasions, the
metal or substance of which they are made,
their dimensions; the several kinds of grain, the
proportion of their mixing and the manner of
their cooking; the preparation of different kinds
of wine from different substances according to
different formulas. Wine here is primarily
used as an agent for the release of the senses
from their engrossment in their outer objects.
The surface faculties and sensibilities constantly
exposed to the shocks and occupations of every-
day life are temporarily suspended and the
deeper, the larger, the subliminal ranges of
consciousness are opened up making it easier
for the practicant to get a hold in the inner
recesses and work for the culture and the purifi-
cation of the being. It is a means, says the
Kularnava, for the purification of the mind and
consciousness, cittagodhana-sadhana. In_ its
fragrance is activated the icchdéakti, the power
‘of will, in its taste is awakened the jnanasakti,

* Ullasa 5

--- PAGE 57 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

48 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the power of knowledge, in its absorption the
kriyagakti, the power of action, and in the
delight of its taking the supreme state.

The several kinds of meat are also specified.
But it is made clear that meat is to be used only
for the purposes of this ritual. No creature shall
be harmed for one’s own sake, one’s own enjoy-
ment. All depends upon the purpose; not even
a blade of grass shall be cut without a worthy
purpose. What is called sin becomes a merit if
it is done for a higher purpose even as what is
considered uplifting becomes a force for binding
if done in disregard of the higher Truth.
Rightly used, rightly directed, the very means
of fall become the means for rise, yaireva
patanam dravyaih siddhistaireva. What is impor-
tant is the spirit in which things are used, the
ceremonies conducted and worship offered ; it is
the inner consecration and not the outer ritual
that is paramount; they are beloved of the Gods
who are dedicated in the inner sacrifice, ~
antaryaga-nistha priyah It is when these
ingredients are consecrated and offered with
devotion that there stirs in the heart of the
sadhaka, the supreme form of the Lord and His
Spouse in the figure of Sat-Chit-Ananda. This
Bliss experienced within is not seizable by
thought or speech. In this condition there is as
it were an invasion, a possession, by the
Dynamic Shiva, Bhairava, and there ensues an
equality of eye towardsall The Self veiled by
the delusion of Maya comes to be perceived as a
house concealed by darkness is seen in the light
of a Jamp. Not intoxication, not disorderly

» petty preoccupations and a

--- PAGE 58 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE FIVE M’S AND THEIR FULL SIGNIFICANCE 49

relaxation into the folds of a lighter and larger
consciousness that sees and feels less constric-
tedly, more universally, is the immediate result
of the correct ritual of wine.

Wine is not to be taken as wine nor flesh as
flesh; nor is it permissible to partake in the
ceremonies as a mere human animal ridden
with greed and desire. The Wine is the Shakti,
the Divine Dynamism, Flesh the Shiva, the
Divine Substance, and he who partakes is none
other than Bhairava himself, the Divine Enjoyer,
The bliss, Ananda that arises when all these
three are fused in the consciousness of the
practicant is real release, moksa. Ananda is the
intimate form of Brahman and it is there
installed in each individual body; wine brings
out, releases into manifestation this indwelling
Bliss. This is the reason why yogins take in the
sanctified wine.

There are conditions to be fulfilled before
one is fit to take this wine. One must be free
from all doubt, free from fear, brave of spirit,
above dualities, above curiosity, one must have
arrived at a definite and conclusive understand-
ing of the wisdom of the Scripture. In sucha
person alone the partaking of wine, processed
and sanctified by the charge of the Mantra,
awakens the sense of godhood which unties the
knots of life,

To be otherwise, to do otherwise, is simply
to be drunk. Worship the Gods and the Manes
in full accord with the prescribed way of the
Scripture, remember the Guru and dedicate

efore partaking of the meat and the wine,

Wine is to be received only for the benefit of the

Gods who claim the Enjoyment and for steady-
49494

--- PAGE 59 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

50 KULARNAVA TANTRA

ing the contemplation on the Divine, by releas-
ing the mind from the tethers of the earth. He
verily sins who drinks out of desire. Wine is to
be taken for the flashing of the meaning of the
Mantra and for the concentration of the mind
end for the removal of the bonds of birth. He
sins who takes to wine and the like for pleasure,
Wine, says another Tantra, should be taken
only as long as the mind remains merged in the
Deity (yavat syan manolayah). The Mahanirvana
lays it down that wine is to be taken only as
long as the mind is not shaken and the sight is
not affected, To drink more is to drink animally.
Completely free from greed or desire in
yourself, with love make the Deity partake,
pragayet, make Her drink, not drink 1t yourself.
Partaking of these ingredients, says the Tantra,
at any other time except on this holy occasion
of dedication and worship is condemnable.
Then, in a significant passage, the text
declares that just as the partaking of Soma is
enjoined upon the Wise in the Sacrifices of the
Veda, so is Wine to be partaken on these
eceasions (of worship), Wine that gives both
bliss and release Now, Soma in the Vedic
context means, as all know, not merely the
juice extracted from the plant of that name. It
is that only externally. The sap that is extrac-
ted from the plant and offered to the God is only
a symbol and an outer figure for the delight of
all life-experience distilled by the soul of the
Yajamana and offered to the Divine for its
acceptance as the acme of its consecration. Like
Soma of the Veda is the Wine of the Tantra It
is something within, the flow of delight that
courses through the veins that is to be articu-

--- PAGE 60 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE FIVE M’S AND THEIR FULL SIGNIFICANCE 51

lated, given shape, concretely felt in the consci-
ousness and offered in that experience. The
outer substance is merely a supporting figure,
‘an occasion and impulsion to the inner experi-
ence. This will be still more clear a little
further on.

The wine, says the Tantra, is not to be
drunk in the manner of the animal drinking,
pasupana vidhau. Unless the Dynamic Lord is
invoked, worshipped and the dedication is
sanctified by the prescribed ritual of Mantras
which includes their repetition, invocation of
the Deities presiding over them, identification
of oneself with them and the merging of oneself
in their rhythms—a too elaborate and exhaus-
tive preliminary, one should think, for the mere
pleasure of a drink !—unless the Feet of the
Supreme Guru are invoked and duly worship-
ped, unless the science of the Divine worship is
thoroughly known, one has no right to partici-
pate in this ritual. To hell he goes who dares
to infringe these conditions and seeks to enjoy
the wine. Such a sinner, libertine that he is,
shall be shunned. For him there is fulfilment
neither here nor there. Drinking of wine that
is not sanctified is as reprehensible as rape.

_ One whose being is overcome by intoxica-
tion is aware of nothing; for him there is no
meditation, no tapas, no worship, no dharma,
no activity of merit, no good, no Guru, no
thought of his self ; he cannot be a votary of this
path; addicted only to sense-enjoyment he,
verily, falls. Not for true worship and dedica-
tion, but for his own animal enjoyment he takes
to wine, eats flesh and resorts to woman, He
may be most learned in the Science of the Truth

--- PAGE 61 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

52 KULARNAVA TANTRA

but if in practice he is given to these objects, he
is indeed condemnable.

In a crowhing peroration of memorable
import, the Kularnava declares unequivocally :

From the Muladhara at the base go up again
and again to the Brahmarandhra at the crown;
bliss issues out of this meet of the Kundali
Shakti and the Moon of Pure-Consciousness.
What flows frorn this Lotus in the supreme
Ether above is the wine, this is the real wine to
be tasted by man; what is drunk otherwise is
only liquor.

The animal that is killed is the notion of
good and bad, merit and demerit, the animal of
duality which is cut asunder by the knower of
yoga with the sword of knowledge. And the
consciousness so freed is merged in the supreme.
This is the true eating of meat.

The host of the senses must be brought
under the mind’s control and yoked to the self;
this is the true eating of fish. The others
merely hurt the creatures.

And the woman to be waited upon is none
other than the inner Shakti that is lying asleep
in the ordinary animal man and is awake in the-
Kaula* This is the ‘Shakti’? to be served,
attended to The rush of Ananda that ensues on
the meeting of this Divine Pair, the Supreme
Shakti and the Supreme Self, the Lord that
waits above, that is the real maithuna, the final
ma, Anything other is only copulation,

This, then, is the yogic, and we shall say,
the ultimate meaning of the Five M’s. This
is the sense in which the highest class of

* Votary of the Kula-marga.

--- PAGE 62 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE FIVE M’S AND THEIR FULL SIGNIFICANCE 53

Shakta worshippers understand the five com-
ponents of this ritual and take steps to realise
them progressively in practice. In the Tantra,
the worshippers are, it is well known, divided
into three broad categories of pasu, animal man,
vira, the heroic man, divya, the godly man*, To
each of these classes of seekers, it should be
mentioned, the Five ingredients have different
connotations: divyatattva, the divine or symbolic
meaning for the divya sadhakat; pratyaksa tattva,
literal, to the Vira who is constitutionally and
temperamentally equipped to ride on the crest
of Nature, subjugating and transforming her in
the course of his sadhana and fulfils the onerous

* There are further gradations leading from one class
to another e.g. svabhava vira, vibhava vira, mantrasiddha
vira etc.

+ The meaning may vary from text to text, but every-
where it is in the yogic sense. For instance, Wine is the
nectarous stream that flows from the Brahmarandhra
(Agamasara) or the high knowledge of Brahman in which
the sense of the external world is lost (Kaula tantra)
Meat (mansa) is speech (amsa, portion of ma, tongue) which
is ‘eaten’ i.e. controlled; or it means the dedication of
all action to the Lord,‘ Mam’. Fish (matsya) are the two
fishes moving in Ganga and Yamuna i.e. the two currents
of breath, expiration and inspiration, constantly moving
in Ida and the Pingala; they are eaten i.e. controlled by
psycho-physical disciplines like Pranayama; or it means
refined knowledge by which through the feeling or ¢ Mine’
mat one identifies oneself with the universal life. Mudra
is the knowledge of the luminous Atman, Self, in the
thousand petalled Lotus above; or it means abondonment
of one’s participation in evil that goes to bind. Maithuna
is the bliss onjoyed by the sadhaka in identification with
the Atman in the Sahasrara; or it 1s the union of the
Kundalini Shakt: in the Muladhara of our being with the
Shiva in the Sabasrara, .

--- PAGE 63 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

54 KULARNAVA TANTRA

conditions laid down by the Sastra. To one who
is neither a divya nor a vira but is on the lowest
rung of the ladder, pagu, Panchatattvas are
substitutional, anukalpatattva. Instead of wine
they use coconut water, instead of meat, garlic
and so on*. The Mahanirvana Tantra lays it
down : ,

When the Kali age is in full sway, in the
case of the householder whose mind is entirely
engrossed with domestic desires, the three
sweets should be substituted in the place of the
first element of worship. Milk, sugar and
honey are the three sweets They should be
deemed to be the image of wine, and as such
offered to the Deity. Those born in Kali age are
by their nature weak in intellect, and their
minds are distracted by lust. By reason of this,
they do not recognise the Shakti to be the image
of the Deity. Therefore, O Parvati, for such as
these let there be, in place of the last element of
worship, meditation upon the Lotus-Feet of
the Devi and the inward recitation of their
istamantra, (VIII. 171-174)

* Here too the items to be substituted may differ from
Tantra to Tantra but everywhere care is taken to see that
they are harmless ingredients. Coconut water or milk for
wine; salt, ginger, sesamum, wheat or garlic for meat,
brinjal, radish or pdniphala for fish; paddy, rice or wheat
for Mudra ; offering of flowers with hands in a prescribed

mudra, joining of particular flowers in dedication ete. for
maithuna,

--- PAGE 64 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

‘ CHAPTER V
REQUIREMENT OF WORSHIP*

It is not everyone who can take to the
worship of the Deity. To make offerings to the
Deity, to summon Her to accept what is
proffered, to receive Her in a fitting manner and
adore Her pleasingly, requires a preparation,
outer and inner, worked out in the present life or
the past. One who is so competent is fully
initiated, knows the truth of the knowledge
embodied in the Scripture. He is full of devotion
for the Guru, and forthe Deity. And he has
control over himself, well-regulated in his life.
The mysteries of the Agamas, which are not all
openly declared in the Sastras, are known to
him. He is full of fervour for worship. Wor-
ship shall not be done as a routine or asa part
of discipline. He who would truly worship
looks forward to the adoration with eagerness,
with joy. And when he worships, he is alive
with the instruction of the Guru. For it is the
Guru who puts him in contact with the Deity and
to be conscious of his instruction is to enliven the
link forged by him. Pure of heart, superbly
joyous, devoid of anger and unsteadiness, reject-
ing the inferior ritual, cheerful of countenance,
he worships. He offers and adores with devotion.
Devotion does not come or grow ina day. Even
when it is intense it does not last. True and
lasting devotion sprouts after a long period of
self-effectuation and particularly by the Grace

* Ullasa 6

--- PAGE 65 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

56 KULARNAVA TANTRA

of the Divine. It is then that offerings made
according to the instruction of the Guru, to the
accompaniment of proper Mantras, reach their
destination It is then that the worship of the
Great Sri Chakra, Abode of the mighty Puissance
of the Divine Mother, can be performed effec-
tively by means of Mantra-Yoga. Not merely
chanting of Mantras, but by yoga of mantra
ive. by a deep identification with the soul of
the Mantra that is repeated. Such worship, says
the Lord, He accepts with distinction along with
Her. And when the worshipper enters into the
Ritual, he must realise and come into a state of
consciousness that feels divine. To truly
commune with the Divine and to offer oneself to
the Divine, one must become aware of one’s own
state of divinity. Such a worshipper attains
Fulfilment as well as Release.

Worship must be performed in a place which
is free from distractions and disturbances, free
from crowd. The worshipper shall seat himself
ina happy position which gives stability to the
body and face either east or north. Prior to
beginning the ceremony he shall, with an un-
agitated mind, visualise himself seated in the
jewelled abode of the Divine Mother in the
Ocean of Immortality with all the high
paraphernalia required for the worship and
perform the Puja according to the command of
the Guru.

Before proceeding to the worship, however,
there is an indispensable process of purification
which is fivefold in character; purification of
oneself, purification of the place, purification of
the materials used, purification of the Mantras
and purification of the Deity. Purification of

--- PAGE 66 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

REQUIREMENT OF WORSHIP 57

oneself is both outer and inner; the outer by
bath and the inner by the purification of the
elements, bhiitaguddhi, by pranayama and nyasa
and other prescribed methods. The place of
worship is sanctified by cleaning, wiping,
anointing into a shine of the mirror, decoration
with flowers, incense, camphor, lights and
colours. The substances used for worship shall
be purified by prescribed methods of sprinkling
with sanctified water reciting the Mantras,
with mudra ete. The Mantras that are used are
to be purified* by appropriate means. And
lastly, the Deity to be worshipped is also to be
purified, by placing it on the seat, making it
whole, i.e. by invoking the life of the Deity into
it, sprinkling with sanctified water along with
recital of the Mulamantra, performance of nyasa
etc in the prescribed manner. Adorning it with
ornaments, offering of incense, lights ete. follow
afterwards.

After this elaborate dnd comprehensive
purification, attention should be paid to the
drawing of the significant circles, mandalas,
the proper placement and utilisation of the
various substances, singly and in combination;
the various cosmic Powers are invoked and the
prescribed Mantras repeated in their due order
with sacred deference. The fraternity of the
Gurustis to be invoked. And after sanctifying

* Purification of the Mantra is the performance of Japa
of the letters of the alphabet which compose the Matrika-
mantra, once in their regular order, and once again in the
opposite, by linking the letters of the Mulamantra with
them.

+The Gurus are classified into three grades: divyaugha,
the celestial order, stddhaugha, the pertected order,

--- PAGE 67 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

58 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the seat the Deity is called. She who dwells in
the cluster of Lotuses, Who is the Form of
Causal Delight, ever active for the good of all,
the Divine Mother is fervently called into
coming and beseeched to stay as long as the
worship is in progress. And the worship is
offered with an exclusive concentration.

The Divine, say the philosophies, is really
without form, without any features. Then how
is it, it may be asked, that It is enjoined to be
worshipped in so many kinds of form and
lauded in Its features in the various scriptures?
The Agama gives the answer.

The Brahman is indeed the Immeasurable,
the Impersonal, without attribute, a sheer
Consciousness. Yet for the benefit of the aspir-
ing, of those who seek for It, Brahman assumes
forms, determines Itself in a way as to be
cognisable and accessible. It takes Form but
certainly It is not limited by that Form or any
number of Forms. Thus, though the Supreme

manavaugha, the human order. The first, the divine order,
consists of Adinatha and His Shakti, Sadasiva and his
consort, Ishwara and his consort, Rudra and his consort,
Vishnu and his beloved, Brahma and his wife—in all
twelve.

In the second, the order of the Siddhas—those who have
arrived at perfection and are eternally present and active—
are Sanake, Sananda, Sanatana, Sanatkumara, Sanatsujate,
Ribhukshaja, Dattatreya, Raivataka, Vamadeva, Vyasa,
Shuka—eleven of them.

The third, the ordinary, is of gods who apparently
eccupy a subordinate position in this scheme: Narasimha,
Mahesha, Bhaskara, Mahendra, Madhava, Vishnu—in all
six. According to some other schools, this mdnavaugha,
human order of Gurus, consists of the human Guru, Maha
Guru, Parama Guru, Parapara Guru etc. ‘

--- PAGE 68 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

REQUIREMENT OF WORSHIP 59

Deity is not determined or limited by Form,
She reveals Herself in many forms. The
worshipper visualises the Formless One in
Form and adores Her in the linga, sign-symbol,
altar, Fire, Water, winnowing fan, wall, sheet,
Mandala (diagram), plank, in the head or in the
heart.

Just as though milk is formed from the
constituents all over the body of the cow, it
flows out only through the teats of its udder,
similarly the Divine who is all pervading shines
specially resplendent in Images and the like,
The Presence of the Divine in the Form is deter-
mined in its intensity by the appropriateness of
that Form, specially of the worship offered and
by the faith of the worshipper. Cream, as long
as it lies in the body of the cow, does not nourish
anyone, But when it is collected, treated and
used, it does promote nourishment, The Divine
is likewise there spread in each body; but with-
out proper adoration and evocation, upasana, it
does not yield fruit to man.

All the pranas of the Deity are to be sum-
moned together, the limbs enlivened, all instal-
led in the Image and then is the live Deity to be
worshipped, Otherwise worship is fruitless.
There may be defect of Mantra, defect of ritual,
defect of process; still if this installation is
done in the proper manner, the worship bears
fruit.

If there be transgression of rule there is no
fruit. Neither there should be allowed defect of
excess or defect of want. Only when things are
done according to the requirements leid down
that Japa, Homa, Pu ja etc. become acceptable to
the Deity and therefore fruitful.

--- PAGE 69 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

60 KULARNAVA TANTRA

If worship be offered without an active
consciousness that the Divine is there in the
form of the Mantra and pervades through the
Mantra, it is useless. The Yantra is declared
to be ensouled by Mantra and the deity is in the
form of Mantra. Worshipped in the Yantra,
She is indeed instantly pleased. And why is
this form called yantra? Because it regulates,
subdues, niyantrana, all misery arising from
desire, anger and other failings. As the body is
to the jiva, soul, as oil is to the lamp, the
Yantra is the established seat of all the Deities.
Therefore draw the Yantra, meditate upon Her
auspicious form, know everything from the
mouth of the Guru and worship according to
rule. If worship be done without proper Yantra
then it can only entail the curse of the Deity.
Each Deity is to be carefully installed in its own
Yantra and worshipped with all its parapher-
nalia. Should you be absent-minded, call one
Deity and worship another, you shall receive
the curses of both. Each Deity is to be received
with the honour that belongs to it, with the
Mantra that is proper to its order. The inner
soul-force, antahSakti, shall be roused to its full
potential and dedicated to the Deity through the
several movements of the worship.

It is only when all these requirements are
learnt from the Guru and worship offered in
accordance with the rule, that the Deity is
pleased. The Puja must be full in its limbs and
full in its duration,

--- PAGE 70 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER VI
YOGA*

Yoga is the main process. The Tantra seeks
to weave it into every detail of life, give a
different meaning to each of man’s activities by
making all of them means for the effectuation
and expression of the inner yoga of progression
from the human into the divine.

And of yoga, dhyana, meditation, is an
important limb. Dhyana is of two kinds, gross
and subtle. When the meditation is upon a
Form, it is the gross, and when it is without
Form, the subtle. The grosser kind of medita-
tion with Form is resorted to when the mind is
very unsteady and needs to be given a prop, a
concrete object on which to fix itself so that it
may not wander away. But the object of both
the gross and subtle kinds of Dhyana is the
same: steadiness, immobility of mind.

When the Divine is conceived with form,
it is contemplated upon in its several limbs, feet,
hands etc., in the prescribed manner. When
it is conceived as without form, it is con-
templated upon as the Sacchidananda, all-
luminous, without parts. It neither rises nor
sets, neither waxes nor wanes, it shines by itself
and enshines others without effort. Infinite,
formed in Light, not perceivable to the eye but
simply existent, it can only be felt, become

aware of by the mind. Knowledge of That is
Brahman.

* Ulldsa 9

--- PAGE 71 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

62 KULARNAVA TANTRA

And he whose movement of life-breath
is arrested, who is immobile like the stone,
knowing only the supreme Self and Abode is
called the yogi who knows yoga. Where there
is not even awareness, where it is still like
blocked water, that Dhyana devoid of Form is
called Samadhi. The Reality shines by itself,
not by mental thinking. And when the Reality
so shines on its own, one instantly becomes
That Itself. He who is as if asleep whether in
the condition of dream or of waking, neither
breathing in nor breathing out, immobile, he is
truly freed. Whose senses are without stir,
whose mind and breath are absorbed in his self,
who is like one dead, he is called the Jivanmukia,
liberated while yet living. He neither hears nor
smells nor touches nor sees, neither he knows
pleasure and pain, neither he exercises the
mind. Like a log of wood, he cognises nothing
nor is aware of anything; he is only absorbed in
Shiva, he isin samadhi. As with water thrown
into water, milk into milk, ghee into ghee, no
difference remains, similarly no difference there
remains between the jivatma and_ the
Paramatma, the soul and the Lord. Even as the
insect becomes a bee by force of concentration,
so can man become Brahman by dint of samadhi.
And once the self is separated from the gunas,
it is never the same again, just as butter
extracted from milk even when thrown again
into the milk does not get into the old state.

Just as one in heavy darkness sees nothing,
so indeed the yogin sees not the world which
does not hold his attention. This is the true sign
of Dhyana: as one does not see the world of
objects when the eyes are closed, so even when

--- PAGE 72 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

YOGA 63

they are open, the world is not seen. He who
knows the Brahman is aware of this world-
movement only in the manner of men being
conscious of some itching on their bodies.

Of him who has known the supreme Reality,
above forms, above change, the very Mantras
with their presiding Deities become the servitors.
Of him who is founded in the sole consciousness
of the Self, every movement is worship, each
utterance is verily a mantra, each gaze is
meditation,* When identification with the body
is gone and the supreme Self is known, wherever
the mind moves there it is samadhi.

When the supreme Self is beheld, cut asunder
is the key-knot, Ardaya-granthi, that rivets all
involvements in the many strands of nature;
shorn are all doubts, doubts of higher possibili-
ties or of the veracity of the scriptures or
utterances of the Jnanins; all karma, legacy of
past action, dwindles away, When the master-
yogin attains to this pure and supreme State, he
cares not for the status of the gods or of the
mighty Asuras. To him who sees the All-
pervading, Peaceful, Blissful, Imperishable,
what can remain still to be attained or still to be
known? When knowledge and-super-knowledge
are attained, when what is to be known is there
alive in the heart and when the state of Peace is
attained, neither yoga nor dhdrana, concentra-

*«May Thou be pleased to accept my prattlings as
Japa, and construe my movements as Mudras. Let my
ramblings be Pradakshina, and what all I eat and drink be
offerings to Thee; my reclining be prostration to Thee,
and all enjoyments not for me but for Thee. Thus let all
actions of mine go to constitute Thy worship.”

(V. 29, Saundarya Lahart)

--- PAGE 73 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

64 KULARNAVA TANTRA

tion, is necossnry, Enough of all rules onee the
supreme Brahman is known, Whon the winds
of the Malayn mount blow, of whnt use is the
palmyra fan? For him who sces himself os the
OM (or as tho Self), thoro is neither checking of
breath nor closing of nostrils, neither yama nor
niyama, neithor yoga based on padmdrana nor
gazing at tho tip of the noso. Yoga is the union
of jiva and the Atmnn, so declare the ndepts in
yoga, And onco thntis achioved all disciplines
preparatory or contributory to yoga are no more
incumbent.

When this Supreme so attnined is meditnted
upon even forn moment with faith, gront and
immeasurable is the good that ensues. Even
deliberation for » moment on the truth that
‘Iam Brahman’, wipes out all sin as tho rise of
the sun dissipatos all darknoss, Tho knower of
Truth reaps millionfold tho fruit that is held
out by observances, sncrifices, pilgrimnges,
gifts, worship of the gods otc.

There are sovernl states of being, so many
gradations of consciousness in this life of yopa,
The best and highest of course is the state natural
sahajavastha, in which oneness with the Divine
is felt spontaneously and always; the middle is
one of concentration, dharand and of moditation,
dhyana; the lowest is of laudation, stuti, and
jepe ; and lower than the lowest is the stngo of
homa and puja, worship. Again, deliberation,
poring of mind over the nature of the Truth is
the best, the highest; preoccupntion with jnpo
is the middle; study of the Sdstra is the lowest ;
and lower than the lowest is occupation with
affairs of the world.

A billion piijds equal ao stotra, laudation ;

--- PAGE 74 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

YOGA 65

a billion stotras equala japa; a billion japas
equal a dhyana; anda billion dhyanas equal an
absorption, laya *

Not higher than Dhyana is the Mantra; not
higher than the Self is god; not higher than
inner pursuit is puja; not higher than content-
ment is there any fruit.t

Free from ritual is higher Worship; silence
is the higher Japa; absence of thought is higher
Dhyana; and absence of desire is the supreme
fruit

Sandhya without mantra or water, tapas
without puja and homa, puja without ceremonies
—these the yogin shall always perform.

Free from attachment, aloof, beyond vasanas
and associations (upadhi) absorbed in the true
nature of oneself, the yogi knows the supreme
Truth,

The body itself is the temple. The jiva
itself is God Sadashiva{ Do away with the
faded petals of Ignorance and worship with the
Consciousness of ‘He am I’. Jiva is Shiva;
Shiva is jiva; the jiva pure is Shiva. When in
bonds itis jiva ; freed from bonds it is Sadashiva.
Enclosed in huskitis paddy; freed from husk
it is rice. Enclosed in karma it is jiva; freed
from karma it is Sadashiva.

To the initiated Wise, Brahmanas, the Divine
reveals Himself in the sacrifical Fire; to the
thinkers in the heart; to the unawakened in the

* Pujakotisamam stotram stotrakotisamo japah}; japa~
kotisamam dhydnam dhydnakotisamo layah.
. + Na ht dhydbat paromantra na dwastrdtmanah parch ;
nd husandhat para pujé na ht trpteh param phalam.
t Deho devdlayo devi jivo devah sadasivah.
49495

--- PAGE 75 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

66 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Images; but for those who know the Self, He is
indeed everywhere*.

He who stands equal-minded in censure and
praise, in cold and in warmth, among foes and
among friends, he is the master of yoga, devoid
of either exuberance or depression, The yogi,
knower of the supreme Truth, dwells in the
body like a wayfarer, devoid of desire, ever-
content, equal-eyed, master of the senses He is
the yogi, knower of the high Truth, who is
without volition, without doubts, without taint
of associations or impressions, absorbed ever in
Truth of his own Reality. The yogi, knower
of truth, lives like the lame, the blind, the deaf,
the impotent, the ebrious, the dull,

Buoyed up on the Bliss supreme ensuing
from the fivefold worship, he is the master of
yoga, beholding his Self within himself. For
those who know how to derive the essential rasa
ot the five constituents of worship, they yield
release; but for those who do not know and yet
resort to them, they are verily means of perdi-
tion He is the real Kula-yogi who in the midst
of these five elements of worship, is constantly
concentrated on the Feet of the Guru, always
free from mental lapses. Freely partaking of
them all, yet fully and ever conscious of the
identity of himself with the Supreme, he lives
contented in that awareness.

Values are totally changed in the path of the
Kula. What is rejected in the ordinary world
is cherished here, what is valued there is
rejected here. Considerations of men in the

* Agnau tistlat. viprandm hrdi devo mantstham,
pratimasvaprabuddhaham sarvatra viditatmandh.

--- PAGE 76 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

YOGA 67

world do not apply to the Kaula whose goal is
different and path still more different. Neither
injunctions of acceptance nor of rejection, neither
merit nor demerit, neither heaven nor hell
existsfor the Kaula In this Path the ignorant
grow wise; the poor grow wealthy; the decayed
progress; enemies become friendly; the very
kings become attendants, all befriend the Kaula.
Those who turn away come to greet, the proud
bow down to him. Obstructors become allies.
Bad qualities turn good, what is not kindred
grows kindred ; what is contrary to the Dharma
becomes Dharma The very death becomes a
helping physician, the home becomes a veritable
heaven. What the Kula yogi wills, that comes
to be.

A Kula Yogi may dwell anywhere, disguised
in any form, unknown to anybody. Such yogins,
in diverse guises, intent on the welfare of men,
walk the earth unrecognised by others. They
do not expend their self-knowledge at once, In
the midst of men they live as if intoxicated,
dumb, dull, The mode of yogins is not easily
perceivable like the stars and the planets in the
skies when there is the sun or the moon. The
mode of the yogins is not seen like the move-
ment of the birds in the skies or of aquatics in
the water. Adepts in Kaula yoga speak in the
manner of the uncivil, behave as if ignorant;
appear like the lowly. They do so in order
that men may ignore them and not flock to
them ; they talk nothing at all, Though realised
in freedom, the yogi will sport like a child;
may conduct himself like a dullard; talk like
one intoxicated. Such a yogi lives in a way
that this world of men may laugh, feel disgust,

--- PAGE 77 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

68 KULARNAVA TANTRA

revile and seeing, pass at a distance leaving him
alone He would go about in different guises,
at times like one worthy, at times like one
fallen, at times like a ghost or demon, If the
yogi accepts things of life it is for the good of
the world and not out of desire. Out of compns-
sion for all men, he will sport on the earth.
Like the sun who dries up everything, like
Agni who consumes everything, the yogi takes
all to himself, but is not tainted by any sin.
Like the Wind which touches everything, like
the sky which spreads everywhere, like all who
bathe in the rivers, the yogi is ever pure. As
water of the township gets pure when it reaches
the river, so too things from the lowly become
pure once they reach the hands of the yogi.

To the wise who seek their higher good,
the ways of the adepts in the Kaula Knowledge
are, verily, the honoured, What the masters
of yoga tread that is the supreme Path; where
the sun rises there is the East. Just as where
the elephant walks 1s formed the path, similarly
where the Kula yogi treads there is the Path,
Who can hope to make straight the winding
course of the river or to arrest its flood? Who
can deter the man in Peace who sports as he
wills?

Even as the charmer is not stung by the
snakes he plays with, the Jnanin playing with
the serpents of senses is not harmed Away
from misery, contented, devoid of duslities,
free from jealousy, given to Kaula Knowledge,
peaceful, the Kaulas are always devoted to the
Divine Without insolence, anger, show, desire
and ego, truthful in speech, not enslaved to the
senses, the masters of the Kaula Path are not

--- PAGE 78 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

YOGA 69

fickle. When the Truth of the Kula is lauded,
their hair stands on end, their voice shakes with
emotion and tears of joy drop down; they are
the best of the Kaulikas. They have the con-
viction that the Kula Dharma born of Shiva is
superior to all dharmas; such are best among
the Kaulas. He who knows the truth of the
Kula, who is proficient in the Science of the
Kula, who is engaged in the worship of the
Kula, he alone is the Kaulika and no other.
He becomes pleased on meeting devotees of the
Kula, knowers of Kula, traditions and obser-
vances of Kula; he is the Kaulika, dear to'
Shiva.

By initiation, diksa, shall one be a Kaula,
knower of the three tattvas, the Feet supreme
and the meaning of the basic, mula, Mantra,
devoted to the Deity and the Guru. The teacher
of the Kaula Path is difficult to get; he is
obtained only by a happy ripening of previous
merit. The intensive practicant of the Kula
Dharma, howsoever low may be his station in
life, purifies instantly if only he is remem-
bered or lauded or seen or bowed to or conversed
with.

“Whether he is an all-knower or a fool,
whether he is the best or the lowest, if he be a
knower of the Kula, where he is, there lam with
Thee (Devi). I dwell not in Kailas nor in Meru
nor in Mandara; I dwell where dwell the
knowers of Kula. Even if such men of the Lord
be far, there must one repair ; they must be seen
with effort; because there, indeed, Iam. The
Teacher of the Kula must be met even if he be
very far; but not the animal man even if he be
very near, Where the knower of Kula lives that

--- PAGE 79 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

70 KULARNAVA TANTRA

place is sanctified. By his sight and by his
worship thrice seven generations are uplifted.
When they see a Kula-Jnanin in their progeny,
the ancestors rejoice saying ‘we shall attain to
the supreme state’ Like the tillers for plenteous
rains, the ancestors always look forward for
a Kaulika in their family, either as a son
or a grandson He indeed is blessed in this
world, freed from sin, whom the masters
of Kula approach with pleasure When the
master of the Kaulikas is at hand, yogins and
yoginis flock happily to his dwelling The very
ancestors wait upon them, therefore are the
adepts in the Kula-knowledge to be worshipped
with devotion. If after worshipping Thee,
O Devi, the devotees are not worshipped, the
sinners who do so do not qualify for Thy Grace.
When the offerings are placed before Thee, thou
acceptest them by mere sight; I take their sap
from the tongue of the devotee. Worship of Thy
devotees is my worship; therefore he who seeks
my favour shall worship Thy devotees alone.
What is done for the Kaulas is done for the gods;
for the gods are all fond of Kulas; so worship
the Kaula. Nowhere am Iso pleased as there
where the master of Kula is worshipped well.
The fruit that is obtained by the worship of the
Kaula is not to be had by pilgrimages, tapas,
gifts or observances Whatever a kaula may
give, donate, sacrifice, however he may do
penance or worship or repeat by way of Japa, it
is useless if the Kula Teacher is disregarded,
He who enters the Kuladharma and yet does not
know the way of the Kula, his house is verily a
burial ground, he a sinner, cooker of kine.

Gifts made to those other than votaries of

--- PAGE 80 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

YOGA 71

the Kula are fruitless like water in a broken jar,
seeds sown on rock, ghee poured inashes What
is given according to one’s capacity to the
Kulayogin, with feeling, on special occasions,
that is superbly fruitful, When the Wise in the
Kula are called on special days, worshipped in
devotion with godly reverence with sandal
paste, flower and the five gladdening mudras,
and they are pleased, Iam pleased and all the
gods are pleased.”

Therefore with all effort, in all conditions,
always be devoted to the Kula Dharma worship
those who are knowers of the Kula Whether
you are learned or not learned, as long as you
hold the body, the way laid down for your
station in life shall be worked out for release
from karma; when ignorance is thus destroyed
by prescribed action, you attain by knowledge
to the state of Shiva and in Shiva you get the
release. Therefore resort to the prescribed
action Do actions which are free from blemish,
works that are enjoined for daily performance ;
released by that action, aspiring for happiness,
devoted to works, live happily. It is not possible
to give up all activity for one who bears the
body ; therefore abandon the fruit of action and
be a true renouncer. Organs engage themselves
in their functions—understanding this, leave
aside the ego-feeling; actions so done do not
taint. Actions done after attainment of Know-
ledge do not touch like water a lotus leaf. Of
one settled in that knowledge all acts of merit
or demerit dwindle away, they do not taint;
neither do those that are done again. Given to
natural joy that ensues and to the Knowledge of
the Truth, having given up all volitions, the

--- PAGE 81 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

72 KULARNAVA TANTRA

wise one should forsake all action that binds.
Merely to give up the scheme of prescribed
works (without this knowledge) is conceit of the
ignorant Justasafter attaining fruit the tree
throws away the flower indifferently, the yogin
attaining to the Truth, gives up the parapher-
nalia of works. Those who are one in their core
with the Brahman are not tainted by any kind of
merit or demerit.

--- PAGE 82 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER VIL
WORSHIP*

Worship, puja, individual and collective,
plays a central part in the life of the Kaula.
There are different rituals for daily worship,
for the fortnightly and the monthly sessions.
Srecial rituals are prescribed for special occa-
sions like the days of religious festivals, birth-
days of one’s own, of the Guru, the Parama
Guru ete. Allare to be observed to the best of
one’s ability, one’s resources, the circumstances,
the times, the customs. In the selection,
assemblage and utilisation of the ingredients of
worship, the utmost care is to be exercised.
Much more than the material side of the
worship, the updsaka has to be careful of his
psychological state of mind and soul. Especially
in the worship with the Five M’s, it is laid down
that they are to be used as prescribed purely for
the delectation of the Deity; if desire creeps in
then it becomes a sinful act. The worshipper
shall bow down to the woman, who is to be
worshipped in certain rituals—mark that she
may be of any age from one year onwards for
purposes of worship of the maiden, kumari
puja—as a deity, devata buddhya. The Deity is to
be first invoked in her and then the worship
proceeded with, with a mind free from impurity,
nirvikarena cetasé. At the best, the wonshipper
himself must rise in his consciousness to the
status of a god—devata-bhavam-asthitah,

* Ulldsas 10, 11,

--- PAGE 83 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

74 KULARNAVA TANTRA

The Yantra is an essential part of the Kaula
worship and without a proper Yantra the Deity
is not pleased to be present, And where worship
is offered according to the scripture, the Lord
himself with the Deviis present. Millions are
the attendants charged by Him with the protec-
tion of the Kula Dharma and of those who adhere
to it. They are ever pleased when they are
remembered and given their due in worship
Some of them, the major deities, are to be
invoked in the prescribed forms and worshipped.

Before entering the ritual of worship the
initiate shall cleanse himself with purificatory
bath. He shall seat himself in the prescribed
manner and abstain from loose unconnected
talk. He shall not eat before-hand He shall
not lack in devotion and shall not be tainted
with greed in any form. He shall not offer
worship in the presence of one who is not
qualified to participate in the ritual i.e. the
pasu, the man still in the animal stage as he is
not sufficiently purified in mind and soul.

It makes a big difference in the Kaula
worship whether the worshipper is an en-
lightened person in.the ways of Knowledge or
he is an ignorant man. The wise, says the
Tantra, intoxicated with the spirit of the ritual,
do japa, meditate, praise, prostrate, instruct,
query, delight themselves during the sessions.
But the ignorant wander, roar, laugh, argue,
weep, desire for sex and cavil. Slight, garru-
lousness, argumentation without logic, indif-
ference, fear, anger, these are to be avoided in
the Circle of Puja. No quarter shall be given to
egotism. All are eligible to respect in the eyes
of the true Kaula, Nobody shall claim superio-

--- PAGE 84 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORSHIP 75

rity over others saying he is the Guru or he is
the elder.

Pay due respect to the recognised Guru.
Perform his worship on suitable occasions.
Do not take his name except at the time of Japa.
Observe proper secrecy regarding the instruc-
tion of the Guru, regarding the Mantra that is
given to you. Receive full instruction in line
with the age-old tradition from the person of
the Guru and do not speak of it to the unquali-
fied Speak not to the lowly, neither hear from
any such

Pay respect to womankind, as they are all
born of the family of the Divine Mother Punish
them not in however mild a manner, whatever
the transgression Their excellences, not failings,
are to be stressed.

Guard the core of this Kula Dharma from
the profane, like wealth of gold and corn from
the brigands. Be a Kaula (worshipper of the
Sovereign Shakti) within; appear a Shaiva
(votary of Shiva) without; but among men in
society pass for a Vaishnava (bard of God
Vishnu). Like the water within the shell ofa
coconut, protect the dharma of the Kula Scrip-
tures like the Veda and the Sastras are like
common women open to the public gaze; but
not so the Sambhavi Vidya—the Science of the
Kaula—which is like the bride of a high family.
And the main-spring of this Kula Dharma lies
not in elaborate rituals like abhiseka, not in
Mantra, not in ponderous study of learned
treatises, but in a truthful ordering of life.

Proclaim the glory of the Guru but guard the
holy Mantra imparted to you. The Guru is the
saviour. And more. Just as the sins of the

--- PAGE 85 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

76 KULARNAVA TANTRA

ministers are laid at the door of the king, of the
wife at the husband’s, so do the sins of the
disciple accrue to the Guru. Therefore be on
guard and carry out his behests faithfully, lest
your sins of omission and commission recoil
upon the Guru.

--- PAGE 86 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER, VII
DEVOTION TO GURU *

Therefore worship him, worship his feet,
cherish the sandals which house his feet, the
paduka, Just as the essence of Speech is there
below in the basic centre, muladhara, just as the
lowest in the rung—the Sudras and the like—are
the effective instrumentations, similarly in the
Ocean of Kula all knowledge is founded on the
paduka. Remember and cherish this paduka
which yields infinitely more merit than any
number of observances, gifts, sacrifices, pilgri-
mages, mantra-japa and rituals of worship It is
that which, remembered, protects in times
of distress and danger and calamity. Study,
remembrance, knowledge, donations and sacri-
fices and worship are truly done by him who
ever remembers on the tip of his tongue the
Mantra of this paduka. Look towards the direc-
tion in which the lotus feet of the Guru lie and
bow to it every day with devotion. There is no
mantra higher than that of the paduka, no god
higher than the Guru, no initiation than that of
the Sakta and no merit higher than the Kula
worship. At the root of dhyana is the form of
the Guru; at the root of puja is the feet of the
Guru; at the root of the mantra is the word of
the Guru and at the root of all liberation is the
grace of the Guru. In this world all holy actions
are rooted in the Guru; therefore is the Guru to

* Ulldsa 12

--- PAGE 87 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

78 KULARNAVA TANTRA

be constantly served with devotion for fulfil-
ment. All fear of distress, grief, avarice,
delusion, bewilderment, exists only as long as
one does not take refuge in the Guru All
wanderings in samsara fraught with grief and
impurity last as long as one has no devotion toa
holy Guru. The beautiful mantra of the paduka,
whose root is in the grace of the Guru, loaded
with the fruit of all fulfilment purifies and leads
to the supreme Truth. As the boon-giving Guru
gives the mantra in contentment and beatitude,
try to please him with devotion, wealth, your
very life. Indeed, it is only when the high Guru
gives himself to the disciple that he becomes
liberated, free from birth. The disciple should
wait upon him till he gets pleased, for once he is
pleased, all the sins drop away. These lovers
of the devoted get for their dependents what
they may not even hope for. When the Guru is
pleased, even Gods like Brahma, Vishnu,
Mahesha, sages and yogins, bestow their grace.
Directed by the compassionate Guru who is
pleased with devotion, the disciple attains
liberation from karma and becomes eligible to
both freedom and fulfilment.

Hence shall the disciple do what is pleasing
to the Guru, by his mind, speech, body and
action, When the Guru so pleased says, ‘You
are freed,’ indeed, one attains to liberation.
From his transcendent station, the Lord in the
form of the Guru frees one from the bonds of the
pagu, Devotion to the Guru is the one main
truth; without that all learning, all austerity,
family status, observances are useless; they are
only decorations pleasing to the worldly eye.
Whatever one’s station is in life, if he be devoted,

--- PAGE 88 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DEVOTION TO GURU 79

he is dear to the Lord and as adorable as the
Lord Himself.

The fire of devotion to the Guru burns away
all taint of bad thought. With devotion even a
cooker of kine is laudable and a learned man
without it isan atheist. He who has complete
devotion, steady and constant in the Guru, what
has he to worry about dharma, artha etc.?
Moksha is in the hollow of his palm. For him
who devotedly remembers, ‘‘ My Guru is Shiva
Himself who grants liberation and enjoyment”,
fulfilment is not far off All objects fructify in
him who has supreme devotion to the Lord and
as to the Lord sotothe Guru As to Narayana,
to Mahadeva, to one’s own mother and father, so
is devotion to be had to one’s own Guru. Look
upon the Guru and his wife as your parents, as
the very Narayana and Lakshmi, as Brahma and
Saraswati. as Shiva and Girija. Not by sacrifice,
gifts, askesis, pilgrimage are all siddhis obtained
in the manner they are by devotion to the Guru,
As the steady devotion for the Guru grows, so
grows one’s knowledge.

Why the pains of long pilgrimages? Why
the observances that emaciate the body? All the
fruit anticipated from such austerities can be
easily obtained by motiveless service to the
Guru. The Sruti declares that for those who
seek for fulfilment and liberation, who aspire to
attain to Brahma, Vishnu and Isha, devotion to
the Guru is the Path and no other. Like fire
consuming a whole heap of cotton, this devotion
burns away in a moment all i inauspicious karma
and great sins. Glory to that faith in the Guru,
giver of all fulfilments, by which even mud,
wood and stone yield fruit without fail. Neither

--- PAGE 89 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

80 KULARNAVA TANTRA

yoga nor tapas nor ritual of worship attain ;
here in this Path of Kula, free from Maya, only
bhakti excels. When the entire universe is
looked upon as pervaded by the Guru, what
Mantra can fail tofructify in that field of the
devoted? To perdition he goes who regards the
Guru as human, the Mantra as mere letters and
the Images as stone Never look upon the Guru
as a mortal. Should you do so then neither
Mantra nor worship can give you success. Do
not associate the holy Guru with the ordinary
folk either in your remembrance or in talk.
Otherwise all the good that is done turns into
evil. The parents are indeed to be adored with
all effort because they are the cause of your
birth But the one to be worshipped especially
is the Guru who shows what is Dharma -and
what is not* Indeed, the Guru is the father,
Guru is the Mother, Guru is God Maheshwara
Himself. Even when God Shiva is wroth, the
Guru is the saviour; but when the Guru himself
is angered, there is none to save. By mind, by
speech, by the body, by action, do what is help-
ful tothe Guru; to do what is contrary to his
well being is to invite a precipitous fall, Death
follows the forsaking of the Mantra; wretched
poverty follows the forsaking of the Guru;
forsaking of both the Guru and the Mantra leads
to the very hell. Bear the body for the sake of the
Guru; acquire wealth for the sake of the Guru;
exert yourself for the Guru regardless of your
own life, Ifthe Guru speaks harshly take it as

*The parents give only e human birth inthis world,
but the Guru ensures a birth in godhead in this world
and the next,

--- PAGE 90 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DEVOTION TO GURU 81

a benediction; even a beating from him take as -
a gift. Whatever objects of enjoyment there be,
offer them first to the Guru and take to them as
his leavings.

When the Guru is present no tapas is
necessary; neither is fasting nor observances ;
neither pilgrimage nor purificatory bath. To
the Guru, you shall not command nor talk in the
singular; with the Guru you shall not transact
any business of purchase and sale or borrow and
lend.

Do not enter into argument with the deniers
of God nor even talk to them; avoid them from
afar; do not sit in their company at any time.

When the Guru is present, do not proceed to
worship another; that worship will prove
fruitless When you hold the lotus of his feet on
your head, you have no burden to carry. You
have only toact as per his command; for the
Guru is indeed the command.

What you hear elsewhere regarding Mantras
and Agamas report to him and accept only what
is approved by him and reject what is not,
What he speaks from his own knowledge, do not
speak of that secret to others; to talk of it is to
break the understanding. Feel one with the
Guru and not as another; and do good to allas
your own.

Service to the Guru is fourfold: service by
self, service by means, service by honouring,
service by happy feeling Please the Guru with
your mind dedicated to his service. The fruit
obtained is the same as from great sacrifices like
the Ashwamedha Such service invites the Grace
of the Divine Mother. If service is accompanied
with a happy devotion it brings in its train all

49496

--- PAGE 91 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

82 KULARNAVA TANTRA

fulfilment; the sins dwindle away and merit
grows by leaps and bounds, Whatever is condu-
cive to yourself turn that conducive to him,
Service done with devotion according to one’s
means has the same merit whether little or
much, whether by the rich or the poor, Even if
you give the whole of your wealth to the Guru
but without devotion, then the fruit will not accrue
to you. For indeed devotion is the only cause.

If the Guru desires any wealth, do not
partake of it; when necessary at all do it with
his leave If you were to utilise even a-sesamum
quantity or half of it, of what belongs to the
Guru, either by greed or delusion, that will
fructify in perdition Do not appropriate even a
fragment of what is his unless it is given to you;
you will slide downwards with disastrous
consequences Cast not your eye on anything
that belongs to the Guru. Breaking of his
command, stealth of his wealth, disagreeable
behaviour—these are treachery to the Guru, a
greatsin Even your own wealth you shall uti-
lise only after offering to the Guru. He who
damages the position of the Guru, his Tradition,
his Dharma, 1s to be ostracised by the Gurus; he*
merits punishment. Ruin follows from the
anger of the Guru; sin from treachery to the
Guru; bad death from criticism of the Guru;
catastrophes from the displeasure of the Guru.
It may be possible for a man who has entered
the fire to remain alive; possible also to be alive
after drinking poison or even when caught in
the hands of Death, but not if he has offended
the Guru

Do not lend your ear to any censure of the
Guru; where such criticism occurs, close your

--- PAGE 92 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DEVOTION TO GURU 83

ears, come out and remember his name to
counteract. Do not disrespect the retinue of the
Guru; do not criticise his traditions—whether
based on Vedas or Scriptures or Agamas The
sacred sandal of the Guru is the ornament;
remembrance of his name is japa; carrying out
of his commands is duty; service to him is
worship.

While entering the home of the Guru, be
calm of mind, devoted in the extreme; leave out
your vehicle, sandals, umbrella, fan and the
like, betel, collyrium and make-up, and enter
slowly. When you see the sandals of the Guru,
his seat, cloth, vehicle, umbrella and fan, bow to
them but do not desire them for yourself. In
the presence of the Guru of the yogins, and in
great centres of realization and pilgrimage and
Ashrams, take care to avoid washing of feet,
bathing, anointing with oil, cleansing of teeth,
micturition, vomiting, shaving, sleeping, sex,
conspicuous sitting, harsh speech, ordering,
laughter, weeping, loosening of the hair, of the
turban and the cloak, nudity, stretching of the
legs, debate, acrimony, casting of blame, contor-
tion of the body, producing of musical notes
from the body, striking of the hands, dice,
amusements, bouts of wrestling and the like and
dancing. They bring the curse of the Deity.

In the presence of the Guru, stand with due
form; dé not enter with desire; serve him
looking at his face; do what he says. In the
service of the Guru—whether expressed or unex-
pressed by him—do not be unmindful; honour
whole-heartedly what he says and do it without
questioning. The Guru is the cause of all checks
and all sanctions, What comes out of his mouth

--- PAGE 93 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

84 KULARNAVA TANTRA

that is the scripture. Intensely devoted to the
Guru, do not commission others for his work if
you yourself can do it even though you may
have any number of attendants.

Whether moving, or standing, sleeping or
waking, doing japa or offering oblation, or
worshipping, carry out only the injunction of
the Guru with your inner being dwelling in him.
Do not be proud because of class, learning or
wealth; be always in service of the Guru, ever
in his presence Giving up desire, anger, humble
and devoted, lauding in spirit, stand on the floor
and do his work. Whether engaged in your own
work or in the work for others, knowing the
mind of the Guru, be by his side humble and
cheerful of countenance Should you do any-
thing in the presence of the Guru what is
normally prohibited, it is extremely blame-
worthy. Do not, out of disregard, hear with the
face turned away what the Guru says, whether
it 1s beneficial or otherwise. To speak falsehood
before the Guru is to commit the highest sin. In
the absence of the Guru who is away and in
distress, do not leave him; go wherever he
commands When he stands below do not your-
self stand above, do not walk in his front, do not
sit when he stands up. Cross not the shadow of
the Shakti, the shadow of God and the shadow of
the Guru; do not let your own shadow fall on
them Do not sleep in his presence. Unless

, directed by him do not speak, do not read, do
not sing, do not eat there; do nothing without
bowing to him Never fail to carry out his
injunction Without his command do not believe
on other’s word Do everything by the command
of the Guru; do not comment on his spouse.

--- PAGE 94 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DEVOTION TO GURU 85

Bow down with devotion, hold the palms to-
gether and stand up. Thereafter, bowing down
move out of his residence on foot. Never sit on
the same seat as the Guru with his colleagues. Do
not be seated in the presence of the Deity and the
Guru. The highest seat shall be given to the Guru
and good seats to the elders; to the younger
give the alloted seats and to others the same as
yours, Whether you are endowed with class,
Jearning, or wealth, seeing the Guru from afar,
prostrate yourself with joy and circumambulate
around him thrice Observe due priorities of
the Guru and the Guru’s Guru ete in offering
your obeisances. Give due honour to the elders,
In the presence of the great Guru, bow to
your own Guru mentally.

Bow to everything, from the Divine to a
blade of grass, as to the Guru, but do not bow as
to God to the idol made of iron or earth. Three
prostrations to the Guru, one to the elders,
joining of palms to the honoured, to the rest
verbal greetings. Bow to the Gods, the Guru,
the Teachers of the Kula, the old in knowledge,
the rich in tapas, the highly learned, those who
are steadfast in their Dharma. Do not bow to
the hated of women, cursed by the Guru, the
learned heretic, the dunce, the doer of wrong,
the ingrate, the transgressor of the ordained
steps (ashramas) in life. While staying in the
same place, should you eat food without offering
tothe Guru, that becomes impure. Staying in .
the same place, prostrate before the Guru thrice,

during the three sandhyas. If you are away,
prostrate as prescribed.*

* the occasions and periods varying with the distance.

--- PAGE 95 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

86 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Do not approach royalty, the Deity and the
Guru empty-handed. Offer in the measure of
your capacity, fruit, flower, cloth and the like.

Regard the Shakti of the Guru, the Guruw’s
son, his elder brother as the Guru himself. The
knower of the self shall look after the younger
brother of the Guru as his own son. Bow to the
Teacher of the Kula, to the eldest and the
youngest of the Guru, to one who is almost like a
Guru, as toyour own Guru. Elder in the sacri-
fices, elder in order, elder in Kula, the eldest of
the Guru’s sons, these are the four elders.
Respect them in that order, in the prescribed
manner.

To the elders like your father, mother and
other worthy relations, express your sentiment
by getting up, prostration and soon But should
you pose to be a teacher yourself, then these
acts become ill of you.

Attained ta the status of the Lord, pati, do
not bow down to any in the grade of the animal,
pagu He who attains to the status of the Guru
by meditation on the Mantra of the Paduka, he
is to be esteemed as the Guru.

--- PAGE 96 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

> CHAPTER IX
GURU-SHISHY A *

The Guru shall desist from taking for his
disciple one who is of wicked descent; wicked;
devoid of good qualities; ugly; disciple of
another; heretic; impotent; fancies himself to
be learned; with body of less or more or
deformed limbs; lame; blind; deaf; dirty;
struck with disease; excommunicated; foul of
rmnouth; wearing any dress he likes; of ill-
formed limbs, movements, gait, speech and
look; sleepy; drowsy; lazy; addicted to vices
like gambling; ever hiding himself behind
cupboards, walls or pillars; mean; devoid of
external signs of devotion though with devotion
within; given to exaggeration in speech; dry;
exiled; merely instigating others; cunning,
impure regarding wealth and wife; given to
perform what is prohibited and to omit what is
enjoined; divulging secrets; ruining what is to
be performed; cat-like (in stealth); crane-like
(in deception); ever intent on finding loopholes
in others; knowing magic; ungrateful; con-
cealing what is within, treacherous ; disloyal to
his master ; sinful; distrustful; ever doubting;
not aspring for fulfilment; criminal; wanting
to exact; angry; bearing false witness; deceiver
of all; proud that he is the best of all; untrue;
eruel; indecent in speech; talkative; of wrong
object; of wrong reasoning; fond of quarrel; _
rebuking others without reason; foolish; un-

* Ullasa 13

--- PAGE 97 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

88 KULARNAVA TANTRA

reliable; bore; slandering people behind their
back yet speaking well before them; talking
like a brahmana (though without that know-
ledge); plagiarist; self-laudatory; envious of
good qualities, injurious; distressed ; passionate ;
garrulous; given to evil company; condemned
of all; harsh; angering others; transgressing
usage, talking of his own ills; traitor to his
master, deceiver of himself; gluttonous and
lustful; thief; given to animal ways; hating,
laughing, suffering, getting angry without any
cause; laughing excessively, inactive, jesting
bitingly; libidinous; shameless; inciting to
false and wicked pursuits, given to jealousy,
intoxication envy, ostentation, egotism, with
mind that is jealous, rough, cruel, niggardly and
angry; unsteady; miserable; coward; weak;
benumbed; afflicted; unawakened in intelli-
gence; dull; perplexed; overcome by care; a
paramour; desireful and greedy; wretched;
discontented ; begging for everything; eating in
profusion; cunning, creating confusion; crook-
ed; devoid of devotion, faith, compassion,
peace, rightful conduct; making fun of the
words of his parents, Guru and the wise and the
holy; creating disgust around the ingredients
of Kula worship and too proud of service to the
Guru; hated of women; fallen from the
tradition; cursed by a Guru. Such are to be
rejected.

The disciple chosen shall be one who is
endowed with auspicious features; given to
sadhana that leads to samadhi ; of good qualities
and culture; clean of body and apparel; wise;
devoted to Dharma; pure of mind, steady in
observances; of truthful practice, gifted with

--- PAGE 98 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 89

faith and devotion; diligent; sparsely eating;
deep-thoughted ; serving without motive; seru-
tinising; heroic, free from poverty of mind;
skilful in all action; clean; obliging to all;
grateful; afraid of sin; approved of the holy
and the good; believer in God; liberal; engaged
in the good of all creatures. He shall be one
who has trust and modesty; who is not given
to deceive in matters of wealth, body ete.,
achieves the impossible; is brave, enthusiastic
and strong; engaged in favourable activities ;
not intoxicated ; able, helpful, truthful, limited
and smiling in speech; not given to blaming
others; who grasps what is said but once;
clever; expansive in intelligence; averse to
listen to his own praise and genial to others’
criticism of himself; master of his senses;
contented with himself; intelligent; celibate;
free from worry, disease, fickleness, grief,
delusion and doubt.

He shall be one who is enthusiastic in
meditation, praise and speaking of the Guru,
worship and prostration to the Deity; well
devoted tothe Deity Guru; worshipper of the
Shakti; ever in the proximity of the Guru;
pleasing the Guru; constantly well engaged in
his attendance by mind, speech, body; carrying
out the command of the Guru; spreading the
glory of the Guru; knowing the authority of the
word of the Guru ; occupied in the service of the
Guru; following the mind of the Guru; function-
ing as a servant; free from pride of class,
honour, wealth in the presence of the Guru; not
coveting the wealth of the Guru; aspiring for his
favours; fond of narration of the Kuladharma, of
yogins and yoginis and the practitioners of the

--- PAGE 99 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

90 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Kaula Path; engaged in Kula worship and the
like; not scared away in disgust at the
ingredients of Kula worship; engaged in Japa,
Dhyana etc ; aspiring for the Path of Moksha ;
fond of the Kaula Scriptures; averse to the texts
of the pagu-class.

And the Guru himself, describes the
Kularnava, is one who is clean of apparel;
charming; endowed with all features; full-
limbed; knowing the truth of all Agamas, the
application of all Mantras; bewitching the
world; sweet-looking like a god; of happy
countenance, easy of access; clean. He is one
who dissipates delusion and doubt; knows the
meaning of gestures; who is wise and knows the
pros and cons; whose attention is directed within
though the look is outward; who knows all;
knows place and time; in whose command lies .
siddhi (fulfilment); knows the past, present and
future; capable of check and sanction; capable
of piercing inwardly; instructing; quiet;
compassionate to all creatures; to whose control
are subject the movements of his senses;
conqueror of the six enemies of desire, anger,
greed, delusion, jealousy, pride; foremost,
highly solemn, knows the distinction between
the fit receptable and the unfit; is equal-minded
to Shiva and Vishnu; good; condemns the
doctrines of the unawakened; stainless; ever
content; independent; endowed with the
powers of Mantra; lover of good devotees;
steadfast; merciful; speaks with prior smile;
dear to devotees; ever-generous; deep, superb
practicant; enthusiastic in the worship of his
chosen Deity, the Guru, the eldest, the Shakti;
given to blameless ritual of three types: regular,

--- PAGE 100 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 91

specifically occasional, and voluntary ; devoid of
anger, hate, fear, pain, ostentation, egoism ;
engaged in the practice of his science (vidya) ;
acquiring dharma and the like; content with
what comes by itself; distinguishing between
good and bad; unattached to women, wealth,
bad company, vice etc.; with a feeling of oneness
with all; free from dualities; constant in
observance; not over-eager; without self-will
and partiality; able; not selling Mantra, Yantra
and Tantra for the sake of money or learning;
un-attached, without doubts, with decided views,
supremely conforming to Dharma, equal in
praise and criticism, silent, without preference,
free from disease.

The Guru, it is declared in unmistakable
terms, is the very Lord Himself. To approach
the Guru, to worship the Guru, is to approach
the Lord, worship the Lord. Why should the
Lord choose to manifest through the Guru, why
should He not act directly?

Shiva is really all-pervading, subtle, above
the mind, without features, imperishable, of the
form of ether, eternal, infinite; how can such a
one be worshipped? That is why, out of compas-
sion for his creatures, He takes the form of the
Guru and when so worshipped in devotion, grants
liberation and fulfilment. Shiva has no binding
form, Shiva is not perceivable by the human eye;
therefore He protects the disciple conforming to
Dharma in the form of the Guru. The Guru is
none other than the supreme Shiva enclosed in
human skin; he walks the earth, concealed, for
bestowing grace on the good disciples. Though
formless, Shiva, the store of compassion, takes
form for the protection of the good devotees and

--- PAGE 101 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

92 KULARNAVA TANTRA

acts in the world as though he were a house-
holder. He conceals his eye on the forehead,
his crescent of moon and two of his hands and
functions in the form of the Guru on the earth.
The Guru is none other than Shiva without His
three eyes, Vishnu without His four arms,
Brahma without His four faces. To him who is
loaded with sinful karma, the Guru appears to
be human; but to him whose karma is
auspicious, meritful, the Guru appears as Shiva,
The less fortunate do not recognise the Guru,
embodiment of the supreme Truth, even when
face to face with him, like the blind before the
arisen sun. Verily, the Guru is none else but
Sadashiva; that is the truth, there is no doubt
about it. Shiva himself is the Guru; otherwise
who is it that gives fulfilment and liberation?
There is no difference between God Sadashiva
and the Guru; it is sinful to make a distinction.
He is the Guru because taking the form of the
Preceptor, he cuts asunder all the bonds of the
pagsu and leads to the supreme status. Store of
compassion, Ishwara, being the fount of all
Grace, takes the form of the Guru and releases
the ‘animal’ by his initiation. Just as vessel,
pitcher, jar (ghata, kalaga, kumbha) all designate
the same thing, similarly Devata, Mantra, Guru
—all designate the same subject. Devata in truth
is the sameas Mantra; Mantra in truthis the
same asthe Guru. The fruit of the worship of
the Devata, Mantra, Guru is the same. ‘Taking
the form of Shiva I aceept the worship; assuming
the form of the Guru I sunder the bonds of
birth,”

He who makes you know ‘I am the knower
of the essence of all philosophy, Iam the core’,

--- PAGE 102 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 93

who is inseparate (from Brahman), ever pleased
in heart—he is the Guru. .

Who sets aside the sequence of the stages
(4Srama) and class (varna) and dwells ever in his
own self, to whom the Supreme Light itself is
both the Varna and Ashrama, the yogi—he is

‘the Guru.

Who knows the organisation of the Chakras
(Lotuses) in the body* and also the six routes,
adhvat, in their order,—he is the Guru.

Who knows the Truth thatis born of pure
Consciousness, born of supreme Ananda,—he is
the Guru.

Who knows the past and the future, Tantra
and Mantra, the Doctrines of Shakta and Shambhu
and the six ways of vedha (subtle impingement)}
—he is the Guru who makes the subtle impact.

Who can purify the sixfold Route of Word,
Mantra, Kala, Yantra, Tattwa and Guna—he is
the Guru.

Who knows well the vedha, ‘striking’, the
object, the opposition, holding and releasing—he
is the Guru.

Who knows the quintuplet of the states of
waking, dream, sound sleep, the fourth (turiya)
state and what is beyond it—he is the Guru.

Who knows the quartette of what is forming
and what is formed, the form and what is beyond
form—he is the Guru,

Who knows the fourfold speech, para,
pasyanti, madhyama and vaikhari, he is the Guru.

* differently computated by different authorities.

t varna, pada, kala, tattva, bhuvana, mantra.

tT Vedha is of 3 types: dnava, Sdkta, Sambhava} each has
again two divisions, bahya and dbhyantara (outer and inner).

--- PAGE 103 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

94 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Who knows the threefold operations of
cutting asunder of the bonds, of initiation by
subtle impact of holding in reins the paégu,
animal,—he is the supreme Guru.

Who knows the mystic meaning of pada
(station), pdésa (bonds), pagu (animal)—he is the
Guru

Who knows the triple symbolism of Chakra,
Mantra and Puja—he is the Guru.

Who knows the position of the three Lingas
of Bana, Itara and Svayambhu*—he is the Guru.

Who is capable of purifying from the
separative (dnava), karmic and mayic impurities
that render man impure—he is the Guru.

Who knows the Vasanas (habitual impres-
sions) of three kinds, red (rdjasic), white (sdttvic),
black (tamasic)—he is the supreme Guru.

Who knows the Mudrast, Mahamudra,
Nabhomudra, Uddiyana, Jalandhara and
Mulabandha—he is the supreme Guru.

Who knows the correct classification of the
36 Tattvast from Shiva to Prithivi in Creation ;
who knows the Yaga—inner and outer, knows
of Time and Existence, the technique of the use
of Mantra; who truly knows the state of oneness
between the microcosm and the macrocosm, and
the constitution of the head, the bones, the hair—
their number etc.; who knows expertly the

*in the Anahata, Ajndand Mulddhara Chakras respec-
tively.

+ postures and gestures,

{Shiva Tattva, Shakti tattva, Sadashive Tattva, Ishvara
Tattva, Shuddha Vidya Tattva; Maya, Five Kanchukas,
Purusha; Prakriti, Buddhi, Ahamkara, Manas, Five
Karmendriyas, Five Jnanendriyas, Five Tanmatras, Five
Elements.

--- PAGE 104 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 95

84 Asanas (like Padmasana), the limbs of the
Eightfold Yoga*—he is the supreme Guru. ;

Pity, doubt, fear, shame, disgust, family
disposition, caste—these are the eight bonds ;
bound by these bonds one is a pagu. Freed from
the bonds one is Shiva; he is the supreme Guru
who removes these bonds.

He is the Guru who knows the seal*of yoni-
mudra, the revelation of conscious-power of the
Mantra, the real form of the Yantra and the
Mantra; who knows the four conditions of the
mind: dispersed, moving to and fro, distressed,
passive and gentle; who knows the fruit of the
movement of the jiva in the petals of the seven
Lotuses from the Muladhara to the Brahma-
randhra; who has received the knowledge of the
multitude of Tattvas up to Shiva and Guru in
their successive order.

When he shows the Truth, the disciple
instantly becomes That and considers himself
liberated—such is the Guru and no other.

They are to be served as Gurus who give a
spontaneous joy and remove the pleasures of the
senses ; the others are imposters to be abandoned,
The Guru is he who with consideration regulates
the disciple afraid of the fear of samsara by
means of observances, fasts, rules etc.

Difficult to obtain is the Guru who pleased,
gifts to you in the fraction of a second, the
wealth of liberation, taking you across the ocean
of Samsara.

Difficult to obtain is the godly Guru who
gives to the disciple his own capacity in a
moment without any ceremony or effort; who

*Yama, Niyama, Asana,

Pranayama, P, ‘ahi
Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi. 7 » Pratyahara,

--- PAGE 105 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

96 KULARNAVA TANTRA

gives instruction in knowledge which instantly
promotes faith, is easy and gives happiness of
the Self.

He is the Guru who goes on giving know-
ledge with facility, without strenuous practice
and the like, as one moves from island to island.

Difficult to obtain is the Guru whose mere
instruction gives rise to knowledge, even as food
gives instant contentment to the hungry.

Many are the Gurus like lamps in house and
house; but rare is the Guru who lights up all
like the sun.

Many are the Gurus who are proficient to the
utmost in Vedas, and Sastras; but rare is the
Guru who has attained to the supreme Truth,

Many are the Gurus on earth who give what
is other than the Self; but rare is the Guru in
the worlds who brings to light the Atman.

Many are the Gurus who know petty
mantras, medicaments; but rare is the Guru
who knows the Mantras handed down by the
Nigama, Agama and Sastra.

Many are the Gurus who rob the disciple of
his wealth; but rare is the Guru who removes
the afflictions of the disciple.

Many are they who are given to the disci-
pline and conduct according to varna (class),
agrama (stage) and kula (family); but he who is
devoid of all volition is the Guru rare to find.

He is the Guru by whose very contact there
flows the supreme Ananda, the intelligent
men shall choose such a one as the Guru and
no other.

By the mere sight of him whose intelligence
is active only till the advent of experience, one
attains liberation, there is no doubt of it,

--- PAGE 106 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 97

Rare is the Guru who has eaten up Doubt
which has engulfed the three worlds with all
that is moving and unmoving.

As in the vicinity of fire the butter gets
melted, sc in the proximity of the holy Guru all
sin dissolves

As lighted fire burns up all fuel—dry and
moist—so the glance of the Guru burns up ina
moment the sin of the disciple.

As a heap of cotton blown up by a great
storm scatters in all the ten directions, so the
heap of sins is driven away by the compassion
of the Guru.

As darkness is destroyed at the very sight of
the lamps, so is ignorance destroyed at the very
sight of the holy Guru.

He indeed is the Guru who is endowed with
all features, knows the way of the Vedas and
Sastras, knows the procedure of all means,
knows the Truth. For him who is without the
Truth, all knowledge of worship, Homa,
Ashrama, conduct, askesis, pilgrimages, obser-
vances, Mantra and Agama is fruitless. The
steady one comes to know his own self in the
supreme Truth that is to be realised in oneself,
If one has no achievement oneself, how can he
help others to achive ?

He who knows not the reality of Brahman in
the form of Mind in himself, how can he give
liberation to another ?

He who knows the Truth, is the Guru even
though he be void of all features. The knower
of Truth alone is the liberated and also the
liberator.

The knower of Truth makes even the pasu
understand (the Truth), But from one who is

4949-7

--- PAGE 107 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

98 KULARNAVA TANTRA

devoid of knowledge how is it possible to receive
the truth of the Self? Those who are instructed
by the knowers of Truth become undoubtedly
knowers of Truth themselves. Those who are
instructed by pasus are verily pagus, It is only
one who is ‘struck’ (initiated by subtle impact)
that can ‘strike’ others , one who is not ‘struck’
can hardly be the ‘striker.’ Only the liberated
one can liberate; how indeed can the unliberated
be the liberator ?

Only the proficient in knowledge can uplift
the foolish; how indeed can the foolish uplift
the foolish ?

Only the boat can ferry the stone across:
surely a stone cannot ferry a stone!

Engrossed in the affairs of the world, one
obtains no fruit whatever either here or there,
getting a Guru who knows not the Truth.

Three are the Gurus among the Shaivas; five
among the Vaishnavas; hundreds in the Vedas
and Sastras. But in the Kula there is only one
Guru.

The Gurus are of six kinds*:

* Different traditions have different classifications of
the Gurus. There is for instance one tradition which
speaks of twelve kinds of Gurus:

1. Dhatuvadi Guru who ensures liberation by making
the disciple practice sadhana, observances and so on.

2. Candena Guru who emanates his high conscious-
ness like the sandal tree giving out its fragrance and
umparting it to other trees in its environs. His mere
proximity acts for liberation,

3. Vieadra Guru who acts on the intelligence of the
disciple and leads him through subtler and subtler opera-
tions of the buddhi.

4, Anugraha Guru who uplifts by sheer grace.

--- PAGE 108 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GURU-SHISHYA 99

Preraka, impeller, who impels interest that
leads to initiation; Swcaka, indicator, who
indicates the sadhana in which interest has been
awakened; Vacaka, explainer, who explains the
process and its object; Daréaka, shower, who
shows definitely the working and its.aim in
greater detail; Siksaka, teacher, who actually
teaches how to do sadhana; Bodhaka, Wlumi-
nator, who lights up in the disciple the lamp of
knowledge, mental and spiritual. Of these, the
first five are, as it were, the effects of the last as
the Cause. For it is only the understanding
knowledge imparted by the Bodhaka that brings

5. Parasa Guru whose mere touch, like that of parasa
(philosopher’s stone) transmutes the disciple.

6. Kacchapa Guru who redeems the disciple merely
by thinking of him, lke the Kacchapa, tortoise, nourish-
ing its young ones by thought alone.

7. Candra Guru whose natural rays melt the being
of the disciple in the manner of the chandrakanta stone
(moon-stone) oozing out at the rays of the moon.

8 Darpana Guru who like a mirror reveals the true
form (of yourself and the universe) when you meet him.

9. Chaydnidhi Guru, whose mere shadow confers
divinity on you even as the shadow of the bird Chayanidhi
is said to confer kinghood on whomsoever falls its
shadow. -

10. Naddanidhi Guru who like the precious stone of
that name, which transmutes any metal into gold the
moment its sound reaches it, gives Knowledge the moment
the call of the aspirant reaches him.

ll. Krauncapaké& Guru whose mere remembrance
confers spiritual elevation on the disciple like the
remembrance by the Krauncapakéi feeding its young ones
in a far away place.

. 12, Suryakanta Guru, whose mere glance burns up the
sins of the disciple like the rays of the sun burning cotton
and the like when they fall on it through the sun-crystal,

--- PAGE 109 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

100 KULARNAVA TANTRA

to fruition all that is contributed by the rest,
Instigation, inauguration, explanation, direction
and teaching would remain barren unless they
are taken up and assimilated in the Knowledge
that is lit.

There may be many Gurus. But only his
feet-sandals are to be worshipped who is compe-
tent to perform the Purna-abhiseka (ceremony
of full bathing).

Having once obtained a Guru who is endowed
with features, who cuts asunder all doubt and
gives knowledge excellently, do not resort to
another. But should you have a Guru who does
not have the knowledge and always creates
doubt, no blemish attaches to you if you go to
another Like the bee greedy for honey going
from flower to flower, the disciple eager for
knowledge goes from Guru to Guru.

We may observe here that this freedom to
go from Guru to Guru has its own advantages
and disadvantages Each Guru has his own way
of approach and communication. The seeker is
the gainer for meeting many who are advanced
on the Path His horizon widens, mind becomes
more catholic But he is disciple to nobody and
the responsibility to pool together all that he
receives and organise it purposively for his self-
advancement lies squarely on his own shoulders.
On the other hand if one is fortunate to find the
right Guru he takes himself to him in fullness
and if the Guru accepts him as his disciple, then
according to all spiritual tradition the Guru
takes charge of his spiritual life. The responsi-
bility rests with the Guru as long as that
relation is allowed to continue,

--- PAGE 110 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER X
DIKSHA (INITIATION) *

It is laid down by the Lord that there can be
no moksa, liberation, without diksd, initiation ;
and initiation cannot be there without a Teacher,
hence it comes down the line of Teachers,
paramparad. Without a Teacher, all philosophy,
traditional knowledge, Mantras are fruitless.
Him alone the gods laud who is the Guru
keeping active what is handed down by tradi-
tion, who is well versed in the Mantras and
Agamas and guards the way of the Samaya
(Traditional) Doctrine. Though himself un-
attached, the Guru, after testing him for some
time, on command of the Lord shall deliver
(the truth) to his disciple, in order to vest him
with authority. Of him who is so invested
with authority, there is verily union with the
Supreme Shiva; at the termination of the bodily
life his is the eternal liberation—this is declared
by the Lord. Therefore should one seek with
all effort to have a Guru of the unbroken Tradi-
tion born of the supreme Shiva himself,

After testing the disciple in the prescribed
manner for the fruition of the Shakti and for
happy success, the Guru shall communicate to
him the Mantra; otherwise it will be fruitless.
If one gives contrary to this requirement, if
one receives contrary to it, both he who gives
and he who receives shall stand cursed for gene-
rations. If, out of delusion, the Guru and the

* Ullasa 14

--- PAGE 111 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

102 KULARNAVA TANTRA

disciple give and receive the instruction without
prior mutual testing, they suffer condemnation.
So too if the instruction is contrary to the Scrip-
ture, both he who gives and he who receives
suffer perdition He who imparts instruction
that is not sanctified is a sinner; his Mantra is
lost like paddy-seed in the sands Knowledge of
the Mantra never holds in the undeserving ; that
is why one is to proceed after due testing, other-
wise it is fruitless Initiating according to the
tradition, giving its paduka (Mantra) seating the
disciple close to oneself, the Guru shall utter the
Mantra; not otherwise The knowledge that is
imparted to the good disciple, excellently
devoted, shall be according to the scripture and
shall be communicated whole ie. without seg-
menting it. Whatever knowledge is imparted
to the bad and undevoted disciple, it becomes
impure like the cow’s milk mixed with dog’s
ghee.

To initiate one who is unfit by reason of
cupidity, fear, greed etc invites the curse of
the Deity and what is done will be fruitless. In
knowledge and in action, shall the Guru test the
disciple with effort for the period of one year or
half or quarter Bring the high to the low, the
low to the high, in matters concerning life,
money, prostration, commands just and other-
wise. He who does not grieve on account of
such delusive cruel doings, words corresponding
to these doings, frequent partialities, indiffer-
ences, several and repeated, whether pulled or
beaten, always takes it asthe Grace of the Guru.
They who thrill with joy, tremor, horripilation
and change in voice, eyes etc. at the remem-
brance of the Guru, in his laudation, in his

'

--- PAGE 112 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DIKSHA (INITIATION) 103

audience, in prostration to him, in his service,
in calling him and sending him off—they are fit
to be inducted in the purification for initiation.

The disciple also shall test the Guru in
similar signs of joy etc. in japa, stotra, dhyana,
homa, puja and so on, After knowing his capa-
city for transmission of knowledge perfection
in the science of Mantra, ability to make subtle
impact, one is to become his disciple, not other-
wise.

There are those who are competent in the
beginning, those competent in the middle and
those competent in-the end, due to the trans-
mission of the Guru’s Shakti; these disciples are
called the lowest, the middling and the best
respectively.

Those in whom there is devotion at the out-
set, when they come for initiation but whose
enthusiasm cools down soon, are the adiyogya,
competent in the beginning.

Those who arrive when the time for initia-
tion is at hand and have neither special nor any
knowledge, but whose past is done away with
by their devotion, are the madhyayogya, compe-
tent in the middle.

Those who have no devotion at the outset,
who have devotion in the middle and whose
devotion is fully grown at the end are the
antayogya, competent at the end and known as the
best jnanins,

Instruction, upadega, is of three kinds: that
of karma, of dharma, of jnana. Of these the
instruction or path of karma proceeds slowly
like the ant which takes long to reach the fruit
at the top of the tree, proceeding slowly and
slowly. The path of dharma is like the pace of

--- PAGE 113 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

104 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the monkey which strains, jumping from branch
to branch, and reaches the fruit. The path of
jnana is like that of the bird which flies straight
and rests on the fruit quickly.

Initiation, diksd, is of three kinds: initiation
by touch, sparéa, initiation by sight, drksanjna,
initiation by thought, mdnasad—all these three
are done without ritual, without exertion.

Initiation and instruction by touch is likened
to the slow nourishing of its young by the bird
with the warmth of its wings.

Initiation and instruction by sight is like the
nourishing of its young by the fish through its
seeing alone.

Initiation and instruction by thought (subtle
impingement) is like the nourishing of its young
by the tortoise by only thinking of them.

The disciple receives the Grace according
to the impact of the Shakti, Saktipata; where
there is no impact of Sakti, there is no fulfil-
ment,

Altogether, diksa, initiation, that gives
liberation is said to be of seven kinds: diksa@
through ritual; through letter; through special
emanation (kala); through touch; through
speech ; through sight ; through thought,

Diksa is also classified as follows: samaya,
when it authorises the disciple to help the Guru
manually in puja etc.; putrika when it enjoins
on him to perform the ritual indicated ; sadhika,
when it initiates him in the inner sadhana;
vedhaka, when it impinges subtly ; purna-dcharya
when it vests on one the full competence of a
teacher ; nirvana, when it leads to laya through
sadhana,

Eightfold again is diksa through outer ritual

--- PAGE 114 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DIKSHA (INITIATION) 105

in which kunda fire-bowl, mandapa, enclosure,
kalaga jar etc., are used; prescribed means are
to be adopted for the purification of the body.

Diksa of letter, varna is threefold depending
on whether the letters are 42 or 50 or 62 Letters
shall be placed on the body of the disciple and
withdrawn in reverse order, joining his con-
sciousness to the supreme Self. After with-
drawal, the letters are to be again laid on the
person of the disciple in the order of creation
and as prescribed; so too shall be exercised the
Consciousness The state of godhood full of
delight is born in the child (of the Guru). This is
the varnamayi diksa which removes all bonds.

Kala diksa is also threefold* to be done as
prescribed. Beginning from the base of the feet
up to the knee, itis nivrttt kala; from the knee
to the navel it is pratistha; from navel to the
neck it is vidya; from the neck to the forehead
it is Santi; from there to the head it is
Sdntyatita This is the graded spread of kala-
diksa.

Following the order of withdrawal, the
knower of the sequence, joins from place to
place up to the head. This is the kala diksa of
38 parts or 50 Knowing from the Guru, follow-
ing the order of creation and withdrawal in the
placement of the tattvas, one shall center and
impinge on the disciple. Then is born the state
of godhead and the meeting with the yogins and
viras (higher beings). This is the kald diksa
which destroys the bonds of the pashu. ,

*anavt, Sakti, Sambaavi, that is to day effectuating
through mantra, though transmission of Sakti, through
direct impact of the Guru.

--- PAGE 115 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

106 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Invoking Lord Siva in the hand, doing japa
as prescribed, the Guru shall touch the person
of the disciple; this is sparga diksa, tactual
initiation,

Securing the mind in the Truth, shall the
Guru utter the body of Mantras which are
expansions of the supreme Truth; that is the
vag-diksd, verbal initiation.

Closing the eyes and meditating upon the
supreme Truth, with a happy mind shall the
Guru gaze well into the disciple; that is drg-
diksa, ocular initiation.

“When by the mere look or speech or touch
of the Guru, there is an instantaneous Know-
ledge, that is ambhavi diksa.

Of two kinds is mano-diksa, mental initia-
tion—intense and highly intense, tivrad and
tivratara. Knowing the sixfold Route, adhva,
one shall form in the body of the disciple, the
bhuvana, tattva, kala, varna, pada and mantra—
from the knee, navel, heart, neck, palate to top
of the head.

The wise shall effect the vedha (subtle
impact) following the method received from
the Guru. In a moment will the disciple in
bonds get freed from them. This is intense,
tivrd, initiation yielding liberation.

Merely by remembrance on the part of the
Guru, proficient in the vedha, the disciple has
his sin severed; this is the highly intense,
tivratara diksa. Released from external activity
he falls on the ground instantly; a godly state
arises in him and he comes to know everything.
Whatever is there at that moment of impact, he
experiences it himself, but on waking up he is
unable to speak of that happiness, Struck by

--- PAGE 116 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DIKSHA (INITIATION) . 107

such impact, one verily is a Shiva, he has no
more birth This is the tivratara diksa that
releases from the bonds of birth, yields the
very state of Shiva.

Of one so struck six are the states described :
joy, tremor, new birth, reeling, sleep, swoon.
These six characteristics are seen at the time of
the impact. Wherever be the person so struck,
he is liberated ; there is no doubt of it.

Difficult to get is such a Guru who can
initiate thus by subtle impact; difficult also is
the disciple fit for it; it is only by happy
conjunction of merit that he is obtained But
this initiation shall not be given to anybody and
everybody; such is the Command.

Duly worshipping the circle of the Kula with
appropriate ingredients of Kula worship, the
Guru shall show it to the disciple. This is the
kauliki diksa, initiation of the Kaula.

Filling the mouth with the substance for
worship mixed with the five nectarous products
of the cow*, the Guru shall bathe the disciple
with it; this is called the gandusa dkisd, mouth-
ful initiation.

Diksa is again twofold depending on whether
it is external, bahya, or internal, antara; the
external is kriya diksa (ritualistic initiation) and
the other, internal, is the vedha diksd (subtle
impact),

Purification is twofold, inner and outer; the
inner is effected by appropriate ritual, the outer
by diksa By diksa, the light of liberation, even
the lowest born is freed. Without these two the
Kaulika is not liberated.

*ksiram dadhi tathd ca djyam miitram goma e
pancagavyam, id gomayamena oa

--- PAGE 117 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

108 KULARNAVA TANTRA

The body as such cannot be purified; nor the
karma It is the inner being that is to be
processed through the diksa of the ageless Shakti
that is Kundali.

Though the ritual be the same, these diksds
work out different results on the meeting of the
Guru and the worthy disciple.

As the power of poison is killed by Mantra
or by medicine, so does the knower of Mantra
sever in a trice the bonds of the paSu by diksd.

From this extensive bondage diksa alone
liberates, by pointing out the supreme station,
and leads to the ancient divine Abode.

Diksad, given according to the prescribed
mode, burns up ina moment all ill-omens and
great sins in their millions.

That by which the paSus (animal men) have
their eyes opened and become Shivas, is the diksa
which liberates from the bonds of the pagus.

That which instantly generates faith and
conviction is diksa ; the rest are only pleasing to
the populace.

That diksa without which there is no fulfil-
ment even witha hundred updsanas, should be
obtained from a holy Guru for the success of the
Mantra.

As iron struck by mercury becomes gold so
does the soul struck by diksa attain to Shivahood.

With all karma burnt out by diksd, all bonds
of Maya severed, attaining to the supreme end of
Jnana, seedless*, he becomes Shiva.

Gone is the shudrahood of a shudra, the.
brahmanhood of a brahmana; there obtains no

distinction of caste where there is the effect of

* seeds of samskdra.

--- PAGE 118 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DIKSHA (INITIATION) 109

diksa. As one suffers sin by looking upon the
linga asa stone, soto think of the past of one
who has been initiated is sinful. As wood, stone,
iron, earth, jewel become linga when established
in sanctity, so too all classes are purified when
initiated.

When the initiated is worshipped all stands
worshipped up to the Brahman; there is no
doubt of it.

For one who is initiated there is nothing to
be achieved by tapas, regulations and observan-
ces, pilgrimages and regulative controls of the
body. Butall japa, puja and like activities by
those who are not initiated are fruitless like the
seed sown on rock.

For one without diksa there is neither fulfil-
ment nor happy destination. Therefore with
all effort shoud one get initiated from the
Guru.

If a brahmana is initiated later and a low-
born is initiated earlier, then the brahmana is
junior and the other is senior; this is the verdict
of the Shastra. But if one be initiated prior to the
Shakti and the son of the Guru, they are still to
be adored as the Guru and not disregarded.

If the Guru passes away and the disciple is
just initiated, he becomes as if the only son and
conducts the full ritual,

One who is initiated properly into all
philosophies by the Guru, full of knowledge, is
freed and no other.

Before the preliminaries and the Chakra
Puja the disciple must be purified by diksd;
otherwise it will be fruitless. _

Primal purification is ordained for Sudra
and mixed castes; one is freed from sin by using

--- PAGE 119 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

110 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the water with which the Feet of the Guru are
washed, by gifts etc.

The brahmana aquires competence within
one year; the ksatriya within two, the vaisya
within three and the gudra in four.

The competence of the widow for diksa is
subject to the consent of the son; of the daughter
to the father’s, of the wife to the husband's; a
woman has no right of her own for getting diksa.

As the Sudra has no competence to study the
Veda, even so he who is not initiated is not
competent,

The initiated shall always please his Guru,
Guru’s wife, Guru’s son, adherents of the Kaula
Path of Shakti, in the measure of his means.

--- PAGE 120 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER XI
PURASCHARANA*

Among the various lines of self-elevation
prescribed to the seekers of the Truth, the
Kularnava lauds the Japa as the pre-eminent and
invests it with the sanctity and efficacy of a
yajna, sacrifice, for attaining the fourfold object
of life viz. dharma, Right, artha, Wealth, Kama,
Desire and moksa, liberation. All other means
ean be left out and only the means of mantra i.e.
japa of mantra resorted to which is sure to yield
success if carried out without blemish But if it
is allowed to be tarnished with fault then its
fruit is indeed inauspicious. Japa is the happy
giver of enjoyment, salvation, self-fulfilling
wish. Therefore practise the Yoga of Japa and
Dhyana. All blemishes due to transgressions of
rule, from the Jiva up tothe Brahma, done know-
ingly or unknowingly, are wiped away by Japa.

Should you desire fulfilment in this life
ridden heavily with unhappiness, doing Japa of
the Mantra with the five-limbed updsand you
will attain happiness. Daily puja at the three
prescribed hours—in the morning, noon and
evening—japa, tarpana (offering of libation),
homa and feeding the Brahmanas is this fivefold
upasana called purascarana. If any of these
limbs are lacking, make up for it with appro-
priate increase of Japa as prescribed. For no
fulfilment is possible if there be want of limb;

hence attempt to set it right by Japa with
devotion,

*Ullasa 15

--- PAGE 121 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

112 KULARNAVA TANTRA

If the Brahmanas be well fed with rice of
four kinds and items with the six rasas, all will
be fulfilled If by the Grace of the Divine
Mother, success is achieved even in one Mantra
through the five-limbed discipline, all Mantras
yield their fruit That isto say, for one who
has attained mastery over the Truth-force
embedded in one Mantra, it is easy to acquire
mastery over other Mantras as well, as the-
Consciousness that is formulated in all the
Mantras is fundamentally One This success in
Mantra-sadhana is due to the potency of the
Instruction, upadeSa, the Grace of the Guru, the
intrinsic power of the Mantra and the devotion
of the practicant. The Mantra obtained from
the Guru who has achieved perfection in Mantra-
sadhana works out the fulfilment. Also the
Mantra yields early success due to practice done
in previous life Self fulfilling too is the Mantra
which is received according to the line of Tradi-
tion, with due diksa, obtained in the right way.

Innumerable are the Mantras; they but
distract the mind. Only that Mantra which is
received through the Grace of the Guru gives
all fulfilment. Japa of a Mantra heard by chance
or seen by deceit or picked up from a sheet, can
only lead to disaster. Those who seeing
Mantras written in books, practise japa of them,
commit a sin tantamount to brahmanicide
resulting in disease and misery. The holy
centre of pilgrimage, the bank of a river, the
cave, the summit of a hill, the place of holy
bath, the confluence of rivers, the holy forest, the
vacant garden, the root of the Bilva tree, the
slope of the hill, the temple, the coast of the sea,
one’s own house—these are the places lauded for

--- PAGE 122 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PURASCHARNA 113

the sadhana of Mantra Japa. Choose any of
these or live where your mind is contented.

+ Japa is praised when done in the proximity
of the sun or the fire, Guru moon, lamp, water,
cow, a brahmana family ora tree For purposes
of the Japa, the enclosed space of a house is
good; better is the dwelling of a cow; still
better is a temple and the best is in the immedi-
ate presence of Shiva.

_Free from foreign elements, the wicked, the
wild beasts, free from suspicion and obstruc-
tion, dwell in a lonely, holy, cavil free, devout,
your own, righteous, opulent, charming, un-
disturbed place of tapas where dwell the
devotees. The knower of Mantra shall not stay
where move kings, ministers, officers, nobles.
Nor shall he live in sites of ruined temples,
gardens, houses, trees, rivers, tanks, walls and
landslides. :

If one does japa or puja without first offering
to the Guru who holds the Light, then he takes
the fruit and all effort shall be in vain,

The wise shall reject the seat made of
bamboo, stone, earth, wood, grass or sprout; it
only brings. poverty, disease and misery. He
shall have a seat made of cotton, wool, cloth,
‘skin of lion, tiger or deer; it brings good fortune,
knowledge and increase. And seating himself
in an dsana—padma, swastika or vira ete.—he
shall perform japa and puja. Otherwise they
will be fruitless.

Pranayama shall be joined to japa and
dhyana in the prescribed manner—with the
specifically regulated exhalation, recaka, inhala-
tion, piraka, retention, kumbhaka, bringing
about the ‘drying up of the body’, ‘ burning of

49498

--- PAGE 123 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

114 KULARNAVA TANTRA

the body’ and ‘bathing tho entire body’ in tho
nectar of union of Kundaliand Shiva Pranayama
is infinitely potent whon combined with japa
and dhyana. Austeritics, pilgrimages, sncrifices,
charities, observances are not worth even a
fraction of such Pranayama. All sin, mental,
verbal or physical, is burnt up in only three
Pranayamas As impurity of the mental is
burnt away when it is blown upon, the sins of
the senses are burnt out by the control of prana.
Whatever action is dono by one who is purified
by Pranayama, that fructifies, undoubtedly, even
if done effortlessly. He who does this practice
regularly in accordance with the direction in the
Agama, attains the state of godhood and acquires
perfection in Mantra, mantrasiddhi Seeing him
who performs japa of the Mantra as prescribed
with nydsa, kavaca ond chandas, obstructions
flee like elephants at the sight of the lion. But
if any one foolishly does the Mantra-japa with-
out taking the precaution of nyasa ete he is
harassed by all obstructions like the infant deer
by the tigers.

While doing the japa one may take the help
of the rosary, rotating it with one’s fingers in
the prescribed manner, taking care to conform
to the injunction regarding the use of particular
fingers for particular purposes

Japa is of three kinds Japa done aloud in
the hearing of others is the lowest; japa done in
low tones, lips moving and which others cannot
follow, is the middle; japa done mentally with-
out movement of lips is the best If the repeti-.
tion is too clipped, it causes disease; if too
extended, it causes decay of tapas; and when
letters are pronounced not distinctly but stuck

--- PAGE 124 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PURASCHARNA 115

to each other, the Mantra does not fructify.
Stotra, laudation, remembered mentally, the
Mantra repeated verbally, are both useless like
water in a broken vessel.

Defect in beginning the Mantra (without
pranava) entails the impurity of birth; defect at
the end (without pranava) entails the impurity
of death. A Mantra contaminated by these two
impurities does aot fructify. Taking care to
avoid both these impurities the Mantra must be
repeated in the mind; such a Mantra yields all
fulfilment. If one does not know the meaning
of the Mantra, the consciousness of the Mantra
and the yoni-mudra, even a hundred crores of
japa do not lead to success. Mantras whose
potency is asleep (i.e. not awakened by appro-
priate means) do not yield fruit. But those
which are alive with their conscious-power give
all success. Bereft of this consciousness the
Mantras remain mere letters; even millions of
repetition do not give fruit. The Truth that
manifests when the Mantra is thus articulated
properly is worth the fruit of crores of repeti-
tions. When a Mantra alive with consciousness
is articulated even once, the knots of the heart
and the throat snap, all limbs increase, tears of
joy rush to the eye, there is horripilation, the
body is intoxicated, speech becomes tremorous,
When such signs are there be sure it has been
handed down by Tradition,

Some Mantras are defective under certain
‘conditions.* For him who does japa without

*The Tantra enumerates os man: i

y as sixty of these
defects that render the mantra ineffective ag Jparucten,
cunningly lettered, benumbed, reverse-faced, broken,
asleep, limbless, inert etc. etc.

--- PAGE 125 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

116 KULARNAVA TANTRA

being cognisant of these defects there is no fulfil-
ment however much he may practise.

There are ten processes for the eradication
of these defects of Mantra: giving birth, giving
life, striking making aware, ceremonial bath,
cleansing of impurity, satisfying, libation,
lighting, covering in protection. As weapons
rubbed on the whetstone get sharpened, Mantras
subjected to these processes acquire bloom.

For one who does the mantra-japa the Sastra
lays down what is to be eaten, what is to be
offered, the vegetable, roots, fruit, barley ete.

If any one acquires merit in the way of the
Dharma, nourished in body by food and drink
from another, then half the merit belongs to the
donor of the food and half to the doer. There-
fore an intelligent person shall, with all effort,
reject another’s food during the time of the
performance and of ritual for desired ends.
The tongue is burnt by the food of another;
hands burnt by accepting from another; the
mind burnt by (thoughts of) women of others;
how then can there be success in the endeavour?

If the mind bein one place, Shiva (passive con-
sciousness) in another, Shakti (active conscious-
ness) in another, and life-breath in still another
place, even a crore of japa is useless All should
be gathered in one effort If learning is acquired
for the sake of debate, japa is done for the sake of
another, gifts given for the sake of fame, how can
there be fulfilment? If pilgrimage is done for the
sake of wealth, austerities for show, worship of
deity for selfish purpose, how indeed can there
be fulfilment? Fools are they who do nyasa,
puja, japa, homa, with a body that is unclean;
they all are fruitless. If the ritual is done by

--- PAGE 126 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PURASCHARNA 117

one unclean due to faces, urine and other
leavings, then all japa, worship ete is rendered
impure. Him who makes japa with soiled cloth,
soiled hair, bad odour of mouth on his person,
the Deity being disgusted burns up in a moment,
Avoid during japa all laziness, yawning, sleep,
sneeze, spitting, fear, touching of lower limbs,
anger The mantra does not succeed where there
is excessive food, meaningless talk, gossip,
rigidity of rule, attachment to another, fickle-
ness. Do not perform japa with a turban on,
with cloak, naked, hair dishevelled, surrounded
by retinue, unclean upper cloth, or while impure
or while walking Avoid during Japa inertia,
grief, useless activity, free imagination and
passing of wind Be calm, be clean, limited in
food, sleeping on ground, devoted, in full
control, free from duality, steady of mind,
silent, self-controlled and do Japa. With
confidence, belief, composure, faith, regularity,
certitude, contentment, enthusiasm, and like
qualities, do Japa.

Success in japa lies in his hands who is
decked with fragrant flowers, ornaments and
clothes. Devoted to the Mantra, with life
dedicated to it, with mind centred upon it,
wholly given to it, following its meaning and
meditating upon it, do Japa of the Mantra.

When tired by japa, take to dhyana; tired in
dhyana take again to japa. Of him who does
both japa and dhyana, the Mantra achieves anon.

--- PAGE 127 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

APPENDIX A
WORD—EXPLANATIONS

The seventeenth and the last Ulldsa of the
Kularnava gives interesting derivations of many
of the important terms in the Tantra Sastra
throwing a flood of light on the height of aim
and the exactitude in detail of the wide-visioned
builders of this system It begins with the Guru-
mantra, the prayer to the Guru:

“ Bow to Thee Oh Lord, to Shiva in the form
of the Guru, who takest on many forms for the
purpose of the manifestation and the fulfilment
of the supreme Knowledge; who art in the form
of Narayana, who art in the form of the supreme
Self, who art the sun dispelling the darkness of
all Ignorance, who art charged with cit, who
knowest all, who art the embodiment of com-
passion, who art the Auspicious, who givest
what is auspicious to all devotees here and
beyond. I bow to Thee in front, at the sides, at
the back, above and below. As Sat-Chit, ordain
that I may ever be Thy servitor.””

Guru. gu signifies darkness; ru, what res-
trains it. He who restrains darkness (of igno-
rance) is the guru.

ge signifies giver of f ulfilment; r, severer of
sin; u, Vishnu. He who contains all the three in
himself is the supreme guru

ga signifies wealth of knowledge; r, illumi-
nator; u, identity with Shiva. He who contains
these in himself is the guru.

Because he brings understanding to those
who are blind to the Truth of the Self and of the
Agamas that are secret, guhya, and because he is

--- PAGE 128 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORD—EXPLANATIONS 119

the form of gods like Rudra, he is called the
guru.

Acdrya: He conducts,acarate, according to
the Norm of Truth and establishes his disciples
in it-the aedra; and he assembles, acinoti, the
various connotations of the Sastras; therefore
he is called the acarya.

He who himself teaches all that come to him
—moving and unmoving, caraeara—and who is
perfect in yoga of yama ete is called acarya.

Aradhya: Because he gives the conscious-
ness of Self, dtmabhava, because he has rejected
likes and dislikes, ragadvesa, and because his
mind is centred solely in meditation, dhyana, he
is called aradhya.

Degika: Because he wears the form of the
deity, devata, because he bestows grace on the
disciple, Sisya, and because he is the embodi-
ment of compassion, karund, he is called de&ika,

Svami: Because he exudes his inner,
svanta, peace, and deliberates on the supreme
truth, and because he is devoid of false
knowings, mithyajnana, he is called svami.

MaheSvara: Because he is devoid of the
blemishes of mind, manodosa, ete., becuse he
rejects dry argument and the like, hetuvada,
because of his likeness to animals like dogs,
Svadi, and because he is pleasing, ramya, he is
called Mahegvara,

Srinatha: Because he imparts the knowledge
of prosperity, rz, and liberation, because he in-
structs on Nada Brahman and Atman, and
because he is an emblem of the blecking,
sthagita, of Ignorance. he is called Srindtha.

Deva: Because he crosses the bounds of
Space and Time, defakdla, because he hes

N

--- PAGE 129 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

120 KULARNAVA TANTRA

acquired control vasikrta, over the world and
the jiva, he is called Deva.

Bhattaraka: Because he removes the bonds
of the world, bhava, because of the moon of the
form of ¢(i.e circular) on his head, because he
protects, raksana, is charming, kamaniya, he is
called Bhattaraka. ;

Prabhu: Because he deliberates upon the
knowledge of the mystic purport of Vedanta and
the Agamas which are well guarded, pragupta,
and because he grants enjoyment, bhukti, and
liberation, he is called prabhu

Yogi: Because he throbs with the glory of
the Mantra due to the practice of yoni-mudra and
because he is adorable by the host of the gods,
girvana gana he is called yogi.

Samyami: Because he rejects misery due to
attachment, sangaduhkha, because he is indifferent
to the stage of life (arama) he may happen to be
in, yatrakutra, because he fastens to the Self in
privacy, mithah, he is called samyami

Tapasvi: Because he meditates upon the
Reality of Truth, tativa, because he rejects all
censure and the like, parivada because he
accepts, suikara, all auspicious doings, he is
called tapasvi.

Avadhuia: Because he is immutable, axsara,
excellent, varenya, because he has shaken off,
dhuta, all bonds of the world, because he has
realised the truth of ‘That Thou art’, tat tvam
asi, he is called avadhita.

_ Vira: Because he is free from, vita, passion,
raga, intoxication, affliction, anger, jealousy,
delusion, because he is far away from, vidhira,
rajas and tamas, he is called vira.

Kaulika: Kula is the group born of Shakti

--- PAGE 130 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORD~EXPLANATIONS “424

and Shiva; he who knows that liberation is from
the kula is the Kaulika.

Kulais Shakti, akula is Shiva; those who are
proficient by meditation on both kula and akula,
are Kaulikas.

Sddhaka: Because he gathers the essence,
sara, because he treads the path of dharma, and
because he controls the active senses, karana-

_grama, he is called sadhaka.

Bhakta: Because by his adoration, bhajandt,
with supreme devotion, with his mind, speech,
body and action, kéyakarmabhih, he crosses,
tarati, all miseries, he is called bhakta.

Sisya: He who dedicates his body, wealth,
the pranas to the holy Gurus and learns, Siksate,
yoga from the Gurus, is called sisya.

Yogini: Because she practises the yoni-
mudra, attends upon the Feet of Girija (The
Divine Mother), and because of the glory of
total immergence without support, nirlinopadhi,
she is called yogini.

Sakti: Because dear to hundred, Sata, crores
of the great divine yogini deities and because
she grants quick liberation, ttvramukti, She is
called Sakti.

Paduka: Because it protects, palandt, from
the blow of misfortune, because it increases
what is desired, kdmitdartha, it.is called pdduka:

Japa: Because it destroys the sin done in
thousands of births, janmdntara, and because it
shows luminously the supreme deity, ptradeva-
prakagat, it is called japa.

_ Stotra: Because little by little, stokastokena,
it causes delight to the mind, and because it

ferries, santGrandt, the laudator, it is called
stotra.

--- PAGE 131 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

122 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Dhyana: Controlling the affliction of the
senses by the mind, the contemplation by the
inner being of the chosen deity is called dhyana,

Carana: Because it protects from all malt
evolent results and causes the flowering of what
has been done, caritartha, because it takes the
form of men and women, naranari, it is called
caranda,

Veda: Because it determines the purport of
all the communicated, vedita, scriptures and of
the holy Dharma, and because it is the standard
of all philosophies, darganas, it is called Veda.

Purana: Because it tells of merit and
demerit, punyapapa, because it dispels evil
beings like raksasas, and because it generates
ninefold devotion, navabhakti, and the like, it is
called purana,

Sastra: Because it constantly commands,
&asandat, those who live in the rule of varna-
agrama, because it ferries, taranat, across all
sins, it is called Sdstra.

Smrti: Because it defines dharma and
adharma for those who are single minded due to
this remembrance, smarana, because it dispels
this darkness, timira, it is called smrtt.

Itthasa: Because it narrates of approved,
ista, dharma etc,, breaks the darkness, timira,
of ignorance, and removes, harandat, all miseries,
it is called itihasa,

Agama: Because it narrates of the course
of conduct, dcara, with a view to arrive at the
godly goal, divyagati, because it speaks of the
truth of the great-souled, mahdtma, it is called
agama. .

Sakta: Because he is adorable by the hosts
of Sakinis, because he carries across, tarand-

--- PAGE 132 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORD—EXPLANATIONS 123

the ocean of life, because of the presence of the
Supreme, Primal Shakti, he is called Sakta.

Kaula: Because it sets aside the usual
stages beginning with youth, kaumara, destroys
birth, death, laya, ete and because it is related
to the Kula without end, it is called kaula

Paramparya: Because it severs the bonds,
pasa, because it delights, ranjanat, the supreme
Light, paratejasah, because it is meditated upon
by ascetics, yatebhih, it is called paramparya,

Sampradaya Because it is the essence of
life in the world samsdara, because it yields
light, joy, prakaSananda-danatah, because it
brings fame, yaSas and good fortune, it is called
sampradaya.

Amnaya: Because it is the premier, dditvat,
among all paths, because it sets into movement
a joy in the mind, manollasa, because it is the
cause of dharma in the form of yajna etc., it is
called amnaya.

Srauta: Because he has heard, Sruta, several
mahamantras, yantra, tantra and devata, and
because in what he has so heard his being lives
unbroken, he is called Srauta.

Acara: Because it embodies the truth in
Amndya, because it affirms the truth with un-
usual skill cdturyartha-nirupandt, and because
it calms down like and dislike, rdgadvesa, it is
called dcara.

Diksa: Because it gives ‘the godly state of
being, dwwyabhava, washes away, ksalandt, the
sin, and releases from the bonds of worldly
existence, it is called diksd.

Abhiseka: Because it removes the sense of
‘I’, ahambhiva, churns away all fear, bhitz,
sprinkles (holy water), secana, and produces

--- PAGE 133 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

124 KULARNAVA TANTRA

thrill, kampa, ananda etc. it is called
abhiseka

UpadeSa: Because it is intense, ulbana,
supreme, para, dear to the deity, devata, and
because of the impact of Sakti, it is called
upadesa.

Mantra: By meditation, manana, on the
luminous Deity who is the form of Truth, it
saves, trayate, from all fear; therefore it is called
mantra,

Devata: Because it occupies the body deha,
of the devotee, gives boons, varadanat, calms
down the three kinds of distress, t¢patraya, it is
called devata,

Nyasa: Because it places in the limbs the
treasures acquired rightly, nyayoparjita, because
it protects all, sarvaraksakardt, it is called
nyasa,

Mudra: Because it pleases, mudam, the gods,
melts the mind, drava, itis called the mudra
that is to be shown.

Aksamalika: Because it yields endless,
ananta, fruit, completely eliminates, ksapita, all
sin, brings gain through letters (of mantra),
matrkd, it is called aksamalika.

Mandala: Because the Dakini who occupies
it is auspicious, mangalatvat dakinyah, because
it is the abode of the host of yoginis and because
of its beauty, lalitatuat, it is called mandala.

Kalaga: Because it has the form of the lotus-
seat, kamalasana, because it destroys the lower
tattvas, laghu tattva, and because it removes,
Samitra, boundless sin, it is called kalaga.

Yantra: Because from all beings like Yama
(lord of death) etc. and even from all fear it
always saves, trayate, it is called yantra.

--- PAGE 134 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORD—EXPLANATIONS 125

Asana: Because it yields self-fulfilment,
dtmasiddhi, prevents all diseases, sarvaroga, and
gives the nine siddhis, navasiddhi, it is called
asana

Madya: Because it destroys all bondage of
maya, shows the path of liberation and parts
away the eight afflictions, it is called madya.

Because it connotes gifting largely,
mahddana, because the holy place of yaga is the
only* place that calls for its use and because
it generates the state of Shiva, it is called
madya.

Sura: Because it is betaken by the pleasant-
minded, sumanasah, because it gives the king-
dom of what is desired, rajya, and because it
gives the form of god, surakara, it is called
sura.

Amrta: Because it has the form of the
moon, amrtam&u, because it removes fear of
death, mrtyu, because it causes the Truth, tativa,
to appear luminously, it is called amria.

Patra: Because the whole universe? itself
is what is to be quaffed, pananga, because it
upholds the triads ahd quartettes, tricatuska, in
creation and because it saves the fallen, trana,
it is called patra,

Adhara: Because it is the form of fire,
aéusuksani, because it is dear to the creator-lord,

*mark the emphasis on eka (yaga bhumi eka kdrandt):
madya is not permissible on any other occasion, The only
occasion is the sanctified hour of yaga within the charged
Chakra.

*What is to be drunk is the entire universe, not merely
the physical substance which is but a symbol. The indivi-
dual consciousness shall so enlarge itself as to contain the
cosmic extension within its embrace.

--- PAGE 135 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

126 KULARNAVA TANTRA

dhatrdeva, because it guards, raksana, what is
supported it is called adhara.

Mamsa: Because it causes auspiciousness,
mdngalya, because it gives the dnanda in
‘consciousness, samvidananda, because it is dear
toall the gods, sarvadevapriyattvat, it is called
mamsa,

Puja: Because it destroys the legacy of
previous births, purvajanma, because it prevents
births and deaths, janmamrtyu, because it yields
complete fruit, it is called puja.

Arcana: Because it yields the desired
fruit, abhistaphala, holds the fruit of all the
four classes, caturvarga, and delights, nandanat,
all the gods, it is called arcana,

Tarpana: Because to the God that is the
Truth, tattva, surrounded by His retinue,
parivara it gives ninefold delight, navananda,
it is called tarpana.

Gandha: Because it destroys the affliction
of misfortune, deep and boundless, gambhira,
because it gives knowledge of dharma, it is
ealled gandha.

Amoda: Because it causes the birth of all
that is based on Smell aghranana (i.e. tattva, of
prithivi), shows the path of salvation,
moksamarga, subjugates all cursed grief etc.,
daghdaduhkha, it is called amoda, ,

Aksaia: Because they yield food, anna,
eliminate completely, ksapita, all sin, and make
one identified with That (truth) Tat, they are
called aksata.

Puspa: Because it increases merit, punya,
removes the heap of sin, pipa, yield much
wealth, puskalartha, it is called puspa .

Dhupa: Because it drives out completely,

--- PAGE 136 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WORD—EXPLANATIONS 127

dhita, the blemish of putrid smell, and because
it yields supreme delight, paramananda, it is
called dhupa,

Dipa: Because it dispels this extending,
dirgha, ignorance, heavy darkness and ego-sense,
and because it lights up the Supreme Truth,
paratativa, it is called dipa.

Moksa-dipa: Because it eliminates the
darkness of delusion, moha, prevents the dis-
tress of decay, ksayarti, gives the celestial form
divyarupa, and lights up the supreme Truth, it
is called the lamp, dipa, of Moksa, the one

means for the achievement of liberation,
. Naivedya: Because this substance of four
kinds, with six rasas, gives satisfaction when
offered nivedandat, it is called the great naivedya,

Bali: Because it is dear to the varied, live
host of heings, bahuprakara, and because it
destroys the sin that is stuck, lipta, it is
called bali.

Tativatraya : By mere service to the Divine
Mother the three elements are purified; because
it lights up the Truth, tattva, the triad, traya, is
called tattvatraya.

Caluka: Because it gets the fruit of all the
four divisions, caturvarga, because it snatches,
lunthita, from the hold of Ajnana, because it is
the root of auspicious dharma, kalyanadharma,
itis called caluka, |

Prasida: Because it yields ananda in the
form of Light, prakdéa, because it yields har-
mony, samarasya, and because it reveals, dargana
the Supreme Truth, it is called pragada.

Pana: Because it severs the bonds, paéga,
prevents hell, naraka, and because it purifies,
pavandt, it is called panda,

--- PAGE 137 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

128 KULARNAVA TANTRA

Upasti: Service at close quarters as pres-
eribed, by action, by mind, by speech, in all
states is called upastt.

Purascarana: Because it is dear to the
chosen Deity by reason of its five-limbed
adoration, it leads in front of the devotee, purahk
carati, it is called purascarana

Arghya: Because it destroys all sin, agha,
because it increases wealth and progeney,
because it yields priceless fruit, anargha-phala,
it is called arghya.

And finally, the ksetra, the sacred Centre of
devotions is not any one particular place but
All this that is mobile and immobile, etat-
earacaram sarvam; He who guards, protects
this All is the ksetrapala, the supreme Guard.

--- PAGE 138 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Il
SANSKRIT TEXT

Edited By
’ TARANATHA VIDYARATNA

4949-84

--- PAGE 139 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 140 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

goriadeaer Garay |
onto

GAA SST:
(Pages 131—143)

afrarat Argirareraget: | fracawaatiag | shawarnyt
that araeoracaretary | afeatt aghiaadartry ange
frat a aware 1 oo wdeweny afer: wefawardrarare
aaa arrgrerrenreomrfer | papi Wa CREAT: |
waraae afar | gearqasfa:. | Paget afera: t
Pardraatieny faadearat fear jequsenfeer a feat
aiartaradteaiay | aarareatRa Ale | qeareiattet
fear urearfkorercat gla: TaATAeTy | mrerraggaters
gfragr qwarteri aga geared eC CCOUROCLG
aaa Sher. oo wsqrarmmay oe Ae faaworg t
waster adaats aa ahaatetne georet faar a
Tad + TTT

facia Seater:
(Pages 144—158)

geuinrgeny aaqeafearrarercasa IG WET
geraen Seep) Weare Aqaearas sts ATaTTHL |
at afk gewtaa: 1 gé@wer_aParatd Hearse: |
namie aggre Gearawere 1 stearer Heart
arent gearenfrasrfefareter: 1 TarariRers Hoare
ai gewiergrem « yegarsewer egies | POST
aita qageaaqi gewiarata agers getarelt

--- PAGE 141 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

iv garter

age: eacaraa; | agqaenht peract agari ydhrrar gar
gear Aaqras aed Meremqi “agaefarfer Asgrier”?
WARREN Houearae mapas sarang
Fourcaticar waft a geariqafr:: garaat
Wears agarearar: 1 peal Fardret gacayi Pear
wafistamat gorteaern srarqi 9 qararet aarfag
fabarq. german fordterrmrantin grameg areata t
ggarfardt craRaay i gar Raat dress arét arco t
aucq afavaqi Prarargarna aanarut Roma
pountgeefet giamaronter t

gata seare:
(Pages 159—170)

aqraietane: | Savafaradenafieienay 1 aaqeaf-
rr Tierney. wager warandgqaa:: ag
weraharmer Yea: sar: eahrarraeger: 1 | aneara-
RTH | wataftarresger atfrearef: 1 gereaqererer
sqaharmer ReaPreang. | saafearrarct sft eg-
free waatant pega a1 BavaiarareaeT
waieornfed 1 aavatearaait flasgea: 1 | avatar
steari ararrat afewakterary 1 otrarraqa pa
Rear oaqealtaraed adanwa: Aa AeaASAAT t
wen frame orarmgresd ag sq eqary. wrara-
Reatagiaca freneri xagenedsht magna safes
mimargreasntter: carr t Weaasag: xararsitr
Faceted) oMagaager dafgadaeaae t
Rinaareaer adasagead | weftagmpr gear fera-
wearer arargaed: wafers:  srargneaantart
ararareasraraft: i arargaedt yfraghrag: 1

--- PAGE 142 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aiaay v
aged geare:

(Pages 171—185)

quorearguedtgrt: (| wnTarawegegquhr; 1 | surardt
adeafeamy, = arearfgeure: 1 sorendtat trafadias-
wR) aeattereura; | aereeara; | ase afar wat
wosrears | ter waswta:1 teweaafigaanr t at ve
wosapaia: | «=o warfqusufagfiaretars: | zouffaxaar
watamear: 1 oaefrngarfedtar: 1 9 sarcerdeanyagreraa: 1
faareq i) wosdearancant saraeaenfiti 9 yaereure: t
yarearanca: 1 saracerenfr ts grearea | cargea
equa: t surfgesreayta: | purlgasreawraram |
orentgeia: 1 orevteercdta: 1 yftearancan: ) earacererfr
Heaeuret 1 Weweuraacay: | sraritenracarenter 5
Saateares: | Saatearansar: | eareeurenfa y ATaHreara; t
FIGSSATAATAT: | aracarenit «= atgardeeareng i
fromecarrg «ogee drafty: = Rre:feaastiyeearenygs
ARTUNSEAMA A HHP’ AST TASTE! Teer
astararttr i

GSAT SoA
(Pages 186—198)

srarorafanet: | ararearamaar 1 amaretto
Bream arrarke arargertart — adigagearafa-
vert otwtpegeafratomere: 1 aredtgqurferafomenre: 1
armrgifsratrarn: 1 garanremamnit: == Aemdtat
qemmerar:t swancdeentert yeresfardt mari zou.
Faaferarery t guaaa georfaueafiat Ferfits1 ate
fafrrq i oontaasiarmei = frareef Reerat dreprra: 1
ugferaurea: | crane gacrftafes 1 Aras aaaeghr 1
aInaaaragiar | HSIIOTT set gonswaaey

--- PAGE 143 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

vi ponies

wrtouzy t fadwakatanaqag afefafrateraar t
smnaery saaaeg pegerearagrHari  aeaatr-
eer Feaqi gegetaanaq News! = AeA-
qapegeraaaregtra: t gerafra: rat ate -faqearc-
wat waar a atari meanrdar aaa areas
aimee faar aadarmteaaqi 9 aerorafa gare faar
Fa a toy aearanssar paarrcaradea ga: araepa-

Berar sar sragher: 1 Merah ageraqrearect aTeaparltar: 1
qatenaat adartatecepfa: 1 waeparat waraaaaer

afters: 1 gurarnen Patan: sfarfirel faarasgqafr: 1
aaearhiret Patracsyqaafa: | mreraee Fatamerorgt «=| Asyereq
fastrearory

qS Seora:
(Pages 199—210)

.

qaasanryt yagsnar cararaarefrsonyz 1 sfraraq-
vara oatrarfgasagig: areari arraghguart: 1 earet-
gfgnare:1 aeagfgnare: 1 geagfguer: 1 saylguepre: 1
qarat wWeerarameat 8 «AUsHagegqalr: HUSSATs 1
aremiqiga craft asaar i adagenferare: | eTaeparyTr
aval) quaainfegquiigtunssay 1 vasa quale t
wat: dew wor eaesteaantat gre wor: 1 arfe-

aofat qe wert = atterea aararrmifa:— anrmwrasa-
wTaAg eure reperaranrter sarunrafasgaredrerarera-
aerememrarrartat | ASLAN AT FA AAMAS THSAAT ET t
Pregiencradasmaageorarifa 1 — ardrerearfira-
WaTQVeMaPisuHoMaraesy 1 AAA eHRASAT: | aTEATUS-
wifgaee: | ayeained: 1) 9 doefara: 1 aragfgnenre: t

cragfguea: 1 fecafagartdteqwageam: | Soarareaaea: t
FEN Sasvrarar Fg: i Hews Roararaarer ger carerfer t
wdlegstet 8g: Perera gira: 1 aeancazaarartany t

--- PAGE 144 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

qhany vii

aeameqeuguhe: | aeagqenferfr: Lo Seadafefa: . srrarte
Toren fran: 1 peagferareareny |

aay Sesrae
(Pages 211—222)

agen euait afsevat fa: agenrargre: | ageafearar-
asat oifaraca: | athattuedtgrea:: 6 atfneftafeararacat
srefamca:. yaofisedrgr: 1 yacfrafsararcacad orfar-
Real saaranedt gre: | hansafsaratacat wrelamea: |
HaNISsey Arareaw | warerswavafsacargre 1 woreda
afearareat omefarca:i agemd©at afsarscarafaarn: t
agaratat afeqrer ager: pada, geada-
Werasea 1 wed: oratrereat arapen oreafafa: 1 ard\fararar
Henfeurarar wary erat aferafearar: gerar: aratferaa:
gorengranraq' wpernufeamrni aaa?
wiramray garamnrasgaea: 1 “gaan afrarmereny
atiaufrrsraq. oh afkerrdonsa: 1 granites:
afrarca:1 sheerrageary. yt: firenacawargraq
frsreq = eymgeeitaenyz GENSeM TATA == - ATARI
agement wear. flattery aeawt 1 arrearfE-
waar wefeigs waadrgremei gaftdtat gee:
safeer oareraa: 1 wrortarfaret Prac ort dea: wader
aeraret ater, oarAeaea | puseargfanea: 1 feoarfadzear
caer afar aveqosa 1 afafteaarafrar: 1 goffiafy-
waar orermare tourer goordlar ghar. ferqrrgerys
Reale Ae: t

AEA SesraAar
(Pages 223—236)

aRegy sera wer ast seer! geragdt
aetorarft 1 gaara atari eradé: aghtet arfeart

--- PAGE 145 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aera data aro ort axforq: wart sfeeara-
veufraeny) «6 sfeoetwaareny) «oder wey grag
mired oaefernat atfeereAar Ser:1 arte
nady fagarrea gaanianfta:: alfenfearat der
wa aqeRTey) sete) | ufraatfeenat: axPaeaary
araetsErT CeTerdét gett =o anitesrageamt aat-
werarearaey wera: steracar: aret Pagaeri spear
Rraguora: | stagredentea seararat Ags. aaiteore-
a: atfear gaat Adam ad feet: aanaroygy
aor oifiigaevarat deri aaret efttargaadwafatts t
ama: Rrra @g:1 gofrerat frawfecenr-
aeng wart: 1 argepeararcahranfeanz 1

AAA Sela:
(Pages 237—251)

' eeyemta wrrer gfe weer. | gen
wray | maataq amfaesemey aafirseory | sfacqea-
ser t =o warhreragrng «= sftararaznrencitetre gered 1
erase, «ocagea |= Peeafeafeaaraq | aeaaaer
aeatfessq; 1 omfaax at ait cra aren ameraer Graf
zeq Sfaraeareritead at: 1 arepreiny sracrrageny t
IAT | Rae: 1 fretae~
areett: caer oo afreree gaara |, a rearerg
gettregr aifesrat a Pafret Bre. aPreceig
aa gfri afimata cei atfeaiterersaorg: — eftra-
yeardiacra fire: gira: gearaaa de:t penivreer
poranrara aa:1 arta: aras ayant, ze-
Rafiarniat anfsraras: weds weniger @g:1
aufgerca: 1 9 ptterrnrfrenrRfereaery 1 aahranrkior
aan rari arash awalfr at <gafer i: = merat: gururder
fora t

--- PAGE 146 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aahoay ix
RIA Beara:
(Pages 252—266)

samfaaeet ger fafa: = qerrr arfgeraet oraary
qamiftanfairesorg) =o aration cat ar aeyer erat t
apysans, garnet deri 9 tenfeereert atfreftgere
agataad arart qerewuerarart slapseangi = ara-
patgarit ware: gaaq: ofaagigaaer garftor
atari oo partgsrmra:t pagans = vareak
aagadtat qari arat arafa, gernesat yart aftra-
gerfafa:t gare: wager met -araftrgarrdtar-
arofeort asta farsa sara etegaari-
aq. feat ger wrafi art caexaardaqt  afaa
waeqandaqt stereegsrs weresfereary 1 sftepvarfe-
asarafagerger t arafeageageri — streafegstrer-
aque: adtammeqi Regime: gegst Par am
atfrerm: 1 wed Pear ger Prenert peqararert
adeadfefterr geqsaey 1 aque sgt sracary
atergaarat getaea fanfeaasfanca:1 ~atfeseft-
waeraraq) Ufsierscerent 6 orfsedteawuararg
ailsfzerrtay i omfhefteamapaayi  arftsefteaem-
PITT

CHIE SIH:
(Pages 267—278)

sora: eferetshr pogertfrarh 1 srarcalferra sree
frenfagsa ocrefraa:1 9 ogerar atererafftr: — sftaas
waafrinntfierer, afer axtoreraifir wi gerade
ayant, aw dart saearder pogeraafraw: 1
porgaaret Prorat:  aranferanfreftieiaarr:1: amar
ferfirgesratir . atfeerer ageait arfer: t Pa: Hager 7

--- PAGE 147 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

x porter

aa oamavar Prararfefrte:) «6 qaffeeqd) stgdanaq
Ue ara at aa Hearearetat a wai. agar:
gortaanirte: 1 walgiger gedit: asat asat: Fears
gear: feam 1 arrantarfgasiar coger | ywuftrrgafagear
a wmiafi avarfacdtaviafata:: feat edtagrfafaer 1
wat: Ream: arggeani eters a afer pega:
afeerat srakaafasr asoffiti weroramasma
ae Paverguéli araffr, gafteqerat at a dart
getreqafaaarg fra wa staegared sree) avait
HForAgisHter: | YHA MHTaTHINaA as! PowreTT
a faspfi:1 alfecr afterentfrs ofr srafrasrgs
aren aime yeteaararant wrtqi frerard ae
areettfer t

SGT Seors:
(Pages 279—292)

PAUGHATETANT | argerenzrmatfat t = ytrtgae-
arecay «oeuferadterear ferear ages war
geufraatary yeuframeq i year au gua yera-
aftar®t ae: yansceorft profit: anfeawasteryt
gu aaa aeager a axtouri cawredeaqeranarir
anazgfe: (eo aga vraag ara agar
yee) «gegen | genta we swim
STATIS ST: 1 * qedrecmarfir aratfir § mpeeeranfafeartr
ae yefreqrrat makaaqi afrerarana avaffri
ag: adyeay fafgerfaatr qeeat ghar: gt ge
adeag:: yaifeaama carsceraffr: seacta
Meat geert caqta wterqi yaeqeh a bq
yererregs ae:1  yafaraga dre:) | atreerqraferaa: 1
aearig: | aremranerorarfr i yeaorareferan: 1 ye
Maman yeaq, Wea

--- PAGE 148 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

atray xi
ANT Bosra:
(Pages 293—307)

asifreasaony: crefirerseng: esas rer
arentt freee qewtorafiret gaa: 1 ftypteafaeq-
fre stat: Brae gfet: 1 qefirateta: 1 | Fanea-
erate: ! Weyeeanf 1 wagerearecrarfet | aTwrag:
ce: oreged: fra: wager weragaghiarset ywarfeer-
core ararheer® gerear: t axaater Prete Aerraranra) at eferats
arraraag qedear: sefaar yxa:1 | quiifiiteegy: ager
geeftar: “athfdeat wag?

AGE Beart
(Pages 308—319)

Heat Prat at Ares tara Peetrat dha arrariae-
raat ég:1 | Algaer ge at fed arm, gered aad
gftra: 1 aedrageafahr: 1 arate deat wpefrerdt: feet~
erattgorftar: t areredtataaat rari | aaadletereaaguae
mre: frsratterfahr: 1 | aafgeafereaory, = rere
geaterrt i oanmarlehea Ararat afeeaq, arses aa
sumfgaga saguen fara, armipftperctoa i eogkear
qedar aTareamtaa sdiieardfaeag, aeoeonhr wz
wferarnrgarta ear srafi Gearanffeiae der acrart
ae Garden arafeitea ereuri avidter fear. aardterr
feart  frqzarfafeefiearenri = <aeictear t arden 1
eden daritaartea sete fart = dtereerongi
Teeny! saeaetea ager asaea:1 atfeat-
Mersey, mahi: 1 amgihts: 1 dts
woufea:.  Pagrfwa:1 oo asuraear:1 9 guffirfeerarar
WaT aranaeasa Aer fyferary areadfeteer fear
Qs: seat Rar aifearat a ghar 1 gagesdtden va

--- PAGE 149 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

xii Portadet
gear) dear ayaresde:, terra) Aterar Araceae Aterer: |
feacaqrt gered: | | dlerdeeramer orfitar a fear
Afnaen qdereat gra: 1 dlfaraea garryferay art fereteny
adfaaar sagsrfse Eraeqi gadiiereta steers
Hara: sped ati ariierdtar gryrahrs 1 ateat (ear
Frearat ero arfreerz: t

Fag Toor:
(Pages 320—332)

Ea rea 6 aee Fea oda ater
arta t geprerer asargitrt = gasnsaftrgen aeaea-
fate: amroeeraea: Peg: oo yafecor gfaneaer sia-
Rrarerqt weastardt argeereitgearamreart yee:
edfaga: afafrmreamcadr Prefs: generftaracatd
ae: geeandy oaeaeerrenfet ) Tarerke gees
ann fafigerranfr drosrergen atear 1 crear
meraater. fafearret cortege arti aromas: t
gage feagesfeeteitt: ameimfga array fefers
eerinrrarrenget: & wroraracnenfery sarenfaqxreareaca-
am: arts | amar dari afsansafamndearearen fyfrar,
amt: weer aeght wa nearer arerdeafiz:
aera SF arena: 1 arrenhs sree:
saftafrr: 1 a sera) gage 1 Acar.
feat Prer sett Prens:) 0 faeaefeaaedr | Prone:
wacuneanftetsaea + areraigarneg, ear sfearar: t
asara fear a8 a Rafgii aearot ae dearer) sod
meecrehtt, Gera aureet asta Rrgieamaerag
(aereaey) Rargaeat:1 Rrgfguea:: Rageraca:
fagafagaea: 1 Rrgaea: 1 areafagera:t area
wail arrgfager:) arnRac:1 gig tgaed
gfagerervsa: 1 gfrgyfrgnca:: gfirgritaca:: aftfirg-

--- PAGE 150 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

weait aftefgaea:: aRRgaea:1 fegrdtat worfert
AeA t agar  stenifgeraears 1 waft t
gramefng oo orarfefeera: 1 | terrfirereraraftarer Far: t
gurpeaey | aeniegaiahh oraeart edtiquieaedt
feafefaar arti Rrawerendiaraaa sry fredeps 1
aagsrearentag fafa: 1 stavarenfggeder first neafatg: |

Sis Beare:
(Pages 333—346)

armraifaareny: sadmfgekamaceng, Rrguan:
miracary «6 Rrgaraca osgartfefg;)) 9 apreroerendet
aae:: Pranmavacte sca deageareat agers
satel oarreer oaremftri wigedanaea: ar
sacar: to oaraarmtga oaieeiterar: «= weaoraferefars t
Teagrergenfan: 1 aaeitfrare: 1 6 earafiaa:: = Brsreq-
waar qatfas frar erate: enRaseaersmarter, ara
TERRA | UsteTasHeft, aaa t | aAaTaT-
(aati, arama mbrert1 amet, anedinsa i
werdiat aeardt ath ahifgirer: | cumrerqucaferesttasye t
feaareoircarcerareatarr: t aia  edtaaquffeuraar
wdetg arene neta ator. afaearhtur
faanranary t

AAMT Sosa
(ages 347—357)

SIN: wtamet) Yet) ara: 9 ener
afiree: to warihi omgeatr1 fem. Bart agra
mye apie sad agedti aagaz: ater attfear
arate frersi atria oanftets 8 orgesr i
TH SALT ETE. AMT Agst gary) MITA t

--- PAGE 151 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

cafe: 1 gfieres i amr ard t we area
mrmaras } oo amearas: oft: orrar:)  dterr oorfae:
Base | Heel Saal Sata FaArl ses AvsoT I
HOU! WAL saa ATT YW swat waz
Ce eC ac Cee
aig: | | ater gear) gaz atast aterdart
aaaqi oafe:l waaaqi Ageql Ware:i weqq
sort: | GRA SUI 1 agra | ootrarearqi
Sq I aaa | aftertaarq i — aepattapftrs 1
aaperm aadeungi cee: oma: ae
arancfteqi are. oo orergretgt aya) caret
aeqaqt Haq Haaes:: Gat wAe geaweuray-
fertrr:, Taq orerearr , gered Fret gsr | wHaxaf-
TUARTSICAMISAATA: HA

warafrs afta

--- PAGE 152 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Sportatcay |

49499

--- PAGE 153 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 154 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

wi

n&W

--- PAGE 155 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

132 portaaet
athe efe azararcamdy Perce: Rraz 1

ada: adeal a aeat fariatsgat non
zag? solfexaracat fafaesre: wera ae:

ferfor: aPeagrregergar sfreeigrepr: udu
atarraferentafear® aerisail Freqfesgenrs |
mafgakrafirear: aftr: asxorfghiy; uSu

aas> grand: adtageaarafrafeaars t
aassifagd teq arguinsa asi . uIOou
afar qaaed Ara WeaTaS 1

qenfagatizeagratenrgers Fra udin
earaer: Reaagarssir:” aferors® agrat erat: 1
witraaqareagem era aaa wuRu
agfaaattraftr acat year wea? 1
ypaearcray® year art Aerterarararg 013.0
aguifrseg rite ator t

a mast arena taatatag wae nu
wa TeTTsT Taal arafer 1

oqifresred Tegutaed gorasaary nisn
earorenze** weer Areata EST |
aearxatat? areniel ARATE aTaaisa HONE
1. , 1, Rrisraa: 5 3, Friar: 2.5, am1

3. @, ceaeararaatear 3 s, aaafretaears

4.7%, wafgafretiear: asealfredefafir:; a, a,
aeiscgaifudfienet  aprifixnfatet:; os,  aweafguarir-
Pearse aprnffaircerrfafa: 1

5. SYA) 6. we, 5, Aad aw fae

7. @, oO, Beaaearan: | 8. a, sar 1

9. mw, a, qerrfor afer: 1 10. 7, Gparar att

11. w, Wf 12. 1, aearaatei

--- PAGE 156 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

FAA Seats: 133

Taga ster wear afegueiisay |

a axarafed aeg a nag arenas: = WON
faa Stat peorf quarert a freer

aTegeaat oer? gorapafer aaa wid u
TAT MAA SATCAT MAST AIST |

zat aeatalasg waded a center nau
gaatar: get: aa gafaed qasferr t

gat: weargny aed at elt get: Get: WROU
mieeerare: Raat aden sets 1

adzofea caranrafe perkates? wu

apifad ware ata wat greta’ a1

aasa vara’ aisPaerg ogee WA
aretra’” af& arearerafeenar Rrarag t

alscat feaeecreargrentet arefireafer nau
gea axcponraRafescat a wafer a1

aear Fertlest xeorat corftrer:® fis Rear on Wa
wag rad at at aged werfer geeifer: t

qrafasfe galst ara ama wasn
sarsftaree ser argaife Preaergqag

Preafer Rgastnrereneta: waratt WRK
Marrsaaet ga oraratratet ara 1
maelegudedt Wasa: AAA nron

-3,59Gt 20,9, S wet 3. e, AA
+}, G, 7, a, aesht cement .
5, etarartiatg i «6. a, S, carer
-%, aka; Saat 8. S, atest

a, a, ademas; =, aedieyy

won ar

--- PAGE 157 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

134 pontaar
apret aT aa ararHred: TareaEenya: |

Gagarar aegel* aa feaareat: We
astarafenararmanrarey? gersfrg:Raarey |
ater ateger dicar at fer afer agraar? ura

arag: Maas Naat PYAIAT t
afssasaeAgaa wer essrerat gfest 1 20
sta sttfaancaed® frar cara gerkkott 1

AAT GALE Tale Prsnsy udu
mreeaed Paregnl® seTstet gc: t

faxaerent srarearet ataee: Fp a7 aoa n3Qu
aratrera® ae sire srepferag Pera? 1
afereasfrarctan®? oper forsfear rfar: n32u
ataa faaafg: erage wafaeren: |

oat areffaanrat came ater Pa ato BB
qaaeetftt at agtg a? guasalt at quate 1

gore a srenfr aa ararfaatfad: 0 38u

1. %, FAQwTa a: 5 A, Fags A; 7, WA-
TMTNI: 5s, Gagitsiay afer

2.5, S alearatarqray; 1, 8, sarearatey
FAISATSAL TAT t

3. &, aft fRaaratat: 1 4. S, wenger afer: 1

5. 3, ad eafiesa; a, ad sftafe aeaed Pra-
weargarwr t

6. &, AIRS 5 My aweITsatreapegrennt
wer: bl TT, 7, wrt cortege:

7. Sy Bat: Bar

8 a, Mworaleaq 1

9. @, 1, aw, frererares

10. s, a ney a fe aa Req

11. %, 1, a, weaolt, a, at oehay

--- PAGE 158 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WATT SOT:
afarasstssnrfag? THAT STSATR t
arse? a Refagl qeafer
otra erat sitar a EAT 1
aragpar gare fagitert eta vreae
gsae Seat qrarenger A AISA A
Waasa agar age year
frat gare Bar Fewer ferehtas t

wae areas we ete wr war

arart & Had & aed A arevarza AS
saraitfe auf fe fea aregat gorge
a paths areifirqrerg SAHA |
vatterarged yegeha cet Fa
wing wtiet gate aauieeey t

at fe seftenet aeq: act aTseT at aT pa”
sghtacearedt wavscarhratreany 1
aegagahratishs eared ® fee ar aaah
amnraatfafarhtest Rrard?° fasoaftiar t
TWIP*IaS cad Gees Atay
Tere Waive ager wisrarerh+ |
wate, dena? aegqrangaig srg

135

nu 3&u

u 20n

u3du

u 383n

u80n

u8Iu

w8Qu

uS2u

ussn

u8Su

1. &, G, 1, a, afore ames 2, Ss, HeraTa 1
3. &, Frdtene 4. &, U, 1, a, aT aed yeaa t

5. U, areas Fi 6. 1, THT AMT; S, qataT
7

8

+ Sy Het arearer atsHarT 1

-%, TaMGaraaard; 1, eat myamfers =,

TRB AArEES 1

% S, HoT 10. , 4, Feats W, Far; s, sr

11. @, Mernaraftr

12. a, weqirr faa; a, a, anfeeras s, anaes

--- PAGE 159 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

136

portadeat

wefroprtenfetaar wera? |

aratararated? anes: TAAL n8&u
wraan ATARI EH AAA |
TEAITASNUTEA TUNA ETA TAT n Son
ARMA MUSAAT aaa.

araryaar yzareeyarnafamEts usu
sarftrarfaras great art ads agtat ATT:

ai dar Fafee er sewlea Hera: u8Sn
TaIIAs He arareat ANT

arora azagiar® 3g coal gaa u Sou
arerttaragea aa gereaulgenry |

war serraxmtasfergeltrarra: n8du
Sat: HPAEs Hale Gageater wsaTT t
qzaraiferat” ofr arecararfeer ger: get: Su
ge aa? Read wt ag oxatnrsae t
Peacoat aaet WS MAT Fea n83u
aRgugatinea seaersoraenfer a
srearraraeer Heretatfer 3am un 88 un
frag Va Wet: crete: AT aw age: 1

aqerg ag WRease axafrs: get waqi

aMiea asd salt ara Heqareafrq? un 88
- ya, weet 2S, 8, aed art gareaka 1

. a, rahi; a, a, =e, Rratrs
+O, Wy Wy, TU S30 A, TAA |
Ss, ma afr: 38.7, a, gat

woNaawok

a, feegarerreafag fart

.1, 7, [VASAT t 4. 5, U, 1, a, aT

+, 1, FT, BAe Tae arall ara Renate 3

--- PAGE 160 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ae

WAR Seorsa: 137

ag: waferar casa: a Tea 7 MITT |

ufg: we a odor: wai ast FE Fos uv S&u
aeaged Praeger ferris? amergay |

gey atte at: aisea: wet aT aTTAMT:? on Bon
Aaa: PRA Teg: aeasareraa: Kraay?

avardiser fagrechat eek leeerga: u Sou
wagenfa sfratsd cracar arf Gasake> 1
wtaraiqgqatgaraca: Gear Sat un 8Su
gage fe dare: a aeiRa a gaa:

aan cant: aay Ben a GAT atraz: Hrs u&Ou
mid? Sagara aHBITy |

aed aaa dart asitg fra w&Iu
aaeracred” at Refteaeaarfirr |

smasa ef canreadraidany Neu

snfgrearaarcty aed gaalirg wa: 1
wear aaaseg Hert axafers: get waq 0&3 0
Seared; aaigeaeatsh Geaey 1

earaatleg Saralt? gears a Harter w&8 nu
perafteagarer sattgiergat yor: 1
HATA POU ASAT TwMEAsSa Bawyt? v&Su
afsaarstafaatseafered star RrerPrear:14 1

at aoa Proorertfatgaaee: Ww && n
1. &, frase 2. mw, 1, FT, BTTAIT

3. 7, Praweqgrp 1 4. &, rarer 5. 5, ateafey
6. 7, AAT 7. MT, AIA 8. wH, Prefer
9. S, SUE! 10. W, Aye 1 11. w, 1, a, aft
2.8, a7 fet 13. m,n, a, Pret; s, areata
4. a, faerafers

--- PAGE 161 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

138

portatet

Riayat sar went Seag a seafer
Gages Fat anarait a oaks
featfad a sracat PreargenrsiariFrer: 1
pfaqurfaer a asqar area: Fra
fargifghererraren: aasat arftrert AAT: |
qretarey Arete: ataat arereter: ar: Bry
mara AeA pat wear eat
wat neafagnat areaca? arerar: fa
cageumigrarfafrcar: wasreaas |
area a Prasad a ar acarmaaiean:
cacqanfsararerzan: adareran: t

a stafed at axa’ qart axafee arefer
Rrararaan: Sfrg squats osigans 1
aareragareata: asalea career”
ATHAAT MeGEls BHH OSTA AT! |
aedtearratarentiftran: weer:
qeraatrararaerat: pram: |

get: aWehtesiea ca® nrokintfear:
gequsararan ar gfeasfeaanz
acftaatsarafa wa: Pesca vata:
wealarasiar Gert? atfhareer Aqatheor: +
wafea anftrasetas** wraafer sarah

aon he

1. S, Beart

u Gout

n Eu

n&Sn

wisou

nein

Hu

093 ti

n 68 u

neS un

uaa

ule u

2S, Arareies i 2. 1, WsaeT 1 3. @, 1, wht
. 7, 7, FIT 5. 1, AaMAes cs, aaaifes
.O, UeMAlaA: 5 STAT 17. S, THAT 1
+, 4, AT 9. s, Ft 10. s, aensietagearedt |

--- PAGE 162 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WIAA STOTT: . 139

arnktagaraad seratsentte arfyery
SATAMIAVE ft AAs AAT nou
Teroraar sta srasfter esrerar:
aaa nerrersa aBrereat wafea Ren OS
aperaenetes gaat: re aretar: |
ageraferat area: Pera gaat vata Feu Con
qnantgerarer: wat? getarlerer: |
ahonfgaar afer miBrers xa aafea fer C1
arrerarceass gies erat: 1
nogecaeanger afraedr wafta Req wu
agfea equraeg cafe gaara: 1

-  Statrett® quail afer raat: Fe wafer RF on C30
areraat: Rrereret: aeagaf= arcane: 1
a Rrafta adtatt Pree wafer Ren C8
gherararraaear seamen” a1
fasiea gescrara aGreaee vata eg on CS
aeatigeatigas art wlasaeresrepre |

GET HPILor Areaaarey PSs . nd&u
agattarrareed oferar: aera: Fae 1

aa? at safer ogarenferateaar: udou
* om geces worarsed afer 1

1. s, falter 2.0, aT 3. 1, S, arrest
B, Ta, vgrett anrfrar:; a, mgreftts

Ty WESARAPHNT: 5 FS, ATT

Sy TAT 7, S, HEATHTRATAT: 1

©, whtararaaedceaigenitasceEy ; a, s, sta
DHAPIUGT | . ’

9. , Areata t

Sage

--- PAGE 163 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

140

polaaet

aqreais att arsaaren? gaxra: |
arelttintensnna? Faster Fe gratlieenr:
aarTagTrran: aarers et Sher As
fasraeer cearfat aq ad asramarfray®
ag avafeg Safafe Prearaarpor: |
qoectefersr afer azazaareqan:

area Sepegleractiar prearsg7em frat” 1
Pacaar g:Raar qerRase corpafegar:
area oat aa’ cratt: Perweafer area
ea Magar? sarwat Halea area
muna? eat arenrafea Fe t
ategiteat: SPagueseafsrart+

qefedt agureatit raga aay t

a steed at axa gat oreeet oar

fret aafer gearfor srext stretrfer arrferepr 1
gefea agureafir goat araagen:
area aay Fe: wag yeafert? 4
wT: HET Set KI aah grafa:

dar atgarerer aregarar at FR eer: |

at Fratia Fafat warPadtaarstart4

1
1

udcu

udu

u8ou

n8in

w8@u

u83u

usu

u8Su

nS&u

u8ou

1. %, U, SSAA: 5 1, Wert Garant: 5 &, AarefaaRare
FRMATEAT: 1

2.5, 7,4, S, wreation wenea: 1
3.

we, a, 7, Wears 4. a, fangs AATATATT

, A, 1, a, WT 16. ST, HST

=, wBrart 8. Uy oT, Tet ard

®, a, saamnfeatsrar: t 12. a, aay 1

5.
7.
9 @ aera 10. @, wet areaenefrara |
1.
3.

SATA 14. , qlafraar

--- PAGE 164 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

FAA Sera: 141

TM SIAM Tany ateueareriqziay? t

ale Gaaa: Met TRARTATT HILO u8cu
amet: Gea: Pag aredatehe Saar

axatiga argiifa feagiea aera t
afgargrargerentifaearaareran:* u8Su
weemet ahea ara? want pas? 1

Ta F MATES FTV aT TAT: u 100 u
ag srafag a ade: atghteofe 1

afar atasary:* arated ata stealer ue 10T tt
aqeaaueatt cacorgfieraten: 1

aearg are Rrstreftarg att da gareta: =u 1O2@n
armen aaah aed arcar fe afgarez

quiere areareff adurd aaeaagq 0 103 u
AMAA TTL ATSTLT TASTE A
aeaaer aear ef a mreaor qatstary u 108 u

a aqnagaregheaedt mreaqsarale 1
arerga Fe gfta: areateaa Aeakst 11081
ATH. arco gaaaeialer aT BrorT |

ata adenearht” arate Fe aren n 108 u
_ afergr qearster® fee: cat Rrsearasr: 1
BSUMTVAA A sa Assia aT un 08 n

* a geah ga: away FgucargyMate qeer: wes wa
afer sterguitey vu

1. &, G, 4, S, eset war 2. 4, WaT t
- 7, S, fr 4, 7, S, Tete 5. 7, Ree
. ST 8ar 7. 0, afered arerareaet 1
.%;, ede; a, auras
. a, sraereot ane

wo nan w

--- PAGE 165 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

142 porta

aigaay Rraettad Reararafeahsray t
ywaran naa areaartanentferr: u Jog u
arorateer Paaanteer Rear ater waete t
wegranmaad at mer eatery 0108 0
aged SPakkzahea gafresfeer arak i
aa ad a orate gargahraiay n 790 ut
Bae aerMere ware ria az
nafs arae?’ vege aafe faqeae n4747it
ae wee ae aeata Rear ar ar Pergeat
strarararat ast Rrerear Rreaergory udu
urag orate daar araq Aatararat t
orafegaaraet aaa ser: 793 0
WAT MATA RA AAT ASTITHSAA 1
Wlaeat Tare: Blah aaaaAHAyT Ha: u 198 u
aragarhtratara aaar araghta fet
OTaeaT PSST SUS AaAAATHAT Ha: un 7a
atataadt wt fief aoetrredarkarz i
aqueanTaHar sada? a fasge n77& nu
wear Waaata Talay” AAar 1
axaferst waefe adtesenter arena: u 779 n
etary” casts lnwer st
areaarParaaagarar we aTt: TE 0.992 ut

. &, ardrart

+. B, 1, A, AIT; , aeaa t

8, SF, WT 4. 5, Wags

S, Wadxawar pri! 6.a, s, Rafi

+S” BUSTED | 8. S, FAHSHATNIeT |
1. S, BEIT: t

wp nagwsnre

--- PAGE 166 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 167 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fedex seerer: |

Sata
seeqara 1

pou stghzaht aasitagariert 1
pouteaar ga qRrat ar sesrfira:

wen ater areed adaatane a
maraearen arereed aend ag 2 maT
aq & gxtarrer af asheart aar ahr

sigeaz Sara t

aqu afar nagar aeat ed ogee 1
wer sararan aiGteftert Prat wag
werasmpergiat? a rar afirae gee
wel Ta Vere TS EPA rar a4
qian aaa HRaaz 1
aed azarae aah aera &
caortt afiaet Re at St mer eae 1
ga waeara Risary area aed aq?
apueetaar ser Spat Foor aA
aorargad wa trae

* @ geass cargrqnites quae

udu

wu

w3u

nu

u8a

wen -

wu

1.5, aa 92. &, gener 3. sy Bert

4. %, G, 1, Gemerar; a, gemzaars

5. S, werargeag t 6. @, Iara t

--- PAGE 168 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fedla seorett

afonrgat ant aria Prgragaay i
fagreargad wiles Blarg wat a FE
Tare Tarat efs arg A WI IA I
arate Rraag? af putehird? poy
aBrear araqoear? Aqrranatar t
aRnaat sor af pout: aya:
Gad: wear zal? aarefteisrarea: |
CHa: pouiga cae areishre: Fa
ofaufea art eet: AYR ATTA: |
aia anor: aa” ofaer: pura fe

aat eRaag Stat adonlirag wag)
ater a waft pe va war Ra

Tal srgeagreisa age Sear Aq Fy
aa a Peat aAaisen: wat wag

145

nédu

won

n 40

wd

wR

uu

niu

* gafrengismreadladcareraned | paritdtaaaafhfe

wat
“ chro SrePagiad Fagreargrayaray
ATAIGTAAAARAG AAPA t

par agqydt afaeafe gertageds aaqareaafa arearitr-
wRargqayary |

arg are wererg wat at fe 1 afer
Qaene Taran: t
ts Gea “Cagrangagqasa aren argasrar are

.%, Praag; s, aats

Ss, poraffer i 6. 6, Wa

a, waar aaf:; s, fafear wat: 1

+7, WaT as AMlateg aye AAT |
war a Heaton wats: AAA AAT u

494910

a

exgey

me, 1, Ss, wufepotrd 3. S, TARAS 1
@, areqa:, 1, wRatet narafa; s, aed

--- PAGE 169 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

146

Portada

TATALATT way a AAT MHS: |

ata anor: af pauctio at war: nasa
avatqahigg quraclaaiar t

aareraraeals peer Tegra TL wu
ae axaqeaar ant aqaa: gears aq 1

por aaadeg aarit a agree n Zou

pout fe al aPa alseratior grifer:? 1
ag: WaRaied Asean Hat wags on WL

ay ar patitres aderarrerrgafert fri 1
werecotfires® art a oreentfer ar aterm: n4dSH
HPorinagt AAAs ATTA: |

_ antag groreafeera” meter waar wROon
gtiag a aag Prreeareer arerar: |
ale Bursa wl T AT Va at aera: un
agara® Reqaca yor waroracwa 1
a mleaaaatshe cat rt gearhas WRU

apt Beta ath arg abt Becta atthe? t
wprateres Hrs Tears qatfirast? a uy Wn

1. %, U, 1, oT, wary var a1
2.6, 4, &, port fe Aa atseratio gif: 5 a,

arscaration gifers

3. %, 4, wp werkt garg ascarid ara yas; ~

a, Ted art wT; Ss, A Herat args

4, &, wale

5. @, Tareas 5-1, 1, Aaveeaieas

6. &, U, 4, HSA waa warea t

7. @, a, =, vanfharat mart 8. 7, Pres

9. B, AQIS; B, age 10. a, arrarq
1

.%, @, oat 12. a, wales s, calf:

--- PAGE 170 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

facta seare:

ant apse Srarg aaa Gparad t
alee aw dara: Psat poral
TeeG YA Vg Sgaargeagyars> |
porta sf araee a Br HAT
fagra aaatiea aranpenatiet a

pote fasta adred fatgtarcrat:*

Gasser PIPAaAe HPoata> THAT |
carat ere *oerraguaaifees feretr
weareazaeag’ ar afgfafear arora? 1
aaa Sas seqgeagat Presta:
sraraora din frraaeg AAT: |
ansafagghaaer gear? caper
aaantea Safir gereractat: Sate |
poudferar & a & aiscfractepr: t+
qurepaadtgrermardtetsraaa: |
aiatgat?? ant ef peared repre
wane ef weoftt wer geraaraferts |
SaARITAAT A PHattet Taree t

* oe oes arenraresr argestar afer 1
fa, U, aT gery wraist afer

1.4, Zeart:; 5, gearfi 2. 5, feet

147

ww

wu

nau

nrou

ue?u

uwvu

u30n

w3du

uu

3.7, S, werent 4. @, a, Pri
5. S, paaet: i 6 GT, a, geithera t
7. 3, Sena 1 8.7, ar afgalfrar geri

9. H, Gy 7, WTR
10. &, F, Bloat t
11. 1, pewst era F a aad a aM WaT
12. &, W, 1, aftorarar
13. S, wHeart meq aearegarafi i

--- PAGE 171 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

148

porta

ugha oreaer alton? yeafaat: 1
afioraaen year Hoare casree *
ar? goumrag afwsg pursas ti
men ufeager aer pwattat repre

ag faangata: aqrargeaa: t
gatas ait: pwatatrarcay

wag potas? a freer wgraet 1
aang ater axed Suara”? aoifeary
at gag Port TIAA porreraye |
aM a Hakkaararaarcayary
wrng aAarat? Haattet agg ale

a qperarfa Rieger Great wag ay:t°
atahieat ype: Rret pearet repre
wae araal aang al iratdhawary
ararsat Serres aerate
puates arcat qead ara cara:
goadneraninear? gage aig
aPaxietta UeqeREA Hs AArsraqs?

*O Grae wlntst a Gxag t

te geat arenraren weg afer
1.4, 7, 5, aft 2. a, sy sett
3. U, T, Porear ; 1, Hafars

n33u
0 38u
n3su
0 3&n
u 36u
udu
n38n
_u8ou

u8iu

4 7, 9$:; 5, afi 5. @, 4, goafaraats 1

6. 1, staaia Heat 7. S Ports
8. 7, seat g pouakindvafirarraay i
20, SARA Barat

10. 5, Wy 11. 4, Frei
12. , 1, Wermbite: 5 S, Aeraet war
13. , 4, Aare!

--- PAGE 172 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fedtar seore: 149

PorRanage agqareat NswAT |

ware? areret cracar Arearerefer areatfer usu
ferera port? a: qeataatt wag 1

weet LeaTygeer quer pradtedr n83u
cease poacarfis agqeeafor® at TAT |

a aemiigaass orgerfir Rrgeafer usin
HPurradt ayACasT alseaASaaA Ag t

astfga qeorat args warafer ussu
adegaresat aran:” ea Garces |

SHG TAARATEM: Pas n8&u
Hernsrag a: carerantetreala? |
arraramét a ofrat adifreste usou
at arenas ufsa ghrioa prefs 1
weap? gerarey waar tt uscu
qedt trafefeaien star arafer 1
aaa aey wleray fet? geprearet u 83 a

waded sfadiatsh anferafaatsra: 1
pots: pamfer yfrargect: a artery on 80-0

goaafadiaish porearral wad 1

wish agfrarcenter Regarer aera: w SV u
1. 3, oR 2. S TAS

3. & wea 4, S, adaatae

5. &, arearfer t 6. &, aearearher i

7. S, wag ort 8. ST, at get

9. a, tart a qyeft «= 10. & eacreeraey walt
ll. s,afei 12. &, afer afera 13. a, s, a1

14. a, Regare® at sem; a, Regare® arm; =,
fey rer org |

--- PAGE 173 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

150 portacdet

poant eat afea claret caper FA
gia: gamer aeardt ar afeeastg wu
freqeg arewar: aT casieg elayarga: t
Hal ae_ AT SPT Wsrat qosaeg ar u S20
aa Aa ger: AS carts aga 1
cagiida gout wertarrararapattr: u88n
waaragaearha seer afer: OereTeTr I
@ g argeara saaqa a rat wag uS$u
trakgagara: Afsatscaferat fret
aaa aaa TT aT: BgfaArcrarg =u SEK
wat: aqaeg fregey settieog frsg i
afercer? grirect at es eta aPeearstgt wv 86
aif Sure a stares Boreer a aeaTEE
at priest argh peat? akearag u 82n
a seg’atdaxareg goatanrfira: 1
fase sranran wzarorcagar® =. BS
Gareer gt weds TaAST TT T_T? 1
aqqagt ga alas 8 Hlefargar fe > n&On
aatsh (&2° sfrafea sfrafear raters
a sttafe wat cer pat sqaReagq w&da -
port fade Fgatcarafea afer a
a lensed wraca a2? stale neu
1. S, aaa 2. S, TEagaraay t
3. S, Ty 4. 3, a oRasiqa
5. S, artenrg i 6. 5, HS WT 1 7. S, WAT
8 GS, TAANTHTAW 5S, ataeTATaT Waragt war AX: |
9. &, a, a, poralfagar & wt vara ga segyt

10. 4, axa: ear chaft 11. H, @, a, gear!

12. Ss, wafaa a

--- PAGE 174 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fata seora: 151

aesakasar ake sia: cagatsha art
poraht pore aq ane sifeary n&3Qu
fagrafi a qaisel arfitest aterarfiten: t
waeaiseraraent ar a: aloft stat: neu
ara Ga sf seca: arg siferar: |
porta sf tara grorgar:? w&Su
a gure afe: peatacian: 1

. aareg at wamRagecrarga: wu eeu
agad porary varargerst: Fa
sauaistt poaral aremnafatert n &on
Tpeeprevayad ag srenferaaraas: |
HPoyscar se ast atet wT Aare: W&C ti

a: oliver: poattet* a aeafer ar Pregfer 1
at qsrafe Rreg wer ag areata’ citer wu G8 n
& qear:® goraprafored aeaed a aAret: 1

ast avaaMefe Haatet cere w60n
Feared Ware: Hareter aA:
sored Pat peated wale wietu
aarernaa addtafanreay |

ad aanaracet perinaarany wru
wiaatsa os wt 2 8 gapftrat aver” 1

a Gastar a fafa waraer TAC

1. W, wardtet 1

2. @, a, Tar seurdat:; <, Pear serarga: 1

3. 6,4, Oh; Gait 4. S, Hoare

5. S, Jar aeta t 6. %, G, a, Frat 1
7. B, @, 7, afrafea os & ar aeuredt apleeit avers 1

--- PAGE 175 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

152

poriager

vasa a: aRagq gs pafirdreaq

pe ay waalt* afer wale cagawers |

porter poutter arena: ceaistary W898 n
pati pafisrat alfeerat rererary? |

qatar? qed aret areca a dere! non
Pauararcamag arged wae aar§ 1

gaa ainadg pa atsio erscret uw n
goal fe a aaa agurealfeamsht ar” 1
aqureasraansls Porc ga FE “eon
wrafed puoarered caged va aay

BA Ta salsa art wegra? say OC
goat va gafea grat pawert fra?)

sacar ate" faaged satqearar fs aqgag n 68 n
areqatAaeed alsa: aeayet:

St: Farseat Yysar?? wegraagataat: udou
nrataset Pe area? peat ar Aak

Fava: RerePa easssi2! Afamat Preerat uci
aftar va srerfeea afta: paqetery |
woftsraqardt ae:1> fis aPar daagq nu
Faragirasrat ott ota ales afer? 1

wend aalitres ale Beara Her udé3u

1. 5, wer Te 2. 3, Psa! 3s, gah
4. 3, Aeasray fara 5 &, agqured aafet Ft
6. Sy BIST 1 7. @, Ss, AeureaAarshs ars
8. a, aT 9. HT, S, Aegwar i

10. &, U, 4, FATT I~ 11 3, areapar: |

12. &, 4, BMI; Ss, ATI 13. %, au, adart

14. @, 4, TUS; ST, THAT! 15 w, a, a, aetTe

16. %, G, 4, Hts wat: afte 1

--- PAGE 176 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fedla svore: 153

seguiatter Asgrfert orgy apfar: act Rire: |
ag fargo: paterarg Sarg a: ucdn
qareta gaat sogiier vafea fer
aenrgarena red Pag aterenas fra? n¢Sn
axfecahassia nog tegaays |
aferg trang art paskaey cack fe ude
sroutasger (gtsh) Rrgutstteafe Frat t
- HS warar afa qeaKsg ac: cou
wearer ware waar arftrett Fre 1
srafsraerater gat: aa Hartleepr: udu
ater at a srefta wer Fes ar ufecate i
ag> need Agata gate udu
HPerskrt qiear Perea TaaeTae: |
ala acar aaenfer war ale fanfgearz , n8On
vacaterrfadiarat poatafaakreany
araatarar peat fanfsa: w8du
A Tensay qaeHtaenishreply” WaT 1
TIS Were Hwa +t TAT u8Qu
aateat aa agaist qt Aamererey t
wat Ee a sraea wa ararfsatfear: n83n
adoraalafs getareafs aleaa:
weed? Hretar Pret qeraramerler a usu

+

. &, a, argrere \

. 5, WeAeHaas rend stores: Prix

+ F, 4, paretegany

» Sy Ragaivierfae 5 a, Regepieat wa

-Fw1 6. a, age 7. Ss, waar
+H, Paaoaqargls i 9. F Wea: |

ounrh Wn

--- PAGE 177 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

154

portant
agama: tad abradtearaenz 1

get Pregfea at aera nef aa aster uu
airftrear Pep rar? @fe agra: ereaenifeg

‘pout a crater aa aren Prarie: u Sau
agaireanfer earfor aire aferatker Fe 1
qeatey wees Neary FUCA WYO t
neMTaatieantt ag assrhrsrae t
aoa cantata wormlferesta u8du
Sea ATTITAT HS sta ads
artarnist guareat portahtreraa? usu
HPoutin sack Fars aenfararer i
qfratisareanrcet gars, axa sar: un 100 0
agaenfaferan: Gesu qifhrepr afer
a Herta Bat FT vereatshatger: u 107 u
maar aga: afta Pearaxartatya:§ |
genisd wearer Hoa feaeg: nn
mar Usirgar: &HPaearerar: soverray 1
fedlad a Baer aaron rarer n 103 u
aguifragarast pdfta fe piusrz 1
ata sound” arentast Peary u 108 u
anaraiea Gad caqerecafsafsranr: t
at ased Hes at vaaeufaalaany u 10% 0
wat arose ® atrardtey aforspsterrey t
Aleat aretar: rear? araedt Hoes 1 OK tt
1. S, Aart 2. H, U, 1, HS Va vata
3. %, U, 4, Para fafg|oari 4. s, fri 5. 3, areas
6. &, PoP 7. we, Te He 5 s, Tet Hatt
8. H, S, SAASYA | 9. &, aerate astra 1

--- PAGE 178 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Feta seera: 155

ataeatfr a xeanfer at araea fe Baer

aie agereatfor prtarercnetter* a n 108 0
afe geafea gah? aa ararferifear: |

goat a gata yfsargiraneney un 1020
eet wdahrar ait watresar 1 -

mist gEuarecar aftr sraceafraar> n 108 0

qos aT Aeaed wera araqer:4 t
aa ate a orafea caaqrarefsafsar: =n 110 0

atal Aer aed caonrarsifaer a
Reranafa® aafar atetqrcraia 0197 0
aa vet ae wre? aareter Prorat

gaara sper aferet” qeragy nITRa
emrenrctowarftgnt gemeire +

wage Ua Sater Fat warghaay 0 193 n
yeagefear vated afer® Suet 1

neaia cere, wate? cad qdfemfear: 0 118 0
grrarar: SPagraafea a ara: t

at wat? wag sardt Sar: Berane: 0 178 0
wea: alfa at Preararmafterrars |

wag perredied aeadfaatrar2? 0 1978 0

1. %, &, eufarenaiftt 2. a, gad; =, gal het
3. &, Aft araafr oar; a, afr sraaheier 3 a, aftr
1

S, Wager a Had peerafey oraz:
* S, Roeg seat |
H, MG; SF Hoe aa as rer
, WI wer; 1, wrest iB. a, netat aa
m, a, a, Sfaqi 10. s, wat gars
S, Yggur 12. 7, &, Teradferfeanr:

reper

ray

--- PAGE 179 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

156 portaaet

neater avast afy Pafg sitet a1

nerrarcan: ad Raf sreaeg arrer:* n 760
arentaratant af gear nfintad t

we arenRret: VT genase wafea fe un 11C 0
raaeaisaran? afe ateit wearer er

_ was seaat Ss gaan: ay: adtitaarg 01980
poamt varefs a aor Frfga: eaPaqs

arraraxfgar aba Rrfegaret ar Bax? Wn 7RQOu
areqart alfees af srrare: pfral wart
faaxecueaar 2fe get: aftsanrferet: niu
PUTALITTATY STAHVS TS AANT |
Wayanad Hoataye WAFRRU
gar orereg Fah quraret Tay |

aergratde Fe Aarieg frehay 023 n
sea alae Aqsa |

ae ate Weateg atearat vearney uw ARBu
atentfer fgsndtar aaretearaia x |

gaaeg warned aera? W728 n
Qe & cena acar gy wegerat?t

TeHTgeNseaY aera at Gui Rag neu

1. 1, oreg afear a 2. U, &, Trani zafir
3.4, 4,4, Tadari 4. 4, ater

5. S, But 6. 5, HoNay t

7. Sy WeTSHeT t 8. 1, Farge t

9. &, &, a, s, ator aT

10. & Gea “gar fa agenat ar yg naqeae? ga-
Pree ceng gear 5 mW oR g ‘aarg” gaa“ orear zg”
gfe crereat ere)

--- PAGE 180 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

fala svere:

grgetararan sate qatastenary
ATTA A TTA AT
aistiepat wasnat TH ataag_Es*
weed araRacracg werer xagfer fafa:

- gerarat prapea? sawed at fafa
ge car afrgses aa: ufgtrarcaarg
nereamtfeoataer orafkeratertr: apart
aferaratat at geararcaret oiforer: Fr
farateaxs att (ernfet agetate 1
a qaisti® gearckeinfag arr
aaqacat Fasafirar fracar safest 1
tepat atoeal”? a aifearset a araenr:®
wafanfirer afar arfear ataapre: 1
areal aut? gear gee Fafa ver:
aiaaegte Heat Guigtearacatg |
weargfaftrar ate wet at Fae? aafaq
faftrar Gere Sfer azar cit? oeftale 1
arama? aeata aetat
wt areakeatat Bader Haraar t
faftretr srt Fast aft gear araef Pecayts

Fy S, THT 1 3. &, Ferferfarce 1
. &, Afra 5. &, ararfei

aN

» S, 8, AAA waq weraAMyVaagE: 1

157
nde nH
uw WRen
WU ARVH
7300
niu
uy
W133 W
0 138 0
0138 4

w 738 1

-%, a, afnaft; s, affaarfer, afar

7. %, Wea 8. FAA: 1 9. S, Tatar aw art
10. S, ares 11. &, qefaxiararatg 1
12. 3, Waratgr 13. &, Ward; s, ware

14. G, 1, S, area caqararey 1
15. &, ararg aysaler t

--- PAGE 181 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

158 porlaaeat

ageta Pargater arches? spor Pre 1
sftasghagatad paemae nifaary 0 7310 0
aeygai: one af aerate ror? 1
poasyqdiaeme ma cage uw 73eu
porurahr caffe wdatearher arate

martes a aegel at gecourfer eghr:* 0 1330
gaan: geagea ag arar ararad t

eafeear afgsar® eft afithagaery 7800
faxoqaran:® arfaxs eraearey Geet Tay 1
Srargqaaryearan:” caret gaa: Ha wI8din
qoadq ofd PaSaq poareccantas 1

aware pouifer Fs wa: stg ireafa n Ra

ale storie Rraforiegr vermest aafriy-
ware wargquencd asap wqvalaraat
Porrarcrnrct ara (ela seoreg: wR

- & Weare 2. & arneearfe Sed t
we, peasayqufaean waa ageaa 1

. H, Waronfer we eqNr a Eeraortsrasghy: t

. a, 7, carfiereraftrsret 5 =, aftrsrais

+H, At; Soret | 7. Uy, S, Beis leracearar: |

anagah oR

--- PAGE 182 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ata Seore: |
Satine .

; sNeoqara |
per sighizaf adankarataay t
wqratrarasa acned aed? ag ager on dn

NIT TATA t
sro afer cagartts cent ca afeaesle 1
wer sTaTATaT sara? Guetale wn
a wathaerar teat: gt poealk 1
aaa aa aargaqrateara gor re udu
Agreagarnfer wenreatfer Porat t
Tameanran:? way cexar: akear Paar: usa
zecarferxeearfer pecureatfer arafer
zeanfaxeerat weeafaquPaas uu
wevatrarraer avd Fe wiser aeqt
anid war aeenfegretteg weer w&u
AW WAGMURT ISAT: ALTA:
qaaa oRaagte afaorearaceaar t
aqeattaraes asa stearic: nln
airarat wee: alsa atexvateartear & aat:

VeaATgWINe Ara wrat fearcor ucu
1. S, Hqxafraee Arered dened 1 2. , wget

3. G0, 8, Yagreanrat: 5 S, ara: 1

4. 3, sqvaferasa ¢ ofa qoreanamas eq 1 Saeafren-
arian FE a

--- PAGE 183 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

160

Portada

arearar seal yeaisag arenas: 1
aktredea? anrearan: Ga &? Hearrhiras
agrara*aaret aga: afer aprferfer> t
wevatrarraed® axaar farxer” atcafege
arara: ataral waearaea: agerfear:
Chara vear yfeargfranang:
BAAeae Arasa: Sat: AAA: 1
naa wrard J otoranengar
aaorafe wear Fara qnena?: |
arantiganra: ager: yfakad

- edacarad afr arent arenfe aaa:

nqvatead a: eRagha araaaifes
wera” at afar ae gaat ara Tea: 1
Re garageraracar aranfteat aq
agurarafsarargavatrarra: az: Fae 1
qardta oraftarg adiedgq Rafgarcra:
sardearg adantnagaeateara: asad? 1

ward aa sA° Harafrara gdtRa:
wpardararg?? Hamer ea aaRaMRNg |

wqudalpwaencar gaara gfe Bye:

hob

+ By Ty TAIT 1

- &, afer wea 5 1, a, aferey aera 1

. 1,9, ada; s, qd

SF, SUMTATA t

wa, adfar; 1, a, arferfer 5 =, arfetet: 1

+ BS, Wavaitarare 1 7. &, @, ara t

. 3, 5aq1 11. a, wardkares t
.&, Serirerari  -

° Sy, a, getRearet 9. H, 1, S, WTA t

uSa

uu

nu

wu

0 93u

nd.

niu

nVu

udou

ndidu

--- PAGE 184 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ada seater: 164

aenreafr arefife oneartentqrardretre te
wateraftines*qqraiearst arg eqn WS
aaslhy warat ad geat war Hr

arraTas a wag aaratrarrecar Fre TOR
gaarat war Rroysafferst areepet Terr t

Aeafareg ar sreft eaardt aRat war RT
qdarat war AweaSot Beget AAT |

arate: ears orsrorat aerr afer: WRU
AAT Lat ATT aqalt BISAeT AAT |

ageat ae tepier daeg afeory Wn
ara aart Areaaterr srarett war t

Tear war reisararat wer fere:5 WwW
armas wer cer arsdiget garg t

aia adanforgqvatearatsttren: ra wana
AAT THAT ATALANTA I

aevafrard fasrefraraterar arraee QE
wert vagy staf poate

wat sag a: oagavatrarrd wah a wou
at againh: areaer geri: afaeres
a aaa aaiftal a dteinawifehs: Uru

aretSaqrtiaake nedtahrgeaz: 1
areal aad ataea:® sftaeupeqad Rrer* u Wn

*S Gea gat ot “fratasreaar fear aaa gat:
waa”? aft wirargatird 1

1. G, 1, areT1 2. , watreranfitye gui 1
‘3. &, sexta fires1 4. S, pears
5. S, oer 6. a, ett

4949—11

--- PAGE 185 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

162

portray

arareastaa ada eof t

adeanaresdt Sevafrarasankaay |

aweareahtt srafrargavateand payate u30n
areata at aret 2f& Fastenfa a axa t

wre oifgat Pals aed aed aaretay un 3dn
wavatrarret ore a: arora? sfahfare t
MAA a? at saegaat or aw: Wan
arearradrgat® ofr Fastrenfer at axad: * 1

a Feu: UGE: Aiseh* a gaa: a afew: 1

a Gen: aw a dager? a geom: a atarae:® ui 33 0
a adt a aad? @ Aisaqerat Se Zsa: 1

a aqnrracarlqerdfeen eran: u38u
a aad: a afrreg @ af: a a wife: t
waar a agiearacant a ear: 0 88
a apf a earkg’? a de: a a sat

a goareat & ada? @ gaa: a Pera: An BK
aape war Bf aeor assreteft ear? 1

aftaat aw art: crreqeareaterers: FHA 1

geared gust: aa Gat teafaraarerar: won
agag faqata atqratearaacer a

araot widtet aft agtet aeqet?? aur
wear sq ped werqaiftras ney u3éu

* He, Ul, 1 GETS AEHGIT ATRIA aT GATT |
1. 3, eRaqs 2. BS, aTeanrttra

3. S, aed aati 4. ao, aS: Ashirn

5. 4, aera 6. a, nares: 7. x, agarft
8 5, ad! 8. @, aT) 10. HT, GaTI
11.4, gpart «12. Ss, waft =| 13. w, ana

--- PAGE 186 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

qatr sears:

a ua aaa ae aa seat? wags
aarmd gfiesa galtfreagay

weg TRaaiga Gevaert ALTA:
ay afa axaat efa a & fhaaat wag
gafrarra: afewa:? Ref wage? afer: 1
dare: aRam af satisaval wag
aeaait Fag: get afeatsroa afarorey 1
oad edabisa arerast aaa
qatar agaragaafadran: |
afaourrsraragar: asataatattear:
aRanrarmasal gifasa? ayaa: t
fag: sefarareata® agar: ftagare
maratearrer darfer a afea? peal 1
are Rosaceae for Rasa wt Rare
warafraraea arererand afr at araz:
neAarasa sath aeataguay
warairraer arerccatita & Pra var?)
wart Hamer reaarerceaqeqa?o
ga: ga? war ated ae opearftt order 1
aga wa gs HoTasHT
sfarargacasagqratearraahahar?2 |
araat: TATesrt at aa a eat Ata:

a, Fash 2. a, Rafreq:1 3. a, afiea:s

1

1
4. 3, giles 5. a, sefauarent 1
6. S, Saratraaga: salary APaTET:
7. &, wafer 8. S, MATAR t
9. wy, ra 10. S, Watt

1. 1, Fa Gh 17, ww, veers

o

163

wa8su
u8ou
usin
U8
n82n
Ww 88 tt
usSn
u 8& u
u8en
u8dn

n88u

--- PAGE 187 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

164 porlaat

frrarfefshrtatedt orftar aroraciar i

Prardlegraweio asatsd ata Pa u 80u
afaer Paar fat cerresrat or Fea? 1
quimrargneant Pratr atarecrat Pre w Sdn
aM rSaT Ma AT EAALT 1

afiest axrat afa areace aerrlere: uu

arsisepriRaes Aeasarget cay aT

Bey TNA: HS TA neal aS ga: un $3 0
greg arels Fara afer: afte af: SR 1
wéuaisa are warart aw flaws u 48 n
Prrerawet vee oftarasa gaars

git afafarasa ade ager aa t
cumragareashe qasaisd* cer Rea: u 88u
aedtst wear gat: qerear Prefer 1
cmratgreasRaey werosisht ae Rea: on $8
qarag wqrtg> grag peraft 1

watt Frat catg wear alaget ara Tn
aRIaTatgneant Yat weal a ASAT | 1
& HS a waeiea Heanleafrasrar: u Son
Noramgawrasay woefta: wacara: n38n
faaraté geomefer? getarrerrmatrasiey t

wane aera vearey arearfor Fafearfer a * 1 Ou
wearergay gar: areagy’ Fafertrg ay

yufer ag qed aa arareatfear: n&ITu

* oH, U, 1, 7 Geay witenrgrag aT Fwy
1.0, 4, grist 2.4, 0, a, aa 3.H, s, Gara
4. @, Trargredish masz 1 5. 5, aareagt
6. S gun 7, H, a, 1, 4, Teadwareucyenareaht |

--- PAGE 188 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

gtr sears: 165
araed a faaee a canassrata:
oraqawasa a rasa: porate * 1

a oued f& ale & aa ararfantfeart n&Qu
age sfiyay wer ger alsa: woae |
sforegaaesd o aear aera w&3u
qaseraeas valganalearegy |

aguresaasie azar qatat at afrerfe? 0&8 u
MT UTHSAHeYaAT: UGICAT YVATASs |
Porargaiaed Pasar ax areas u&3u
anafasqegra spiiggeggan: |
agegrbigadan rawegrga: Fra neu
arpusarfgqaar afasifegeftzaat: |
ware anita sfacsygera: weg: =n Gln
nafperaunedat: Rrgfraranrea: t
Noaraiqarrsamrasa fd Het t
wee Heated gust sqecerenfe are fer TCA
araet gern fear ast: dearaiirar 1
qisd eepiga Alea araTargonfter: u&Su
waegesfacqarahy quaar® aay
waded fedast carorarguealag
gaa at nfs ofa a at ads aie: noon
wer Pacarnfit: erate: weaaete 1
par: Resx:® orang cerrargenfter: veda
* wm, a, 1, oT Gedy versie a geet

. &, aamarafeafiar: |) 2. a, adatt ay afaenfe 1

a, at fasrerrfer avert 4. a, , Troe SP awrite

» %, T, FAT; 7, Fear; S, Qerar

. &, weegralaoprahryaraa 1

- &, THe 8. UL, TW, 1, Et

Naaok

--- PAGE 189 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

iporsiereret

ar ornate alr wrswery 1

aeararasrared? am: agaketey Tackar
sftoraraacered uy Prstrenfer azar?

at ay cars tere streraccafa fier: u63u
aararenra teas: xacrristty Fe aretfer -
sare t erate: ofa ay at tigre: u 8a
neantaeg! ay Ofer azrorenageisrenry

gaaasht fx eta fo qerafgurakay nies n
crcmarenraneast aay water aks afer

ag wer aerwarker aay eared creat zt] nee a
Heng ately aeeafanleeray t

quimrargnedt ay AP alse at Ua: nou
auracenatfer aaenfa ada t

aumrengreasrce frei rear? * nen
orimrarareant ad frat faker t

fesada wafke anearerastary nen
axrmrenquearhrwaat qorerlr 1

ERM ager’ le qganfaaraa: ndou
mrmrargreagny wea Prefer areifer7

fagad adrt ar grant: ac t udiu
fra deradirtdoorgadeganrary

adnearey ow sank amauta ndrn

* aremrg of angela a qeade ar gaat
4 qa orrea arguctan: a Grae at GEA t

1. S, WH 2. 5, RIprargardd at
3. 8, Waa 1 4. H, WeaReaey |
5. a, adart 6. 3, aaa

7. %, 1, w orrarareaanagaate aeakiy t
8. 3, AR

--- PAGE 190 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ata svera: 167
sftorargaracal Pret wer aie
wen aaferaraor gaoatshe fagerct udu
arent arsecarsy af gPaaterg ia: Frat
aumrargsrdt a: a yaeat ara eT: uc8u
nesaRagat arte sive: satatsht art
quorenrgucdisd eafit a a fearone: ucSnu
Rtt@anna aca: ua aaa t
pot aeaursisd eftst wang: uc&n
CRIM AGASaISH MAMSAPTATAT: |
araatsaratat arf? wsrat asrrgt wa S on Con
gategt Ofsettaeg caranalt @ marrca¥ 1
werftareractt areftararey aferareaet ndon
aaftatet fregardl afr rafergent 1
sas ATA Pole udu
mroraralt a arsrerf fret Ferferferserasy 1
qagiaty aq gog Ga gas are
SASS aq Adaratha a cea: non
gedtearfir aaffor aracitceranrfer® Fe 1
auInratgaeaisd aearg waferant waq7 on 87
wed waa at gar Porat
farsa? ric fret Raper calvary? on 82
atacand? ag nalararantaay t
RIGA ASAT ASMA AEST u83n
1. a, fire; 3, gfratcoerarsg fr: 1
2. @, Sraratsarerat aft 1
3. 5,7, nftr1 4, S, weqrif frit. 65. s aart
6. &, taonfer 1 7. @, WAG 8. &, ferent
9. &, Brfasa aaa = 10. &, arereaaas

--- PAGE 191 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

168

_ portaaer

aenraticalad ef qurmrargzearer ey t
quaaaerrang aeagrereq oud
Rranaracares yferrg fanaa: |
aapalte a fersant agprsarfe frp
storarquraea adaeakercraher t
saat ufeasa gfrasa ore ara cea:
agara Regatta adart yor Fa 1
Pormngqaasaad wed a ray
gana at arafigta at aa: |

aqha ot wrarfighta aereery

gana ae der gga att sa:

gata at axalteha at aay

agta Wi aa gqha aur aL
aga at Sa gqhta at HET

gana ot ser ggta our nf: 1

qgha at Fat wed aed ot TT A

afer wear waat afears:? ear ear Prt
aroratecter fararr ser 2quirgeerery |
Poragiaca waretat Haq 1
Weare werecarlengrarteer asafiz:
Foard at wdafe sftorergaureyy 1
agueftiewaterareor area et
rantler on gard ceiwastere hia:
arg drat art HAGA AGIA,

1. , afeatge: 1 2. a, afar
3. &, ugfaufa 1 4. Gi, BHI MTTAT 1
5. &, orate

u8sn
nS8u
un S&u
nWwu
uX<cu
u8Su

n 100 u
nin

tt 402 u
n 703 u

u 108 n

--- PAGE 192 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ata svora: 169

PUT HAST ATA aTratrareTHaATA t
TeMTATHASeT IATA HAUSA:

Head ala Wega: era garapgey 0108 n
fast at wafer sitorarqararay |

TaSGy A Gud wagaty aq AST n 08 uv
adaeag ad got addtig aq ney* .
aq ne ore efa-ara wrat frarcorr n 100 n
agiad Haq sag sorergawrsayy |

mar aeq seagr aftarerefaga: 1

Sasa? ara wete: wafafgaaaar: n 102 ut
ag cenalsoated Tag arcentcartara:? |
anfefeerantenea areraer apt Rear: u 908 u
aralemgal ee stage aghtarg i

aeahtedt aege: aaa: Hoare 0190
wig Tard seg sloreargqarray t

Tes ta can whrg Hewes WAIT
TAT adwatat wataerg adar t
sStoramatasd aig afrafegeaae WFIU
aria qafre acd at Rrartregaaq 1

a fe Sartre Frar a ateanagtary n 1930

a parities art a ararghrcs gar
arergraRrasr® ge ar f& wten Pres ne 1

ag arafag wet aed Tet ot era: u 798 4
storergarasanrercatie afiigay? 1
at waar aerate wormtleraha n 778 40

* eorargind a, 1 geawatel Gere
1. S, Gard 2. &, Fa Fraga:
3. , 1, u, Tier ye gear: 4. s, a Hoafrat aralt
5. @, 1, 4, areremiftear 5 S, atersr array
6. &, Phang

--- PAGE 193 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

170 pontadet

Bt adaaraeg art args wart 1

war a asaareret ReSara wid war 0 11K
wavatrrraed arercea sovrargqraat: |

afar & aire af fs wa: atghreaet u779 4

afe sftgpenta Graforiargrt wereet
Taba aaa SATA
we aqafaraaca starargaer-

Fear are gia seara: th,

1. S, atgeerfer 1

--- PAGE 194 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aga SeoTeT |

—onteo—

Seyara |
poe atgteo forergaawagy* t
Heaurst aaarat caraearaeft: we

aL Jara
gor afer segarfer aeat ct aRoese 1
wer gaara? Rraresre: ws
qa: Ga war alaat Headtsd wer peahrg 1
ae wargaraer oT ATA
aatedaegyaattiegraeggmicad: |
soracaracat yfeageraneng:
qmrangueaey alguad: porary t
ABM ATGOACAT AU ARSET AT:
yaeafacrasacara? af greirecaareg 1
mrercatres aaaare Tae eres
TANGHUTVSTT Tag ra Re:
GRATARASACATY TLATCH AHIMA tt
oR fateg sera Tenifergetarre?
avtetnagaiea qAatareorg |
Wea AaasaT Gaee seta:

aonw re

+7, 9, Prarmorg7. ty TRAE

+ Ay Raretreg 1 9 &, waco 1

wid

nu

udu

usa

uu

n&u

non

ncu

+ U, WH 2. G, STATA 5 a, aetertaT
+ 7, 4, AL 4. Hy W, Wea) 5. wh, wreRaTET

--- PAGE 195 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

172

porter

poneatag af card roy agri a7

aay? ota: Bena pega Pacey un
HeeTS Aa: Hear’ Halfgoyanraay t
areal etre Tecaracorayratay u0n
weed gieaset fercraaferareg? 1
GHANA TaTeeTt Agree nddn
aarganreearat Rrafayeacqary 1

area moragacTeacgaTHart wu
argerencrsia Peerarrrrodat Fa

HUSM Ta MOAT: AM ATLEMEG uu
faraorarsarsara® Pafirqear? sa araesry
qmerorareat Part srodaery ut
safaeer FX; THEBeAaTSraA aT |

maadt faa ara awaaeagaty cer WIS a
aiaage ye atst afar? ato
saqidgaagqecd?? asgifer a arate nu
SMACGTAMN CAA SAHARA I

qsargqfeg Freaer qfa aaag Rreaaq?? 100
aag* sat arargftearaaratg 1
ararafeanron Rerrareaaftaats uddu

1.5, AUT «2. BLS, arr 3. aw, U, ATT
4. S, ApPYISA Sar 7 5. 3, frenerg
6. &, S, AHA 5 -T, 1, TAMA t
7. S zargeradr i
8. Ss, drardet 5-1, 7, Aareneraa 1
9. &, Rraerasa qrAsT 1 10. 3, Asageraé t
11. Ss, tere t
12. a, seeriyedisiar; 3, wgdiefqagaaa i
13. 5, AHI 14. 5, 95qMTt 15. a, Aeargahay

--- PAGE 196 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ray

aga seer:

wet otet pouifer pata qafaaaciar 1
nated sure wa: pate aarhed t
aeanriea Fafrar gaararafarga

usa pearle sralad? aa stargaIeASA A
gosal’ yaa yRaicagaaara: 1
Famer sare: adore
aaray azaerifer wasaeaTT SEAT |
rosagrastefahrReareardtaasr:?

aa TarrAerergracacantlya:® t
Wqvssasgs qeyraed Fe tse”
strafar aror Frooparcwur® aarefoft 1
agg slaearat parsarkaayr

gfeger ar? xar aan? aa areraciftrar 1
Regoett"? aasetttiarsetdtfrar: t
May Wisatat eaqarorakgaanr:
wargie:?? war aret Fras: save va fet
ulear a geriza weet gacecar

aervor ufaahisaa art agata a1
apred ext cet aret ufreegerar
wae areas: asafeafes |

wast eraraal equica: aitiea:

. U, Hea; S, ser
Saad a aeaedt —-3. aT, WEST
+ &, ReMleres sare adeurdraart 1

 %, gegen 10. 3, wert: 1

RON aA NE

- 4, &, Pafigeecit 1 12. am, ave anf: 1

173

udu

wRon
urdu
WAVQa

nu

Uwn
uIwsn
wRreu

nu

+H, Asere 1 6. &, 1, , waar |
-@, gga ater 6 8. a, Regarenr

--- PAGE 197 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

174

stpertadcay

aratar aftseor gf Rratsant*sirarcer aeat |

geadt cerita aadt adager Wn
areravtt gaadt wararar wasaet 1
qetat aa egroit aafoft qzaeatt WRBn

arar arearaalt sy wareftfer ater 1

ean: BSsargtar? eanfarcahraaanr 1

Gara wraferaat eqarea: ata: un 30u
anata ana aterptfegarfor at 1
isa vasa guifersraz> uu 31
araft ansftsadt® arefy arferadt a aeeadt 1

needy arepagr Grae aregr arcey Fa
Rerenferepr Wengersarceprara dearer: n Qn
anprd zaatefion selteitst Faarcenry t
faarequreenrca” argenrecat: ITZ u 330
aeq mascara Pr aa afr PATTI
rosaehrernca® aquifer ererfterasiag t
aigerearadniedarercad ora han BV
Prarmaaamenasale<aqeqa: 1

ama qurengsttian gacar sara saaq on 88
TSAI Ts TTR WaASTT Jeqa?? |
Faargquacared af att ¢ atas aaq nau

ray

- a, fragat i 2. w, Hardiat; w, 1, Tecra!
He, UT | 4. &, Fgarfrar: 1

. a, &, wet drer aaa: 1 6 @, wexat

S, Heated t 8. o, fafrertra; s, Fehrererect
. &, aTprearesreatedcarargy aagaly 1

- HAH Tat 11. S, UFaTySh 1

. 3, FATHAT ARE t

NoOUNGO

--- PAGE 198 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

age aeore: 175
otesa Preasda sanileag? aa: t
gare art qesgaed? aeq Pe uv 3ou
adqraregacararget a? qrqatedag t
£3 at Faas gaat? armteaciaHy t
desq gdagq olen qenalele Reade wv 3cu
dese qdaq der aealfieatq Hae W384
& CT agreed vane 9g wa
Tease yaa Mea sla areal: afaeraa, u8on
ait aft aeras afr ot qerPrarcray” 1
dese gdagq ater affair Rreuaa u84u
at at: taTaasda® eet arereiareey |
Resa gdagq ater yaar afarataq nS Qu
aaron ara atest Freafe a?
dsq qdaq ster gorakt g easy u83u
aent yeaa? weet stftreftaftr a
Tse qdaq dea carrera sara Ha u88a
zation wat Stet? ceed cifepoirake t
gee gaaq wea anit a feqaq he u8Su
want cage aeazeet orlepeftahe 1
Ws Gag ver equ Rreaaq fa u8&u
1. &, aterererfe G2. &H, A, TM, a, FaaTEA AT
3. 4, 5%, AG 4. &, fast

a, afaye 5 1, 8, Peraareeteaaare 1
7, of creat: afieuaq
|, Waar areca Fererreres

GaNaAMY

ray

- &, Teearfea 1 11. S, a Yat Aer

+7, aaaestra 1 9. @, axeeuad Rear i

--- PAGE 199 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

176 portaaca

qaisa neeté* weet aprltpefrale 1
eer dag der aesqe saaq Pe
qeasisa watt qerdesa? anfepefrahe
ga ydaq Mer anaes saaq Fa
genisa cornice ateetare
Vasa Waa wer were reas Fra

& a aed canal aferoittnth a fra 1
gesa Gdaq Wear waxed a aera
faargencared agéuaad> atq
arRraret starr’ get a sara aaaT
peed Waateurd yPaenranaratg 2
Suraaanrardamfacqaora:
nyagadare war fafa t
Sawa eter: carry qrataz: t
arya: agi: cerararrege:
senevegrt Amat argaaar aa * t
safgea Shot genre quali ark
got aera? qaeoratsaaraar t
afertareraer af artacr: taxdaar:

u Sou

u8du

u8Sa

wou

u Sdn

W8Qu

un 830

n88n

un 88a

*aiterghte @ geai afta; 1 geat ga: oe
“Coerrmanrudter atarraa: frr?? ele xstergufrd grat

waneregrnt Marita “ gaypedegri fer arat aa: t

1. S, HEN

2. &, Swat ; wa, arleypeast t

3. T, BGT! 4. =, arfeedt 5. a, cat

6. 5, arart = 7. &, sft 8. S, Wear; S, rar!
9. &, Bee 1

10. 4, ataadt; s, dread?

11. a, ater

--- PAGE 200 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

age seute:

wa: gatsr ara again Ta at
Hargasaar Hla Seeacqearea: i
aarcaataral a arrga gitar:
eurgt wraer? oarfeerayr t
qoganaarar agra Tas TV*
seared Surqaatal TASAA TT? TL
aragr at egaa afergiga Shar:5 1
audiat osicarat antat gaara:
wear asrofaasar: aehey Prare: 1
faatar a fafifSasa aera ager: 0
Faxon? gcyeat: HATE TAITGAT Fa
aRactt aSeatt setafsrot afkrerkoft 1
starter’ adaifiear afaarerar® 1
Shear a gear ale aterar are saar:

faareqursared wazreg Prsopey arerfererpreg t

aqeal AVA Yeateyl Aes asa saa
THAMES SAITAMA IGT T 1
qarlgaraadcd facaaq qagaty

* = qeade wreorghag at gaara t
. &, Bae; WT, aan
-@, Dear dracarar axe wegrgarfett 1

+ Sy Bega TTGEATAT Ta |
Wy, Waren t

. 3, BUTGIAIST

+S, SSA AAT; a, Verarersar
. %, afar

+, Weaeg 5 Ss, carvaea 1

- &, Uday 3 Ss, aredanvdre t
494917,

YQoaoahonPe

ray
ow fo

177

n 8&1

n Bou

udu

n 88a

un GO u

u&In

n&Qu

a, war eqpfasrarr; =, aar cespfrdiear: 1

--- PAGE 201 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

178

pontaaca
wreigqarey: Aad? wardtey alraaygarey |
qrgadargeoisdaarag fered |
quate? serdtey ares afeagereeneq 0 G30
faargqencarea fifaquiaants aeq 1
are axureargea® a ara sade saa
gharate faatet reaeard anata n&8u
Paarzge of at 27 Tamasa we at
Ager povardanraeatRasacad: n&Sa
aaisfataarh erg wHasa Kear? 1
and airemperairarget aat aq u&&u
go &H ale? carl] mer? qdaq qu
as az oe anfe agar Pape?) qaaq ceq 0 RO
& CE age wale gdagq a7 1
at aif of at: asaeai quife qdaqaey on CU
& st ta weoai emeale gdagq qa 1
ad $ a acawai woes qaaq gay n&Su
oa at seme agniie?? qdaq qq
st é é aaaasa sanlg?s qdaq geq ubon
Set qusgsa fase qdaq aa
tf ¢ carqued vale gdaq ae ulorn

. F, Wgreieagaey 2. Gt, AeaTeL I

- Sy FASAAGT 4. 4, Ss, omfei

. %, S, Nagai; a, Pageatewar t

. &, are Bair 1 7. &, faarygeacated i
8. S, HONE 9. a, ae; =, gare
10. a, FReeteHe 1

11. 7, anfgenie; a, anfganife; s, alee 1

12. &, wale 13. &, Farah 1

anwok

--- PAGE 202 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

age gewre: 179

a at d graxr@at aroarfet qdaq aE I
wt ad anleuaal werole gdaq aT Tacha
4a t ageued reals qaaq 9A
& a wt waquea gnife qdaq aT

ga és a? ctenwei faquly a ster nw 630
ararcare Rawaeafagaate aes Aa: |
war meagre a ots Hesatt* gar: un 68
grrqrgeh au: Maat Heararay weeahy 1
araaegarathreqas Aaareras neSu

fealfroraragedl Faedt da waraa* t

senent fasraaa ao arg argied Ta A
gansead a” facaaq guariie nb& 0
faarngencare udazaftasragy 1

amt aerearseh a eqh sara saa nison
Heaeare featet gaaearaarara’ |
fearegancatred af at cea a ued
MPrigeusgred arias ag atq 1
ferqrararag?? gst arr geqeata fa u 8 n

S Grae verghig a gaat
ar, ureertfe
AAA 3 ST TST
Gy RETA S, WAT
. &, fragt
a, wvsreotfag a eaaq; s, eqavsg aw reuag
6. H, ag atgred a Wedd faenay poahiss 5 s, Fredy
weqrdgyeneat |
7. Sy YRSH HATED |
8. 8, Famers seas
9. HT, a, AAT!

10. 3, fraararagra i

--- PAGE 203 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

180

puriaacar

g £1 alPreftafasi? at qdagearas t

3 & aghataisa At Gdageatae

as ae urea aor afta att qdageata
we & gf mrecadtat IF gdageatg
Ce §asq gear Is Gdageara t

ait aff tietararegred sTAT® gaagq at
af a Rrarat wat ttt qdageatg,

& a falgrategei” OF qaageatg t
wd anaes gt qdageate
$a areaa oar? It qdageady |
eo necdfasat te qaageatg

at of qerpuegrea afar gdagq ae? |
é é aarfrai? ae gdageara

3 é Reeacatarsa?? Net qdageara 1

ot df qeaTTsABIST et Gaageat

at ¢ a frqderratt> te qdageatg

af a magrarasa Is Gdageatgqtt

 & Fragegead posst Gag az
at age Sardiisa It qdageatg

. 8, arate 4. 3, wordt 1

Na oer

. a, fag Aare 5 s, a G Hata 1

. 3, gar 2. %, arnafserss 1

12
14
15

. 5, AeaTSTH UST t 9. S, aareast Strat 1
10.
ll.

we, afrartd qaaq ger 5 s, edt geagratg
a, wat oerfsiat 5 ¢, agitsaerfrar 1

T, RaraTASITA t 13. @, fagatat wast
Be, iegees wroufasa getaq t

a, aga 1

ndou

ncn

undu

ué3u

ncvu

ucSu

vc&u

nou

udou

. 3, TAT 6. H, 1, TH qedagearg t

--- PAGE 204 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ag seats:
ot HaeTEsTeA aprexfart qaaa |
e& meee? TF qaageara
xt merraeadt® qaageard |
gd frost Feat TT qaageats

ant TETFATSSA A gan sata mag |
gacuret faartest arqesraareraraet

eared maniaeanley |
adrgouateatae att at Fe TFSI

181

AR

n8ou

nSiu

WAU

n32u

nSsu

nssu

anearyet ARN? GaSe eat wero: ITAL |

areargek Taisateet arfead He” aad
agar Tat AFSAATT at ait? aaRt
at ai aahrargercaatrenra at sratd

. &, A, MT, FT, qagasr afeaTe |
_ a, af arengedt Tat |
LS, BAT AAS TA? |
. @, APOTTIG 5 S, at aa
10. a, afeart ats a Aqearart a3 3s
at & agearerat aa
Li. &, of et atkerargaaar7 |

ns&u

nou

afaarr ad:

--- PAGE 205 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

182

poriarer
mat att ¢ of aftarsa aeeatty"

ame ¢ & ua? ws Nasa gag u8u
cast aTeatt & at abivadt aaq 1

arrdisa firasa J & alterasasyY nu
wat Paadl ae at afagra? aod

aout art a axfigmiarlaqdad® n 400 u
gat went of at fe arerara:® gat
Tega & F ugerualy qdaq 040% u
qent earfgheadi” & at Rasa ao

gegrett Aza ¢ xi Pale: arafeeerar? = tt JOR N
west ward aaa aif at wrenfeefa ato
argust tet at a a oreufaes sitaors22 0 103 0
SH Tea at wt agq?? agaree vftaorg t
rareedt enPseftea ot & avareer vtaorg?? 1 108 u
derivate Ii qdageate t
qornfegerhtsaareafaagar: n 108 u

1. a, wat Galt ¢ at aflaesradeardt aur; s, ae

aad g ot areaar woadsadt; on, wat aattdtar
afeaasa weedy 1

2. a, aa; s, dare ag of aleaa 1

3. 3 aged 4. 5,551

5. %, G, 1, 7, aoenrt denfafg mrearegedagq 1

6. G, EE aera: ays oa, Sararera: |

7. S, Fete aati 8. 3, Rafefesifa wi

9. a, Pofeiine: adtfre: ; a, 1, a, Rofefeser wrarfesan: t
10. &, ofa arenyafa wi 11. s, argqest ait a geartt
12. 3, oat Saad at ot AAT 1
13. &, of ose Nera meet aaNet; a, vareset-

uiehisa at S aper a; 1, uw, af: aTsaTerestt
aifeerasa wat: 1

--- PAGE 206 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

|

age Beers: 183
stamratrerarcead wera
faarqencaed aratzarsga: Ww 108
afore aurear2geh aut surah saa 1
argeuret weanfer palga carfea: u 100 u
Ua saeacaefe varaeasaereredt: t
arraiarrecteren orga guftirat w docu
PoTgaaarea er afar Seoreaacss |
Tauern sl aerate seast W108 0
faalorreaaardta acgqaigamray?
agifasraaged afaraatersory n110 0
alfenrqionet wer stenarfiasy 1
neghraqarraist fara aeggtary? wu
Rorracaniad?? feoanrzonyfreary 1
crassa Rreggt Fras gecas at:17 WIR
freardfatg Rrarret agreteqqaany t
namafeaieeaanrcnaraary nu 730
va Rreareasy vortggearrdltieat fra
Set ar wlefa edied ar faPaeaag W198
warar Bras mag afagriaguenry t
adasind sf aarracaney wAIu
1. U, HHI 2. A, AUT! 3. &, eae t
4. 1, a, Terergaigiantitd 1 «5. UM, S, Aa

My AGUA 5 S, TALAAT |
- 0, a, Prerearaareasr t

3, wqqdantaag t

Sy WegysHy |

+7, FT, BTST 1

+ &, afect Hr 1

a
POP SND

--- PAGE 207 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

184

pontadea
aa: weqeiteqgrearas? aaeaky 1
afer fagea qui efa*qgrageay
qatar? verge awatgahfat ware t
aerafea ara iq Fargerale |
yaa aBasaaete site Brawitronyz
WeaGoIss THerakawny
ararapurrgsr Prrareageanrarcey> t
Taeaaqae THESsaareftony
eqig Arf dent aafrarrgd eq
ga eae awa af crag aefkrat® wag t
aed’ Sara Besal Freranenn:
netsteredt eared a: asetfer fear Peart
aar: aa anata & oarfr a deta:
nated caret wate aa? ardfer
fered age arcareratsrary
wear coraftnt efe aa sresfer aretas 1
aa snfgsal ont: arrest: dred fra
Heliiatpadeuraedet at aera Pras

ue

uion

n49 ut

wd484

n 720 u

nin

URrQU

surrarenequrcantfer® fe arar Pra: era? 1 7230

amassiarrarertd +t sare wife at

Ho

faoreaOenrastereey ferarfaar: nq
1. @, AAR 2. &, Bf 3. S, Ter

4. H, U, 1, 4, Tagg t 5. & Faas!

6. &, aT

7. Gy, S, a: wae fer

8. U, tagat afe aega ; =, calaafe aera: 1

9. U, 3, Wrareqyaarcenfe t

0. S, aarfira: 1

1. 5, Tag aed t

--- PAGE 208 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

age gear: 185

WAS yaaa SeaLA TES sa:*

WaT TAA Ager FT Psgalk WQS u
nated eared serfrenfirarga: |

gar: ag ataeafea? azaaishh qeftgrer: =n TRE
ageaaat fs af corata ar Brat

argara agefa arrears sesrertg® wou

aranfatgaracanthe aenieeard TATA 1

ae aa tat” Saararafargar i

ale arta at aete: wet weet aerep ae RAC
aavafraranaera? auorarghareararzy t
Haealtared areter Tat: Hay Hu
afer & wfird af acatgrarfecs?° Pra

aaraet parma fen wa: stg freak ut 730 tt

ate stgerte Gratotergrt nereett
Tar Baga ISTA-
wae Havatentadead Heriterenerct
ara age sara: 0 81

1. S, waroret: 1 2. 4, S, EF

3. , &, weedeat 4. &, arfirearr cesrerag t
5. &, arora a afer eteafirequarfrer 1

6. &, tafe cara ATA 1 7. Sy AA: Ways ATeTT 1
8. S, Waa 1 9. S FTI

1

0. 3, RaBaenarcaratad 1

--- PAGE 209 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GAH Seared |

pata

sqoyara

HPourarcaranr raraisa SRT |

pogoren Pratt Aq areata a wit
afanaa aq ad afrastear aq nar

aq ad ma@frearir aq F wert urn

Sear Jara t

sya afer meagarfty cent et ogee 1

ae saoaran Paatt: arat aaIT n3u
arrarter fererr sigit ar a qeafear? vrare: t
aenrfgRragran seaatg poetrhras nga
atrart Faas are: seag ar ageagy |

atrart ag@renrt patafa vaterqt uSu
ea RrarmisiermraaaayS |
arktoeaugdagadgiraray gaye “a &n
gra agg wet Hatigaaros |

afaqerafters Rot Areaca acitgt uu

*aq geae ga: ot “armmicarfefrete: ad ta g
arang ? gfa eiteergahta geae

1.

a, S, Wentereat 2. 3, mefeai 3 aw, Fafa

4. 4, S, AANA
5.
6. @, TIRES aggeargearaaggaq 7. S, gag |

S, eoRrrad: eipursrsrgqea: 1

--- PAGE 210 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

An Sera: 187

gaiterarmrfrt adfatgaratr a
gifeate a Rrerara? warrat Aa Toa uc
arRmesa ast carghrark? a prisny t
ag stand gfeagedtstanaratt+ w8u
arermrgarahr apiatgecntr> =
gorges? ararfir acorreerftr at
sareaag safkr” cate caeag u10u
Beret caqarhr gor Bfer erarfear? t
saarar grams TAs ata aT ndd8
wget ager Feresa aerany? t
yfenrarepe: arg vehae atetaq ae 0 720
strarfaafae earat erratkaagur? |
wentgfarl? aarter seareage gaqt? 13. 0
saver ga: starrer ara" t
waters: feet eeanat Aer gt: ud 4
1. &, cacttrearfer ararfir t
2. S, AIST 1
3. &, axararahrare t
4. %, yeagieraarmatet 5 wa, geramgfeet: sitfe-
stheratY 1
5. &, aaaragarfir 1
6. S, Tawa 1
7.3, TAZ «8. MW, MATA I
9. 1, a, S, arr t
10. 3, gfenrargept afr vafetwags
11. a, araguaraa: 5 s, caraageaeafr t
12. S, Grarereit 1
13. u, feae arenatreday 5 1, Temsnag TIT t
14. &, eamanta werd: 5 a, wtanaararggpe: aE |
15. G, TET | ‘

--- PAGE 211 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

188 poniadear

Wall AEH ae aE ATRIA” |
wrap ate aT THEATStse AAT |

war astfer Frearar gfstar gaqrere: ndiSu
ait a Waadusrgraperfrarerany? t

que poutfer arcatpeyy wrqe neu
afkonget ar Sepreer Parte t

adaat arenes? aglrenaarora:” uou
afé Famgnsanfa frspara fetaa gerep? 1
anffgeattaatakasy atetitg 12° wicu
punt waa Teoraemasraa: |
oer faaeet afraraa?°? nia
SIGMISaT Taw: Tare AHAacaargst* 1

war iife airar Rrresaggayr? nu

* @ gene gaat
“qergae afer tereerat Faferfarag |
qaHrerar tyeaq asda aareye:” gakrar
grad t
. &, TRAT
. H, RAAT AATHPe: 1
BH, Teearstaa ; A, Aafear rarer: 1
. &, We araerapesrgeaHarramerar 3 1, 7, aire?
AAAaSTS 3 S, WS Wit asgecaes WEAATaT |
. a, Fat; S, aa
. Hy WT, Ty ATEHS 1
. @, aufeteprarrd: 1
. &, Rreparamarora: t
9. U, Ussren; &, ysahtefersg arsig Fee Tet
10. =, fag wfafead aa
11. %, vaTeiuaaateget 5 Ss, aurea GF eH: FATT daa
ae arhrett
12. S, @ger

Pon bP

aNaua

--- PAGE 212 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

qsaH Seare: 189

Fagot wanxegeat af dats ae 1
Feet We: Vesargerq gwaatag t

gar aredt ager gaaritfcranrixofr wn
gat uodt fgafara attafaad? war

MAST TAGs arg asa gearfer gogo WRI
anfiysakad jarcrg qvarag 1

aq wetlet ged mPreftorergqaag Wn
argegias grat arfet cerrrearanas |
araraagrasats atstist afar gare WW
a Aeficar daten” areg® agrge wags
aeatitarmarreael aS agsranra? uu
‘Fr aratqger fsx: ae: arasy ferensig+

nat a afsattaracagr aay areta:?? wren
PATHS TS: aad MTT

artes? qeag ad aarategd) 4 gay non
Gaquad got adgaftrest rr

vatfat® agéafa wareqearfer wreag WRrau

greater grange? Wrst aera
ayet eta?” ante Als Ree WwW

wn awe

. S, WHS: TAT I
. 3, gearfir quae 1

W, WeTHTEHy |
Hy AATF 1

 H, TEqT

. &, aaffr wre
13.
15.
17.

T, SF, BTA 1
iy, Xe '
S, myPeoeeg 1

. &, Walp

. Hy F, AGIs FAT
. &, afer gar i

. S ATE

. &, Fri

. S, ATT: 5S, Aaa
« S, WHET 1
.71, S, Aredteh t

. &, araedt

--- PAGE 213 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

190 HPortaaea

raredterattatfar afer ierraerftr a

Wareg Ge vet atargart ha u 200
ast sitet a aredt a faarar faferar gars
adfatgatl Sef sitet abraarrefh n3du
andy gferaadt sar ger eargaarftrar 1
fearneerdt sar? graft tisamar wag Wu
ares were ear arse Fegaferei 1
ark®enrar sitar arerat a gpragr n 330
ages ateareanel andtany Thrverferefts 1

Rarer Somrfer adartaraefeeit wu 38u
ArIRAgeyd At aHSAHTAT | _
AQ aad agalgay wasn
neatetest fafaeere aalgza vettax:5* 1

nai aged?’ af gaat Afaqrasy t WG iu
anehzs” quag ard aAtarega gays |

Tagless get wAgafrs fra n on
grigetararar adare: were 1

AGIMAMTAAT? TAHTRS GAT nadu

qeeagataran difatfead Sid
efe acarera: creneerteg ied aghany n3su

* xa Ae args oH Gea aT GRAT
teaal “qari gaegit wereaemir ora’? gic
RATE TT GeaHarggaes t

1. &, Bxrert saat fr 2. Gy slat

3. S, ASE areredt arkgufeqernfirat 1

4. U, wedart «5. U, Wqarereaqufaae; cs, waif az
6. 1, 8, aad Aggy t 7. Sy ARAST 1

8. S, WRATASqaIeaTe: 1 9. FT, ARSTTATTATAT |
10. %, 4, 4, dea arash 5 Ss, dea ara t

--- PAGE 214 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GSA Sears: 191

gzoralea: GUN areraleara TA

aeare a Reorafrrargeara ar Rear? an BO nn
afer sen: maar: Perasiteeraraars® 1

arate aarecat gered BATA u8in
neaaralefasat arenet: gfafsrary

ane aftent aca copay Prerarer: |

Rarer g afeat ae dasa aig ws Ru
strato aor eda? aguilera 1

atafioerar pateaq? at a wlaag u

marae afe Qa Saararaacyary w83u
aiaeg Fafadt wlect mastead Pre

TTAATaAAa THOTT TePTTAT |

| ategeieraran quasiatag HoT u88n
fragaaaas safer fadraae 1
area oftrat fear wqhaeatear Au S8u
afer? got arf Seater Hgraet |
gaat Fgsiret art? acar ortet Pecos use nr
arranger ae geet art cara ofererrerer:++ 4
afeafird ate ard?? gui wafer sreafe uv 8lon
ata qaet got: fullgetita atkrar
arwagta alr Acar vararar u8cu
1. 3, aga 2. BS, aefearfer: a

3. %, afguqgaiea taitaerarar; a, Aazeiracr-
araar 3 s, Prasitaararaatt 1
4. S, Wye 5.3, ATi 6. a, aes S, Arar
7-4, 8a1 3. a, ae fear; s, af ar Rentwars
9. &, caterer 10. a, &, fst nr ari
11. &, 1, a, s, goasfr ard sary weraraa: 1
12. &, 1, a, nana ord t

--- PAGE 215 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

192

purtaaear

nem? paat Gar steal wasafe (afe) 1

act & apafea acranifegeitgaar: w8Su
aeurenean aaa cahracar ag Frat
TRIGA: GST ASAI ate TIT? u 30 u

Rratqeafag osnaed Rraat ara? 1
aa qvaea? agit ce FE ar Rr Rratsfe feu 87 0
Te ware THs Fasusfest wart TFA 1

GRaAT Tartare Teare Boal; faa wu
atanaad F wYet argehy ATTLeg ar” t
ara qaTaefe areqer® Rrens wag u 83n

neuniafadiaad aaah a? adaq t

a pafencerararar fear get gerarq ou SBN
falta Rrearacg Frargult fregar t
waeuionran afersrns? sag nu
pogsad aka querrsasciay t

aera a: Gaigecar ufeaqacal: & Ursa tl En
araritaiscameaat yeraat SAT: |

Hssat weg a F fravaal wag n Son
agatiatt anfararrarireadrary
Ragan” yaenengrt> un 8Cu

- 3, WHat 2. m, Proms wags

- U, waeg Bena at: 5 1, Ss, sacai feast aig
. &, ATE aay 1 5. &, 1, a, S, Ass

+, agar 7. S, ATATHAy 1

8. %, 7, 4, Tea 5 S, FeltaeaAT 1 9. H, 1, 71

anor

10. &, Aqeantarat 5 s, a7 palates
11. S, ada 1 12. a, 1, a, srareitaeet areca |
13. 5, 7, grr wt aarfira; wa, gfrad garfer fe;

a, gfrand oar Fra: 1

--- PAGE 216 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

USA STOTT! 193
qerga wd" gar? gisrar gaglta 1
agfiar ef Gah gag pagha sn
poyst faar seg? wekad ygia:
a ofa ax detafseafatr: est ufon
TA AAAI FSATAT AAT
aaa wahrgiea ara erat Perarcor veda
ACTA ATALANTA ATT '
at ag ata meetle palgderastera® neu
MUS CIMT Pal wT Hey AAAcayparg t
aT RS ara aHET pear wardargq® 4 &3 at
TANS aly Har AeA HS BAT”
TRS ara pear fragt wu SB u
argtalfedtis sateat aq REATATATT 1
aqAs sue oe say pear wardenq® n &S n
agatatar fas afe aemracor? gare at
gpurrate gost paged a wdfaq?? n&&u
HS ar aoe gray at garages a
ate? age diet wa poe aarts » &9n
wagttamgred ateories ode 1
fransfefiftaraeg?® quet Fras waq 0 bCu
1. 3, Gis 2. BN, Ty S TATA
3. @, FSSA! 4. S WEI
5. S, araenge "6. S, HSTAAH t
7. 3, Bear Tew sarfer aq wed wae rr
8. S, wer par fama) 9. a, wear
10. &, Re L144. & eg waa 12. H, VT r
13. G, ary at aSTTa TT; 4, Harge aay;

S, wear sagas art
14. &, afar 15. 3, far fafiarargs
494913

--- PAGE 217 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

194

ponigaer

pogolgar patsaaaetataay |
frond agaele aenefta cer ery
aiareaaet? wart: Bra: eget afewarcr:
aareantafersr® & & Prat afer ariaz*

andafer & areca atranars faftraraay t

seargated arated aRaar: afer &°
ara: aA aagrereqaaory’
HPugertaapre ae aTeaqayr
AeA TAA AAlararagnta: |
HPorernia? arre atreqerr rr
afar a pagar poasaigatar:?? 1
aaa Axara: ada aAgefer:tt
aasatad Aer aan dier gaz 1

war arargat @rear geuaretet?? gear
neaqd pager yecatia Ha

3 faafea srerrectat cron? Saret ar Pree
qaeg Axal gat vei afer: ata
oral wteat a nerer?* nteaqazrafltr

n&Sn

nou

neta

neu

uu

u8u

ueSu

u eR

nou

1. @, qogsreanisd 5 =, aragerentn |

2. ay My a,

3. S, denreaafafrer: 1

4. U, &, Prorat af aati 5. aw, 1, a, HKPAT
6. 1, HT, S, Ft 7. @, oy

8. a, Afar 9. S, PoRoaraysat t
1o. @, arleer: t 11. %, aw, after: t

12. %, @, a, Porat; s, aradtaar
13. S, WS Var arr

14, , weal geri fe wer Pes wu, armyaasa FAST;
Ty ore Vari aged; a, arét yet Taha

--- PAGE 218 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WTA Tes: 195

weata ae: Scar at at faspedr Frat
Aguetea? war at gaat: ea alleen: wl a
gre ufea: Rrat® ate agiaart Axa: taza

TARTS stetegt ate Sea wOS a
Maes HAT Wd cea 8B saakeraye 1
wanhreassta wet aA Aretear dara ucou
pevargnaraifear agguifer Ferra: t

fis a oeafe olotsd wafer seasrey nd7n
fragt fertat diet Grdssit® Rrsapqas:
fafiaaigarearat axat arecit faaq wn
Hoa GrTaA AT WALT t

wad Faanaral waqeafantaa:? wddu
ATER AST At elerarer oT A+? y

MSA J Fever yRearecdfwarfert+ uésn

geez Prqer aaa afer ereaiteracterr t

Ie wey Raenct area ate a aia ou CS
qeagt fiqgarat?? serareaPerert ats 1

aaa agate gear aq a arrest uc&

1. &, 1, a, fire Crear dprgrrae az: 5 S, Pret Gear ay
ar freee ae:
2. %, 1, a, aeistHat) 3. s, fire 4. w, TRAIT
5. &, S, ahead aqquearcrear Aaya |
6. H, TUttoaakraq; a, cea ae afaleerq; a, TAS
sraferar 1
7. G1, HVS; SPOTL 8 H, A, T, 7, Arey Krgegr i
9. GH, Aeraraaarret: 110. a, ARTA
11. S, TarareRTa Agaqgeareredftr 1
12. %, 1, a, Ss aazarai
13. S, wetaret rare wt

--- PAGE 219 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

196

partaaer

nearteqenratat ware: TTA |
waar reared? anrata

aaa wagers at werdtfer a araany t
mreaskaarmet? car frerafaahaa:
qemniagudaiar agerat fara
anes faatreaa gacit afar fre

aa ages fast alraret Fadftaas 1
wear wear ert AAAS aA eET
sty poueaa: araPaga araanz t
gsagqar faxaa area afrat wag
atiafe pedirasa agargteet Gem a2” 1
Asawa gar are? Fearraarceayara
aaer tea Sanpear AeTadoy |
ceorafadt drcar dest areas asig
alcar HBsraACAAgy PLargBry
aiskaey aed? vada ft deals wag
wloaret afegt weaged ataghtresle 1
B Raratdal sta: waa Cakkepa:

AIA ALA ATTA Gaeta: + |

a Raga: pouereacient of areiq??

1. 3, Reanicawsag 1

2. a, fears Ss, aera 1

3. 5, Wears

4, @, a Aart

5. a, war egoufeoroat aaa’ at afact 1

nou
udu
ucdu
80
uS8inu
usu
u83u
ussu
088 uN

neu

6. S, TAT I 7. Gy, 1, UT, HTS TYST A

8 S, Wer oS tear

10. &, ada 11. 3, Saqhaxaarferer: 1

12. &, a Paxton ad aed aera 1

--- PAGE 220 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GAH Seay:

a: wrafafirgersa axit areca: t

197

a fafghte arene axa a aet? nfay vou
_ Besar waar’ ay drareieorcatsirart

a aaa wane: asi aoedtefaarteht: W8du

aeepd Prarged> qgerqenrtor Feyetey 1

saan’ ed ate OR ares aig u3sn

HSI: WAATAT” aagufsrsraHr: |

Seeear vyar araurafasier Vea n 100 tt

pagent Fara alseuggterarfSre: 1

qeNadeard yang ara u IT n

narafgarenr a af feafsaaht Sa a1

a ete? a ant arat a wat aa agar 01020

a ¢q a qeafeafra?? a a aif: |

Sad fsuraaa: cada a de: 0103 0

Farearant at goreff? ataratt fia: t

armagadiarl a: Asal? ara TAG u 108 0

ateeerdt g at at care aot yar Faas

pot mafereist? Rrecernfinesfe = 108 n

fegaafadion: serarefatige:14 1

Wawra amet verdad aq n 10& u

1. S, Serra 1 2. SF, AH

3. &, @, adapt: t 4, a, drantfrenfratsia: 1

5. 7, oy aa 1 6. &, afar

7. %, WyAaEda 5 S, WYTATKAT 1

8. 1, oT, aagalearaet 19. HT, a, BTS

10. &, a 4a a qeaher Brera; s, 7 weagagafar t

11. &, weaRAET I 12. &, atseaes 1
13. %, 1, a, Tear a TaTT
14. &, 1, a, asrarefir Peat

--- PAGE 221 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

198

pariaaer

AAS MCATHAILeA WAT For? Fats |
PaareggueMtaferamwa qatar:
anlrrgearereqgraacay FT:? |
gararetfirg steaftrat® serorfizer:
geargeaagyl ecar aratagirat arnferg t
a ott aaRad cere a Porat
rarer Sfegarret darareafer aaa? 1
weearedt a waefer ster: aq: orf Peeresr:
aragr sett: wir aergr atfwarer ay
after at Sate’? ag a vag afiraae:
quraracaren Prggerearacatar az:

o aed Feet we arg’ wilerraar:
geatfe asaqgrt areet? speverrfires
great eqarala a: Aaa at? qeas
gfe & afr tf pagenfgaqrrg 1
aaa pom fs wer: stig feahe

fa sftparra fraforitergrt wercest
VATA gorgaeaey asaA-
we aqvakaraded Searenca-
mae ATA GSA Tewra’* 1

m

. &, afer: araert

. wy Baraat adit 7A 1

. 3, Rearedt a strerafeaar t
27, TesTe 5 Ss, at rT

. S, Hag ware fe 1
SH, OT, WT CT 9. 1, TART
. 3 MARTA TZ!

onnur kh WN

n 708 u
uO
WOR 2
"990 0
i
w7qRu
ud 0

u 998 i

» &, 8, camnietyamt arora asa; s are 7
7. BS, wed Say 1

--- PAGE 222 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

FS Sours |

—Sntting—

STeeqara t
pou Neeakr gases a wary
pagontedenrende? ag & wut

geat sara t
qu af cagarftr cent ct oRoeare 1
wer TATATAT MAA? Sagrera:
fereecareept wa Aretar: querepfior: 1
PoIAQaaear wsted 4* gerat:
quitiaafean> squreactarafag 1
saanpertacdeg ferrarerraag’® Fre

POV TALIA FATTY: t

ypeaareigad: qaqa Hovethras
ger afersige: atraterfaafra: 1
agrarfetaga: yqaay asta? fra
aat ga: parte wreer agert (rr
qorerget woreda genlra anna:

. &, yore t
. 5,1, o, pogemifeastat ares t

wo nNawn ere

. H, AeRATTAT t
10. u, wafieguitta ; =, gernfra

« Sy FAR 4. @, ware
- 8, 7, aT, GonPraefaed 6. a, Rr asda
. Sy Hear 8. UT, wrt

udu

wu
udu
uSu
u Sit
w&u

neu

--- PAGE 223 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

200

poriaaey

aq? adot pate get: sfricateast
peagnfakrar areas carat Tae
aeaalitar safer pata sframgqereny |
aqeag carat are sper eaerargara
Seaisefhfr sreara? adarrfezporfeeras 1
afer dfacer abiteg: pogereal waq>
gearfgeerontta: weal Rrra: 1
aeat oadbhefe yfeagacat:* a aster
Taped Fasratseod oat ararfrafae 1
garaas anreter: sreqral arygqge ya:
arya? TP gra HerpeTATTAT sy” 1
wearotprcasdied wer traarars ay
gearatrataiad resets aay t
pega raed wariganlerey
THOS AAA LarcaTSaATHS ATA |
sfyierarar ef Sagat waratg
arrerearearragergaahgeg asa t
arava Hea vedl aakardal Ha:
gearangeret gy arorararhyhtrt9 fret
osgiakascardaragrg: atiear

aa

+ F, TK; SF TTI

. %, G, wear

. Gy 5, PST TaARAT 1
2%, S, eae:

41 10. m, Hyxdiet aT
+ S, TeRSG Yarra t 12. 5, FE
. 2%, IIE aATayliged aromararlea t

OrFUOUN UR WON H

udu

uSu

nd0u

w4ddin

nau

nt

ud n

uu

nu

nou

o S, GeAraT 1 6. Hy, U, STyAET; ST, arTartt
+ U1, F, TNTAS 8. UW, aka; H, FT, aT

--- PAGE 224 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ae Sears: 201

BATS AASUASINGTACH AT |
Rrarerqadrarfegeaaratantirag t

qsqaricaiad wrgfghdtRar wddn
gfrear aigeratiegsrcararerier = t

sulemara fycraxatt seaufghedt Rar widiu4
gergeurftr anea? qoreaty farafag t
aligagara gorgtghdiar nou
Hs 34 vfasra waster neafaq? 1

HSreAT srearear sarageatgeat aS 1

faart Wedfggrr gacatsedt ear nda
qoagfg, ramet qeare asrerarate 1

at Gor net waar arene Bremer ava wy
posdat Peer gar Pane afirar fae 1
wearenisanifosd fafrada gaitg nun
ravsnsarant Faat sore sraerarz”

aolet alisd Feat wos ave Bar Ara HWa
sestarat agea® srrwasa ator |

areease weg? ora: quiets, ne wu
eye HOTS AEA EL WTI HAT
arareaattyertraeararttr qsaeqrte neu

. a, wateanrgarate: t
+ S, Qeirgearact tert
. &, garearig; <, Ware
. S, waApalare: t
.&, Sodmemeanrdgagra aw; a, dftent sreroreif-
wet aS oT, a, dordlenreadiqater a 1
6. S FEI 7. Sy Waa)
8. S, Taret ages Tart 9. @, TIewAgasgnt
10. U, , wgaet singsrafearasa aaa 1

ak wn

--- PAGE 225 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

202 poriaaer

Foor ar feroreat ar Genare ar prxaq* 1
waghnonigarared wrearrazafader gt
aya? qeasan porale frarerferg
aa arama eet are Pafarhag
até: affimeb otetstaratsrea: t
aegha: axtoratreahie Frense wag

a qeby orarftr atfiraec: parahtt t
varkedea nfgsea® gota: 1
natletseanfer adot aes WaT
areepat BU wansgerhrg:aare 1
argsian Rebarraraeraren frarhreaty
weary depen Parag Goget casdaq 1
arenat axes arf arar wtear a® dara:
fear gootyaraar® a steer sate HA
R erefer ar qereaat gra az ag
arader Prat seal a recor Prerrera: 1
qzeazfatikrearg, apet gar Prefrae
aceigrafergfasa*° arcar peqara Pra
Meret aterot caret neaqarretrerg
get ada careaah Paarcenit
*aq g qeammt: carghts a gear

ta so qeamat: wrearghag a gear t

1. 3, euaey aearear snuet arate J

Ty Hy SF AIST 3. 3, offacthee: 1

noun
urn

www

un 30u
u 370
W3Qn
u 33n

u 384

n 380

. S We 5. &, vartiresa after

. a, wifi; s, aRrergen ateasa af Pre agatha
. S, ARIAT ATA 1 9. m, , gourfrareat t

2
4
6. 1, S, aaepagara wogefagaay i
7
8
0.

1

. me, aqeaeathrasT 11. Gy sere a ATT!

--- PAGE 226 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ray

ae Sessa: 203

aftagiegraagtreqaaeras? |

agraatraed: wienasae FIT n 3&0
arya arerar gat gfe: get xferefers 1

afitett afeget anfasatcerr off: itfregar u 30 0
got quigar afr ara: pears

aicor: aranafirer: Steer CH: HoT: u3én
aaaft arfteft gar adtRrsaffeett wPa: 1

ara whtar fagar Streit? arfeoft ear

ira aya: arsstear greaifrar:? n 33 n
qaifaesnr safeedt sateat fragfeteett 1

gan: geart after gorwmerazy aft t

anaar afganfer> aan actaan: wer: u8on
afectar eqfesshg: arfeacertteifer: Rerer 1

Rafe: fafsRfr aaa: eaastaar ger
ASMA HAIMA: Bz TEA Hon” w8Iu
ore at oTfalt® errfeadieardt ePranifas 1
azqranqatitferdtat: qeaasion:? j

saeronrar Rreursirar: wy: erat wer: BQ
efter Sgt war fragt wear aqq?° atftraft Feat
Sq qryafteyarat aaresiser FT

ASM Vara: Aaa Hor: n83n

aw, ahriegurafieesratese: 4

a, atfrett ,

U, SHUT; S, Hore agar: ater: war grew SfFaw: t
@, 1, S, TEST 5. @, atfeaviferr y

S, Gfe i a

SF, AHORA AAVEY HOT TAT: t

1, S star wurlesch t 9. S, war a gent Sart
Fy FTW | 11. S, Bram

SCON ARAN Fe
8 ee ee ee

--- PAGE 227 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

204 pontaaea

gastrtgace: ay drar srareonferar:* 1
puraacasnakanam Pregesn:? u88n
ferqfara after a fren aifeaeattar a

afeaenr dtfeeer arf Pres? aRrepr ger <u 8S
Seat Beargar aresqar areal Tar 1
sarftefy sxbawar a ateart CAIs: HST: |

AARON AG eAAHSt: HAT u8&n
mart Tepe ral _LaASATLT

araag girs ereagebercagrlean:S uiou
faconiifer wer asa: STATS?
agerafrrsarengaarraratgan:” t u8cu

AeaTiaRa Gols arenas asa: t
ara & [a] oon Salear wearet goers 1 8S
srautapcarategrepst azSgureafer 1

wraeqaguama Eriageshifer? n 800
aporanzarate?? Pafgareraey ght |
argacd atari agit frorarshaftr 0 81 n

*= geae ga:  “Coepinredatae: gferar afc
farar:?? geaftras eatenrg, FRAT

ta ges “mortar Pett goae®t ar: gerep geet
agaate astra arecadser asait: ? gait gurtt

1. 7, 4, S, wertert 2. 3, Rerearenra Pregm: 1

3. Gy, tfereert 4. &, Paegrar:

5. S, waneg pa dat 6. S, aera

7. 3, agiefiazar: wqkaarare gra; uw, saararer
eaaryt .
8. UW, wee Hora, w gras “mr”? zara “at”?
arat Gere |

9. U, TarBIeGEHUMAts 5 S, TavT eg vearRaayd-
wftriti) 10. a m1 11. , Gear ad

--- PAGE 228 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ae Jeorst: 205

agidiecersy seared TETSU | '
year aarqarart afr Rreageot ge? w8Vn
and orgaat? afin: gfeReganftaar* 1

Rafaer casramretiegursspar® n 33 n
Rerteregegear® saat Pregumftaar t

aa ag Faraqaare Fat gs u 88a
Terreeattegacan wagers ler”

and orang gg Fgoreat geruligag |
arqasitrg: ater: eaterafgaent 3 * u 8S
amd agpasa anafgestfe amaraz t

STARS aa: eect aafigir eseqhfer a Ww 8& nt
Hertel Peper Hrareasaregt: TZ I

ardia mMaereqrea peared agua: w Sou
marg wrargaar sia acarfafReAe: 1

aftaakyea: adage: ha W8Cu
Tat: war arqaisaraa[osegr os arlgeprez wraTeq? |
ara daaisa qaueaals warq w8Su

*s orate gat ot “aimed aqupasa ararltett aa: cet
Ro ad” at andr W ast’ aa: ce ert atar sey
aera pe pe FS ani Aet ow ge dl” A’? saree
ee
. S, aghttareited pear tag cawleftr 1
. Ss, eget ge
+ FS, Weert
3, GeReg: aeear
Sy WaeTSUeT MATGEGASSHay t
. S, Raraategeyea t
- &, arfafers <, wftfir 8.0, a, wafeahs
+, AeA 10. &, cagentfgesr aeqaf

wONauoh WN BP

--- PAGE 229 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

206

portaded

gatgagion Ppagatctattas t
daa’ aaeg gaagagqgar
WEIS ASAHTTA VITA AATAT |
arghtd mera? draszerntag?
TeReAT cerhs Hrgearena Sxha
ruralatatasararcar ental Gate a
qatar sftysrgediea york a argeery t
feonlt® arama aeafrarar aarfkra:
aeoeelt Agaceaen’” arat wgET TPA: 1
fercore aftsar ser acarear grqatrar:®
age wawrwte aareqra Wada: |
MAPA Baya ayes
garaat tacepl?? aragaeda: GZ
wat sore: geeeta? carga atRar:
array aRrara weet arene? 2eqar
Haegt araat Faro: ase at wast Ferar:
aniseed arsth* Sefer Poder ace fRraeqt
vattrasa Prgre arerate aagrraq?s
aa: WS amas Sdtarareag Ft
Aetaaeaey wreotategane 1
aayalet aratate ateake

RR

OrONA Awe

. &, Far areata 2. & aegyras
. S, AETATa 1 4. S, Waa

+ BH, My S GRANT t

+, 1, U, Ure: Yakraneteg art

Sy STAT 8. &, Rerari

« S, HY! Tas 1 10. &, Saari

+ Sy ATALT YHA | 12. %, 7, Tapia

u Ou

n&Iu

we Qu

n&3u

u&u

n&Snu

ua

n&ou

neu

n&Su

Soi 14. 5,00 fra: 1 915. s, Pras

--- PAGE 230 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aS Sears: 207

aafer aferge? aafaredgat i

areaxat gorarite? arad year war u90 u
waa Barr wsdtaagerd:s t

eorcar Hat weeafaat seaqearmarfefa: =n 61
Faerrertataren FersforenrPartt ot: |

arrerat fearmifa serot waetar uu

fagcubsoaguragiggaiey a7 1
quge Hee qalter ele ar ger ahaa: uesu
gg earerg safir asifea axat Rrargé 1

“ereat wht? acar pares zat ae: v8 nu
war watgst ett wag erearyarg werrtt |
war aesrat!? ger: aferarfes sre wOS tu

anftrecaredts Faraert* gota fasta: 1
aren a fagararg afeerdt?> gear wag 8

rat afe: alcet ar palergatony¢ y

wrptetad at gaara atsaq?7* noon

* syeah qa: god “eqepriePad qaneearta deo”?
afer sdteergufteated 1

1. 5, aRarceaaa t

2. S, qarkrearhe t

3. w, Fatoa qaag git: 5 a, wsifkaraaeadh: 1

4. S, wexakert 5. &, Parsforer i

6. S PS 7. Gy, 1, at ae Tt

12.
14.
16.
17.
rere 1

. S eqag vankrar: | 9. a, s, aed Brat
- US, red Shri 11. 5, aaa azar

S, water 13. 5, a1

®, a, Fasaea 15. w, afadt; =, atherert
a, god aftra: wlicerr at etraradany t

a, griota st garcia date; s, garcate

--- PAGE 231 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

208

porlaaer

qa aderdicar afidg wheat 1

frat alarecti? afer ar gather ws op
aasray Tanne agercakegarftr a? 1
afasreardaater area? Bron nag
neddiat Reardte faftrdtase aq aaa
arar arara® ad Haragy ag arene
fanarahatia’ ag ag at alr a1
a ReBagarer we Raeafer saagtea:®
agattakeawatfir a nalta aarcer |
garfats sarefte? acaatftr malta Fe
afgerar and ant Haatarderrfeg 1
gaanthrg** ware ufrrgherrnangey??
qa aeawrea qeaoataarsrerary t
pardaniga adt* sot arafer erevfer
aed aeand Aad Faar aeawlaost |
asa a> gfsrart af aeda aeftele
armtafgaintea adg:afracarg t
arattearetaktag, ga: Hone: gst:
minia sae Daw aAeag a1
aaorate Sarat wert aed ofahray

- 7, 8, Retreat 4, Grorghranend 1
TT, Sere ATI; GW, aT a ATTA 1

an woe

10. S, afgaret i 11. =, Arar

12. S, Wawa 13. 5, Fasa aeawusz t

14. &, Wea 15. 3, Waa
16. &, aaeq 1 17. 3, a4r1

- & Aga azT 1 7. %, Broarafaaaat i
8. S, PANT | 9. S, war aUMerayer t

uedcu

uoSu

u don

ucdu

udu

ndé3u

udu

ucSu -

udu

udu

. &, ar a aad 2. 4, &, adrareitfegaritr a1

--- PAGE 232 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ae seore: . 209

aearg aed? fRacar at earcat arafad? Rraq i

aiear Fegarg aa qaafgRrer ha wdon
wens grag got Peer aed alfa a

agifged ofkeasa® Gaareraarcaqareg, wddu
geehs Goenfer a SF aH qeray gery
aagrantaar Faareafgurera:® n80n
aaa gaat qatqeagaary 1

Saat srs wd wed? asaTentara: wStu
qearfeaat arear spect: atreaer: FA? 1
fahranadie® arargaar yneftafer US Qu
MNsteratey as aracer Kray? t

qsaaqurcan seagearerarhe Ar: w83n
narstelganisattarizea seater

WIS saniscta Wea AAA? w3su
arnrmtadat apt adage freghz: 1
agpranierasa aa Breage: 1
earraategfererag?s faftrag paanftras w8Su

APU ASA AKA THs agesryz i
seamafea agence adateaaar: wS&u

1. &, Wea

2. @, arepias 5S, gartaq aet

3. &, agerfaaft waar 4. @, oa

5. &, 1, F, qrawitat af adh 6. S, HET

7. @, Wa 8. &, fraraartag 1 9. &, rar

10. &, atgraraAdag 1, 11, %, 7, a, Bf
12. &, 1, a, waftiimeag ead; a, ava Ergeqyfhara
13. &, 1, U, araTaeasaereded 5 Gy, Waraeragncacse |

14. %, S, RET t 15. &, dReaar: 1
494914

--- PAGE 233 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

210

Portada

aeqet fzal gat erat afescor Pret
mares Mita ada poaeaay
aeysrenftrarase agreprifir.adag t
astergysatra adagfirarcaes t
pitereysatta camry adag Prat

Ga aeaet Safir? gavgstreferrferter
Faargeat sfe yeagadiga quraq?
agfra Saami arcar arasrareaedt:
axnat Peqgt wa Sarasa gaudy
FATT ACA AT PGA SITAA |
parla a wore a raT eI

gaat Pagrazisig® yxagfarar ssastfery?
va agse ose ard Aaaka az
arrere Patera steerrfor Ferferarfer =
aqgnsrcta dirqesa aati

afer & afird ofa poracer watz t

nSlou

u8u

n8Su

u 100 0

Veteh mn

goreieareg gars? fsacag stgf=esf 11020

afa ftgonta frafudergrt were
walter argent qsaa-
we Barateraaea Fors eaTT
fararereeet ara oe
srore nu & ti

. 5, esanar Aaygt wgqele

wpnaarr

. 5, varrt «2. 5, aterrart ~ 3. w, weadaehrn
. a, wa; s wa! 5. &, a, afar

- %, 4, Aaa; 1, Ada 8. OS, ATT

a, pater: 1 10. &, pagel aewre: t

--- PAGE 234 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AIH SeUTT |

onting-

Nea 1
pou anda afesa aferarsenry* 1
agora? wdtert ag & peorferet

feat Jarsq |
agar afer cergarltr went ct afeqeahe 1
ae TAMATATS Taal Teprayréd
grasa ah qurataccra Horaly |
quite gaan: wal: ercorg asrarelh
agentdtey asitenrE Teagearerarkeras* 1
adensaferaaa gear ffrarcaarg
ufsBancrdandt gael awrega4 t
aera rae vaca Batar:® HPaeafe
acerca agaritr gorse spavarrfre
a: aafaaaao ae agaecqagar:
arat wat gatgate agate at
amfa atesemrmamatiges
faaala ag agarssarerqaag wa: 1
gat gat afe eget otaaewur 1
saat agenedisd agqracafiargqat:
afearaat aagel age: adfafige:
atfear pity & Pret aaatarwatea:

1. 1, o, frat. 2. 1, a, aATET

ndn

WAu
w3n
un
wn
w&u

uu

udu

uSu

3. U, Twa 1 4, ww, TPA 15. S, HET

--- PAGE 235 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

212 portaaca
aad aa: waaPrapa: ag asa

aang anion: ahaa a nn
ag anal? sifeefho: emfeefro: ag aq
aaraafa ag? ter aifeefter gar aaa Th
gait afes peut carereat aPrefterey:

awratst neeifer wea? asareqeran: uRa
ar iPaq atBrat dar dear atcarar ager? t

aad wad oat Marg F aar nu
arat agq aha: ad ga

grag qagkeal qqgaa:® acagqarene: nu
azar & faferaresrer Fesar? wrarearfers: t
qraredear & SPaesaarer” vrferar: udu

qaran® aeaaearee gegrar: caotahteran:? t
qaeg danera: sfesretcad afery udu
artvat agafe gud slag aq

gan agwarara axargheseahur*

adfacarey 1g aearg arerafgadt were uu
TEA wag Fararsag wa:

watamcafeattrar gar afe aeqi

Te Te fysteaist gaarsra: rats un

* = geae cargiag aria

1. S, Wart 2. &, adreafaag t

. HUH 4. &, aterar fe 1

. U, Tarélaet: 5 S F HE 6. a, &, ag
. &, ore wart 8. S, ARE: |
. S, Tat: weeguafeart 10. =, adr af
11. 3, Axeatfafsare wt

wn aw

--- PAGE 236 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WIT Grara: 213

agiseaat: Mad: wafalgagraa:* 1
aisReay ee rare a gaara Rg: 1

Waist afeqrte adzeat aug F ndn
aad agure sftarergazrargy: t

at & ga greardl Araifulsara a Wu
aaburaega:? wrarggartieg:? Faq |
fagaiuqaniter aargaaegay Wwrd4
Haasag? agar wewsa* ag Tat

MAGA WAT PSFAIs TAH Wu
fafggqaag arReae eoreathraag aa: 1
nrarraaasRrey eargerraaa aar:5 wu
aaggwanafa editqaag wa 1

Rragag war TAS ag aa nrWwu
asardifa ag ararsianta ad aq t

war wafecenfiroas gat get af agq on Sn
TS TS PLSG AT aay |

saagorsaag® adfacafrdreag WE
areatgat at af agar afgiadtetg’ 1

Ratesr ateaz F cepa ora: Hou
* sora ga sre argesrnge afer t

ts geam ga: at esterg afta
1. &, satvared ad: 3 S, aatearaea: 1
3, fifi: 3.5, 971 4.5, ia
+S, aftry arta gerfrrae ae:
+ S, Fay wsae yrs 1
. 27, 0, at aft aqarara afheag; s, at aff of a ait
Heats WUT t
8. F, WAT

NA as

--- PAGE 237 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

214 Hpurtaaeay

atat aaq aargyay Haas 7
wrereragat gat gar afwrar: azz I
Tega Fgoreatsorerfeerrent va:
aaa afar agaataatad: |
WTUTAY sat F velag waar
aRat age Fa2que aBrefrafesq
ge yaa gare qaaresa share
warersigat mea quit poets
aequrafianasy ager afe: aya t
asteftreanrartrenreqeathreftates:
seq aatfirerat wcrafes: Far
aeqysandihassd garsatag |
AASAAAVAST UAUAICT FT
agardiey ance Hadrarey veatirg? t
sogergtea agesyfearara:®

Harz sAVHraHreey fratorafereprarey’ t
pofsantteo: peafeara acarey asa ar
aera afecast vatacatframarey
Faar geqaft ara padrarey Rragaq
aaeraahe safer caer se
arrerferepfirg efer speror ar Parga
gpodtaey wesate okeargar aarata

1. %, wT; s, age 2. @, Fat
3. &, 4, 4, asiereaneqeaiia t
4. 3, af ata 5. 5, aaa

wru

n@wu

v 200

win

wa

un 330

n38u

uw 3Su

ny 3&0

6. u, Raquragfita galgareyateam; s, Fad

ceatits patgaregereaart: 7. s, mPrarert

8. 71, 4, arated 5s, THETA ga afer work

--- PAGE 238 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAA SeoTaT: 215

caterer atealter ar deat qeartast 1

qrafiear ata ararfafe smzaea Pagaa: ut 3 0
ardifirat Rat pate ae: ceareaae 1
aradtentaarta’* yg® vate aera u 3a
wena Goan’ afar seargeareaehrs +

grat Faaragar uprard Braga wasn
ager Herereals waged wWeteTt:7 1

arger faatagur Fag Wwe Ya gay on SON
alata g a: wet puget rray t

git frené wer gaara oeftefe udu

asta ate a anret? gawd qar 1
ward agar? aa Saif frxrmreart =n BQ
Hpurrathts Waacnperes gear? |
‘wegat?® ehftsat Ga measitdt a costa 4H 83 n
TraasyY ustay FRredt aatferat?® a aerrecit y
TeaAASaAAASAT AAAraar her u8sn
garnet at areata a arg grererh arts
arate tae; area?” ar star west gh: uu SSF

. 5, 1, 1, Tenet; =, dlerarse feta: 1

=, fate 1

S, snaet saaragur Aadepreaftay

7, &, Prarerat:; =, ferarctert 5. aw, der; =, Rrra
. a, weet 7. @, AeA: 1

. a, 1, a, ota; s, waar

9. &, S, ATagt 1 10. a, after; a, wocait
11. 1, a, Seaetfiear: 1 12. S, vagereaqera f
13. s, ataeri 14. Gy, 1, FT, Tea

15. @, wTay; S, Salt 16. 7, 7, 41

17. S, BTSy at: aera: t

--- PAGE 239 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

216

portance
BHAA SANT Agere wT
gear aeott orear? Soraya? wPa: ngeu
agréranr afeagerar ser areatasttferctt* t
ararear® gfrer a Rearear Praag ou SlOn
esaqanraear® gra alfsahrar 1
ferreerer ferstaatr Garararearaitegaar t
matter aararar wferartar” Beeror udu
gala? waar ge? gRaar pagacft* 1
gerarer aarevar var gearttgeswart? = 88
fergracafegetarts drarst sarfrdtfsar t
giear pferar* ger aglerar teeafira’> 80 n
pant praarerar frésar seer t
Rredlennist crear ceracalraraater 1
Sqaft aeagaasa afer ar’ feast 870
adistenfg ad neatgn? quae t

ga: gatfet*aaar vedh Qe anda n8Qu
araafta: ga srorargt wa: ToT I
seaaiirercat? ormeacrgyitag u 834
Rarer Aaa? arar pro acat asq
RAINUIST TT: TRATAgW wa: TAA u 88 in
1. &, WdeY Nat; a, 1, a, argawinaqi 2. S, wea
3. &, cagergfear 4. &, 5, Teuredraatfrelt t
5. H, APTA «6. S, a RRATI 7. &, aferatert
8. 1, 4, FergT1 «9. US, eaeaT1 «10. SF, gfeari
11. @, agri 12. S, aUrfter Wagar SWARIGASSAT t
13. a, giew 14. a, v, g:Raar
15. &, 7, &, teers 1 16. a, afeaait; c, ae
17. S, Aeateer 18. m, ga: oars

19.

S, Taffiresrerea 20. 3, Waar

--- PAGE 240 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Maa Seas: 217

Rear a aq edt crag aged aq wet asa

aq aa yea area? aeanftanfeater

watered) Tafteqaafkaacacae: Fa uv 88u
atadisataar af qenar Heat rats

wa pealid adfife arrears area W8&u
qe armed safer aqear arear a aifercras
maraaaarge aftarereg aaaaAS 1

ua arazot at Preadig saeqrasi” won
afier® anafer guaran waAT t

argmd egkseranvsie aqaearuy? u8cn
agenae adet agrgqpegreaa:? t
qafanfratien wterratta: w88u
reanratar Prafet after aad 1
edighvemast mrtg aataarmedrt =n 80
atorarafaanagttatrcat aftargqeatesifaattt2
faratdt aaa Hea HTT HBT 1
yggt** aagguseaeit arramypissaat?s

nradt aoratshte gferageals af generar GIN

aN an ke

- 3, FL pi 2. F, yegared 3. s, Reracagueae: 1
. &, fires S, wari 5. G, &, Aras t

+B, Gy AHeSAT 5 1, AYPRAT; S, TAT!

. %, A, F, SHIT TIEGYN 5 S, qaITGA

.s, aneafr

. &, BRar Peaghocarsst aqaeaey t

. 3, aug a yAaBA

11.
12.
13.
14.
16.

wa, Hfweafal ; =, afearifeett 1

%, a, tetqargrhaet 1

B, Surwal 5 w, BaTgarg; S, Baraat
By Porgy t 15. S, Gsasvaai 1
S, wore aera 1

--- PAGE 241 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

218

porlaaet

aa: stypewarat ara ceRrara a1
expat wagqea afgdtt aadig
warner agardhRert aE Fs
aneraega peat aragasatt
TAG Wael Fat PrarswTsag: |
aarfatr fgehaer perarenrageaTey
Rt armataeg gor aera 1
anengeat axa? adore fagtaag”
aeniteoraafedt: TaSaAAAGT: |
spe: Rrearey wagE qera<aat rae
Rreatarararars agra pantgany t
aarratterd ferererer® Rraerrenferatsre:
more afexers wleagareds eet: a
ware Caraat aaa Rrarr yeehaer

girareyeat? pear att aerat!arasiatt 1

areparmafer near iar stg eT
ariseereantearat qaracamarkary 1
wget faggege Saqreranetan:7$

amniggystattiranat Rrearer size: Fra

reper: Wreadeagiaafatr: frat

1. & yearns

2.8, TTTAGT | :
3. S, Gort 4, &, faeea aggaratt
5. S, Hamaeg vet gegen 1

6. FT, S TEL 7. &, Perera t

8. , frag 9. a, &, faeftarar
10. &, aracat 1 11. &, Takarqyear t
12. S AT 13. 3,

14. =, Prats

nan

n&3un

neu

n&8n

n&&n

n&ou

n&du

vn &Su

on

udu

--- PAGE 242 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AIA SEO: ‘ 219

etaygaded amrdar* poraly |
dgatarnawaa? wages famaag, uu
arankeqearec yer RAR ARIRCE S| acahy: t
ard: canigiaihet wrausiat aealegt
gaaa fraraaa gered faraagq uw 93 4
we: Rrarefaaed: irae sarees: |
quar? Rraaxcrar ot 3¢ Fata wn
sefaraaafeaaiisenr arear” a1
adamant stst ada? Retuag tou
sade og gare algdtoae ye? 1
wees geo qd mteahtie ateazez 1
waar Areata: FRreat Fersersg Fea: Feaaferq? 08 y
afinat!+ ceed ada ayAEary t
Rramyfeagred og e¢ fafaratq?? vison
werner wig? qed frente t
quad Rraaed earlefr aerad sag? vleu
qs aaasrae WWhatcar a arate
a sfasta gaa: waifefe gearing nou
. &, Safgartes atnract
a, ayes 5 S, AytaTT Ter

+, WT, T, FATHTS t
we, yetatien 5 1, a, aad: eg adatiea t
. &, rata giraret: waaden orga
. 8, @, WaT
. &, aifsearsaear t
. S, wearaarfird Ast ada 1

9. &, arathaat ger afgdtanis yeq; s, sirad-
Racer afgdtenfaer ye:

10. 7,4, 81 11. e,agnati 12. =, fexiaig i
13. , Taos WaAET HUTT 14. %, aq

--- PAGE 243 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

220

gortadert
aa: rper a pe: Rreea: gaat vag 1

ana geo gat afgatarad? Frtq udou

sypRsIegearat quae? Harare

attafaer Paerery gfer areata Frofa:$ nciu

mortgmalesranraRefaserorey t

atfeararate weg aT AagragreagT warn

Brie a aera oraRad fadtaa* 1

asnieneatraraa afet gewerhra udé3n

ag afaaagd Prarfer rates’

agarerageag art tater uu

Pad career cea aa aSGA ATA: 1

aenaated Vata arareateafear Ta? aU C3

gated Prana grader trad? |

aenifgut ger af gotisé cat Praremeq? a CE

Feat aR qoacan arafarg

sapere: Hateisaret eet: eet: udou

zarcngafrarrr alfeaiaanat |

posearpraraga'* gerq got BATaHy udu

* = Geaa oratane Fadia gered argue at gaat

1. w, w, (atone 1 2. 3, mat wae}

3. s, maftarihrag fF. 4. S, sora aerast

5. S, WaTeoE I

6. @, Pameardrararreataegua: ca; 1, Rrtearer
frararcearaeqaarett: 5 S, Pat carder enaraaereqaa:
wad! 7. &, Wareareakaraa 1

8. UG, &, Taxaraeeaaarars caveareadar daa t

9. &, frarara: 1

10. U, caTagofaataantateanrar 5 s, aca |

11. w, Pragta; s, groserpiatage t

--- PAGE 244 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BATA Joa: 221

aerararanRafigearrcangay |

arrerarad ad etary? ucSu
yeqaaneatet aaah gar t
aragesranteagaan Reery von
usual Pafgg aad? drat atreragraan: 1

garg aaguifta: are rafrdtraqs u8iu
wisatted Fert vet ware ulster Fao 1

aya afgarettarg agest year Te usu
adit gat card Hrd Ha

adie fear art Sas Proagait u8du
qrasa fated wad feoadtzagearg 1

feat Gouna: oer AT Garaa paAs 1 usu
eave agachtd? agora u88u
ufeargfeang fer drt aftr aaq7 1

agate attend sitet arate FB? uS&u
genrraargena atasatt waka wat° y

arad wet cepdfat? agora: coy u Son
qacafeguiaet oacal gadHay 1

araga fageneaeae cet wag? * WS’

* Ss geaw ya: oe argasiar arfea i

1. S, AA ediarwanrg 1

2. S, wees: Pafga: drerdt i

3. 7, Wawnftr: Hs rah; s, pay wa Rar

4. u, &, farang 5. UG, S, aglaa Fa
6. @, S, ater 7. Gy &, Aferang frr 1
8. S, aaa 1 9. w&, aqe Facnes Fr

10. @, ategrar aveugafafaur: 1
11. @, Waratah GaBTsir
12. &, wag a; rad act a gedl ara Sara: 1

--- PAGE 245 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

222

Hporiaaea

guifitagearat aret efer Erveae i
HULA WaARRAA? AWTS T AKG? t
amare Raget a gaat ara aaa:
tear teat gat: Pear are oath way
sera a get: Heat Gasten ar fereret
ataegraare sat qesar Hea: caay |
anata’ wdagarma aeathafararatg
enqaatat + aq ge poatranry t
aq ge arama qasarft a frat

aa ga polis Gagealitacarg |
aa seater ale: cag aah aTrerey
afe & wire febagq> agracafegsary 1
aaraat poaifer fos wer: stg ftreaher

ak wON HE

ata sftponta Gratusiegre aereest waf-
THAT Targa MTHS Barat
raed aeereranlegert art
aan srore, wou

. St, TERT
. H, TT Wega 1 .
. a, Test Ana: 5 S, qedarg Axa: 1

. H, VINE; G, aaa t

- Sy TH A

uSsu

u 1000

n 40TH

nIORu

u 103 0

u 108 u

--- PAGE 246 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SACHA Seo t

—onrno—

sPesqars t
gor sighzats ssorgaratea*
SeoTaAAg Fax? gorcrafeagay
wages? ft amhearrrta a4 1
act afoaradtat ag FX aAaxaz

Seat SarA |
gor afer aagatit aeat ct afegeste 1
aer sauna sraa Feeraraar
sree Aaa Asha a
AGAMA ATARAT TACHA Ga AAA:
axaat eargreer: afar: avarrhres 1
ara aeniveraearet Gaara
Haat nate: aeageorea: gerto: FAs
wea geratarar® stefteahrdtas
AYIA as 7 gesq? aratserq?© 1
aatgg Neageare aa pafg waraet * |
qatktreert cart pdfet cateay

*S qeah wlarse a gee 1

1. G, wera 1 2. S, ForeT 1
3. S, Wraps |

4.1, a, Raftiea:; =, feafate 1

nda

urn

n24

usu

aSu

n&un

won

5. raat: WeTgTi 6. a, aydtearea; <, weitere |

7. 1, BIaTT | 8. a, grastarary t
9. 3, agree fera ah adedq
10. @, aesaracy Aeet 1

--- PAGE 247 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

224

yorladet
oditrazaratzaradttegae: 1

gue: anautel? pale goaugiay
ara weanretea casaaaaFeRr:5
aghh: gga pute goraghayt
ealfRe opeAr: ercoiiear ster sarc: t
pornandieca a palq gorustag
agaraanntoran: afereresraryen:” |
pountatiaraaag aRasiaqe
wWepPS? a agGa ar agiraracahaay:2° 4
cacganfagen: wraaaat oR
wigatraaagat Resararahatt arate
poranrattarat ag asfifere
agediearnsat? gareaxferarrany |
frat ayaa a pate goraghry
qeurd a odie af are Poa: |
near: queqar afd? faragda ag az
TTARATSYSA FT FANTYRAMT Tt

ale gerepomifer Gaarenranraarg
wie vista craarat maafeaqt |

MART AGA ara PVG

1. &, Tea 2. FS TAVIE 1

3. a, ATR A 4. S, waagherq
5. 1, a, ealges 1 6. S, aTgeret 1

7. a, Sreqertateas: 3 =, gfrerertfrrar:
8. m, aed aslafar 9. 1, FT, S, AHS
10. &, Ggrarenacter: 1 11. 7, Frearoraftr t
12. S, GSAS t 13. S, em

14.

S, yUacomarler 7

15. H, ageq

udu

uSa

n 101

nada

WR

un

nwa

Wwrsa

uq&u

nqWou

--- PAGE 248 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

wen sears: 225

wate ar patraiieen:* aatwary
qaghmratenggaaRadaraa4r * udu
afiaey wardaraltgie: eaereatafh 1

mitted agate ataaa ager uu
mi Prahreitiea cext qrarasy |
waRTTAUgErQwreased? arena WR0u
wahag ageear meat caleoracg* alert: |

ara Gaaoacar Pref ys areez> wn
Teufsargarassy pestecltreat: t

sasteutt asd wigearener ora WAR
waghos faq got diReesr ado

ares a arrest axa a wa wn
shod vgig tot anat aiReeradia 1
arash sahkr eeu” caret wa UewWa
afrerat <P Renn gugkoeataa 1

qa Wat alse? & waqragqreaqa usu
area fesetacg?© at ar meth ateas*+ 1
wreresrarg? wargia saarmaaraarg =n RR

¥S Qeade Fa AVA ares Tg

TS Ged aenteat TSR HT FAT 1

1. &, anfeee: t 2. B, Hed West
3. S, AGesar | ATT 1 4, a, anfearteg i
5. &, Bf We casa orehat

6. @, TRAPS aAAGAT 1 7. S, Tea I

8. S, ATI 9. G, As 1

10. 3, arecifesearasy t
11. w, geet: 5 ay perf Faget: 1
12. a, Vera

494915

--- PAGE 249 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

226

poriqaer

deta poem patgiofeestargt
gunrarghe: patferenter gy? sereaz
Teanga: Gea? wrMagksekzay |
nafaqesrwaaaed Fraley
pont fxd eae adfacerierarcony
aad ageart aarghortzay t
ufagt afe expat ng at Fyeteam:
aeggrracneatss gifeaaferPrcetts
sifearead Tscararadagfeferegh:
qafea goat qxarqagery
TASTAATTT aI tt
wacakrgreday’watres
aarfr arereeatireftorory®
Miterasrarest arssaway
aaa Rrear art fed Feet Pray
seanigaidareatscerdaamrrey |
aa: fteradeara?? postafrferarkrer
angt gtd tor: waararwegare’? 1
a & ad? sadiesyg Roramer Award
agurbatgast after: get amt
aifeaiaterr arg weg cater tear:

1. &, patefefrassiag t
2. &, fast yearns 5 s, Pritt art
4. %, a, 7, a, g aisle [agargeaesg & afSfa ord wealth

non

ae
wrdvru

u20n

u3du
u3Qn
u33n
usu

u 28a

3. &, Rreirt

wasn glemaanrarirg aseatrfeas aygferdr:] 1
5. &, ACTS | 6. &, WaearTaag 1
7. @, &, ate 8. &, apTemaitefiarg t

9. & aedataersy i 10. s, Farr

11. a, wags 12. &, aeraffr 1

--- PAGE 250 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SCA Seats:

argseprear afrarsesrar
odteqasiteqaaararary |

SET WRT HOST Tat:

alg wise warez Psat:

aegey ara geargy-auiant &
fagrrareaitamadnereaar 3 1
Argel Taos car: ae
area fagigagigammrar ®
acqeyg Pragxacagqgaana4r®
saereaar® anfrat agenr: pared: t
a? MBrefinaxdiapes wear
aegeg arafantfgrrergetat:
aegeg affafergor Freaeferst
frie Preaar freagarea |
fered rxostercar spxat Ferttar:?
MSTA MSTA TA aH AST:
aegeg ainfxar: peabryaar
arartara tear ganres |
rat Fgsir gaaal waa: Barat
at axeg rear yeneasler:

a, sefera t
+ BT, HoweaTt

S, arggent 1

S, wrggeedtars 1

- &, Fae 1

ayo

. a, aioe; s, ararhyfiaadrs

<, Ferearrs t 10. @, aaa

227

wn 3&0

u dou

u3du

u 38a

n8on

+H, FeTaTSAAGeaAT 5 1, A, Geurerler ayes

--- PAGE 251 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

228 porter

ary UrTEGer aearcarsr:t

gor: cag aaatgh? atBreftarrey

ar meray apg prltr wareraeetr

wear PAINTS Tes usin
arammnyfrramaay arg ar: aRerar

at: eragaergalersar ar: ARerar agg t
segreniaepargtiear rearrararce ar-

ear Seat Reqventaorcar aeqeg® alerfarear:7 usu
ar gen:® poanrar: Ralesrar ar FaarPeatasr

av Pret aBramar: firRasrar ar arakgatear:2° 1

ar satarfed*taeseryanar at: Aa: aaar-

war: wat? peavtarsetaen aiid qasseg F uS3n
wees serosal" ar fefer wsreras zWas ar aw arts
mas aaa? ar afeaaararatia pa Rerar ars

aa fataiaeg a paagr qadrarfeesert7

frat ea: war ar: er Safefafirar aeg aegace:?9 u

1. a, arararpraferarafrer: i om, a, aferarfeferen: 5
s, poreafeuratatsry |

2. S, Wor seeg waafefirt 3. a, met; Ss, Aer

4. W, Argyl 5. &, 1, seorarht; s, segrethiaars

6. 5, TEMTNEeg | 7. S, Heathrar: t

8. 71, ar fear: 1 9. Gy 1, F, aT ar tart

10. 6, ar frear gfeamm; «a, ar ger: afta:
wareorar; =, FaRrsrar ar ar afar afeerar: 1

11. 4, o, oararaT t 12. S, Sous

13. @, 1, 4, Tera: 1 14. @, TEITOTH t

15. a, s, ree ari 16. &, 1, S ast

17. @, fetraiadorleg a paar qadtarfwarst: 5S, Ae
Rerahterfes a padres GT: wAgeaT: | 18. @, pal

19. 3, eqereg areraereafoaloraferadudrarfeeser 1

--- PAGE 252 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HEA Sesras 229

wen ot: taguiqeacantn? tear: gaarer
aqarouagueagratgraayeararan:? t

wer neadferacas feftarergan: fereererer?
apirisano: Rptroecghrareasm: oeg as u83n
aeenhaetacr wenger? Marrar Axar

ABreat agerea aeiftaxt wor: Rrrrar wars |

aed apaearaer Pefraar Tarsapreaeat-

aquieat pagar aa: oat adrasaerye w8&n
weasag yweareuta Rrertt Saree Aq are”

Strat aq? aegaar afe wager? wart fe aq

aurea? af aafet wafer Sgrarcoratenfe eq?
wears a plewriacd warea wr: Adar u son
AeGeY AIH: AT AWS PHN: t

aeaat armrdy Aseg?? qeeatisey ye: aar u8cn
aerer ect seat afe Axanresay

FAT POAT: CATTS AREY FTE: u8Su
areata Salter eTTaAT |

AAI: WANA MPrahar reeaTey u 80 t

« &, 1, T, THIET 1

. S, waka verse aafiggern: Reger yererem: 1
&, frqeerger fesrdir; =, Prax: Rerrer cert
+, 1, FT, TEN MRATS SATA | 5. Sy WHAT 1
. &, fae: dicar afta ae t

+ aGy Sener are 1

S, WAAT 1

+ Sy HET

10. S, araedht

li. &, Ferarernara Aq

12. 3, wae arerdiaregy

OnNar aon re

ve)

--- PAGE 253 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

230

portant
feaag? araz: cath: Rraeg pean? t
Rasg Arar: at aa Fe sraferar: u 8dn
qeaeg? arax: walk: aggr: erorRrar: |
abrea: gaara wa es srafear: Su
fraraafreied senlgraracgary |
wroremighrarcasa srg ate Tag n 83.0
giver aftravsaer afte: sitateqget areter
qeannefaaranegras ata(catfier)staner Revers t
PAMATACAG ITA Asse eeaeT Ft
UgMtagHgarapgaad weer Farega* u$u
ofecarcodarrard wager? ype: FR
aay gare eafRreara’ ware evarifaras u SS
canfreaerarn’” Serer: aRathra t
Weredtestarta giga atBracws® 1
Mitatavss ta wargrereqyera? u 8&0
aqreasy ftig aprafaret or rae t
gra mreaaraPateatar aagalt u Son
awa 4g aa pt wet Et ar ate arse |
aad Qaanfel sae gegegh u8cn

a

domuaanen

Fa S Geaewat: wSstearset aT GUAT |

+, Taegi «2. we, AAgr: aoferar: t

. 3, Prag

+ Hy, 1, 7, AesE |

By AYRISA 5 T, AYFEITT t

- @, Ofireara

. SF, VETHV 1 ,

. &, Wetedt soraar ead] adhrss 1

.a;, amarreggeaa; <, Airelasdeda Feaayt
\

--- PAGE 254 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WEA Sessa: 231

sea Sones aegrt warkrePrsnraa? 1

fafisar goat afer oft Aedtafe:? u8Su
gira: wizofeadair: cated aearouriray?
suraisanaeizagit aista® gacferar n&On
Arent vorariranfet saat aeget wag

agesra Har ara’ ar aver ar wt akSear t
araterifaaceg a: eure a arerasr wu &F nu
qaeaesrar ster” Fersrar: axa rar: t
Farmgatear® qarsr: Bra sTaSTATy? WER u
SAG: WaAraeg: Ttat SreTa eT" 1
audtofgaasa afrarcaantgary 0&3 4
get arse ara:? agent farsa |
wrat fafear af alr geaPredrae u&su
amore areal ater aPreat agaeerer:?? 1
ware safer aetesrat vara n&S
wet: Geafeats oredearey faeeorenfrafeay™ 1
frarat® aga ora Farfioor Fraafea a n&&u
FUT CagREyd Heal Hrsareunasraa’s |
aia geagarle Heredtesrersige:?7” u aon
- SW Fer: HS Tea: | 2. w, &, wire
. &, dee Axe afer 4. &, PRATany t
we, argh t 6. &, agears:; S, AgveTaxaratey
- , efter 8. m, Ss, F aregqafea t
. S, BMT 1
. , ae: Soar quitarmavta; s, aerate
song 11. &, Wi, AST Ta: 5 S, Tats A
:% APA’ 13. s, Goulet

te &, feafeerqi 15. =, Frarrt

16. 7, 4, S, aged Ged Alaa Sea HAT I

17. 4, 3, weta Geareanta stereortat AATT 1

Pexeee

--- PAGE 255 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

232

gortaaet
gen: ged wergfsyerangeary |

10. Saar 11. a, Heartfrenr: |
12. UH, &, AaIPory

geoler xaafer war wed oreq gy ast un ecu
Re wrt aaararar: Readfire dferar 1

saret Pafirg goa sre Fes arget? Rag n&Sa
ye argh afeet arrafeer Pear: rarer

wager gat Raccar ferferafea Rraretey uso n
Tercaetenararhers sasstertfer a reste

gear Rreher aeafea nentrosifs MPre* un Tu
WAM ATHCA GSAT IN TH t
weawcaglacora® qeaka peuaaa: wet
APray wgaaea casa ware 1

nape aren: aaa gear no3 n
aalage gor pasar a aT

qarfafarrat tet pater gesarkras uu
ferepfer sere fear aglesre: Tae? 1 :
war F Saanared wasted aPrggar: u63u
afer trata ay ar Rregfr qeefts 1

& arraea asad a Brea: peers? WR
a Progen gaq aah am ranerearey?? 1
Geese arf afkefa gear uson
1. &, garftaas 1 2. a, Perarer Tet 1
3. &, qefea after 1 4. a, afar 1

5. 5, aglaacarasa Pasar

6. S, Taatreneafararay |

7. AR 8. a, Pat 9. ST seers THAT 1

--- PAGE 256 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AEA IIaT: 233

wat até a pdte enfgasa? aaraty t

WAT MeHeagarey? Wastes wacera:® wiecu
aa agipertey ger Paeakeaarfrar 1

niga aeqat wacor a esq? aBreftaay on oS n
quagaftad ash at srercar aatfesen: Pre 1
aadisangaarmens sig ndon
Borat: Taratlearegy Qeser® a Gere:
sraTeageara ae draahsas wcin
Pat dfeeara at at fe wrtacrett? 1

at WeNeaoutarenrigot gresverfeasto+ nen
aahgornrag: ara Brae |

arate afrey adteera at waq?? 23 n
quyASaTaSaSaY Trae esar aes |

qidarafaast f& qet4gaa: ot re: on CB
* = gaa ga: ot Steg alta 1

1. BT BIST 1

2. A, ArHAsareTs S, ATaTeAaATsA 1

3. &, Maenqaread 1 4. , Aega
5. F, Wars

6. &, SMG; GT, dela Wesar aw
7. Gy TANTS 3 S, Te

o

8& @, ae arenas; 7, wo dank 5s, wag at
zt

9. &, faufggae at ott Praag oxarartt 1
10. &, W sergeaeurranigdt genta ;

S, Ot meniteararents years oe Ferg: 1
11. U, S, varaqaear t 12. a, aaaeaferarasiryq
TeoTa ACTA Hr ‘

13. @, yeaa: | 14. a, aiaredifigs 1

--- PAGE 257 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

234

Portas

weaseat afegtetaamteaaatsra: t

gar g meres? gar adacag myers ucSu
watdftof aaisecar amreraarales
waatcartrat ater: Rrar va aT ea: a CE
art: Panfiosrafea carereareragrarn:” 1

agr aad aheahife cag a marae nou
waamarepyaed webu? aitearearag |

Sgai?° argai cteafalt aad a waa

gee"! quartet agerarergeaa udcu
age Freare earet Serre ee t

wrg aa mactiit4 ga gercoarfea:t§ ucu

wereareratreteg Saat: aah aR A
aismsatea afte?” santa eamar2> 1 80n
AAIASagaa al Ta gaeaat Aer? 4

are) faarmatranter: rerater pratt 1
aerawnrea rare? siasd ara ae: «= ST

1.
3.

H, Arata; UW, steasert 2. B, A, AAT
a, firaeo anarfiett; a, Rarer ere firett 5

S, Preven praarfratt 1

4.
. S, arya t 6. a, &, a Rafsaaftri

. Gy S, TAQSTAATATT 1

. G, aan aot dhe wearers; &, war arfeat
. G, 1, a, caatargafa what 10. F, wget

. a, aaa 12. &, 1, Foorarsr i

13.
15.
16.
18.
19.

ona

@, arreaaaet:; =, warat Fa aap: i

T, T, Faraawwti 14. &, were

nT, watfaer: 5 7, aarhtrar; =, caer g faetaa 1-
S, Werqaretreg: 17. e, Paw

a, wraeaealear ga3 S, Waa FTI

@, S, ARAL AETKnaTy t 20. S, Tarrarer |

--- PAGE 258 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AEA Bearsts 235

agera Reqater aftrarereferge: 1

odrertag ore: Fart aleet Prey wu
Ry: TAT ISAaqaAaTSA:? PATS |

a I: Por TaraAereaarea4n:? w82u
ararrenga alae Weta at

aarat sinigyacdonen:? cat Seat USB
waa* gata: VIqawraragar t

aaitestasa® at aa a gat: a a aioe: uS8u
mee audras ag ant eset t

Pras hedtade wet aml: gerep ores neu
eat are Gee: quseavstet ar Fysitera: t
asRaeta Tats ae Rrererar:® erat: Son

amie Preterera” mgt aren aaa
ate strameasht teed aduterar: uScu
aro afed ale eteita car waqi

war sframaet g onfetel a Frere u88u
wanfiggpralss Sargeug ser aife
ata apmash Saar: wdaretan: _ 100 n

wifaatal a assseeq at Rraaar: ara: 1
aes Raa oaa fe aa Fe wer arerditg nn
agera fayqater ararkt Horalt 1
Ag: Gear: as cagar: wag: Ha n 102 0
. G, Waray 5S, Maa: t
H, SARA: 5 a, TASTER: 1
, 1, 8, Srafgegera: aera: 1
7, a, Aeratel; S aeraeST OS. OS, aretesTAST I
4, S, Fae 7, S, Areritqraareyg t
+7, T, Sata eere

Pokey ht

--- PAGE 259 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

236 goriaret

spre g gereat sifatg axiler at

a uma aBreaat wt pens? = 103 0
eaTASaaAs wet Cameras wera |

acrar Paget car areargaanag n 108 0
TSOTSI aT ARTS AsTaprtor at Fy 1
Rranftafrar ad aad cardag 0 108 0
afereadt oar arat sqefteareracit war t

mer aroftierarart Saar dre: afar: = 108 0
PUPHTACAR ATAATTTATT |

a gent ate anfesrad Pre W409 0
aT alge FT Age aT TuTgeHs TTT |
fearensa wiigsa aenteofraRrarcrary u10dn
Rranferearapn afsrez are asa 1

a weer potas wari: a fadtaat 0 1080
argent at Rat vedq adtegedtSadirangy t

we: deareegig’* Fafeacare Rad astq 091900
afer awantesranratrants aay t

wareer poatfer fs za: stg hrecft u 4770

aft stgorts frafrttergr serget vahrienit-
wa aaeaEREY asaAaTS Havaharraet
arafacanrenigaqare arren seora: uC

1. 3, & waa parte 1

2. H, WET 3. &, Watered t

4, %, crodiaa 3 1, water: adtaa; s, aarftirear
aad 5. S, gereoedt i 6. &, dra pest var

--- PAGE 260 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AIH SIVAN |
SEE

slecgara t
pou agra abr abies? t
porate ag & peonlery nn

Seat Sata t
sgor afer cagurftr cent cd afore
AT TAMA AT: ATT THAT wt
voreteg (glia ated eegqguatrgas: |
arent wot Tey win
Reet wate: Shergq* we earet TATE t
wash Grae Rat wag Tete Frases un 8 uy
wurralqerenle afer waa |
adasitad wie afeagrereghrcney® uSn
alefa arerenafe a afg arf or erry
zat Rqrerarearfer? wreraeq?? araet Rrar on &
ward neared"? qararannay }
Waa Waaeae asa Hare feraeyt? wou

1. &, arapieoweng) 2. aS

3. &, arraviersaengy t

4, &, Farremarere: wag t 5. Hy TIS

6. 3, waar faRad Beat vag Geach gfeufe 1

7. S, ages t 8. UT, WHTaeaHHAT }

9% &, t 10. 7, WTaaT; SF, wTaAT

ll. F, WaaTIST AGT t

12. &, 1, aaa aaa Tey; «6S, TaaTafer
aIASay |

--- PAGE 261 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

238

Hotaaest
mTeargasare:? arate ger Prgaress t
qasftaaarmat? ath atrfergerer ucu
aga ata rata: Rafiatehraq Raa
wawayed* aguret aarftreredtag wu
a feBahaecarga® cat aed cepa t
eat peers axa aaqaeRAye wag un 100
aga Gaag’ alsafex t
fraritegreadara fRadt® gar gaa: uth
PreqeqenmTa: carers tareranishers:? 4
a aed Facey slacygan: W sera* UR
ar goiter or areanfer or eaeifer at agent? 1

a orenft ge gd a ageaaa wer: n73n
at arf fefsaccnanie? a a avafe aisagq t

qa fre fastener amfrer geheaer wisa-
afatat waagssitararacarcray2? un
at waretea aTAeae atetsh waazy 1

wer aah ereniggnyzat vase: wien

* HEATER Wigs w, MT, T Gecesy 1 GATT I

1. G, WHESTSASATT: |

2. a, wesftaer aaa; a, 1, a, TEtag aearit
3. a, aatnratrata:; =, vaqrfararriey
4.3, Sayasdt 55. 1, S, Paeaerrefrt

6. Gy WEAN; HoT

7. S TATA | 8. &, 1, Pray t

9. &, 1, Tarsiraawen: 5 S, Tae a re: |
10. &, a guitfer at ar ater Frater a rreafe 1

11. 3, aa Sfeare

12. U, a arftaena oftag 13. &, @, aearenfert
14. W, S, eaTeTET

--- PAGE 262 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAR Sears: 239

aataaed get agra React a* gears 1

guepal? yon: warerear agigetert® nwa
aur nrereaaereeant ot Reafee asafe 1

aagasa* war Asi mass ata oRafe* nu
nar Pardfiear are oss eta agafer 1
atratetieash wargaguraea> Seon udu
war: eaoaganogia fasratie aa gar

at sarcaedy a aPa freafeafeary” WRU
fafaa aaa axa anfdte afafinae 1

fogecd fe nzofea neat earfit: ag wn
anchantrafrser ar oe? Ser aqeery |

at at sea: & Benea a guredt afearttraonyz 22 0
serra vfs Rare? aeareafer

aa Wa Heit oe ca ca wars: un Zu
frae eqouufaRoaed adeigrar |

aftaed area aaffer afer gb aerear22 1 Pn
atsftegor mart ored feris oer ag

qargeag atearcasakh ot spera*4 un

* aw, 1, U GeaHy wreorgiMg 7 GeTa 1

1. aw, Freaegt

2. Hy 1, PATS S, PAL 3. &, arafedteaa i

4, @, AAARHEAAT | 5. G, warutecarrer 1
6. S TAST 7. %, 1, fare waka
8. 1, a, aot afsafame 5 =, anftaseatiwe 1

9

+, 7, Wart 10. S, waneaAeT I «11. w, &, Pa
12. @, wrt; S wart 13. 5, Wart
- 14. &, ageareret arftr stake t

--- PAGE 263 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

240

portaaet

a a Bast Mreacatateghaa SAAT t

wer Reagan arced arafiraa? wea
went arafearar 3a a afe dearer 1

wet aifeaagt afer at abil eta arxor , nu
a? meni Frarae aaearaacey t

aragqetar Fes ort wet aaaATET wu
sitaracrt aa afiearacaat ot fe 1

at aay Proaleantta caaaliafa? aerarg 3
at Tareatat abit ar araraferdrerorye* 1

ad sfrarcrenP agaist aAprferean<a4: u 200
varaat?® morara Fe agar qeafecag?t 1

agad gasa!? get qeareat Aa oaat> un B10
aut tarenanfe a: pated 1

a

wdi4 qa aurea: qatgat war wan

Tamgat athign~igardeantey t

aq ne afeqind agarenfe axafag 0 33n

SHAT ASAI AMAT LATA

smeght: VIgaAyT stagensTarara4r u38n

*s gee aemet “aaa ah arferent
Britgaa?? gf ceargafras gare i

1.

Sy Wetegraret 5 S, Aleteqreicg 1

2. 3, a cen feRasarccurarcoarenrahrere t

3. &, Raga a af& Raa 4. &, atfane i

5. 3 atari 6. 7, a, Graratsrav; =, Brearferadr
7. S, TaaraT 1

& a, &, Brhgomrgi = 9. 7, a, ATT

10. &, varaer i - 11. GU, Aet3 S WTI

12. S, TAT 13. a, Fras 1, a, weet
14. G, &, ara 15. S, WapaTaa

--- PAGE 264 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TAH Jeo: | - “94. —

saat axahreat? eqrssafaeat go AeTaT t

WMearsraisrar Rar Sta Paeatsraracar u 28a
gsralfead ald xitanieant? aa:
waatlead watet vareraifeaar wa: n 3&0

at f& eoretre? aah neal ar Saerarenat:* aes)
araceare oer ger ar FE acts at ey BW

afseata oer ger dtearRa act sa 4

ataeta at wreraireeg at Heat W2Cu
ardlqalaanr wea garetifaerr aa? t

saartfiar gsi? apt Fro aarstg n38n
raged fragen Predtorfarfirarerer: 1
Rromawairiter: a air acaxafergt w8ou
aat sareat fae sftat Ga: aarfhra:? Vo

was Magrafdted asemiaar Gta u8iu

sfra: fra: Rrat sfta: | sila: Sara: Prat

ata g: Wat sa: orrgqed: aarfita: u8Qu
gan agi Af: wargarmra fe avge: t

aniag: ayat" sfra: adqaa: watfiva: =u 83

*wiaist 1, 4, F yedhy a gaa; fog = grat

“Rreearrort got ait ta carat”? gerngadtar gee t

{ erent = gary “Caer agaarafregaerasstay: |

Prater gounfer cer ash a cafe? gerfirw: etre get

tm, a, 1, o, Gay wataisd a Gert 1

1. &, sSieafaear 2. By, THI

3. Fy Tad; S, Atay t 4. Gy S, Tavares 1
5. @, &, aTGaea: 1 6. S, G21

7. &, saatar git; S, aerg

8. &, 38 Fatsr avit 9. a, ax: Pras t
10. &, 4, ARTA 11. ®, Bart

4949—16

--- PAGE 265 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

242

Fortaaet

anett Rrefetfesrot fe gate Prorry
sftrararagret® ada fafeareany u88n
ay frreqreghasittior*gqug:akaegg t

ar aed a5 atsftegt acfadtiaahia: usSu
fat Rreaaege: aargeit Rratega: 1

aia 8& warefta® anit quraxzafeg ng&u
fersagedt Rrfdenedt fafScatarfrarerer: v
farsnawahttra: a asf qavaxakaq n Son
aay cgraara Rrastalena’ssea: |

Rraafea peanfet aur anit aaxafeq =u 8
asaya agrreaaTareteg rene: 4

ao aed a g° abiteg: agrcarenrararenfer uw 880
afeaiargaraé aq ga sraa Rat

wea met? fagarrgarearcg™? aay ou SON
aqt araraalearat agr axoPaeaa:t$ 1

war deradtal4* a; peabht a sear u8Tu
Rene o615 ergey AeoraraTAT: |

ade agaal* ad aranhaaad gat?” uu

* yoraisd S Fetes afta 1

1.
3.
4.
6.
‘8
11.
13.
15.

w, 1, 7 fret gt 2. S, dari

U, S, eager 5 7, 7, werary agers |

S, MSg_i 45. A, TANYA; 7, 7, TAMA HT Th
S, ewidtiswamrat a1 7. a, la; SF, WalerT 1
Gy Fort 9. S, AiEd AAS t 10. 5, gomyt
Gy, AQMiatrey 5 SF, WAAAey! 12. Sy Frazer
S, war w axfaeae: 1 14. a, wareafedreir
S, TAL 16. S HE ANTI 17. F BH

--- PAGE 266 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Aaa seers: . 243

anfirrcadteudia a gad wag? 1

maadld o asiga? ate a dere: n 33 u
mragrranred: wag Ty? oyafa: aT
fratfearanster area agate: ag: un
alte raegrsd stalqad (2) Greea
Pernt a_gke Ader werenar u S30

war: warren? sriygearags t

waaay oat wre feet peat ~ 0 Shu
araafe tt wre verte at

amenate met zag Hifwesrat PSak u Slo
at fafret freer: career gud ar a oraTaRy t

a cant aa axa alfeorat posal Ww 8 tt
‘qatar aftrafear ear carat a
feater aft aged atfeer: poarihtras u88n

Raagarft Grater arereratea aftrar: 1

aerate war: aa alfwetat paral nou
Faget: gyat:? aa nfSar: aorafear ae

arte: araerasa® afoot poral vein
fauforr: araee ates YHuraa t *

arate wa afearat park neu
aryderae sf arena cantar eq? t
qametssaraet:? aifeorat porate =u B32

oa

* HM, a, S, Geaey waist 7 TAT

- 4, ge wag; = aifisrerndmadihmer a ye aT
. %, WaT; Sa fae 3. @, wea
.U, maqerqi | 5. Sarita a 6. , are t
--, W, TIA: 5 A, GM: Tarr 1 8. A, moran yf
. &, araer afer s Ss, arresrarcar afer t

» S, cart: area werad t 11. S, sar: wats 1

COUN ANH

--- PAGE 267 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

'

244 portaacs

agera feegacer gaatsitecrer: fre

war useage: agate araf Rrarcor neu
Ret Salt Seer Der Herrcrafare:7 1

aa paran fasq poattt para 2 n&8u
mbrat fatadSatefarot PeaenrFor: 1

watea gfrelrarafranracaelaor: n &&
aperarcatearet eaaica porate 1

seu aessaaatentaaaa:t n &on
areuay FE ar wtas ootPar aegrebatsra: 1
ARAM WATS TAT Aueg alfrerAyS ne&du
arreprat afer afar sesh stearftorey

ner vfret gata var ad Fe atBrerq” WES u
aaedt Fa ITE aecaar® ga HA

arr? ga gated Heat? reregr: wlsou
Wal WaTaHSASA Nea ashag

at ReBagit arsed aart? asf gate noTu
qaatsit qivagq ateq pant asaeatq4
aagrauatggrey Poavtt waeale* wu

* op, 1, T Geay wrrghg a Gad t
. a, Fe oferta t
. a, wales 3 S nese Heart varia 1
. G, aa earataret cara goats
. S, Seas t
2 Mt, 1, sega fe wer sas otter aegrebapifa: 5
S, Begreearea |
6. 3, Aa Feary 7. @, AeTAATT 1
8. Sy AFAR t 9. SF, WaT 10. =, peat .
11. &, afar 12. S, adh
13. S$, Bear 14, S, THaratT |

apron ee

--- PAGE 268 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAA IST: 245

aot eae steisd saree a peafat 1

fastar grat afer ver? atefh pax non
wafufiee: aafage:? wafaq wafteraag t
Ararat abt Rratssnrdtae no8 n

anit stata whey WSaT wT HT_ar*
ware wary wafes areca oirftase uleSu
aaa? wer et: aT aarseTss

ait qacarkawrey’ wbtreg Tat artef Face uw 68 0
waa Aa aTqMATHTTaT AAT

we cer adreatratedar abit Agr aha: Won
aa oTTe ast ad gad washer 1

wer eonrereats arenes ghee noda
aassarea safit poarafearegr:? t

aga faget area arnant Fecepreferora* = 93 n
aia atefter: @ ant: Gat wa

meargefa qatfe gafar ar frre 1 n don
aa aalasit afe aa anit war wags
peapt ate wa a a avt:?* Hoxatt wcru

* s oxats ecrargihd afta t

. &, paisa 1 2. S, aT 3. 5, wafage:)
+, Ty 1, ARAMA AINSI ATZAT |

+1, Ty Quand eat wal; S, ae Yer Herel water
S, waarett + 7. By THAT HOLA

. &, catfgaffigecra: afer: |

+S, POAT: 5 S, PHCTINA: +

10. 4, &, ANT 11. &, earg gate a g gee
12. GS, 7aaT1 13. UW,  Aeanist

wpann pr

--- PAGE 269 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

246 Portada
agt asrtge ay eried aqrarary |
wrorfsarfeot aed ar ar arehirgy ar: naa
ageneaamida: Bigatti? Fas
ager gerd aval Hrs fealega tact: un
faaagimaeger® fagegr waATTe:® 1
PoMara” aearweagaar wa a aries: u CB
argHlagrrranesiar: aeratlgers: |
alfeiegr aarer & Ag agreant: né8u
BAHT HPS Bait? Charsat sarge: 1
arategrg aaefet? asfrar: atfeeraar Ch
aaaniftrat otis poad: Rraifga: 1
afer & faraaftira: mearee aifeertarar 1 Cou
at Wad HSAs: Poured *fagregs
Porta: T ware alfwat arc: ats on CON
Horst HOM al Psrarpararey* t
rat wate at gear alfeer: aaa Are: on C80
araaa ae Syeaeariaxarag |
gaanperaagale pleas: earea dretar?7 =u 80.
1. &, aaraw 1 2. B, TAHA; S, UGAAT!
3. 1, FT, MISA Gat; s, alse wat aT)
4. &, ait anscatega i 5. s, Breagrar: wegen:
6. &, 1, a, PagusTmacar: |
7. By Me AAT: | 8. , 5, aeeATt
9. &, fafa i 10. &, aa t

ll. &, Bretequarardy fa 5 S, atretegr: Arovet Be

12. @, PsA; SF, Poa
13. a, s, afm: ax: t 14. 5, HS WIT!

15. U, TeaaafitaeT 5 1, a, TATE TAHT t
16. S, HEATH 17, 1, A, Weds laar; S, Heard iaran

--- PAGE 270 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aad Soot: 247

get advlsy Horarier qefary

gaara gquarat* srad areca Pre TS
dea: athaat get afegay virftatsfi ar t

gate gpoufteraosraist agesar WwSQu
adal aft qat argaat arseatsftr ar |

wa af paarat Taresa cayt TE u82ua
aré aanfir are at AL a aT AGRI

goat aa Fasfea aa Frere: arferfer u8X8u
gqualt seaet wa Areal Set: t

geosa yucaa aa ufeafent aan? u88u
afageReat aft geen: paaliren:* 1

aha axiaranisht ot ger: ay: Fa ns&u
Hpumat aq wa> ST Ser: Guaurey Tas t
Riagdarcer acapagged wou
pomttanman waar se Rea t

safe frazeren® oreara: acai fey w8Xdu

aaraafea® Rate: qafefira2° adaor: 1
AISMAEPST Gat ar tal ar atfeet wag ou SSu
a Gea: aE Slsaaq ges: efloreners: 1
aeadtd4t aararfeer peraat qq fa 0 1000
Piswey ana wfsracasd we t

waraifer gar efe aBrent arr: we ou 107

1. &, Praretra ert

2. 4, Ss, afeady 3. & a afear aeq
4.%,1, pea 1 «45. S, WAG AAA
6. S Qasr: 1 7. BH, Tat AEN, SF, TATA A

8. m, Tatea fra: a
9. &, wargalea ; s, aaraafed 1
lo. &, vaqfefaa 1 11. S, Agari

--- PAGE 271 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

248

* = gee wrarghd areas
1. &, 1, yward

3. M, S, Epa edtpe sar
5.

7. @, weaftas 1

gortaacet

ofeer poattteg asret* ragaanr: 1
ae AAR Poarararaney?
enadiiear cai afa cagaareardafear 2
otercaquanrger arstet at valet &
aaa grat eaed astarg edtanct cara? 1
wareyt vacer Brarargsantltr wa sarot
wagaaqerarafa ghstatsé a cert:
aearern® Brorergall cagearcra gait
ag pd pois’ agarat wd wags
Be: par: ad wang aesadaq
aT gareneneua car wear Agha: t
wpietregshae wera mer gears arefer
ay HS Hifssegrait grat suas ha *
ay aS araarftetadgaaaara:
gare gt aed ghd acaafta a7 1
afer vagal post asararerag
erate aq a? ofa a ort saaarara: 1
a: afar Es at porat a ahr aq
pofersrey aeasr aeaeAet TAT |
waret Frome Sf gran & ate aT
farses se aga Rrerangeredtsrag t
wereita gd got ageretA Alisa

S, WHET AT I

or wz”? N

. S, WT RL

Ss, argh

S, TI

W102
wu 103n
u 108 u
0108 u
u 108 U
Ww 0l9 u
un 10¢ 0
un 108 0
n190
n99dn

uu

. &, pohrearny i

--- PAGE 272 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAA SOTA: 249

margacar g a Peaq at ger poate i

fagafefirs? frear canes ae avy u 7934
ay af caaaiga Hearertey Br? Fer 1

enael Fang gar sreageareratattr: 0998 0
arfefr: asagarhz: agacar afkareag

ag gerd Gewenr: |: aagaar: W713 0
afreft ar gat araf at garg porate 1

aera safir wer get at eae u1TE
catererra staf inerersaratat afgary i

qe oat areassshid* ae W119 4
cMTaaaeat adalwaesary |

orua fe puget puabitaufiay 04900

aRaey att waa ate: Sageree: Ha

ash Sart wae qesfes gareaqyeReran”? vIn
wfiewey aE RRa’ gut wiley wag

fe gadefingadead get eta ere W IRON
aU Uda Talay waar |

Pera wor Huarlerarada WAT
anfraisarferat aif aragq Seer areor
araguisarar:?° aden: pigeaaatt HBR

—_—

&, Parrediify t 2. S, GRAB Foarargy t
aw, afrara ; 1, ofafeege

. &, Ataf aa: =, deaaiieqi ' 5. 5, att
+, M, WI5 ST, Gea 7. S, waguheera: t

. &, awa a: apASAT | 9. G, HPoAawy |
10. &, 1, ahanrare: S, TUGUPAATATT: 1

11. a, artgead 5 s, wagear

on he ow Pe

--- PAGE 273 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

250

partadet
atntegiwassrat arate Rraat? weg
fara Seta? gla: warga? at ware,
patafrecepatter frccenaifor ar atq*
pigad: Garaget wife: ga awsige
adapalhr daag a wad gaara
wag wins at ar a casfteahreday
wants wasted weorefifr Preatg 1
aernrancata oa: pate a at fear
Reannnfer walitt arararcacerraay |
a a gute awa TS GAGs AAT
afeasea a waif guriguarfer carry
gaifea ata fearea Reanronfer at ger:°
SFA AEA ATSFATATTALT: Fz |
aeaaadagser: wo fagrey wt wea
aia? a; aRcaadt ariprosrafisd: |
qravst: aftsarneared aise aces Fa
mS? eT wa get: Godt? carsifer (rege: 1
aed oree car abit casrg atahoay

¥ S Geate wterghtg at Graal

WARZH
HRVu
WARSa
Wee a
WAAC tt
WARu
WARN
Ww 7300

nu 13748

+, 7, atom fed art 5 a, weotreghet ATT |

1
2. BG, 1, AAA |

3. u, frdeata 5 s, firderactat
4

- &, ara

5.5, 1, Taga Horse w: Ha: ear |ha;
a, arerarg afa far
6. %, 7, fearaafa argar; =, Gerarofer argeirt

7. SF TTI 8. a, aaa
9. a, M5 5, 10. @, S, Ta

--- PAGE 274 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TaN Seow: 251

aramargaanh srerecayarat At

qorattet Fscreet at war efe Rerery WRU
uftreat atfer aprfftr Pratoerferfraa* 1
Paratoerafearfh apciorr fis apPeafe n 733 0
afer & afiret Reta abt atstter7aqory 1

anata porifet fe aa: tg hreshe W138 4

aft sftgoni® Praferterge nereeet

wabriaiaa warner asa

wy maraiaramaeet areca yet
ara aaa seora: uSu

1. &, o, Raftrera | 2. %, S, Treat t

--- PAGE 275 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

v

BIA Sess |

Satine

sieeqara 1

pou stghtreahr feasietgarartay
acarafins ga aq F aAaT

Seat JaTA t

squy afer wager cent ct afeaeshe 1
AT TATATAT VATA: TST

saat Pereager card wea ca gsteTy? |
aragsisaar afer arergaed oyna?
fafetafeitgetatargaed arderq’* 1
oeiia: wagresr> ale warererte Get:
wel Aiea Hea Yat Aaarha a
epics? efer gaara”
afgasaacdientat Geaniaa get: t
aaa fea qeorar Aq ae oreaast
poredtragueranrarcarr Gira t
ana: oa caffr® ay quafeas a
estonia ana aqyrerayeree t
artdrnfagaisa® casrenigaa ar

udu

wen

n3n

“nSu

ua

n&u

wou

ucn

S, TAGS F ATAT 1

2 Sy SF BVT
. & GSA

. Hy, 1, 7, AAAATI

--- PAGE 276 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

arr seers: 253
aradt a aaeerd aatdrerratastat #1

array? AAs sasrergeler uSu
sRrepmras guardtigargett |

vanrlyg aftr Pratsfeaag a nu
areal? aerarg aarget carat |

Aas AMS TAT Gat TATA nH
arrarttor rarsrer? soretreaseystet yz?

wat ar goraefer Pereggaigaarea® wR
a & otenarante gearurghaateray’” t

apa? aolfeent aereaarnraargur¢y un 30
ara: arf faara ar? sonra aqeresfa art

SS gaagacarsmca aaedtgateareg?? udu
apa poeasat asat quran

aeateag Huge: pagerguaeq?2 wisn
Wrearray gag*> gray gferray t

qaag aBrataed afr aeteareate nda
FAGAN AIaAT: Psat: Pale $1
atenttaagiaa wecag war He wou

+a, = geet: wennfeared Rteeaay Berd
arage anther t

+ om ede last aT ERAT

1-H, FAQ 2. H, Haar 3. a, s, wast

4.5, rarest) 5. @, aed) 6. we, ORT I

7. S, wasraenaraitte gararagheralsrea: 1

8. a, at Hal; S, aaa

9. & fara ari = 10. S, sareasat edtgarfeate: 3

11. G, 1, TPS 1

12. &, NT, ARUIAGIAS 5 U, AHIsNIGTAS 1

13. a, deg

--- PAGE 277 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

254

©. >

Portawer

gesan qoraeter Freperrenizattshtr ar 1
Tea Sar aS HaT: |
veoisarfefatird: dgréh: ogerfeacr: =n Cu

Wee afear afs art fraafea aw

antanthle tat geqoarit ager WB
puleratgpartort qerakaerarears®

mrafareaa gaat Arde: WRATATT: wreOu
Faletast Tessa TAHT |

ned? sarcarer ugar patafas wari wT
MAGMALG eat TAUAAATAAT |
gaarafeared aterqader waaag wR

cn cee 247
srargealahrdadiivd padtace:7 t .
vpatisareaarara:® etasarrqarae:

"ON aA NB

aqvlaReorfenseat atateaq nZu
walertra: cat afer Haredieoradga:? t

amined sigalacaga sia rat Ww
qramagepat weary? Pasatg Weqaay 1

Taal Gaara gar aHeper Pasha wasn
fedtarat fgastear aaa gertqt 1

va fast partsa astq gaigenFarary WE
. &, Weitvoragha gala t

. &, paler 3. , pater agarltor Gor verses: t
. &, ta facade

- &, par afar 6. S GoueMeat TATA 1

+ Hy MT, HST: 1 8. &, wEae Mysore |

. a, Hacheoracye: 5 &, afro: cas ofa atasiiewrea-

10. 6,7, Gguri 11. &, ned ggurafirig i
12. S, WaT 13. &, FRadfari 14. w, asTAG

--- PAGE 278 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ae Sears: 255

aartiaastearaagteaper: t
ater ug a ofear arfeeft a ager’ t

azead?t tar et gut a aa anfaar: WAN

frarrerstaisrtea gaaragaar: |

arahtea ageted:? gota’ gerep gerae WAC

ae waatsT aaas oats |

Targearra peta tfentafaears: wen
_ snusd Faatagar ser: afeateay |

wanimorguy framenfralta: nu 320u

aaa AigHlaragar srr ws 1 .

aatrapat gat afer ea” aadag w32u

args efeint gxar parttear Prarsiag

qa aapartiormdar aftracaey u Qn

a: oelfa & goarear gaciitfearcaarae t

nalstrort arora Rraaaa afeerdt u33n

axat Naatwer: wargr ara? aah t

Ratan: gegen? aaufar aeafaa u 38 n

wut wat teat waleseat? Hafsary 1
gest arat Beat gnf agesa noigaey 1
qaag ganar? agar: afkateag nu 38a

* rerghtg = grate afta t
1. GSU; Ss, aeeadt war ie gnf aeqgalt qari
exer sar star arear a ata atferars |

2. a, val: qagedea: 1

3. 5, GRR 4. PBA «45. H, WT, Fourswars
6. 5, ta aaghawad ai = 7. &, Pag

8. S, tafanarcgqarg: 9. 3, afer
+10 Ss, gfStar vacant 11. Ss, Harqestt
12. %, 1, Gerard: 5 S, Taaarqeaarat: |

--- PAGE 279 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

256

portaacr

Weredieoracigad: aegqer afe art Fart

mame earara Fraataa afearet W260

qa a: qaaater frat aaa: t

quar at Raar& ar are arGserar? HB <u Hon

frat at geet at aer* gaazaarfirar 1

adage a wagraat: Rr: n3cu

Yat Pour preawrssttaany t \

RASHMAMSAaAM ARS TATA u 38a

porporeent 3fao Fracearga gfeacht 1

MUG MAUS Say Aaa, u8ou

Terguarraccaeiraganer rarer t

areata Tearquaraaspatgy poraht w8ia

sata gaat aeat aaecuraman a? 1

HAT Hada qadtasa padraprey?? usu

weet Saaragat age: sgarfeats 1

ararfieraisaraenadefatt afeaa: us3u

HNerteorcrafeat at carey Tsay t

draatewraalea: tag aAgareaacax:3 ussu

fafaero ta aeaceaHr t

sofas aacafer car we Frat ata usu

faasaarca Saag yapares a: Fra

gudfghrensser ver got at sort usen

1.7,5, 5a: 2. w, 7, RaBri 3. 5, are Aarrari

4, S, WaArara: 1 5. &, Weeerei t

6. a, S, artery 7. By MTT A

8. Gy aT 9. S TRA ASeNTAwAT Tt
10. &, prardet qadrt gearet Hadiads 1 11. a, s, afer
12. w, patfgaern: 1 13. %, 7, 4, rare

--- PAGE 280 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GWA Seorasy:

agimerdans a oreatifa paxatyt* |
Wg Ug VRAIS Taare
aaeat araaead® Frater Ferarerfag
wie: asta? wdtageacfarararg
gatg wbes? arftt wat Hresreiery 1
gerat esas at adele fa
wrRoRrat cakes arcfrarkesraay
grategy Ofecfraedt caranet a marred
wagererderay aedhizaralt 1
figanfs vanaed’? gafadeta aaiar
faarafgeraisster caesarean faarafre
meagerfght: gear merd:® afeatete
Werateoragqaaths peta Rreratr a
Ua we at Tegeager Haragaar t
waged a afer qazafea watt

nirateg a: pata spracat Prererretarnq?? t

ae wt att feaaa adertanaa:
ar aqranraer gawnfradtaky 1
AS BRN Sears warrat TeeargaeT

—_—

ee
POMANOAON HE

* aq gee wierging enfin

. S, wet aretreareigray t

- S, ag aaeg nails aaragresiteretad: |
- a, Br 5 nm, BAT

+S, weal & GSaa 5 Ss, SAAT TAT |

+ &, 1, 7, Agararfer areare: t

+ 7, Ta
494917

257

nSlon
u 4 u
u8Su
n 30 n
nu Sdn

wn

uw 830
uu

u8Sa

« S, dasr wee 1 6. U, Gorarary 1

+S, Gear Tare: t 9. H, 1, 1, TZ ea, aT
. a, ware feardayq; s, pafgear yng

--- PAGE 281 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

258

gartaact

wetter velar warat gérenPrgaera: 1
arene Teaeardageer rarer? *
pra qulgaearary Franrranthera:? 1
ReRapgiga at avse® eaegqaarg
earear araxot aaa gerafefererr Fe t
NSVMVIANY APIS GUAT

poder aqeater Rrara spewhacr 1
aqeratante Pfraggaatsraataay -
oret fraer aeae cad wear Pate Frat
Waciieoraratedt Prise? Frat
widens shire caaaay |
wear wae Taya gaara aygig”
qa gawnfaag? saree (ear? FA I
Parssorast poragdersanftads
araraenfest fat? guizslraaitieenreg t
faasmaca tara ar faxtehrfrafsra:

qa at aranracg pate qafgardtearyz 1
gaat at eger qaifer wetter
rere aaa arare ardaet a

a 7 dqmearente atireftat frat aq |

1
1

© ar geet weteetst at gee |

1. &, ferareras t

2. &, aifras 3. , Tar
4. m, wear aq wer; UB, S, WAT Ast

u 8&1

u Sion

un 3da

uu

u Gon

un&7u

n&Qa

n&2u

n &8 a

0&8 a

. a, &, Pafaerta 6. G, caetAvss Af aterax 1

- a, agigade

5
7
8. &, afeate 1 9.5, 971 10. s, arfert
1. %, 1, 4, feacaasa 12. 3, 9q1
3

. 3, ardet aa 14. ardtqi

--- PAGE 282 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GIA Seora: 259

faaeat atscaed* areara frarafad? 1

atigat ore Pag gaafgata afer nee
aragaontuaty Rarerefratser: 1

_ SURAT? WaSIFATAT: TT TeaTTT TN a
gaidatertanin adgeranfraa: t
dHankoraaearaegent> gaat wT u&u
AGMA Alsrsararagys t
qa afaeet uasageerara dag ue&su
diareat aerrerecar gsitealercralfwanrey |
Ca a: PVA vA Tewagreaed (a uloou
ad oafergreat wagerteafeara: |
waalendges: Rraafaaag ule? ACh

qestdisda agagg aa Praaz 1

a: woe Frater wale wrareg aware uO
qe TRatsRasrey wba saag® Prvgetar:
arate wrt ara ATA: vod u
ay ota geonfaadreat® 1

wrrcaraee? argiear saree pear Guzarez wlo8

vad sfrastes g gfyarcar warfare t
qafdattad?° fafrar adgeranieaa: uu
amtrranfiaraetata asarer arate
BATT RaAAAT AAAS wb&a

1. a, Ss, 241 2. @, &, Frarera: 1

3. 5, Sata t 4. &, qateteaa t

5. @, caaent; s, Pagari «6-6. S, WaT

7. 1, etqufe ; s, wistdoqeara fraakoqaet

8 %, aart 9. @, careatter 5 cardyarer 1
10. a, a, quicteitea 1 11. &, 1, 4, ararPrareqe i

--- PAGE 283 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

260

yotadet

ayy a Hse Hrerarea ater

aig dara guar saarhraahera:
Hot araxt gf xarear Pahraguag 1
Haaren? dawat Frat wey
Wea Hastert: 1

va Bada puagemeaatas

atarareanigar vacar qotkeokeratieenrer? t

va wr pour gaar Afearagarg
adore gin adetaaeaa: t
MAMHHAEA SA: ASA T AMNAAy
Hereattea Hate wearagarars |
amaretetyaasay® gaeferg art
gfanaada agesfe7ag a

pert predate sprratarrazar® ar 1
waa wat Halfgunreatsakia:
Horney Tararsatarsetzan: |
agerasa freyattocefir: afegarst+ Ra
qoreargarettfa aftgihat? same i
aapae Sag:afetrarcnir arid

uou

ulod

uu

udou

udciu

au Qu

né3u

né8u

ucSu

» H, NALS A, a, Aa 2. ®, Wasdieoraalear 1
. 3, wag poufeasrqs 4. 5, waarafaggrart

. &, aaarefeastarrar ; s, serarefeastarer t
- a, asaafet 8. S, AT
+, 1, ATUTEMT | 10. wm, 71, Fag

1
3
5. S, wear aera a arat
6
7
9

11. 7, waht: 5 =, afears t
12. &, 5, Fores vareitfe vferg fet

13. @, atevaTel; 1, a, aTEATd: 5 S, atalera t

--- PAGE 284 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GIA Sears: 261

gatacat Prater aarferrafarag? |

BAB a Hala Bearatefaga? ndc&u
TATA? HaETATarTaTSh Hs
vemisafeiirafaraged sgeaa: 1

were weaaaete Freareatrateaa:4 udu
Preredtesraated> watg sftawafiaay 1

Ua a: Hea se wHguesdany nccu
wefaornsenlagaatr: a gsrae 1

fe gerafaaresa ararg Rra garce:* udu
agdarragiafeantrefaroretega:” |

gaughaugal Brataarateardy wn
aaETaararnferenreot TEAL?

arene otaar gar ata wet at err: nS8in
augdfad ase at vacarerees a2? |
qagraagdaeditadmlens Sig un
Ts 7: Breas wacarereHysrery?? |
ageanresqueat rat after at aera: wn
sStevadiiar asaraferaerfer aAaag |

qatater Rrarter paxal& Rraraferq us8u
1. &, waa

2.m, srfafagr; ¢; widtt a odfa ater sraf
\

* a, o grant: ga aren aaataed satege aria
3. 8, Neagearraerped: | 4. %, wferaa t

5. 3 Waesrta afed: 6. 1, a, Fania gaa
7. %, age; s, afer 18. a, Rraafiods

9. S, WR azagady 10. H, weg wea: aatfea 1
ll. S, waaraaa i 12. %, 1, 7, THATEHAaga t

13. 4, &, agree

--- PAGE 285 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

c. x

262 goviadet
wrinotagaes Rraaraaferatsres t
Peredieoragaaier Frater waa? =n SSN
wegerter sacafta arerenaftad meq 1
sToareata: ada Goud Faae Pra t
aa ote aaefe wanlggeetega:* uS&u
aparanfe strane aprerife Fereperrfer = 1
Sfrpvsle amearet® ages wae gage = YON
aramerg a: pata siicarlearaeys |

ara araserar ay” cqarenfeae faa nsu
qafader fearter aenfenrafrearay 1
ANetediewraated Maralgarafaqs nSSu
Harare tha aegen aa°saanr:

walaga afer: adsacttianfeaa: 0 700
Bibsherey dega:2? ad: a Haeaeai wag? y
aarea ararattfer wa alas at tT: n 107 u
qdtarteg?® a: pate gataafaRrer frat 1
fafaacter fata aanftaanaa: WOR U

*a@ geah ga orang andttiaad rere a gaa
tr grea oearqred Rertand aq gaed ATgRSH-
ga afer 1

1. %, 1, 7, feather; a, wasp

2. 3, Waedteorvatedt frypareae ream 3. 3, att
4. &, Grafega 5 1, o, Grrga:; ST, TEs ATI Ta: tt
5. 3S, Mavala 6. H, WNAaL; @, AANAT
7. B, WET 8 Ss, ut faarera:t

9. Us, weg 10. a, aatadn; s, watagit t
11. 5, wqpa:
12. 4, 4, ofeMerians oq 13. a, 1, afr aTegl
14. 5, pata gateafafaar stfeeur: yotet rir
15. &, stemftar; a, Aeufera

--- PAGE 286 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

QUA Sea: 263
af af aqufediardans sig
amfafigtaaenr gaanitfearcearg = ~ uI0du
frsgareg? a: patfgestareisarary? t
anrataae Fafrar gaorafgarafarg 908 u
qaqa? were carfentafrerey
wager saatkaa:* ada onsng4: t
aaft arate wasolea a cee: 1080
gearlegaargat Paatafeaaa aS |
arte’ aeafafiar a vagraat: Fra: n 108 ut
stam atfeet aterfgsisfgaas a: t
a adfe wat: wey a vag Bream: = 10w nt
pore Fret aas® arftresre: aersaet* 1
Hoya gerard a: wale a artisan: uv 10C 0
fear wean gon aeaar at weitale t
Hoya gerard a: walfer fe arferens |
Pom aderatfe? arta 0 108 0
afralsir art? cap geran BIIAG a: HPSraery
a ugtanarcenta Regare® fgsraa: n 790 0
TH anata wafawrgy waar
Foyt warpfensaga n9dd8
* a, u, s geasg wiatst aT TAT
1. 3, qenfanegy 1
- %, Get gored a: pifkouarafeenftrery 1
+ 5, gat 4. &, wats 1
4, WISTS 5 -S, Toa
. a, &, feaag a 7. BH, TM, Ty WAT; S WAY
(Tia 9. a, Ss, aaah; 1, a, aaa t
10. &, 1, a, greftarsitr

aonnwn

--- PAGE 287 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

264

portaaet
pogarftrest aa: pagerirss wary 1

pogerftes fet pagerfirs aa WAR
poushtres aret pagefrer ear

poqattd art pages gay n 1930
portant at; pagenfre sy

pogaifte vara pager we: wAWu
posit abr: paysite safer: |

pogeits urd pagoftratsdar nda
atifter arrfeer qerarffRer cat ee paerrhres |

agate Royacer weet yor areifer nT

aarreMaarasior pagar wef a4 1

aeareta Reret at cat Fahy areca vrfafer? 1

ag aealtd wet cet ae a tT: u 794
aufifersraiiRaaadaar: a
venatfemirensaracat Azar arf 1

fargaar fe sor ef padxeora a n19¢
feae gaa ag raf gfgarerarr:? 1
araesrata deed careagetarfescerart Ht

agtianrg freafia® areafea® ggfsrar: 1
yweradreyl Agrarrey qearaafee warfrareyz? 0 1200
vfsadrarey gurarrey arate vesrerepez® 1
sfram centaenrg alfreftacarey frat HARI

1. &, Get wee ay az 1

2. 7, a, aaae Feerfer ofa fafrarera arfafer i
3.7, 4, eae feat ah ada cearaa; s, feaagq

feareg ae a gfear are: 1

4G, raat reed Far: qorratgar; =, “cara”?

qua “rar? | 5. &, Preatfea i 6. U, &, weltalea t

7. S, wafer 71 8. ST, WANTS I

--- PAGE 288 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aur seota:

a wig ale gear alBreftat wag og: 1

aera saprek g cerita waged?
oaprefta Safer areaenrey area cera? 1
atarecg searftr gor Sfer aerrsnetsy
areqelsanerst ar ost sy AAT
ragoranigad apqeran leary
aaa afernt qxrar ehrara gerep yer |
mgeaea acter: wahreonyfear:
qafaeqraagadt: AAeART Wee FTG |
qrararsdgeigaera aed fearege:
Teagenfght: arandfacar weaTy |
aura ti dat [eat] si ot suse aa:

265

nu
Ww RBu
WARS H
WARS
WIRE

TRC

sftarget Fut [eat] Flt a eewate geeaa: 1

agen waraisits waxfead: fra
Treageafets: crakear grap gee |
qaiataarey rare aeiag prererat
ataarter a aati arate sag
arenarea acenrlr cere gore HA
epnat arreariea gare gafergt 1
ant agerisa efeafelferga

wraré geaate agdafeenfer a
qafanigarera wre afed ey
sonsat guy argent, |
poureaayad ageswanaagq
afrasa gactar PaRgatacastena: 1
ferred a pdfa adteda Pahgarena:
1. &, TSRVaaA at: 5 SF, PSFaaT:

Qe SF WITHA at UAT: |

Hn Ren

WH 2Sn

1-730

n 7370

W324

n 1330

n 138 0

--- PAGE 289 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

\

266 portadct
Cd Gees THTSATAA AAS ACA 1

ataaet sata areas: aefaga u33n
woreda Gaagar stfepeurer aeeretst t
agse aad? at gatg adfaga W728 0
aleageaqeieadt afraferaferatarey 1
erator wargear gaferaferfirea le 1

/ afayeat <ater afer Graterasiagg 1300
siftat adagar fas sasernr |
erSsyg wood aeaedt aerer W93¢u
sowagar gat uftseft atoufesrar 1
wgucadgedt cafesrartiar W380
sifeelt sfresorereut orerseperarer ae 1
qesiguagrn Habra W180 u
aft araaart a arfiteragsar t
fagel goseigaar fafger ade WI n
aifeal cassarear arate Yabrar -
afeusa wart gs arRaedt ufaReaar Ww I82 nN
alleal araaqar sfteeteqafearar t
HUBS A Vcaeamfrar t
vafgfeageranga’l aoa 07830
gfe & ofird RefsatgateGaarcderq 1
wartat pomlet fonqa: sitgfresfe 0188 0

‘af sftgparta Frafortergr werect caf.
wa waged gored Havaheragea
fagteigaarte are ara gear: uIOU -

* amfiqahisrcaamarargl auyarcarierarenera-
TSE Tied HF, UW, 1, 7 Grae afer t

--- PAGE 290 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THIET SST |
—~ontino—
sega
pon sights adatargira 1
Porat sa ag A peonferst Ta

SRaL SATA A
sqor afer cagerity went ct afeqeste t

AST MATATAT TATA? ETT Hu
afe adit ste:? pagerigatsa: 1

aeofirs: wuarsad Peqet warate nu
aeadtd vat sear eae YS AAT* 1

at Peer aead ft yooftra order usa
gare a sae gee aife> qanta 1

arcat quig Rerd Rrenratagaarar - wn
steer a oferser Rrarma React 1

aa qdaqrar: fire: pons n&n
saraHles area? Hatateg Rrra 1

ayrat waar YS Blea waar ahor” ada von
ferearsiet Feet pafgrat afaRrerderg

saat: srerepatfer afer ereaer Rrofa: cu

1. @, wad: ; Ss, adara: 12. a, war g difera: Be:

3.0, GT 4.5, 78 5. s, wears

6. H, AMITMSMAAT; -T, Uy SSA HMTATSAT;
S, sare aliees ore arent aaratg t

7. &, Bags ge afa caaapini Sear? saa
‘vaca? aft wari

r

--- PAGE 291 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

portaacat
ARAUCATSAT AA AT wWacar ar qaaeer hy |
TAIRA HAITAALASTHT: |
afrereantat ar pagar a arte uSn
faa aeaer® ar ger Rar araart adory
fear sacar g aearet rene Prat Pra u10u
staprar ar pal’gaqaey ardaq *1
arddgwaeccat at Fagearftrar udu
aeATarraeleas ardag ogefeeret 1
morro ofesreass Pafersfedenorer a nau
strats area ParBeer a ayererey PB? ¥4 1
sSramaytar afer Saat: arqerrgrany t
aan aq anges Aeprankora 013 0
HAMM ATARI aHeITey afecrarfserez t

RrasitRrar ef aradtearanraag niWu0
porarhyé aear vaca arafeg ga?
magqasaeasyts agqara we erg u7I78 tn
Horatin aesacar qt arasar wera: 1
ANSP JF TRlageaar awh TA n& in

* arash Ww ged area ts geaa wirerghre

aT Get |

1. S, aeareat argereaty ar year ar aorarafer t
2. Sy TATSUTTAT t 3. a, a, Rr ae; s, Prar

Aree t

4.5,0%T1 5. 3,T par 6.4, dts

7. @, frase grease agave: at

8. H, aeaita Age t 9. &, aeart Rrogugeg cifras 1
10. @, sara: aaqrarercamear: erferanterar: 1

11. , ara) 12. &, fage@ati

13. , arataqasanfa 5 s, aratqqarestsa 1

14. %, aeoRaT 5 A, ara J TesEAT |

--- PAGE 292 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THEM ToT:

areata atemracar ar ahargifat waraly 1
a: &aa paged aged arareqarg?
sete Hoyat aret yer orge:9 |
sant welt ferardt a a Baa Hora
amryaa Bretarerentsakararg |
PHASA Wetrest FaaraN4gaeg ars
cara fafeeay yssirereccantrstet t
gaara Paget? & afer areas ra

a: Baa Hager Rare a
AAPSR’? TW TAA TasAS HPs? t
fragt wdenfer aiset Te aS
ofoet a cagizass? pagoorfor arate t
afe:?° caret a Het Hugearhr grat
wes *? ayer Tt ard Gea a
viTarad Gxrepes?? Fafetea waar
ama ubaftrar pxnerecarlyer |

a: eure fe yerear aw waaragreag”s
fastest we qanalargfrasiar 1
fara a: pate a wag afreftag:

263

uu

wddu

niu

wou

wedu

Wea

niu

nwa

nu

1. @, aearar aft yrat; =, area aft yurar

STANT AT 1

. s, aR 7. Sy TAPS 1

waonwn

. 3, See a ete 10. Ss aT PE

. &, Tashreanmargard ; &, war ermaregar¢g
. 5, fora 4. wm, a, eq@r) 5. a, =, Beta

. , Goshen a, aqgafe Haq ga casas Homer

11. a, Aehres ss, AQUOS 1 12. a, F, Farge 1

13. S, qraqreag

--- PAGE 293 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

270 Hortaqeat

aoe a ay oe a afer wet

Frorarat aT recat? shah area a neu
aa afer carafe aqafea sorafea at
aaa a gesfea aegita anfrears* Au lon
ware wafer msifed gata Raga

agfea Raaceofea Freqecaanfeter:? HA Wan

oer versa fravst aguaifiras i

aitgreftet wat tet aared ferashag UW
ardent aarefa at wasapALaa: 1

qiord et pear’ ao fay Pat ha w20u
awa? Taser: Bey at Freee araaftaras 1
qgnat at eaate ara a reg areage: wd
wera grat at Garafsra Hr

aM a aetd water pala aageeg uBR
wareg a fagens?° ata a ar Gea

aaNet asked wart wt aaattga: u32u
wrart atgitg wararart a7? fafa 1
Record?’ a adie a od wraag fra usu.
a Wa Seagrary ard arqaraag Ha* t

pared raat oaficorar aagahet+ un 38u

* a, S Gecenat: WrBrghs aT GAT |

. & walea fr 2. &, Tea

. , Feat; S, HRT 4. &, aafea afore t
. SF, et 6. &, aaqfta Frat

. S, Aeqeeranferet 1 8. 5, Fear

.H, ATH «10. S, Gort 11. %, aS
12. B, AATATT Ws SF, ATATLOT aT 13. %, TeaaTe 1
14. S, wert: Pari

wna oe

--- PAGE 294 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHEN BEST: 274
agit ardifiatesre: aiitar: ayitere |
ade WMTeahh agg agar? Ww 2&u
pata wguag ar agepratitr ar aq
anfafgierquradattoarte® areafer u 30 u
sSramet puget a: ager: weet |
water? gag a wag afreftag: a 8
Roonft a prfsat arargearmrera: |
Rranrgad ohteted> cet wea van
mar edtgattrarts gear aa: wecata® t
war fq’ alfeanrey gear a wag alPreAfer 0 8On
weniqerraniod wer Fo ypeaeates t
aaa & asferereg wt at Goat aataTs 1
afer faiacafge: a aagraat: Fra: w8Iu
ateta afeitet atte a? wafer & n8Qu
sie peurcar gereararfer afer a
wera sftqaes afer coren oferty u83u
Ie altar aT UIT Soepraraee Pa 1
Neary sa care fray aaa seq u88n
aq: gest ygit® ysued caargerT |
Rreargeae! gah a aaq cer meq 1 880
1. &, wari 2. S, Tafertt
3. S, steveftearle 1 4. 3, Sos
5. U, wag ae
6. &, wat qxat wea eacct aga 7. s, car aw
8. HM, ATL «OV &, , aNfoenTE_

1o. &, afar 11. &, ireargera t

--- PAGE 295 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

272

portant

oreeqafrareanra? arararenfyes Fra
ad yeqaressd? Tene Meat Brera
sferearsrmqasa® grads at adqy At
fret aadagacar aged at Fate
cagrafeakaa poarearhir waste
agenreafr caffe asttg oxagrag
eaatet oar aleaded cara Fase: 1
TAT AGUTgAtl a steroats fe arleas:

ao solfe porat arrneasa at cee

arant tesa: arerg atBreftel awn
aaguranr % ara peat”? Herahe 1
artnet Bratee araqrgerfeitoag
BHESl TAT TAT Pra Weert T ATATEAT? t
wap wrarzar’? arf asaqar mypeatfire: |
sega" gsefiar apfeaqypeatlire:

speaterr frarraf?? gsart?> serait 1

sagigt fapergiovd penraft a4 aratg
gare ubrat drat eqat arfr Rrarafer t
at erage pafearmieadweq?e

Nap NE

. & Weed gTaTEUT t
. h, Gea fe ang a; s, gear aaah)
. Hy POM; S, Pott 8. SF, EPG

., sari 6. S, Garg ad a tae

ugeu

n Son

u8du

n8Su

u 80n

uSda

usu

u 834

nu S8u

Wy PWHPoTesed 1 3. 5, HaTaTAMTAIST t

9. 1, 4, aaa; S, Bayar A Aerttar You A aATEAT!
10. W, %, 4, Brea 11. H, Geageq!
12. S, wereafier i
13. &, part 14. a, ofestemraftr t
15.

1, WT, 7 BTA 16. Hy S, TET

--- PAGE 296 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

waar Beare: 273

e 5 L
puige poant gartisat palates

raledt dhaaearadaeaathrar wu S33n
qaqft a aaa? ada poahrefry? 1

ABA kan gear wrmaaq Hayesls* Ww 8G u
aranta gupet ast fafgiafgaq t
aenratasa HrsTeter: parla: wen
THag wenasa ays afar

antics wraraaat gear aege uleraa: u 8a
Teueagaustsafrstay pagar t
pocadameattr pageatftr altfeasrey w88n
trary qaentealht araeprey qafesreaar

Rreterey aterenrer® att atirefthageaesrey” 0&0 u
aeat paiftat arerngerar arf aera y

a fregert yaa’ a etearanrate wedn
anlet area gare apearlr® sraatfirer: 1

pear? afe pote aaa pwattaq ueQu
water waar Aeonsa warpaqtt |

a agightat?? apargenai meeeettqts =n BB
fae ar caeontt** agar ata drag 1

ar aPaggar ote ar arg peanrar n&8

. @, Gat ANY Sonal garsarsa

1

2. FS TRMATt 3. S, Fonte 1
4. 3, BTRaeagT Haraey t 5. 3, me

6. Gy aT A

7. ®, Paget; =, Pafggearez

8. S, a fretear weg: 9. s, aaa
10. S, Hoar t Ll. G, 1, paths 1
12. %, @, 7, ate aferar i 13. a, aftr atfhaft 1
14. &, a ar Fates 15. &, ar Arar

4949—18

--- PAGE 297 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

274 poriadet
putea poalhreat aftarat safari
Rat sraraxrasag? getorfit a asa t
aereat mag ator porate? gern nesn
fastea poalfiten: pogay adar
TIAL + wero aay? fagtra: n&&u
a ad Porat T AIgTATAT |
get vaca aaegalesgien Hqrat w Gu
RoMnide Hisar Prrawaqersgraraes |
faeraetgracea fafearst aacit® erat nn
saad apt: art Geared waar 1
didorafiarrtet ate: asa Rrastirg, u&&u
Argent qararet Freeh rsaony 1
Agere acta aa” |
nareitged afeerat porat ulsou
ga axaaRarei ree fare
sofas wert ae aHlasamelerrEr® notin
gaareareat® fargrarfersrer: t
Fearate egiat weRtaaaT AAT ub Qu
qwaret et epear cfterey nicet a Hat 1
We gener Geer at FrfSter areazt t
reer pormieattt wafer wercraret: un o3 0
* sgeais wrangité onfea
tm, 7, oT geaty qd wag aT TUT |
1. 1, Rat waroerter 5 s, waraereaterar t
2. S, Woufera 1 3. S, Abas | 4. S Far
5. &, PSE gt 6. &, Aecataarot ay 5
My Wy AT, AELATAAT ATT 1 7. &, aeaTET aSae
8. &, Tia shift at afewneirme 1
9. H, Faayeareat; s, Frarpearcarftr i

--- PAGE 298 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Caray sews: 275

TeHereRAgrant at PVsaTaATEAT |

gata? olfererd sear austecanarearg, =n OB

arat fat uraf wreat areas Geary

pofeeqrnt af geaurgaifearcaay? Tach EL

ydets Saant ar aleeart porate 1

pormartagar powakite ar no&n

afas Rreqret acar arftrer: caatra art

TRAAERATANTEL ST IL Stat Hrs wou

qekaferaet aa aifia® gearkktor t

agat wale Sa get wer at wag Wied a

famed’ qured wt at af atsqe7q |

aaifrecta aaron Prearar aaah t wes n

aafaera pata det Fqureaq ucou

Pesanareart afaracanfweareyz t

pugonled af a atq agafeardt ucin

mat tafe aout werarearigas Fa? |

Hort ser sf agen; afeeaq?? wu

sea: Hat ahe: al ara F Seora;7+ |

are? gmaefa nResneraray udu

poantfes adi? cafaerrg adat

wees pata seteaftorenfagi ucon
4. &, ore 2. @, S, waranfearat 3. s, Forks

4. %, 71, a, Hoan 5. w, Fat; a, Fart

6. 7, a, ree oe aria 5 Ss qeofeet (oraet aa afte

7. &, Sf& sire 1 8. & water

9. &, Taareunenfads t 10. 3, oareaq i
1. S, aeat: Bron afe: Sar: Marat Avorar wars
2

1
12. 3, HS 13. s, Forifed afar 14. s, sea at

--- PAGE 299 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

cS x

276° portader

agureageronfer ererfer* srforenr ZT t

qaeg arena? fren yar paaghta ncn
greransaracayeted Faas t

apsiafg carter’ armrated weprereerez ou Can
HBR PUA: PSFAATATT: |

& cat wale Gace & Frsfea wares udou
IS rHTAAG are Hed Acker TIGA t
SAAHUAHSIUNA ATT: AragIadyo* udu
wafarafare: porat warsaq? 1

poraakuer ied awh asiq udu
areag frcpfirger werarafercrraftr t

pore’ safe a get facpfie: aafaq =n SO.
Hoat sacar arast ay at aTSsAT 1
aaoatRordea® Heraratener: Fre usta
anaat ghd thr akg weet rT

aPreftat centara cafearfer? ae ae usru

vararat:?° cetera Asitdtentsfagafer:22 |
fafega: aafatget?? faaqe:?> asratia: 1
aenaencat arf arteiea aaari+ u83n
*agga: Rw geass “slomaar ait galaparad a
aratq i aritmecca a Rageraftrear i? gaftrep: ester
qeae aearameaaaarg arscareafEra: t
7 1. G, S, arateq i 2. 1, 1, BT
3.4, 7, 9, ateafafs sazoia; s, arufaty-
rareeitfer 1 4, S, ora weerarag t 5. &, &, aftaed
i l 6. @, aera: watts, Tera aa
7. 3, HET 8. STAT 9. Gy, weeraqod cahsasw t
10. %, Waearet:; A, Gaaret: t
11. 3, asitdaitsherg Reacts ' 12. G, way
13. w, Fags: 14. s, wewerftisa sae 1

--- PAGE 300 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THEY SOTA: 277

qarfat saantear: sifper: gresarfecer: |

wafer ger arat? at gut wae JF u%su
aeargrarcarez> Sf alBreftat frat vag
anata ugdarrararn:* Eoralt wSSun
qIgHTAaaa: Aerarg afeaa> |

agar gad? aPrefrateawerz t

weurarated Ferterd aifeenreatguetarg wean
atanfaglad” Sranararerfeersafe 1
arataearg aaaranfarga eater n Son
arfrtent® at deat at at areagaartteany t

pret Poarter agra)? Herakt nSdu

ater? sfturgeraxaaararifeareant:? |

ay afe aah a carg aifeepeanfl area on S30
araset atest Sr aracer ereftapa: t

geare fasta: tare AaAaaraEarg ut 400 it
depron fadterarg YeatTaaTy SSAA |
aracastarefat? aif: ofeat we 109
fret afaPaes ari qeqararfeetceny’ |
WACIISUgMaagsaaATay 16 W402 nt

3, atts 2. a, erat 3. S, cenreraradh)
. %, U, 1, UgsigraranIag; &, agdiararaengs
. &, aarareafara: 5 Ss, warary waam 1
. 5, afr 7. a, aranfalgent;s n, a, amrenfatgite 1
8. a, arf start 9. %, 1, &, APTS
10. S ararerg 1 11. S RT
12. Wy area 1 13. S, wgarefa 1 14. 3, yer
15. %, U, Heaaeatgaraay ; Ss, Hecarakaraet 1
16. U, HAE aYQiay aeadeerarayq; 1, a, sat
Ugg Aeacieorianrd |

OO Be

--- PAGE 301 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

278

porfaaet

qerneeanrd arettaretad Hert

ganfey gas ater Pewee ? u103u ”
jet pre aat Prat? ereasy area arertFarfer 1

maRad yecarg* adarafegga 0 108
Rreaish yecssacd > craRad aaratgd |

Ara Aaa PRTG BAT: u 108 tt

sTFgaqea® Hee aarg warherar t

sara arfwei? craReaaRaer gq nu 1080
ageata Reqedar xext oor arate i

anise aderarars: aanfaag: u 200 u
yeaararant arte poraft 1

at spatter Fe Rreagetargr ort apxtef fe n 0d u
aleageare xsitet starete: afer oer t

war orestterere ae Rrecrare 3pee Fret un 108 0
afer & aire feiaq anrtear poraly?
porarefakt ef eager: atgfreafer u 1100

gfe staorte Rraforttergrt sereet
wah waarmee asTA-
ATA THIET IeSTA: |

. a, ar

BW, WRT oT AKI «—-3. B, HTH AAT

a, yet: patg S, Uw: patqs

7, ot, eis S, Breet Faag wrerat
+ 3, Mrarqenr Fe 1 7. Sy HATA |
+S Oe 9. &, MT, 1, AMATI

--- PAGE 302 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Glqwt Seon |
—outiong—
SP Qaqara |
Hor stg rear agar* vlerserory t
ararmafa 2aer ag & peonfere udu

Seat Tats t
sro af maga seat et afeaeater t
wer samara alr saa * wan
aMmrar qeaw® Ware: Hrotrapat:? t
qa Foss aret? argerat vfahray nu
afeatfenagmare oleaterarag t
anfeaferarmara’ oer ftargenreqfas> usu
atarfencanrarg wifedterfantectra® 1
allegardarafa’” oer sfrargeregie: a8u
FER werqarea® warale aera 1
werafy aarart azar <efer argeer wea
grant gurera® gaeit gufame*°
garart att sagt arar caer orgeor von

¥ as greats gaat “gat oeterfer aei wath?
afer witergaticd gxaet

it
1
:

RON DO AW
A
4
A

ay

--- PAGE 303 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

280

Hortaacr
aardte wat aay ge Gasat ghraq

Rrra ave wer aar? sfrargesreqfa: “acu
apa? sfarget afer at ar srafert afearat: t

wa adgorasfea: areantfar azat® afer wSu
ufratagfratfa aacar arch argeny t
samara aatieranieny ota a: uIon

sferqaeoratis? wear fer Frases 1

aeat fefir® anapafg vacar ofafger fre 1 17:0
aT Ages Asal at Sa: sftypts azs7 1

at fe area oer ster? at get pegsrarra* wu
MATS URI TIS YR TIA

neaqe? qaafat alenges yh Har n 730
eqer: Rear: aaf stsReaey gevarlra t

aearg Seat? yeferedt Rague afeaeige: 0 18 0
aragieniat steel Shrtewarga:1* 1

rasa aot frye wacaqaasy uu
aragq waka dart adgeaasiiaar:?? t

at vag aay afar afagater Qfeearrq 18

1. geagsr; TMT GSU, BT EES

2. Gy F Wr 3. U, Par

4. 3, aafert 5. 1, a, ager t

6. &, wee far 7. w, septa

8. s, aw FE areata oe att 9. &, qeued 1
10. 7, Tet

li. w, araqiad gs aeritewaraa:; 1, Aareitp-

WaTea: t

12. a, wre geaerefterar 1 13. S, dwperifera 1

--- PAGE 304 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

graqur ere: x 281

adfafgrattat rea: eater ehrerst* y
yRrargysist wacarter? uu
agar? aqifa aege: Weaeat axel Tar

aan Wea wets HTS aeter AA wdc
aan ger safireata® earented Sfirestae: 1

aar gaat vakisorerat arta gernfa: uu
atagrraifigen: qasstset wate aaq 1

We ceareat Rrerer eer:” oragtat wag nu
Herat at aprged® arey praterer sit ieret: 1
aragaica® ary aaley cartent waraqeen: wld

wafsorraanfggaargferatiter: 1

Haecage Fer YXt ge at vier: WRu
tor gear geo a: afee:t? aargerr 1
arigadt® wahoo afragacat: a aretary 23 0

reer: ae aretts gar weatfrat pe: 1 .
Bret afer gafitt? qeitaragerrndAr: WW

*a yea gaat “Cadtafgnatacnanradt a
faguia? af wrergaitre gaa

1. @, 0, aeanedisf ater: 1
2. S, HET: 1
- 3. S, watt 4. S, aan
5. &, cafirema: 1 6. @, ar
7. Sy Aa 8. S, areha
9. H, STMT; SF, eTaT 10. A, Weraufa

li. S, WRT Begeeor dafee: pararar

12. 1, a, af gest 13. &, writer

14. &, 1, Ty Tar ated; S, adit wre t

15. &, 1, 4, qT aadaag Ye 5 Gy, Tar wedieaa ye: 1
16. H, G, 1, a, Teg yr: Ket Heaey

--- PAGE 305 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

282 HPoviaacat

aly gear yeoreaRreat* va patac t
gadisetfa aarfee:? atsfe gar arate An 8S ut
arrar fearsaosaer areca etfard gaz? 1

wolfe yewtor ogqarafatany wReu
at & Rreagedt agaa: vactatsf are
aah aa wal ata & Ff Goat ae FAT nron
Fert: TETRA A TAS ST RTT tt

- racalsfer sporetenisfer afrararey Fersa? Serer uRCu
speafrafadrarer aat fren pee eae |
ad aaft aaa aot wlewssrerq? UW
errata arargrrgifracrs: |

sacaisf at: geal? frgrafe a ena: 0 300
wafetarf: Fereaer ale va at Rera:2? 1

wrafef: sftt5qRey afer oer afea: car Ree ou 370
a frat yewtor uferrgferarmay wat 1

afer werar sat meg wer Pafgegxa:t§ u3sQu
mee fatoqar afratar seh war yer t

wer a7? @Prar aa: cepreee Haeak® n33n
¥ oH, 1, 1 TRAST AGRA aT FRAT t

1. a, a, aff at age qeor; gs, af ar agar

Wear 2. S, WORE:
3. 1, a, dat Padtgae: 3 &, aiftteoor Parereaf&
4. %, 1, a, TI 5. &, vara: Gras t

6. &, S, Persitshr qorgatt arerantt 5 3, arercit porzerit

arena) 67. 0, fret 8. @, WSL O8. G, BAA ya

aA | 10. S Wanqerear waaay 1
11. G, We gad 12. a, wahiortenra at wer
ae Rerar: 1 13. U, wana; 5, vata

14. H, Waqi 15. @, WAT 16. G, &, afar
17. 6,4, TAT; Fs, Teta

--- PAGE 306 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Ba Feorsy:

arena werga ararftater astter 1!
afar werefat aa asraf rer att
wetter aroftararst Frfsrferat 1
sftye peacefion Prarafater Preatg
yeracor ser ef arearer? adfergar t
aaSaraarmdiiaaraad var Ra

stiyg frraer afeataga fe aar azar
aor aaren® Frareat age pecthtras

fie ftarfeiferare: Fes ae: wraantatr:®
ferontsraar Safir afeater fe waq:”
wae Aga arr art wa Het
aq as ora efe Gear yetaar
avratatitet serferecfterrgeerfgoey |
ufeata ayy ef area: cea gf afer?
agpifer a apafitr verarcassifer? a 1
wafer: atret qafer qa? °urfarftrarae:
fesarera area aafafguar rer 1
dat yeregue: meeratane Heit

at abt a act araten: wish adstaz 1
arart Honiishaeet? “fratea Fare h2s

wm, erated: 5 a, wrayer: 1

won aw be
8 8 8

ray

+, Fer Gerhr ants neal ws 1

a, wareafenfaare t 2. Sy WET
wet 4. a, afer 5. S, eae

283

w 38u
vasa
uw 3&0
uv 36n
0 3dn
wasn
u80u
u8iu
Usui

u83u

B, afeatat Pra 7h 8. a, a Prat
Sy Beran 1 10. @, gr,

+ S, TATATFOAMTT | 13. w, m1, a, vftrater Pe wat

--- PAGE 307 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

284 portader

wranrg pent afer adfereq? zasrrecté

nag? uferaat dat aca: Sar at rea 0 88 0
et waergigss vet arerafger i
ofearg Rrerafg pafot ache aatg us Su
ye ot wet aut afe gett wer fe 1
a waagagq Pafgserat gaara: n8&u
Sips ated: arg F wrxfeer ager wt
ast fe gat aa artes wafer Pra n Son
weneg Fe fradt qsreftett sacra: 1
eration: geal aaferingaion: usin
aye: Paar eater yegat wexre:? 1 -
fara SP Rata YN VE at eee usa
mRifed fe exit wattareercrandhr: |
afearacorefe Frsrar sae Petr: 0 80n
aiztercanina sys asaafea a4 1
Reftiatcraged oregqafea ar <igra: uw 870
AeA AMT RASH LS CATA t
yearackcanngind” ara ATT WS ru
at areaRs Te? werastaT 1
farsinroney aeeasa Reeert qaraty u $30
peed ged atararhtrt oRPreaag 1
aa aeafeat at sarefakr deta un 88n
wpa atsarfer aeqfer ya wt Ada 1

aafife aBbaccer Tear porate uw BB

1. S, Washraez 2. a, &, freq

3. 3 etfs 4. a, wixshfranon: syptdisaatea F1
5. 3 Oe 6. S Hert 7. &, a, afarht tea
8. 3, Fett 9. 5, Ti 10. &, yreafts

~

--- PAGE 308 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

EM Teast:

Tan at at: pafeatrarasratgay
atiarat a patea? af errorarnyga

a Grab qa: pata? geagr aa rst
waa THssetat aaa swataswrss |

a pata eft: arg Rreat year aperectet
at pafeenRamatd? ararsorardtsaly 1
faster geal neBearreta aE &: saPry
me afeafer ag gstigeratas 1

a ofa axe aet> ar gar Prener wag
ferver a ater ywargrestatheor t
TTA F PLOTAANTSAy PSs VT:
Aeararaaeaa aa aah ragqaq t
qataar g etarafeafirg Rrastirg®
wauieatadt weeard” a agg wer HeaPaT |
afe garg a@ aaareega® Ta at ciara:
wee arated a Zar? Teor aE t
arnag ahaa? fee Haig pSeals
ararinraagra: gars? wreagftar t
garsar Rrar afer Perea: aeatadg THA
ag agsraierer ces oer TTS

UIT A TVeqaraenany

1. UW, wana

2. m, Tet Gata; scab AL Sia

3. S, watered 1 4. 3, al

285

n 8% a

uw 8on

non

u88u

n&On

nT au

we u-

un &3u

n&8 au

n&Su

5. 5, Awe att 6. w, aatie Readies «, gate
g ovat fag avitg aar; s, ware 7. Sy TEATS

8. S, AT AAT area 1

9. SAGA 10. &, JSUT aT; a, S THAT

11. 5, aearnareragra: gar t

--- PAGE 309 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

286

portagcar
Sas? yey caqeparenthtefy Ha
ughraafear ae ar care?
RQraar Ssarnfer Gea FoI 1
Rrafea aderafitr qeqacar fet
ag ugrenled ag wafgagarata? 1
Teqarienl* weg wer Got ar sore
vero Praga yegher aq pays |
ae neler ar get geacntenghegat:
adeaalt at gerq yet aferaferafsta: 1
Rareay at aarentfer afeata fe asreory
aferey goa TARR wer’ array aq
aragt aff asar MIqaaTAg TAL
aRaerg aag. at peeagqastrake 1
onirentiara® a aziter axas a Paracas?
wend Fe yigeaag eteOker a1
a Rrefy2 Cat rarasa: ssoordefeera22 a
yesortordl a qeedrrataga t
afeaer gqeweneat? grafted or Frere
ananrgistaxt ytefaaxterg?? 1
yealefrg org: aifer 44 qrerasr

- 3S HAG 1
. &, ageaateer: at adenoma: t

3, ATH! «6. H, aeuAa HeT FT Ges

un && uy

0 &on

u&u

w&Sn

usou

nodu

Tacha)

no3 u

nosu

ueSu

1

2

3. G7, 7, aagmasaa | 4. , WRATH
5

7

- a, par 8. &, AEST! 9. &, Frans

10. &, faxari 11. &, we

12. @, ArwTwET;, 4, WAST; FT, UH aeT!

13. &, aiet i 14. H, U, 4, a: paiga gi

--- PAGE 310 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

HET Seo: 287

wagentaferabren arferaer et att

afaaa g a: pala aw wag RaTaATAS: WG at
IR: wret Aragre Tee? at rama

geht: a afeenrat qual aor: a arate Cou
qpenlarfgata: <are egherd werent
faqeppelereqrat yafereterarag:> wou
stagtanfeet ar are: drafaststtr ari

Hegeeray arf aarrerereset® yTt:” wFu
aa siiypeferegr care Prater sratrsitaas® 1
BeaeaeAgfersprarg, Geral Tarot arerT?

yRtata sata? azarg watt ar afafsar =u Con
gefragqearetigrarency* araararag |

a faeaqer waaay agureatraigereq ou Cin
yet: sfrargesnyer?s ywerrartaqfrstas 1

afareexct pet grat astait5 spat: nen
fafageftrarare*© areaPadistratrararey

ae Ugest st art sameriyeny 1

arAS woes anqqasa afadtaseat: né3u

1.%,a,7,4,t fea; s, qgenfatraites arfrae
IRA | 2. S, wget

3. 1, 4, Gedl aeayT urd; S, quedtsmem: aw
OTA | 4, S, qearnigaraiset yedreret area 1

5. &, a aftufetreara qafrerer arag: 1

6. B, aaa 7. Sy tt 8. 7, H, TAT Ta
9.5, Ie aT sat aa; 7) 4, qa sact mars
Sp TERTENTSTTNES 1 EET TAT 10. S, waqt

1. S, Geqaeityarer 1 12. &, Aazorear i
ie. My TAT 5S, TST 14. US, G1
15. 1, Gwargeray t 16. S, Shireer wards

17. S, TASS AANT |

--- PAGE 311 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

portadear
geriteet aed ateet SAATAL 1
gg IReinapatearcarabirea? araag
WMS SAMUS Gua aey |
qa Radiat ett gat Aaa
arreet ggafedt areet areatgerae 1
Suara wade aera Tar
BePA_IPAenlgepcrenrsengeray
quae *aeatlaggear ante alta t
TENProaeighoRaraag at
AV atqraten ale TAM AAA
ara afease yaa Azsar ert
arava? aaa ageiea waratg *
wpeacttayaad?° seis aler reat Fa
freer aqypedarad eortafeergartt
Rmésane anit ye: ader sro
Ratt aqydaar ad med ager
Weert waa werat art Aaagq at
agreed: afeaisnterfaaraey+

* & Get wrest GET t

. a, 7, Pat 7. FATA
. Hy Sy W, FT, STAs rar Frsq

wo aon rh

. SF, AATASAT 1 10. 4, Fererag t
11. =, cq ariafeara: = 12. &, Brvétsquert
13. S, Aga ATIVHKA: 1 14. %, whranreyt

uc8u

ucsn

udc&u

udou

udccu

AST

u8oun

uStu

uSQu

. 1, S ATAL A 2. & ayaa = «3. Gy areehs
4,7, Ss, pepet - 5. A, w, Arar

--- PAGE 312 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Blaqe seures: 289
TRA WI TSAI Te TAA

getter pala wartensaerera4r u83n
afrarat a steal snfaftencentaft: 1

waar adeq? Fret Rrea: sftapwafereat u8u
armtaakeantt Rrefte: aqferarrarey t

afa yeorear Fadqoyeert warata* u88u
wardnerert ar Rea: caapefrafad t
Raia ast: weretagqet was wS&u
ararenat Rifirgsa aeyereate afeerat t
arataer afer” de: teat wag von
arenger yRratat yrarg a: aaa: 1

aed ar fad aft Qed aah aA u8du
MAATAT PAT aq urd BAarayany t

aq wt aaah yeas, wu
wratteaete as oper Frat Pera? 1

Sis a aq vat aaieet aaq ha on 100

aa: Rat qeragd a Rabe warat® 1

aT resqnrarre at fas? ghaa Wet un 407 0

fast quest Yweorat a w_Aq

a ag gatq ero a watgq qeafeardt 01020
- ape atset set? alstet eraenfyay 1

watteel a odie at aracgagdany 0103 0

* S Gea eStnrgiag a gerd |

1. 3, sys 2. &, war a rae

W, Tere; H, 1, 1, THTEeY fase

+S, 1, qeariagqge: | 5. &, tue Pt ata
. &, Birasa war 7. @, 7, ararg afe Were t
- Tt, Ret 5 s, aerertearaarrer |

a, 3,7 aa 10. G, wat 5 S, Drei t
494919

won hw

--- PAGE 313 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

290

gortaacar

weeciad pate qafaraarsara 1

faar qafsar fret Reateareanraar 0 108 u
ag gata patea Pree2erqRad fra 1

we wT ARE Harafege: HA nu 1080
aarqga Prtesearreper WETe t -
carat atafaste yer aaa: ws n 108 tt
a fadtgreaas eff gaanpeafearedt 1

WW: Prereett Sa sagrearrgeraraary t

goad wfrerartratet wary.  100
snfaSfaarrateat ar gt ger TS ware 1

qosmonrdt peaas” fa: rehire atey u 0d tt
waka: we great are sterfgetatea art
REapeattar® ageter apes Fat? u 1084
wat at We ae qatar a faaragq* 1

saya: after fre: cape? eran aA 110
yVagar ata ad gad?> qera ar

a at@agga g afeat steqording nin
yw: wuafaadt sasrahtas va a1 °
qaarsaieerggeaat aanaegayq 0 17R

1. &, ‘Tn, gafaramreaq; &, qatar arora

2.
4.

7.
gen ar
9.

, 10.
11.

12.

13.

@, 1, a, anfazaqieat 1 3. Fy S, aT Aaa 1
s, Weve 5. Seb. &, TafGar
&, pdf 8. Hy ARATE MT SWAT 5" Ss, wRarer

a, F UVeaqye art -

Gy, W, Aeter Lays 5 =, aka tepTaget | ~
HG, 7, a, adr aag qe ash qafard Praag
&, SR: afeerdh freak a TS 3

S, aati 14. S ats ag

--- PAGE 314 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

gar Sears:

291

tary gwar! porate arerggrey TaaAey
frenfresrey cara? sorta gaara 01130

waAZES QeAr: acd arees afese sy
reat parasararatisat at arq
afrae qunigaa® cadena? 1
aed agagest Yee Trad Fa:
qemaReaa: RiaRaaeut mote Ter t
srataRaa: Areal ge afatet aaa
argaisram:” Rrea: antag aaadg 1
THANAATAOT ase grearaer
aqevargadata: stays corte Fat

qxaafiera: Freat® wracat aaateah sets

aa aistarciealarataa? oote eT I
afagura: Rreat ase ware wer
Revexta aliases Saat yey
magerraurefer?? agra aArdagqit
Va at at aes sara TAT
geared aagat steurar ye: wpa:22
analiea weflatd garg aorta? |
porariea"* safkr pesteafersat: 1
React peta ont caqeia4r

« &, fgerr 2. FS, ABASATET 1

nd4Wu
n 77380
wu
wiieu
wdICu
W198 1
WITROU

WRI

WAR

+O, AES S, AAPA 4. Ss, EretoT aration 1

. &, aeceoneeeard 7. @, agate: 1
- &, ara ere rst 9. &, atsterewardit

1

3

5. U, Wided; SF It yerI
6 <=

8

feterqi 10. @, rae 1 1. S, aT

12. , Wat: Ta t 13. S, WsAd gaa_ Pay
arerarter t

14, U, Vlerarter; a,

--- PAGE 315 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

292 portant
anTsae:? masts: Postserdrae: |
qestsgar’ afa gf asageay nARBu
anrste rage? ssftrasrergatra: tt
grea Pogues aagettay* ferarera: WAR t
fagaraiadg goranteg ways |
sryrermoTrarecraay senaafes> wA7Vn
Agr TATAAS BT Aeaiat AAHAAT t
MYMANTA AT TTR” Ww PRE
aferfeat agnasa godt a; afeeafers 1
a naaghwaeat Saarraarcy ard, WIE tt
ay speeatares orca: orgenrafiaiwaar? 1
ead A FT Aeaeal cadet a a Ao NW
gfe & afra SeRaq ageraasaorg t
aareaa pomter fis za: stg safe HPRZu

afer sftparta Grateriargre aareed
waht warquauest asaH-
ws warafaraaee orgenrereret
ATT GE Sea: U12

1. U, Swe; SF TasrseA t .
2. S Tester i 3. Hy Sy AASSABITATSST |
4. G, IRa: Hoaga aeqea4r 5

%, yer gogeer aeqariet t
. am, ora charg afk; s, vormarrerrd:
+S, Aq aarariwa 1 7. S ETING T A TAT t
+S, UPL oearg sot agalire: 1
. &, a yee Ywarufiracaey
. &, wegag ahha 11. aL. argent Pom

ann

©,0 0

--- PAGE 316 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

. AAEM SUIT: |
Onno
ATA
pou Agen seorgaakey 1
aagudle gaat sat pefkrerat:

grat sara t
squy af wagurfr vent ct ofecesle 1
TT TATATAT MITA? Tsay
gecutad gu° gota Fareham! |
oeRrease orevd aug aftscarlereny
franfratanry Saoauafaray t
qeqacasa ait afeet aniritfsaq
sque® giasarft Aemaerad Hae 1
ghiarergaentante ars aor”
fagrecgiseraereafgoraeneaay
wacpeacdanal fratfeacea, aan? *
aeifernt ga? ara tafeafra firey

* = geah wrergitd a gaat
a, Farr 2. 7, Tear: 1

a, aeraaftet gg 5 S, aBreetaasi at 1

won hw Rh
8 © 8

11. 3, wuswrafier i

udu

wen

udu

uu

w8a

wen

s, Prefadt 5. U, &, Shot 6.5, 01
s, Araopfigct t 8. U, texisreteered }
. a, fafeanfeerar 1 10. a, qenfraterd |

--- PAGE 317 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

294 portader
sasiwalyet <aadt ara Ae ez 1 -

gacdrafgatad Bratt trata uu
weeatae aft afe reife? t
arakanghioar wareaaragry, udu
arate paisa TessTATSTaTIHT |
fasaraarad carfeatfact arco uu
aleyaraat dare Reguateony? 1*
areatfiararece ahid? geerfaory nu
advan afr aatqperhrartrarg

wat frguaad mrafeagfrory® wdin
gaaegpaatigaa woahiar 1

qm@aet ya aqs° ahasraany wARu
qa Gaat cere Prararkeerz 1

anprarage Rrearcrearcagtaat wu
sprrafescra feared)? shraraleae 1

adie? gsiaad uderefantéagq ¢ nu

Paget cwaearet aitagqaord?* Ha
waren aga carat caccasaay on 180

* = geae wrargihe afta i

+ sgeae ga aren “sofiarraa ada qeafteardt”?
qeeafaafestenr a gxaee 1
. a, Rsteparfget piss, gst 2. s, dfed ob ast
1 a, Pete 1 4. a, a, o, aorafeerreres 5 at, apreffererrers |
&, faxarerarfeet deeprhot arcenftivr t
a, Fafgeoriget t .
a, Hale 5 s, straarhratenrat Halera t
U, agarfiti t 9. s, gfararzs 10. &, arate t
- H, Wet) 12. Gy a5 S, AT 13. @, arate I
a, aaguerd 1 5. a, WET

bp
REeseser;

--- PAGE 318 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TAM STOTT: 295
Rregtawrat efs cant agrafiery 1
aTarUT grasa reprangaprh eons nda
alraranaatt? anfeacaeraay t
argasnfafiaest Heargreqaany uu
APAMAGAT TASHA CAAT |
Sooforerdgerasrtoasp lara widn
ant gaat arearaceranrgey? |
anggata aed qd> Prearees Freq un
qorehiyd derage’ adaraay
aatret waftet ura pes fra wn
affasgraarmiecaatarratsrarg t
markrqspenrarear gay’ ererepr cea win
pogeniadhrqa yeearfrarferarg t
eahtige® anawed yeered Hoealy 1
gearfggrponad? spe; Ret frasiitg, WRua
aksoeg pole prsamagay
aaa Mamatid ppeteankary w Zu
waeagerrat"* ora afte Wena t
goad aareant sogmifrranfeaaq? wu
ganenhtrat yehad Rrafiaany t
fear for dit water RegoraRra* nen

* wm, TT, o ery wSrerghrg a Gera 1
+ Fy sett
. @, arareaantet t 3. &, UW, wafer t
11, Head TaSITGY 5 -T, SATA 1
2, Ty TEA 6. &, , AMT 7. HB, Bead y
- a, wage 9. 7, aT, SEMA) 10 wy, wae
Li. w, caraeg at 12. a, amnfead 1

,O ak nN

--- PAGE 319 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

poritaaer

uderafferpas creas cataakory |
Sra Tatasd Masa
akRaé qartesa ahpafer cry 1
Rrarafrarattd watgraasaray
TarTaara WPTCASAsAyary t
wage hraryaanaad Praatory
facacafretarsct yerargany
wegenidrart agt afglaaany
waagal cehregrar fap gaye Ft
raha qaege dreed sar2arRony
waahrearhrarreag:anteanarays |
TRrereaghiaHatgaratasqatd gay
yegacanradt ariitrefigsras az |
fret eadtaet ywaratraray
aaah’ aftanleagqeay t
gatararsds afer ywartPanenrerany
YRATSAMAT TAT TSN TTT TAH t
Rraraattet tea7antRor gwerrferas
siftareraar 1a Satta peateera 1
fratat qeget caprenrattranfyoy
porter mirahrettatteatear |
porated peqoargyaay??

oan or

10.

. &, TASS I
. G, Wet Geugragaws t
., ag 86. a. ywarti | 7. A, Der

a, sesnfrarentaffe t
Sy PoRoayyract t

wren
wu
uu
nWu
u 30n
wit
uw 3Qn
u 334
n3vu
n38u

n 3&0

2. %, 1, T, ager

4, @, AeqaNGyD 1

9. 5, Hert

--- PAGE 320 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa seore: 297
aoearanighrcd atemraiiirarefeore |
pomratia se ag?ereaareqary |
qarkgwantad spe: Bret oinea 300
sitye: aetafer agent wettez: |
wavered; aafaragnifira: ncn
watrarfaxaa: aaned® Rraafad i
Beane taaq Rragsia: un 38n
GTS: Yor: caeat waders? t

afsarerefag ura waratefagssae: © un 80n

aeasear’ afeete: adat aernrafeg t
aranfatghearmat frrereameart: u8dn
aarent ateren:$ rea: aasftagarax:? 1
carnfiafgorasarerg asi frst: 2° us Qn
amnrealsfaneite: orarcraresrerag |

Rrafasrera: aradeqastargra:++ us3u

fartati? freraege: taaral neaaleararez?s |
- aRaraqaat de: ware: Raagefarez?* = BV

. &, Terranigetige 1
- SF, FTG 1 3. W, S, adaea |
. G, S, Sreparatrenrare |
. &, cave: AeahssoTaAT: t 6. &, raat: 1
. a, aera 8. , Waar aras:5 1, a, Agar

area: 1 9. S, GUTH | 10. a, 7, u, Prove: Bor;
&, Fasrrme: 11. u, Rrafearag: arg: agesfergeep: 5
S, argrepzaong ar: 1 12. a, &, frarr

13. a, Groarten a va gaara; |S, cacedtsaea-
wire 14. By WEST

N ag ky

--- PAGE 321 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

298 Hportadcer

arerafrr: aalaret were: Preece: 1

we zayesis 2aferarqaarage: us8u
fered Afr Raa wred va: acoafregrs 1

aTgN sraaHargerresiza era; u Shu
walseraerarat wafdtarngarstas:? 1 .
agesianTaeger yorgtakntqe: non
adaigaaraaat gagerrarags 1
aaternradgaal” fa g-gt faaaae: us8dcu
sere aageafamardt Frat: |
frafrenfefirtsancaararafardt ugssu
fersergt Fafaescager Proffarerfsfaarfitens 1
geafereqrgferifat Frxtait Pererea:7° 1 .
zerlgoumntaa: sftape: afr: re n Bou
a: Rra: wer: qeagdtenarr Rrepetsera: 1
salar asilsaee: a Het gear a n Stu
ara Ta Rra:** arenraqyeed aarhra: |

waco argterar’? afer yf afer aasofe u 82

1. a, afeafirr: adereaar guiftre afer ser 5
S, wears: ant afer refs: Rrearaay: t
2. Gy, YS: Matt; Ss, ser Faye Ay 1
3. a, waft aaa 4. &, argu; Ss, aager
5. @, waftergercadaatonsa wearers;
&, wisgremeigefas: 1
6. 4, orechiBaa:; 9s, gragy orarenfag i
7. S, Weyer 8. a, Hagar; s, Wa_RT!
9. U, Ss, Prffarenfes 10. a, s, Prarep:t
11. S, ert 12. , &, wegeraafa

--- PAGE 322 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAEM BESTT: 299

Rratsé arepheargia arxgsprrat afet t
awearg AySSto Rrearey wafer arfiepreg? 830
aeareior ag’ arena Tera: kara

akocortanerata sé atefer Rat u 88
ugeacenia Pereresresh arepfas® t

fia: eorftRrete aartta fe aeae u 88 n
Boreslaa aegt sarah a geo

aeaata a ata? yewat wdras un 8&u
afaaa: fre: arenrqagatereqa: t

aagagay ven stryps: wre: Fa uw 8ou

aragqgara aa sips: arcencorr 1

Rraaq gqeaa st wafer qurator® w8cu
Aye wet aed Reed aaa:

regunar a ofa aea:? qifateaq ou Su
ye agra: aren wearer at ATT

Rr gat? qeaif agfera gfe gare ae | kOU
aagifitaer Saar sftayerefe ora 1

Sralteast are a: weer a arerest nada

1. u, Rrar Rroarpfietis axgnirerer afe ;
&, Rratsenrepfer t
. &, wader
- 3, TEI
+H, &, cafirear 1
s, Greagrearepier t
&, Ufa 1
a, aeafiara atta i s, aeaeafa a adtst 1
Uy Bren arr Guerentior 5
By, TT, AIO querer 1
D. H, THAT 5 S, Yow | 10. &, Rrawit i

epxyaapey

4

--- PAGE 323 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

300

Powtaaet
Sfresrephrareara oat: arerrersrrarst t
Poxar ot ag ofa aracdarmat ye:?
wafangayce dieae: areurrferhirs |
SraATASAA TA sTeHAT ARAL TET
FAT TERT SST: Praga: |
Tal Gaga usar yertert seas
aa FaRAMT Asal AT ASATTAT Bs |
qansapenisa Gears age Tey
Rreed area gat sparfrt ard a
eed sarge waurenfsarpeaas
fagraranaad dtsitsehife atrpqs
afafoson: aat eeceqal Yeoay

ay faagarsrarey anferensta Rera: oar” 1

safe tanta ateit a spe: ara: Pre
aarart sexvare® stearrareferoiay 1

ay sirentfer Feraretat a ape: apfirer: fret
get fear Rew gfederareract Prat
fesrore Ret argien care a pe: Fret
ag dfaPasteret?? qarmeqaygay t
award fated er a pe: woah

i, Wargeradt: 5 S, TYoETeTaT: |
a, aaaafhfe aft: 5 =, ratrarar yest
3, Gere: 4. a, &, Teri

. a, Rageaft; sc, ferpeatgs

pages

10. %, agarahttseaat ; =, awrefaharsterat t

. 3, afaoeramree: 7. a, Ret aftr

- a, ar 9. S, Ieratet WerM< 1

ua

0&3 0

neu

wESu

un Gn

n &ou

nw Eu

n&&u

nou

u 67 n-

7

--- PAGE 324 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa BeBe: 301

weedy aearedt APa as MARITATAT |

jusq ogfet afer a fe Saat yest wen
TATAPSUAAAAAT ONL. 1
maagq a: wsvareat a ye: Bra: ra non
ad ag fattaseas weot Aletot ae 1

ay at araiasranfe a mpe: Pra: Bet 0 08 u
sing wer: gaara Girt agdtaag* |

ay afe asa afer a spe: afr: ha nos an.
fos ag aur wd wordt aAgeay |

at ar acahasrante a pe: efira: Bea noma
at ar qusa aged? rerat aatrate

ages fasrenfa a ae: afra: fa ubeu
anafaanrandinf axat*ageay t

at afa aztenfet a speatfax: Fre ulecu
orresg> Sadler ameter a I

Fateret at ferstrenfer @ apes TAY Hae: uu
ag ori? agence teearel® faareras 1

at sranfr verte a pe: anPirer: Fra udcou

*sgqeah aenrgren wrarad arfer 1
1. G, yet arat age were aeTatae at
Aare aghrd af a fe amet qe: U
S, Fauedt asaaeat afeerareraferaa: 1
ausu agfad afa a fe aha ae yer
2. &, a, RaiwarAaaTayIaaay ; 7, aqaviere4r-
Rass Years t
- a, wé tae; =, fraesai 4. &, Peart
oT, Wgeaed 5 a, agedht i
+7, WYeIeT; S, TYPE
+S, Weare 8. S, LETT!

NO Ow

--- PAGE 325 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

302 polar
amUsTs aed? Gores Tar
Frad at festrenfr a ye: Pre: en CI
antaraunarerfagiaanaderfery t
weaat ay Pastreanhe a ae: asfirer: fre nau
amd arosta? antasa naan t
ay fereibafirg maar: a pe: zal va: wan
anargaaitrar [par] saqraaaraany |
ay srartfer serefer a ape: azay wa: un
Tergat amiganry sqdtaret aH 1
qeaeasat ay afar a ye: aA wa: ucsi
firarfgfaftaded cefasrexaferstry 1
ay Pastrarftt ater a ape: geal Ae: ud&u
aedabi afeatt aoraraReafe> Pre
araravafaarasa at afr a ye: free n dou
Rwusmenvgattad Raft? at aPa axaa:t
frurRetrdwofs a aeafox: frae ucen
oa fgagreftiereararrecraferarann: 1
aAraeTgabra: Sf pS: AAT AT: ncn
TOT MET aa wes sya fer asaret? 1
pe te cer sifereet aren: santPear: u son
1. &, aa 1
2. B, Ares antsra 5 ST, street anrdiorsaa
3. 5, altar 4. BH, Faust
5. %, S, arovatret Pera 1 6. , aIeaeafaurasa aT

afr a aye: fer; 3, fafrararsa at aha a ge: azett nat

7. 3S, Pea 1 8. S, Hye: AY Fa 1
9 F, For aos at Mar gyrar ae ast t

--- PAGE 326 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaley Seore: 303

ONTAG? TUT: aTTyFAT ASAT: |

ARATE TTTSRY Tet St Ss ITAT Fes wu Sin
asuet arygrar aerate? |

aera ereasg at Ar a ye: Ha uu
faferfacat sratarat afer dfeeftacry* 1
agaat qalsaeat at af a ype: Bra w83n
qorlqraqreredaca4>ratstgag a5 |

sfrararens aPa a peafax: a n88n
Rrarfeyeccied areeadeptor a: 1

ara aware: a pRafax: a7 usSu
Bat ar affa axa aqaordenay vag t

Wear Faareatat a ywetfae: rae wen
a grat aesrareg gush egos GaA? 1

Boa YRS: Pree casa: TaATLEHT: nou
daroraraca FRreqeq?? spearqare
Ratqarafraafiacar aT peta: uScu

A Weert: ITA Tletwett?? cooler 1

get & faseftarg gS carearanyy 7? usu

1.U,aal 2. S, net Aaerdaast «3. Uy Hear!

4. a, Pattee norart dReest Preftaat; a, Pafer-
Racrnarard feast afectiatat 1

5. &, gergreraed wormehfisiag m5 Ss, qarlk-
FUME Aas FHF ws 6. Gl, SATea t

7. SOS: TAY a

8. &, aed agranhas Tye: UAT Aa I

2%, aefiegast ga; =, Wt aa afvaqreed
Resa gi 10. Sard «11. &, MaKe

12. S, WARMTH 1

--- PAGE 327 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

304

porladet
a: aitereranret cafincorer garfer Pet
Reararenfaxfeat a spetagent:
Ot Met: Wea Yorrsarenaipeag ye |
Malaga Hear a PRAage:
Qragq _*raeaxt sf asalaquar art
at qarg & yeatermorarefeafsreary
atraer sar qacwerrary saa? 1
aAagTATag grergt FAY Ss
yal aga: aa dtaaea Te 7S 1
geist qeate qiagq addiae:$
yal aga: afea Agareafarasrst 1
gorisd peel aaxarelarasr:
Rat aaa: ar sirenatiseumar afat 1
gdutsd specie sticareneprare:>
yxat aaa: afer peaediafraryer:
Boranrardtadacaat gaat afer
yar aga: afer Rreafrarsercentst 1
geuist qeefe Risrgsaragrce:
antrngarantrzar agat7afe 1
wdagerdiat a: a ypecfa gah:

* a Ges Waist aT TAA |

+ ow Gears at aren wstawar arfea 1

fw, w geet: eateantsd at gee i

1. s, Rrovararfacfca: 1 .

. S, gleererrg gera aert

. %, frergrarcera: 5 a, aaxarefarat: 1

nr ON

+S Tl 7. S War

nu 100 0

n 0740

uIRu

n O33 ni

W108 tt

0 108 0
W108 n
u 108 u
wu

u 108 0

. &, Waruqaar yf 5. S, Bley TaN: t

--- PAGE 328 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa searet: 305

yaaa arcana? aereregishrstrarg t

qe ata quarearat aferreare: W190 0

mearepraaied? gigera® wart |

AMS HeapAant Gere ara eT: wiAIdu

ugar afd ad doled aaa t

ar ag aferat dat er qeatertge: WAR

aat afeadtaet ataeftd fasttad

aur ord Fadia aqrardeadraa: n 293 0
- mar dare: ard yowarasae frgaq

war peecraeg Rrearard gq sora 09198 a

aot vefratgd FS qulget asigq 1

aaa Peerwoarg aaah; eT” wSu

Fagiaaran crates at wet

waytastarafa cerrsaret Frerzafas W11& 0

wasTaraeaY Iqieafraerag t

walarafsararacaxaaray wpe: o FR? n 179 uu

qordlarsrarancacedieiaanigeny |

neanragaara aad Brena nV U0

wat 8H2° Gh ax carearat Aa Rreas22 |

acraisamal? ant aceatare: Sey 198

+H AAT; S, WeaTiG 1
 werreranied 1 3. S, af yemers
S, qT 5. U, Aarars t
1,5, 5, Danas! 7. 5, s, waar
- m, WAAT; 1, a, GeTAa; s, fesaT1
9. @, awd Yeefe; s, adtarafrarta’ axrareft

Geafer 10. a, easter; a, u, aware; s, Geass

ll. 4, wararea a faeaT 1 =—12. a, Prat

494920

DARD

--- PAGE 329 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

306 gortaaet
senett? nabed ncaa wT a Raa t
ay at crater arene oper? alet qqrereay 1 1200
adware tsa Aaa es TTT t
aearawalazag gaat aaa ca a FRI
aeaxafereneanter a 74 ateraeafe 1
aadtarg Halsearetacasraraheara:> WRRru
awateaer & aaa aT aT
aghrealaker % af & aaa: ara: WAR
fageg Fadefe arfergl Aaa wag 1
gaaeg naage? a qaal alae: wr WARS
ahtarargieqd a qaf gaggia
frat araaeale Fe” Rrer araFesarz u 725
azadtei® 7S wear Sas wa ATIT 1
gerga we RefSeq a aret? areagarg Au IRE
Ha Qeat ated Sort yeasasy
aqmeay aaa Peta: Poreaar WO At
tre: qapma arr quien t
Ragat atameta 63a WRas Sat: Ww ARCn
qsae aprehyar: ay: sreot alent wag
quiftiaaat at yecaeta ager i
qaafrar seer agrashi a aera: UARBa
sys samMtdl? aaadqanrws7 1
ware aretng Afar ot YAeaTAAAg u 7300

- G, Taras 1 2. wa, carferfer 3. H, BET
. S, anders 5. &, ata: parsearerahwe|: 1
.&, Watgeed) 7. SA 8. a, afgert

. &, ara 10. @, pormts =, patra
2, afar: arot aaqi 12. &, seeytsaoaa

roa AP

»

--- PAGE 330 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa seore: 307

araftrat 7S area ar aigrrercepa |

yaeaVey Wear a aaeleor fears u 7370
AUG AIT IS: Garg Gearsat TAT
arergereaan Perea: yefdeat arergq WIR
afer & fired RaSacmani spefrerat: 1

wataat pommler fenra: atghreofe n 133 un

gfe stgorit Grafortergre wereaet
wabrtaaraa aarqeemest aaa
we wqvafarmard mpefirsaager
aA airay seora: n 130

--- PAGE 331 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ATEN Seoret: |
ontiee -
Ngeqara 1
por aafreah aftet efron: 1
soar Aegis ag A mat wu

Seat Saray t
agar afer cage aeat ca ofegeaFe 1
wea sanaran Paaghg: weraa * u Qu
frat fet at Met: waragad? Rrawaa t
ata a eafgaranifiearariageqar? w3n
aeara Pagrect arorcar aragrarfeeg hrs?
aeaioagert near: wferonar aa:4 nu
aareata gaa oreeadivatass
ge asanrarta® arora wu
ape” Perscrfranreret facaatsfe Rrararar |
febaqaerd tater caRrsar wadag n&u

1. a, Pear det a Aer: carfgaret, s, Pear drat as
at cara afar i

2. S, Graz

3. u, Ba: fagranrcaniamararikege:; 7, 7, Pergred-
Aratet 5 S, Har Ra grtarcarfaenaqrargegey: t

4, G, Hearorager FX aear F rower Aa: t

5. U, wuigaTa, S, weasigquaay t

6. 3, Aeatrarlagi 7. a, S, Yel

--- PAGE 332 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Ager Bore:

aaa fGarftresreea* alder: Brera at Pa
gered? areacdt qferafifer ge aria
aera Tansey Ararat fea

" erygrrafaPeseet® oar gata qe: aR
ufeafafgafergat* aden faftrag ye 1
agngafetensarcaar fren 7aq
wenka X at garg Wercasarraya ast
aqat eat ef Garrat afecafe
gefrearany sterqadiga area
suaat aqq Teer wtearat Pearse
araredtaragasa at sparfer aarfer FE t
yee ata aterm fey
weepatagasa a: puller a arerat* 1
faasafe a asad Gad ofsatoags
aag neafiaredt at frefe saree t
aang wert eeraeoar Pras vag
PA AAAS IHNIT FAT WAAUTHT A |
afeaararena:® Ried agened a areaa4r
aRosomfaraaa astarargateeare 1
aeaet TY erat afygeargaftsay
aaksatenraag agaretgaeead 1
ae wornafraed matt xrgarheer

* & gece eatenrghad or geaa 1

309

non

udu

w&<u

nd0n

nada

WATRAU

un

n 4840

nin

ndu

non

1.1, 9, azarcoafieren 3 s, aearfe arftresrcer t
2. Hy aaa 3. 5, arraraaRRget 1

on >

. &, Weer agua art dad ofseisrag i
. 3, fragt 7. SF, AE

a

a, ufragfranfageel 5 s, whrafafgafagrt t

--- PAGE 333 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

310

portaaet
wznraenracapa afe fear 1
qaararaarenfe wasa fersas wage
arate fraar arf spe: frct atte
dacat agg ar aay ar wacera:
saniearat patesfraranadhr 1
miTgsrOTATa eee eae At
aqedqubatadafarhtr: peared: t
qeareqretaracs sa gede:
anpecatisat aft at fear ar arfer at
Te: pat etedtler gar aBaratg war
sfiaeh: ercot aria arster qalarsfer at
aeget afeaafarargrar Set Fra
araeqHrniMasacas Aaifefafseanr?
Rear waedsa aparea® qrereecprcaefor
Rreaish satte: pate yealenn 1
arlaegrasraea aearearararaalgeq”
alatageraraed aeafalgadtsal® 1
Saeed? aftara Risat worse areaa4r
anfgrvaraaratg abort: efeeatferarkerars? t
araar ava: ster: rear afer cantPerar:

* a Gee Fader aatfeaeasrar area t

ndIéu
un
nu
win
wR
wu
WRBWa
usu
Wu

nrou

1. @, ware: 5 s, merged: qarararaiier wars: t

2. Hy Tet 3. Sy TAMAS AUATAMSSH t

4. T, TAT 5. , arereqaradnres caetarfag Falsoar: |

6. G, Fat were Avar: Hy t

7. 4, soy eta carazardaray 5 s, arardenfahy: 1

8 S, Tq t 9. &, arar afeakrarferar t

--- PAGE 334 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

“age seare: 311

andy afeentaafas Aenet aqefear By

gafagueriea anfgaizar gdtrar: wu
Hearanqaancar a afraraafsar:? 1
waa TeaTaafar? weaaarea J aya: Wu

aidt afeafadianr & qerrerareg F eras |
wean grads wearer arafer &

sangria careacgaga kere Pret u20u
aur Adie aeqaeg germs HOT

Patorcanlfr aprifagesgerfa cer are: n2dn
ae afta mrarat? MMII TATA |

we mathe ater® alagererar a wn
war faage: sitst mes va Paritefe 1

wart arattagesea opfire: gevarrfras u 330
waafear af gegeiar arararear Aeeafy
Reararerfgefear sat dhe rar ear 38
aan eft sqomieat Preqay sta gaeaet:? 1
wigigtagarea args: ahra: Pra Ww 38u
saracorfer oar aqeayl areatrera aeaq

eat Hatagaa args: aAgaky w 3&u

a

* am, 7, U, & qeay esrarghrg of Gera

1. a, gakigureerea; =, galaqaeeree t

2. &, areata wafsrar: t

3. &, weacadiaf &; s, avaecrgfirirs

4. @, area myaufeteq arerdvar; =, ated wear:
RAS: syRteaaar i

5. Tanrraraeagaar) = «6. S aafasers

7. SMTA: | 8. UW, VAAET I 9. S, SY RTGA 1

--- PAGE 335 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

312 poriade#r

BAT Bi WAAAY LaTaATaAy aA |

jadreloaara urea: warq? aarfera: v 200
ulearoratararier firensamerefe t

aa alec cafe oa Paget sae n adn
frortaoreastantggnraacarar* |

ater aeanar @fa acer ofan Rerar nu 38n
waareor fatter a arrest gfrargar

Saar gofdar araraf feraforafarepr* n8on

Reardignear waar posnosaogfaapr t
poafeanargaar wxteat peor afe: 1

aaftr geugut® gataafaftrarata” usin

avtdrer ferar aterar Peacaresraett: 1

asarigetat efer fgafefefafreg ar usu

antag Rreaaeil cnea ofrelter data? 1 ,

qaarcafer dalsa weds ape: Fa u 830

wIgaE ate antag eaafeseraal Gets 1

gfemin fafrar daeasa casa W88n

wad Gararara: cereteg nar: FEretts 1

ger aviary siterar gta aretet?° faa n88n

* & Gees TGs a GAT

1. 3, AgQuer 2. a, ufranrarazarte 5 =, afta
ATATATLT 3. 7, a, earevenregar: 5 S, Gearanrateot-
CaP ATATTAAT HST: t 4, 5, 1, a, S, dear: qian:
egraaf feraforearcpr: 1

5. 3, peng: 6. s, gefeguts 7. #, fafrarata
8. 3 wm 9. s, aeardta
10. a, Share srerar arterer; S, araeert

--- PAGE 336 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

agdy Beara: 313

wordter Rrar Sart atoar PaRreaq Pray

Prafantanted? cergroe dears u8&u

argataltrated Anfersr frefer Fe

ara: awosrater sarcar® ferar mrfearera: ae ui Su

Haressleqded sarcar aeciPestsahes 1

mecadtar war ae” worsartafedtfar au 80

dar Swat waar watareay Fra 1

cutee faftrerq? araBafaaar?? Rrasafr ou 88a

qa staat paanfer femtrana ret 1

aefarq aoiiat asarafgeent ar w 80 tt
, Raemawite afeaarcarsta:2? 1

aicat perpetrate: ferek calor Fatq udu

wa Faararat arate sarg?s t

wordtent* ager agqaranrcerttetr wu 8a

aed fared qe erear steqgargariealtT 1

Te: eauifissaead?? caxidten wary u 83
> Rar ake aaa aeaxataafeerreq?7 1

seatg cearearaa’* andiafa Frrarae u 88 a

a

1. 3, a Pada 1
2. &, frafaorguici 1 3. 5, aferat
4. 3, seta arfttaded 5. S, arrtt wvorafr crear
6. U, Poxrafrs 7. @, aI
8, asTaT 1 9. &, fast
10. a, Fafrarars Ll. s, Pat wate
12. u, aa 1 13. a, dame; s, dRaga
14. a, gadian 1 15. G, aca Frage 1

16. %, 1, 4, Ye: eqaa frees, &, Iw: eaag cafrerer
17. 1, 4, &, Sfearqi =—-18. H, Meatenedl; Ss, Wear-

--- PAGE 337 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

314 portaaer

Fadftem araet earcat aaa gacadh: 1

arog agiae: Fret gsrdtar a wag eu 8S
TRC ae arse, eaReTTsAT 1

Ta: AsHAg aret ar dren ergy war WBE
nade Pear? Wear dtar Placa wi

arate’? ogfad arcar Rrearge cazee Aon On
porigact ara war af ag wayt
arsraartreqaisare a gica aa wen
yeaeearito sa palfaar: 1 :

orrgea:” sonrPesoaReserareaare wat

war gfranar ateat dtsrdter pesahe* u88u
afa Aaaer aft peor aATATAT |

aarpeafter: Rreaeesorgeagr wag u on
araeararcherfaat att cafe caer t
assrafgertalsel aa snarfa? qreafe ou G1
aah Aare aq? eqaharapyyqaey

Tag: Vey aT aatlfa aq gw aagdisafe? wen
qafag: Pera: arene garstemany waq?? 1

ger dtr star vaacafastaaty |

Rretrangr ararg?s cat wat pons 1 &3 0

* 1, 7, S yeahy areararay “oqyaq”? TaeTaAgRNaT
atti oo 1. H, WaT; a, S, GATT

2. B, 1, 4, Har; s, Aaréfer Fears

3. Baal «= 4. UW, HOt at ad aq; s, woratiag
mgio 5. Gas 6.5, Feral «7. SF, waged t

8 a, aera «69. Gag t 10. s, Aus TTT!

11. 5, wag: Bear firereaqerer ag ixafs 1

12. G, &, A Fasten TAT 13. 3, afi

--- PAGE 338 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AGEN Seara; 315

ararequda BeIRatgar Fatt Haas.
fagr qest a Sacer? asaerr: satfrat: = WEB
Guet TST AI Aras? PSsalr 1
afratt aa parla faseqeat a aera: u&3n
" Sadierenel Stas stspedet: Hart
faroatsi GURTIgE GuaaaT SAT
a garg wer penfs gearair aAgalt uw Seu
Fore: ana goa? Rraera 1
farsorar qeiaefa dtdar atest rar in G9 n
paged’ ga ge asansarqaeaay t
afifistg ye: Rret negerear adRar uu EC
astatttagadar gxar gaat a
Baya: FarViaga PBSAT aT 1
atte aa: patgrat aq awfrd Ga? wea
Ateaeg afar af aad awa sera?
asarsattaarge? Rret aahheaagq nou
art)? firg Arias; earqraradearhet? arahr
frers qeceresatt qearssifsefats a on OT a
Us 8g Horenraeasaiaearsaes?” wag t
ways gearaba aa: FYRSals: wer
-a, Tit 2. mH, Faea1 3. S, AaeeT
.%, tadts s, Fears 5. & Horert
a, fagged 5 s, rage. 7. @, TASATAT |
+ &, ussite; S, wate 1
9. My arerat HPrar gets; S; Aveta: afer Pa

aon nr

10. &, at Seay 11. &, Tomeitarsy |
12. 5, HE 13. &, sraratsttr ai

14, &, eAlHrRgraTETT 15. B, TTI 1 16. S, TGP!
17. &, ug ageartitearreaew 1 | 18. A, AAAI

--- PAGE 339 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

316

portance
gat argiftracsor aterat Seretarar? 1
goffraaorat:? asaraar: wanferars wu 63u
porate tar Pera Tera: |
guifiiaqar & & gaearwag sterfer> 0 68 ut
goifitiagar & ware gaettfires |
gaisaaladt star year freaftorr Tacha
gor: guifirsaor Rreargearagrfrerr 1
aa afar asigea® aneret aransaty w 08 u
quit dren rrangrett a; atfesent rae ake 1
Pracararcanft araqrgaddcwaq” nou
rar a fefaar waar qrarasacitga: | .
feardrenr wergrar Sarcarasadl var ween
aengrgifeutgigraar aanFerar t
orm a frargigate: ufgea dtear usu
Freon Herta avsraish Fageae 1
anat far pom? atfeent Aa geas* 1 COU
TON A ASN Tas a a wror:? 1

ana: Haden popes, ucin
tan arar:?° asad Prearfaferarfrear: 1
afracaarat efrt+ sirataafiteaat: nu
* sgeae aergirg afer

1. &, Get:

2.5, aah AAT 7, oN, a, Aah Bese WS

S, areas asset 71 3.5, ararhi 4. S, Harare

5. &, wafer 6. S aaeeT 7. S, apyaaeaay |
8. &, atrarrarsa ferarr afer 1
9. Ua Ta a ators 3, a ofaet a wT: 1
10. &, dlety 5 1, Harrar; a, Heftaar; =, dlewarart
11. ®, @, 1, 4, ahracarerpeq seq:

--- PAGE 340 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aAqey Beat: 317

acdtatrien georfguefiar paeatt 1
agar aur Poearterar reakerg, aor udc3u
arg taaargearg weierraratraras |

Aa Mate Gs Feet ara araeafe un é8u
sooaasenthr aerate: 1

amraefa safer qrear fe Faftrerr par un ¢3u
gor atedtfearearat wafer agra: feat: t

ar dren eater afer agrarerfereat Paras? udc&u
aor difeanrag sraee wera: (a1

ar Fier aetgr sar Tereg sar afar: TRACE
saraarraaiht at Paar ata Paeafers 1

at Perarsag acatig fyieahaga uccu
wegn oar fagaa: gavfat req 1

Ferfegeaar arear Rract ora He udSu
Henhagapatal nrafsfsracaat: |

Te: at aretaret* rafsteg Rrat zag u8ou
met Bega yard Farenifr a fara 1
Dardeprcarassy srfatrat at Pere n8dn
frafee fraats pda aq aansaa 1

daa gdécaegear ag awaarcaarg* ou <Vu

. * sgeam cergiig afer
1.%, aenrg sfaaangearg wATrrerarrargy 5

4) ween;  s, ween ofradeurg
RACMTETA TAT

2. S, avgarafagfrepr t

3. 3, at Prear aa qaaf i 4. 3, var axt araferei i
5. &, frat

--- PAGE 341 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

318

poriatet
qrendieqaea ifategutateay

aateaa aa Ugh? adanteg stata: udu
aa ghraaran armengaareaere 1

ghia der ae caret feactat ot ciara: wu 38u
Afeaea a wrt caraahaferaraaa: 1

a dtefdanaatadt a otizacat: uSSu
adifiaar & pater stagerfgepr: feats 1

a aofee fra dat Rrerargerdtsrag, un Sau
afer drenfadterer a Pafgef a aanfas i

aearg waar peor Meat WaT nou
Fast ak Dear: agarqecrst: gear Ete: 1

Fast: aefere: @ ste gfer erearefferofar: - nu Sdn
yeafragaratisa at at carg? gage 1
era’ FX Gear AAU: HersweyT ussu
reat difhanraag afe cast arat YR t
Teradata Gone? u 100 u
qiay a ag peor srerefsair 1

arerat weg Farrar a gaat araz: 107k
wfrarsar’ qaeg APAsnTTATT t

Hear wMaakscrrsq Pras wag WOR u
aacargrarrcttarrents at yhahaey t

aratges narra? pate aratfeataerg un 103 0
1. S, Faswsreaget t

2. S Gear 3. M, Faery t

4. @, aa 5. S YXATAT

6. &, GddeareTatg; w, Didier aaratg; =, Vie

awa AAP | 7. FS, AAA 8. Sy, TG

9. , aT ara 10. S, argenrfe t
11. &, woweret: 1 12. S, ore

--- PAGE 342 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Aer Iesre:
qaregat Fait ala: afaat aqacgare |
deat araRahrdieaght: ug va a
fawaran: Gargarg wearar: Faguarar t
aifaesta: saat strat avatar? wyerarar
wargareaaar ger atrfrenret are HA? 1
adardt rasan anftreart goeratt
fs gexefsa aaqgd afraatferanrz? t
Aaa teataaefes aeriferrafeercay>
afa & afr Refaq otter spefererats 1
Penta sf Ranga: wth

afa ftpenfa Grafodtergr wares
watriradrad aqaqaemed aera
waratarraca yehrerattearerct
ae Ager seora: u Fu

1. 3, aritreret ot arf arian
2. 3, aq 3. &, Sfrargqe

4. 3, dhfttar 5. @, Pasatst

319

nu 108 un

n 105 0

u 10k

u 108 n

un 10

--- PAGE 343 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Gea Serord: |
ono
sfteeqara 1
por wMeftear Gears |
erarerfagor aq F azagaz

Sat Jara |
sro afer rerperfr went cat afereaee
aeer TAOTATAT AeaTa? TTT
waMaTs WY walt ararsedte Heer t
aerissttat caffra teres arate
wang? aRcasa aeaarg? amaa_ t
amarag wad Palg: wargragt* cass
aba SATAN STA:
soeararaa” abit cearefe aaratg
omadtisagiora Prafissatgar: t
atetatarpar? af core sora Pa

eart gas? adlesq Pahgttareaar t

gagmiartaty waa aig qaq??
gsr wafer Bret soca a 1
aiat srenngfeaea Guawrgert

wtu

wan

un

usu

wa

n&u

uu

udu

1. &, Aeaaea to 2. S ATA 83. S, eaRTsT

4. G, WArgIsaIaT | 5. 4,93 F, WaT

6. &, WTTITIAge: Sea | 7. GS, TA

8%, ATT 9. A, Wega: t
10. &, AaRGwTaT 1 11. 1, B71
12. om, wig FHA; a, afreafer

--- PAGE 344 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Gag Seo: 321

aq wag fadaa wqeteofggoy sta: 1

pate fgragiasadwat ar aren: Fat wu
pdtat arsfagaed aaa a aftrra:? t

aweag?g? fadtaa nett Agrarcgqary uIou
aeatraghatsta oak: sgenieac: t

ghkag fats ad fe ane wag W474
armafaganca Iargareatat 7

adaeana fafa crag? pee uu

saarrer areata, sftrytiea carga:s v

weamtrargecaroa aeahahy: asraae nH
fugueag yNtdsat aeat a: Pafgaretaq” 1
qavenpaparareacat ar etahafgg: nu
Farge peafer werasHaTTT t

eaqrqweaa a Aea a a Reet at dee ou 1S

arena seqed wafecor g dgeqe t
HATHA? Wee” wea Pagl waereF 1-16 0
farenmeagaaaiganreager |

Wess qatened eal arg aoraviqgeaeey un Wu

* ae astenea arene ey t
agernfaata aeafatg: sera?
a, S gece: geafiras 1
1. S Ha
2. S, agwartar feat: | 3. Go Bag; &, TAG
4. GU, Waa: «45. A, MUA 6. S, Asawa t
7. &, Tanearearagaanrgenreeatay 4
8. U, Fed seorenarafa yafsantager 1
9. Fy HAT WATT t
494921

--- PAGE 345 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

322 gportacder

arerntaaian ara alfenter t

wftar: yet aegel oe: ad aggayt wddu
aanaftaeaht Papeanutfit a

aed Teparorcata ang adfafgay wdASu
TEs Bat eae Gea soar a

ga Rerat ar areareaS asaa: earqerefag* 0 200
gaa PaRaarenearez Faster astafet 31
waa Tat araasy sarfirgeagqa® Hn
geudd adit yer darsaey | -
aingar: Rregat aga: aaat aay wR
saretifer fafeerarfer fasarges ad Fras 1

gaaradat HS wager Prst eq Wn
aay? gasatier errarresarfet wary

aaa Praauaa aa Pad oeftafer uwu
qianpa oeggtaer a ase ae
mMfargaagat aerdt were sta: wasn
we cay ar ans saryer 7aT |

aitgarea quanaad Rrerafearat wu
Progeqnee Magiasfaat ia: :
qaranadr Prequfea ufeadge nu
waaat afta oat qfirat Rreage 1
wettqedstaene Pratarcarsrats A

1. u, sfeareg a ate Gag ae agGRaT
2S, YSATT I 3. @, maT eary
4, &, assta aelgg; a, asso: carafe: 5
3, awoter aap t 5. 7, afranfera 1
6. U, AIHA 7. B, FIT 8. S, eSATA At
9. 1, a, Wears S, ear 10. S, farar
11. G, or! 21. S, VFI 13. H, 771

--- PAGE 346 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

UsStEy SeoTa: 323

xistat: aParar wat Gear: werat? srarr: t

aufta fat atta a aa*aa neafag w@wur
steisarsnearenpesanray Ft

adtasingagt yfogizg at aaae u30n
Paarraagr at sagelya ALA? t

WRG TAA Tar Tearara: HS waq* u3dn
aerreracofigrequassarearaay t

aiaqad far agen: W3Qnr
qearasarant Fag’orapnfaay |

pega fare ahisaaargigay u32u
qeraRcadtufearaagaeaet a

wordafee patgenar Breas wag n38u
gamadagy aga wrdeg Frarany®

qa figear aguededt tat wag 0 33n
MNsmadtay? at Gagrarareay 1

waesor aqxrart? quar oat Paay n 2&0
gquractae*? art an at a prada
meaggdaa tentoordtraqs non
gaa qdatgry Range peadq? |

qea* qaastiaa te areata u3dn
* 3 grate wrerghyg anf

ts gram stergihe afer

1. U, Wager agal; SF, Wat: WaT: Tear

2. S, Brae 3. @, ar 4. @, Reg

5. &, Fatrq 6. 3, sraararnhearr at rorgeparaty t

7. @, Paasrapacarit aq 8. a, Faareteny 3
S, faargeq: 9. a, adi; sade: 10. a, Bere
ll. &, adie 12. @, 1

13. &, [aaea sarge i 14. S115. A aAt
- \

--- PAGE 347 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

324

portadeat

gars qaagy fateargt Gerag |
fragosfefatneaeqanya azar |
sragaaa afr erat corre? zag
woot faarsmt: aotzafgatarea? 1
arate mfPagaa: arta: srarhra:
aaifa diefararanr aaagrearsarga: 1
maa AMT Hot ara wsxhy
arate aiPaas arch aprftras arf rq apart
aq aa Prkaedte ororarmadt rat

qae winrar agqarea war aay t
aahgarnt qaea ator: aroma aang
mrorarifaggiear aq ag ast apatfer Fe 16
TUL HSAASGRKA ATA aT HAT
amrraladat ation? fret wafer ae
qaarmranranfa acalafg: carae®

Ot smaHaaesegy aed woh ae a1
faear get aera Fre get aa stair:
SHA FATAHS AY Yercar? qsdeaAy t
areas adfacaga cortrinfitgaaot
aeaarar far atear wfeaatsafeaate at

nu 38n

u8on

u8du

WS Wu

n83u

n88u

usSu

u seu

u son

afeaar afta: aecai?? argesr eargenfeaar n 8d u

1. a, WOE orars Ss, WIAA cara’

2. &, Frater: 1 3. 5, amin 1
4. G, S aa F1 5. 1, Ty HBTT GeATeA |
6. Gy S, APT ears 1 7. 3, aaa 8. 5,71

9. U, BAS; ST, TeaTT! «10. =, Passnagdar
11. 7, a, APA: aera; S, Arefh: eycart

--- PAGE 348 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AGT Seay: 325

aufensaraacfeattqearafe atPaar

aqanfernat naiersafaas: w8Su
Chane yaiht: cargarhreran Hey? |
afnfir;? gaara arftaartsaaargere un Sou

fants: carga gfe: acafantahrdag 1
asafaerfifirental asaggarhirar® 1

asatate: pamifer adfatgeal ars uw Stu
aeysa a Ate: carastalt aagarferatt*

neaat water Pree ercfeaepriocrerrfirepr 1

aferer carematorest qaetPaar wu
gasafiearftearal® ager aeafaaa:7 |

Rewraal wficarsa tet atgwadag wS3n
Seasidisam: Maw sary: eye:

saat aravat afer fafaa: wPrat ora: W S88 u
afageat sarfragelrdterecaaras |

eEretdgaal al wea: a at Paeafas n83u
Waa a: MG ald AIST al Aa HAT 1

oad Fava 2fa Areentieslae oer) u 8&0

* w@ geah reniqrua argestacra—
“ seq drereasteat wae da nears
aeaarsarftenr atedt afer canrarftefh ? n

HaHa AH: as: |

1. a, anfeereareuenear; s, anfeencaresreaar i

2. 4, Teousuieht: enzarhigiqureyzsy

3. 5, avert: 1 4. as, arfsear) 5. s, Rear

6. B, S, Taraea Tfooaretfer 1 7. @, &, wealaq

8. B, HeEaged Tiehfrawerag; = atau

aya wiahterasagherag |

--- PAGE 349 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

326

poriaaear
MATIHANY MAAGeA FTTTHA 1
qanguagaay at aea:? a at Peeafer
araeafed? pear aeanravtafgar? 1
qapgaterfedtt at nea: wafafga:®
neared meadaed alergat a afar at
maaestantt ae Rafgef cree
gradtorga® & aear at greater me Pra
nearaaetatear: adfafgeer: sar:
Qacuefeat ear: Maat ante Sasyt
Te ata qasaiea oerplesrargh
aealzart Het age” cred ard wag
ge: aeaehal elfester aa Hey
qqave*nartiger aalaraa gery 1
aeaegrsr A Gwent Feraer: Paral 1
wenger WEA AAT ara Tera:
wageaktasad usa aaeadga® 1
gad cera wa oreo TESA
wget? Herat grat ag: wera Aa: 1
are: Pal gam: Wet agra nfsa:

u Sig a
u 8cu
uu
u&On
n&in

neu

uu
u&8u

w&Su

caferat goat aut anfea: uftsa: aa:27 1

neg: queqahwent afitisataa:

. SW Wea 1 _ 2. &, oraeagfear

Nao ke

. H, 1, 1, HAM SATOH | ’
. a, eqn; Ss, ere 9. S, Fq21

HEH
NO o

. i, &, rears 13. S, Wea

n&&u .

. w, Pears Ss, Bar 4. S, Ganguagad t
. &, a fe Rreafeart 6. &, 3, qeadtater

. 3, ag 11. 1, 4, AE; FS, BEN

--- PAGE 350 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

asda SeoTe! 327

Regez:t afre: casa? wrrerveras Disa: 1
farscAat faaat vaeat* Rarsffa:® aftsarftas:® u 89 u
gra’ Racpat rar’ afsasa gurag: t

Parsaxal Pafstal? qragaqeed aagK: w&du
fakaat Pafega: pz:2° maaan erpecet:*2
Prafaf?? wftratts aca? arofteeisgétarn:35
atet fagtSagreftat ofearat Mfkaiswe?” un &Vu
sede’? aeagaia asarcay WAAerey?? 1

fafga sraa wer waalfe nara nO 0
peared a aap Aeageeur: At

aad fact qardsa alec aa: neta
afrtatse asleurrcaraey art

aot staat aka: cearer: Goatees wn

moitestetfer exarfir2° ger eqferfkranfer & 1
near epfaarotta demrtanhtrerar no3n
aga afasd sresife Fafearfet esrecfti22

WS vag tara? qearstarh afar u 98 u

1. HS, BHU 2. H, SHCA; MT, I, Fras; S, TITAS
3. 5, Jerr 4, &, G, carer

5. , 1, a, Pardis:; a, Pada:

6. &, wisahar; a, qaltsa:; 1, a, afosafratt

7. @, Ga 8. 5, Har 9. &, rear
10. 7, a, s, Faparare: 1 11. a, Prtaa 1
12. a, &, Frdfr i 13. a; s, gat 14. a, wart
15. %, 1, wrt: weisgdlaH:; a, War: Hoitsgdiam: 5

S, war: Persgdlaa: t 16. a, Dfearke i

17. &, Afea: fr 18. 3, aRaarzs
19. &, 7, 4, 5, Tear ugarsstg Fret 20. s, erearftrs
21. 7, a, wrerfe fatgarfer as ort 22. 3, marque)

--- PAGE 351 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

328

Poriaaear

WOASAUTAGES Per TASATA 1

easy: HS ATG Heearg T ws: noSn
Tea BAgaaag asst ait Gell: |
GAGS AF wrroepread gah e? uo& n

Fran azar qarectat ae aret afrmerat
nat ant aver: wrifeahtr: wat aaq? ou lon

qeghaeguag aqafgagaseg |
aermaaronfeafaPraatasreata> wee u
feaq steals arqenrrtey Fercrerors |
TAAATARU AeA TALS eat uu

Pagdle, wedenedt pata arearkefn:® ger 1
agragfauma Rrgrdtey sorte gat: * u cou
fagagt sare Reg Peper, Pgarere: 1
fagufhalsgaarg fegkéea arewarg on Cn
anrafagisttaamarg areca Parzefas: |
anagegl waar arenkkéa nase C20
gfghasgaraqareasg aerteaa: |

aqghag werga gfagih: camtaer” udé3n
affag: ga eeargRanceyg alfeaq

wages: HS efea varcarat afar afeg: ou CVn
Rargraf arewar: Waar: area Baer: Byars 1
gree ater stars gaat arate: ear; an CE

* 3 geae cergiad area

1. OT, WeaeaAMAgETE: 5 S, Weareetorangafea 1

2. S, wIAHrteadieats 1 3. a, wer Palgderaa i

4. % 415.5, 7, a, cawrbcalgiahiadtqucafa mA
6. S, Fargifehr: 1

7. &. cronagqgfage aahea Sar t

--- PAGE 352 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WagT TST:

arerar aaaritenr: wfgrsar Baa |
afawayairaa great: Deer: ara: *
mera I~ wat wqearlgws: Bey? |

Bie sto og ora: wat at Hg Aare 1
anf: warg cated? g tacignrea’l war

wen urag faaq aa geaft: areal aerst

fra axafrasa cenrgtler gar: gar:
ares vite qT ator arefterifer wera? 1
sao Afar ants wearat wea: aay?
wat det UITaraygaNHoaraw |
eet atepatasaar gree Urea:
equridearreed sroreftet Feacretirst 1
ware wareraa arate cater:
ATAARLATS araereal er rerzTz |
feat pear cathrequragealgatta ary
aprathrana aa scot densa? 4
waaay aaenea Taq gage aa:

* = geaee sorergfid arfeert
+ & Gea wrist afer

329

non

uddu

ucSu

n80un

wn Siu

wn

u82u

n88u

1. 1, 4, afeuggaaeg Near gqreureHugreg Braet:

2. , S, WIT oT agua wgeatfkas az: 1
BramrHagaragerarag Afar: nv
1, Ht, ara star ag ovat wrearigew: BL 1

Se Sra og: ara: were fear: Au

OW Gea wefttara: Hx: 1
3. F, Bareat 4. maT

5. &, ard whRoge 1 6. S, aeteaRr ufirg 1

7. B, WeaM: Sy: 1, a, aga: eran: 1

8. &, aTagutt 9. HM, 1, AeA TAA: 5

10, &, 7, 1, ART

--- PAGE 353 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

330

porladet

ood etar: aoa Hal fregrar: afeaanrar:* |
BISA: ISM: TeAAeleaigT TanfSar: nS88u
araienqaarernm: aarnieasqa: wag t
adlafsemMankraraeateke

grad salar Aa ada ara usu
qrafsegrar anfat wa agfer: 1
asitarge Hed srerpud posaly n 864
Tesreat aa Pe age neaarrasys

iga wacaoetr a Pgdteta Maaq? 0 8du
neafagiatees agurarasy a1

araraeag safin Rargrgteta aaag uu

afeertaurant wrearguraet at

ahostacaeant Radeta ataag 100 0

Halscud Rratsena afraxeae area: t

at Feeafe aude omanlfesraraht un

argrt qoaa> Prer axret eae wa: 1

waren dar area wert Pugduaat udu

wart eae fief qnaret eae aa: t

arate gaargen® wef Palge sraat WORN
‘ ada F Ber cara Fardet say |

aa pata aeqeragq ad rad a u 908

* = gece esrantse afer t
fa geat ga: ot “ areant Rragafir sare garetet sich

ara patra 8 ger: aa wafer feronss? qatar: esratshrar geaat /

to grate wtenrgiid anfea t :
. S, Ferrari 1 * 2. B71, 7, Adtafrers
. &, afta 5 1, a, Rea Th

ray

3
- 4, @, aaa 5. U, arent Pree
6

. m, walt Saar grat; A, Heat Farar Ger t

--- PAGE 354 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Gage Tera: 331

faogaearsrteragaa:? ant sete a
worden adaafad wag fra nu 10%
afeanrracearle gaghiardga: 1

at wad gecurg? gaat Gaya Ww 108 u
ares Gent Prat ad Pretest va
atargrata ald stapes frastag u 2019 ut
weurare: Terara® aoreat Ferararae:® 1
senragra’ oteasa oghtteal at Pavafe 1 10C u

softeft woqay asal yaa at wor: t
aofsatataraghatdrs at arq> v0 u
ated gra ques frarg ar watery?

afeeg Geargsa?? coarse Prasiag 07900

giea: Ufattararct wert afeerarey aelt 1

fageg: feredtefett ctoarear Sag 197
fasararRaareorsagraa reat: 1
aeailagaerantfexiadt aTaste:24 UqR
grileageanrcoracaheeepa: |

wea eeanart Pafgafeoer copia: un 1934
aaeerqraarieaeaaer gaa: t
augigedenad Pay ved TAG Rn 1

. &, feogatqageanfintas: 1 2. @, ar

a, Tey 4. w, Fagyhenrg; s, grag qyftads
mW, waa 6. @, ramet 7. G, sera
. &, aofedraitceg Reever saq Far

. a, Aaa wz ‘

10. wu, faxrt tesnsusa; s, afe: catgarasw i

11. M, Ged wertg Fre

--- PAGE 355 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

332 gortacet
AUNT Mets FTAA gaeA Het: TAT AT |
orrearafagaden fiat wea: afeeafe* 19183 0
afa & wfrad Rea quearresmory
aaraar pownfer fos ya: aig freatt wd
aft sttgorit Praforteargt serge
wabrieres wargame ase
we wavelet gurrwnty-
ead ATH OSATaT
srores HVS

* S geass wronged afer

--- PAGE 356 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SISA SST: 1
—~ostieo—
aflgsqara t
pon wMgeat seoraeakes 1
asragedfaarea ag A aha

Seat ara |
qo afa nagaf went cat oRceske 1
wer gTaTATaN gainrgat Fag
aedt fagrgeqa: gafaaterrarieaa:* 1
sforagaaed axawat wa Ha
quit ages aepe eorarect |
quiet adhere: alee: mfeargs:?
TPTGAT TAHT ST TRATES PT
EAA SU oor A atel Goagen naa:
mea Airealas cenfearafserys
Ue soTasarererataredera dor:>
nedt Rrgageta® orang oerat aq t
aa: eanaaisleray’” cabirey poathiras
nearer aferarey arate ufeagaahe |
fagueaa Rrafta se walfir at cera: 1
aa Preeafger Gararnararegarg

. &, Fasanfaa: 1

nin

nu ®u

udu

usu

wSu

neu

uu

udu

1

2. H, TAT gat: as: HEATH 3. a, PoRet
4. S, Freq 5. THs a, TTI
6. , Heafeigurameq: 1 7. Mi, a: amMAaAETey I
8

. &, &, vlageaer

--- PAGE 357 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

334

poriadca

aeravapreasgat aetet at Frere t

moatgiast wencacer g frat nSu
qaeantt Perareter at part magay t

gait gare aeaifeatsmrat gaat astq? non
ataadonrcardteatercearetfamsa: 1

area aenht ge ealfir carat niadu
waited age farerat aaraty t

wee Tenet soraeararaateaea:® wiau
TARTS TASTE AAT A

a aq we at arenfa saarmanraarg =u 13
feirarsa aart abrarergyaganry’

ast poaar”? arear wafhir arg nu
airaediqaagearaaiandantgary |

atst afer areca’ arear aeaifit araaq u 1S a
qaateragiea Ranta |

yahat walated great wear arate an WE
nealaansrged Prgsa atrery }
wigayaerdiza areca wafftr areata nu
waxantagiged FagedaeagaanT 1

eeaaritgardisa areat neath aradgt =n IC

* aise a, S gear: alta t

+ iaist a, = gerepat: onfeat

1. S, BRAT
2. U, HATH, Wi «3. S, afar
4, 4, war ned 5. a, wafead 1

6. 4, Rerarayt wurditn asereg sets 3 =, Reraraxtear-

army way 7. &, Magia; a, dad
plats a, a wit; s, Pageants

8. a, ateadt; a, after afecraitoat 71

--- PAGE 358 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Sew sewre: 335

USAT GUAT AM OAT ASAT aT AT TS
Hedepreggdarey? great watfr® aratq nin
airaraaarradiaanigagray |
qaararegqahe arear wafer araag> wu
araaraaanitr Sadhligorasay |

Wat wed TaTsae great waffe” araaq uu

sqahtaraaracighaarenreciferare 1
PsRaAATg ey? atcar at AAG WAR
aBamat aracfafireaitaradts 1 .
gpraeigs arcar evaitg aE nn
Heaadrar" qereurargaamigany |
qedrearentasa aicat watfirt? aratq a Ba
ass Hougerylg?? nears |

Sara agranfe areat dtat warty wIvu
Raed afifad ret Brod ara areargy 1
gararorasaf arear attr arate wren
ganspenaanlgpagsta Peery |

poreaiegtgeat great gat waratg’” uw Won

1. S, arArarareaarfeer | 2. B, TF, SF Yer
3. a, Aearfer 4. %, a, cafeagian; U, cage
5. &, jaararagale aarti aarti; s, Fararsrs-
yatte area sey aera 1
6. UG, AATANISH $ S, TRAAAMIST I
7. @, aearfors 8. a, aaeat t
9. S, Hrs agemaEarary t 10. 4, Yt; FS, aT
ll. 4, aears 12. a, “earfirs
13. 4, SousaRhge ; cs, wad got gig t
14. 5, Marerri 5. s  gamfe 16. Ss, Rafgsm
17. & a, waif araaqs

--- PAGE 359 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

336

poriadet
aaah aati aeredenraaikkany? ¢
aagarsste 3a areat waft ark?
carrera worggreateatys 1
agaifgafs ef arcar watftr anaaq*
Horporeanasnarigedr> Bayz t
proandgad ediccarrdagay 1
afa qetpreresa ancar afar oeaetaq
qa HereoramareTr Ref 7aarrry
araarer eter aicat pagar aq
amaag avfer Refer rsfaet Fa
MPa eaenks arcar vale arfese:
WwMaHssa Pagraragary? |
gifeasrargdeet aicar war Haale:
Praarangrereghattasaarederes |
fageafatrqsusa arear aaffer ara?
araaag asd" qaastata a
gead?? arma atear pal arg
staseanperant waqAgeq?s qrgery i

aqofaardt+ ofa arcar pair araitq?s

we Wa

nwa

nu 30n
un 370
nau
u 330
uv 38u
n3asu

u 3&n

1. U, Tass Sas; =, seaffeerraarfeay

2. GF, Tr aararg

3. @, Boiaeraqaay; +s, wararifeprd goy wTA-
BoABy | 4. @, Fst waratg i
5. B, Pagarcawmeisy FMA; S, Harporemet
airartasa 1 6. B, YG 7. @, Wearaqarofeahr t
8. a, S ants o% F, Padiaraary t

10. @, care Hoefire: t 11. &, 4, S, agri

12. W, saad; H, G, 7, attsrea 13. w, arse |

14. a, mena 1 15. @, vary Hogfira: t

--- PAGE 360 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Vise sear:

earhrper eaayera errant
fgyartaerate areat wafftr arate
aha iademearete rae
Madtatrarants arear sathir aratq>
gearen: Hira: FafSafgaren: gral t
adore acarnt far: araroseas*
neat: geagar: egfaen: edtgaar: Fra
aeat: Gat gneear: ort wafer gfe 1
ah ort cated aatseat: Betpaers t
ardtgarea att ago ated anita a
aifeaes aera: Seon yPasegraraen? 1
weed: Waqaareaaa: PLY”
Re a et ane awe ge Ba g ATI
PTA a an: wad? caren enferawh fea
airadoral: carer saragsrerateta: 1
Heated alsateredl sare aerferay?©
sifate usta ait wslaaeg ae |
dents aract wrt cag Rade
fenvest enifeeres tad ceenreasa aaa 1
aderticceted pt arefaanfir a

1. m, 3, Pafggar i 2. U, Horfter 1

3. a, suarafeararfe anar cag goafirs: 1

\

837

uv 30n

udu

“38a

n8on

usta

w82Qu

u82u

n88u

u88u

ns&u

4, w, anfert fae: erarconem: 5, fair arene: wars

&, faa: craw: 5. S, ae aears

6. %, uiiweguarar: 5 a, Wereureryararn: t

7. @, Sagqorer irr: gerig; =, Ressrar deenfftr

area t 8. &, fafggel at git

9. a, aa uPA 10. &, wenfearfers
4949-22

--- PAGE 361 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

338

portant

gia Saat gat agardy PaRaghoar

arn g aderalin wt ang sragkoarr* n Vou

wag? iftamet cargeaiet afisaroe t

aden Faye rasa HrHt az n8u
waTrenan raha? arcar pera Fra 1
adaatir pate vedt aarqnarceae u8Su
g& oreradtsisa ceonitearakenry 1

saary wuatst segrgTaAMTT n Ou
qeequnaengi af araegfriz; |

qolanaedied starakgenelohr:? u S7u
qurTaTaraa:* Pera ag aera |

ateateat araaearet a wagaTAT: un
qd ware gear adwafft aradq 1

Raafea® azar af ara araf Rrarcor u 33a
waraad? naga adfakgant Fae é
gRad sua dar goratarfee Pret nu 88u
warat wanted af& aram: Rexareras t

Rerat agraat wt yrosqaqday u 88a
neakaranpiaegarsaaaTyS |
ANorargaurdts Ne meacaygay u S& tt
gqeenitaartpegegaad Ft

araegiara asaragaicofaataneg u $0
* syrah wrargihg area t
1. 3, 78 7 2. a, aha awanrdlier

- a, aftaftrs 1 4. O, &, wargardfaard: t

- ap, Pareater i 6. S, Farag 1 -

2G, Wea; SASSI 9S, Ha

3
5
7. a, sages Fear t
8
10. a, dist

--- PAGE 362 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Siew Seare:

arentat aradfeaedt Prasat t
aafhs? fadtie suettagtrarmead?*
SPAM ASAT ATAAOALaASAHT t
awilesraafeat aoees Garg Fra
AAT YASUATAUMALTS WAT t
TeMeneaarniaenarest way
Rrearirenefea: gatiaanfeaa: |
Hagind args gra: adarara:

aaa geared afaar Prfartaag 1
Preval arara> arareata estat ferarcor
satenrgieeing wakes Prewraey t
qearanftrqapep igang |
aaTrag safe qdakaeray Tag
Ranits wae wafes fahreate t
aaemrzafeanrafea or: ad af cera;
quifegag” at vaeetfggadleay 1
aa dtst iva Tans wales gar
war aRaeatagahiar o TAAL: |
waeinae? Perenand Pre

award wae? aka set at dara
aikaarararst fe natagét ay

* a gram esrargiag after t
1. &, wah

2. &, Oiotasran_; SF, fhrgarteereonz
. By a, art 4. H, AEST 5 W, a, Tier

. S, Pread Qea 1 6. S, AGET 1
+ S seehgq1 8. H, S, SIT
+, &, waaTEEE 1 10. S, wre t

won aw

339

u 82 ue

wu 8u

u&ou

nu Gin

u&Qu

wen

n&Bn

n&Su

n&&n

TR ACH|

--- PAGE 363 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

340 porlaaet

cifeacaatfit caffe PaRrarcta area
fafraratar sah abrisaage wag
MIMIMATCINT FIqUeAataA TT 1

atsi aBaradg meg a agar:
astatitg ogidtdgad ets] faharatq
gerarerzanhr: geae paar
qqaehtiarma qiaossdkRuary 1
qumaahseg aeqreraanTy
Sarasqanhaeqe-aaTA seas 1
qsaferafahr: sanfarts ddtaca Raa
aqMTessaieradiaHa sinxaay |
arentiasa alee Praaaatearcrar
qumagacag TMNesracaga: 1
seraaaey Foss aAag gel:
qagraranendugherarcyparary |
faereacregaley aatey arirearcace: Raa:
Pagearaleiregraterentay® geustrarft t
aaaray HVeTAese Feo Ganfararkyaprey7
nacgadareanfe casharmees Fa

n edn

n&Su

ulson

nod

Tacha

wlo2n

nn

oS

neu

qen qatar ae Hera, a aeat Has saree nn Won

waaarasi sr metagétRayz t
aaapatfir aafftr faftrearctear ret?
1. 5, aT 2. 5, agrt
3. &, S, arated; a, aa

4, &, U, vediga t 5. &, daeiteore t

6. S, ate 7. Sy AVTATEA: t
8. a, frags 9. wm, BraAg

nodu

--- PAGE 364 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Wer SeaTa:

adams 2f& adsadinanage 1

arenre Way “eared arr aed at AeA:
feakamlot acter aera werguy t
gered aera anvarranaay
acai segifer fafwaq qtealt t
Sutg caval ante gag aaa
res Agel fafeaeqeuttas
qsaatalfires gt gfeaateny

qa aad aniseed fafrarncafaaa:? |
qafas gags waraag fiat
aronfgageared gifs aearez Fae 1
araareranarfer aca ar aer ar frat
age arage at paty armas |
wReacaafieracgyata’ efrt say
afacattiarpian Rian Pre:2
Ream aa gaat WAT Heawaary
arfadtarazrgifer ara Axarfeaar:?° 1
fag gefacantgnfaaadta fa

* wm, ow german: cargirg aria t
lL. G, 77 F AgeHrtwafsaencaaftas t

341

wu

un dou

ndia

ucu

n¢d3n

uu

néSa

wc&u

ndon

2. G, S, GEN 3. Sy AGIA

4, m, CHlaagy ugimearracaaag; ¢, vafghuag
Agimorey Taratg Pet 5. a, gifaafarery wargt

6. &, ara: wera: 1 7. S, SUT

8. U, WHacafirargd aifSend Rraz

9. S, Heaaray 1 10. #, 4, arferetghixerhy arast

fearfiaan: 5 a, afrdtghee enfe ara Aeanftaar: 1
11. &, faleargetereser 1

--- PAGE 365 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

342 Hortaaear

aoag aaa fafracreatera |

afafasag Prat Fret adqaranereath? udon
argttarfratarrsataarctarigas? aq |
cranfihiaat ora ageanrent wéty undo
aknsaaishafredea wegeady raga t
aanhaear aud ot wagonfeaaq* w8on
warageguinrenr faagafer a ATT:

fase arf ast ar PeRacar aeaquaay uSdn
fagd argar {fa adxgret wag 1

argquriaagad Frarent at say u8n
ag ag anaTasHlE Tagreanterana: t

wgast ameaed afqonssterargary uS2u
afinraefagaife terraaraary |
assiraniypfearmayarhashrgas w88u
CUATAGATaAaA ESA ATA TTT: |

sq nif syssita areaar vate Fre wu Sn
Ragetdfigra: afaqaanarfeFi: 1

wear qdaeneal Gaarcararaqa: uS&u
aremanfageaaraginareger Fra
arargennia Sfe caeateara sea. n Sou
weanfegerat Frarrerarat frat 1

aearg at voted arta aeet a tigre: w8cu

* = geam ga area dhapagad stfeercaysrer a
afer

1. 3, FeaguAT

2. S, fre waoraaorerany t

3. 5, aa 4. a, a, Tewls gerfefaarratat aT 1

--- PAGE 366 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ew sss: 343

anrenorast af nated fear 1

gearoreatiy fafrertar anaig n88n
gearfe worertgat anvar yeqarg Pa

gz waffr qgosita areaur dieahae u 400 ut
aleaaneqiefta urgarge: |

OBI gaa aT MAT ANT aaa uw 404
aearaditarmiaemietaegarent: 1

feared: qigeh: afirqrameteats§ u4OR nN
ughva aaddatatedRaeares:® t
ngReddumideatad gearires n 1030
Cea aa adal aqareEsrcay |
orar af aeaeq aeatea asa ar? u 08 u
aoe Faget arfa aad ar pasate 1

aTASTea HS aeps eouaear u 08 u
ere eearafeae earear aracott Fe
forreraguiefa wandareauenar nw 908 u
FETS OSAMA

wagianaaa aqEoneatia see: Ww 90l8 0
aaa aauasa art Prat sag hd

ara MmaGageam narra: WOE i

Le mt, vaterTiaire | Ds My ETAT EEE A

Be tty Hat | 4. try H, ntlin t

5. i, FA was (ttidofy erltepetentebsig a, (ah
weds git 4 fir Hy SEE etn EE ee tet eetig Sr g
a, aber cress eel iiqungay i

To My AON ain EWEN, bearer atic iby Ay eet
(aa treet) | "4

--- PAGE 367 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

344

poriaaet

APS GAMBA ACHAT:
aredtiaftearsnfaaaerarrgt:* Ww 708u
wERrenasqreaytpegatanlelts |
aaTiRnonqgdigagaa ets 01900
EGA VH AU AAT HFEPAgeys |

waded: mig: afrquansrga:? wd
gdargearere Pitrasncafeera: 1 ,
adtadisa’ gearey reat draerfaar: HAH
Feeley Ae TAT SaTETEL TET Geta sTairerfer4 |

fagearatmaneadaferaraar 1

garafa® pounler andeara sere: WV 0
aisiweanelte Rararadag wary

faftrerctar 2a cahiraged wtg n 198 0
agaia feqada fag ales afearry t

waa aeausta arand Paat aah wa
warateartalrorea:® qerareangaeatad t

poutaciacaar sfracqea: Heealt nde a
gehts arcadtyt ar”? seaash ar waz t
qUATagGreaa Hat Ta aT ST: W199 0
fgaritsgayazaaacstaatiaer: t

quae gona wavatrarred orefer u19C u

* a Gea araiscaftrar gaat 1. we, oT

2. a, afrquamerfad: 5 a, afrqrarnsrKa: 1

a, wdoarfz 4. a, wets aIgeaahy 1
. a, aataftr

. a, Presa; s, Prera:1 7. &, TaeferpeahtT arr
- &, Tag -

on am w

--- PAGE 368 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

der Jess: 345

Preaerecartarrereprcanerngrearhts*
aiRernucarqenr eget cpr artes? wau
agh: aoratiga afrqransred’:? |
spequitargrafrancare Paatsstet: WFR U
senacercifrad Pret carey weP eras? 1
araageilfrea Pramrenaaieae: wiARin
aremnfirephtr gaiterraraqarer |
aranfafranat gosentaly arate WIRRVtt
wagner aedl posearat career t

adtaaa wetar diagfexasn: Taree
Prarad Preaw7acrers aay t

agorefgarafa faftracncaferar: URI
pattggroteareoareonfer =f Seas |

aifeat aiftaas ofa sacacf areata WRG
aaa g asta Ofer cacracf fafeaag* 1

ard erertig poract faPreaag Feu
ARAL GI Hear aearg Hathor aradq 1

asa Hear Alay A Taeaarag: W720
aenale verterare gat afer gehts? 1

peat walitr pdfa arcaer aeafege WARS H

* S geae ga: ATES aries t

1. S Shaeneaers 3S, aveatfanaftsttr: t

2. a, SRTARSTs 5 a, athterpoca-
Rrarerrefteeprareorr, |, AGT a TET | ,

3. 4, Fok: grratiza afiquanerdh:; aw, wt, ach:
gurativa afiquamnsred?: ; S mera: 1

4, @, Reeszaftaferarsaer ; a, &, raza

5. a, werfrts t 6. &, Prete

--- PAGE 369 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

346

porter

qorarmadsrred ahead? re |

amas aq wearearsRaaaray WTsnu
gaming? daa aafirenfaasren: 1
wad amaAsan aahyaragT: u 7300
gfaorangat acarguefeasiaa:® |
Haaser: ara n937 40
Hed ASH” AAEETALaRAHA |
oftrearfto: axa ewerore maior 7382

gar garrey HUT Taalferearerfeer: 1
walanedarerey Praag warzretareg?> on 138 0
gemnfggenedea Agr FsTHUCeT ATWET 1
agfananfaaasater fafaerag 1

gitar atraararfea sear ga araat+ u 7380
mer yafe enigtst a geqaftoresher |

mraaraag sar arerdraft armaq?? =) 138 4
af a ora: Refaq arerasdfahr:t$ Fae |
aaraat pouifer fos ya: stg fresher n 136 0

anno rer

10.
12.
13.

aft stgoria frafustergre sarmesr
aaimtratat asagquened assay
wavafaraaed sraredfiaret art
sw sera: un Ie

. 3, Worarartated 1 2. w, afeavand 1

. 8, a, wrerearher t 4, @, wirerag 1

. i, SeaTTSMT: t

. &, arom aapaedtiaghehstre: 5 a, gfeeisterer: t

-U, aaeg ass 18. S, Praag «9. S, FST!
Wy AGRA I 11. w, a, a, adr

a, wordiate arig 5 Ss, Merdearmag |
S, wafer t

--- PAGE 370 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ACTEM FEST:
—~Sotino—
aAtaqara |

poe sitgtreahtr qeerenfareerys
at poagatat ag & aheax win

grat sara |

ayy af magenfy went ca ofeqeete

TA TAMATAT PoaAted THAT wea

aay aren aaraey Rrara yeekrr .

faaraandfaga rparaanfrre* vin

ARIAT SANT ALATA TT SLU |

watararanagurada Rrquara a uu

wdara goraqcafamern Prasad 1

Wee AF Veda weaTAT wragiray uSa

eT Tea: ae at: Hafgacters 1

agr akaaetnr ale ca qrevangy wen

WRSGAATaTT: ware VRreqeafeatVharass |

arorerefrtercarg? yeReafirdray won
\ repre: Pafigg: staat Ron: ore aren: t

Sart ReyftagadRaaarear ye: Fe ¢ ucu

TERY arerearady Lonera TATE: |

seore: Peraararert ypefteafiretaas w8u

* 2—€ wien w, = germ aba t
t 8-9 what n ged a ar

1.7, areas a, armreftony 1 2. 1, Bratt

--- PAGE 371 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

348 portatet

Jarrarraarercstgratt aterarrafe
ealfggawrcag4pekcahreiag udu
eaanraca Rreqrerark? warrant 1

oufaatdte mrearefaratetat Here nddu
araraaiaea aaa 43 AMT
aarkainfageargrandt gir pear HRe
arerarangrarg® wnrgaasstarg t
wiapiastaacaaqera gh pene n43n
gaareaa Reaver |
wenraaghacarehire: asfira: Fra ud’
rennet equcararebacdare® 1
freorrafadiacare cari ara: An 18h
nataiaiggreargyaraiqassiarg’ t

satfgorftra argxarg xeararea wagae:® uu
PtalagragrycaeagraIeAaNTAy? |
waPrarsrafrecara?? sftatrer: ara: ha un W80
aereprarfaattert* aefarerra gett t
apasmrssttareq gah nIieu

1. %, 4, Jamerinanteerarg 5 a, yearranidenea-
aeararg |

2. S, Faraway 1 3. m, wu, Rreararata 5 , firetr
arat 4. S, STVATTa TATE 1 5. Ml, WAAL

6. 4, caaeatea: apie caeanfuang; a, <,
eareauTeagatays t

7. 7, iqumfrasang 8. s, safkarg agaraerareat
weraty 5 a, Geacarea t 9. S, qramartaarg t

10. 4, warfta araPag war 5 S, caPrrarcfararg t

11. &, A, 1, T, wrafarrer t

12. &, @, 1, FT, SETAT |

--- PAGE 372 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAT SESTT $49

qa SHTEGHAAT: |

qeore wreftacary TeITae geftfta: nu
ayrarrragreatceeareateaary: |
ghraghrangrnen myfcahrdrar wou
ARR ASUTAS MEHTA SAT TAT |
sfratororgeacarqatttfer aera: Fra win
ag gaan AA PAAATATT |

fret girenfracacarg® dafteafidtaa wR
aereraary’ GRargigatsrarg |

Marergq gota aeteahidtad nerdzu
HaCaT ZUVATAT HAS aaa!
aanadfagear? aagaishredtae WrWa
ArawragaserHraarceaimeY|®d: t
wrantfagquearas geahidtiae neu

HFS Wat Bread aza ufaratgary t
der ater gfat° aret afer: aishiretae =n En
age Fre gga? oe afta: cathaar

HFupParqaeaareagor: pleat: Ha wAGn
arednaeneata atantgatarg 1
Prmmrafsraargy apres: aishretay WAC u
1. 5, cartegirarg 1
2. i, , AyFAaT 3. &, wemranftaang |
4. %, s, Seargt 5. &, Oy MET .
6S, S, TaTeNTGaeMay; | M, | caveats;

U, TATHTQaaTa4rg |

7 Hy A, TAT MIATA; S, TRIE ATT

8. S, GaeTeRaIT | «9. S Ae MeaTETA ATT
10. a, ferxanferaret 5 1, sterefirs er, rarPfr 1
Li. a, &, Rreargai 1 12. S, wt

--- PAGE 373 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

350 Portada
MAA Tar waar AaTlareresraraal;2

avaaagiarlt? weargad after: uBWu
anttene? arog aapeat Freer a

peer: Rarer abst? Rrer geared u 30n
MPrqgreecurarg PrRsrargaaang t
fardfattarfaRnrarg aBrefteafiredtaer n3dn
caalenariygorRref ofthat t
Ataghra°aqrarcea afaReahrefroe uu
oreatghtarsare, artrater agarg t

ager aarearat aa aed va frat n33n
HASALACAT PIMAATTAT |

aganernred sa geafidtaa* n&8u
ealwediear wate: ara raerereg t
wiqaearemefe eantaftreahrdtar 0 38u
araegaqacadt wera aferaar a
warrantieqae’” React earerqear 0 3&0
aftarefferesrerrca® xerorrafer arafer |
azanizasarea aor apfire fra non
afeatshawrreariagute Perea”

akarat sarrearsa gcafredtae udu
* Ss geah wmiagaitd aftr

« &, wafeeaers 1 2. &, gnfferi

. 5, eT: Readiris a, yeh: afg apa t

+ &, 4, S, Proftety ; a, Feder 5. 11, Peearett reat: t
- & eR 7. &, srearearlees t

. %, aRarafrarensa 5 s, aRaretfirenrerea t

. 3, waded

wo anrk We

--- PAGE 374 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

AAI Sears: xs

qoaararigarararerantaferarcore t
werracaestareng? qe gf aeae ay
areata afa antsaferaany 1
arog adarten: orahtreahrdrarar Wa
anoqgafrsrat? awafadfreang t
fafattazentfe cafafcahadrae nity
qeanfigacanParisrarrssarg® 1
eng adgarar gfreres afrt eye: aK
sraneuaiizeantanrtatrgraas |
Tern axaayananr: aera: ra PEE
mieftrorgeancararonrgaankea: t >
quieres geahrdiay «7.
astararfgtrttacarg’ oa srenrhtsmarra? ;
areas ve geatdtay a
TEP VGA THAT TAHT
aetiRacarang wees
PACATTACaT A Mapa Aee aT
amalanaaeng amare site:
anfaearg adamint talwsrara ge.
amnetageargrara gf atthe:
oT, U, Tera, 5 S, Ay,
. , SrUTsAPVATAL 5 SF, STLTE Bay,

ey

on aA kek WN
3
q
FI
%
#

oT, ATTA FS, ATHAT I HH
10. 4, qaraarg | 11. 3, a

4

--- PAGE 375 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

352

Reeqaedaralegaarg t
Rrefiae i

1

gortader

sarerernsanedasaegaarat \
at aqalakorardta gearredaa?
Aaa Aa SAT SATA el Per SIOTT
corenigarrararare’ gfe atte
feearangrearea Hiway BATT Tt
Aafe afar afetaacafaataarg®
sennragupifanaard Saaraiaé |
aprorareaigsrerarghites gfer ayes
Seana wcarea FaartPerarera: t
aferaafarargyage afer ara:*
FaAaraaeaey Farenraraa: t
aaa adaacensnienea gdtfta:
aenreara weatat axgrearea arafer t
aranferaarmaar atanhear
aarafsraferararass Perferaarearg t
wdzareeuere sare seabed

ag pdfed garat waife graaa® at
aenregar afer waren afftasar:? porate
Bacamagarey araaTHssse t
Arqerearaar srraxorgereafeeor

* @ Gee iratsanftrat qeare
1. 1, 8, Saretangmedacdaeaagad

u8Sa

non

u8da

ua

u 830

n 88 u

u 88 u

n S& a

nw Son

u Sdn

2. 4, Hatsaaahora: datainiaa; s, segqarer-

6. 7, FT, segremhtRraersna aaaralr;

anni sare Saarafe i 7. @, WT, Bet
8. 5, areafeat 9. 5, ance af ward afiaer: |

stttearrafsrar itt ga-
3. 1, argaife; a, gabier; =, argafart

4, Wy S, Gravett 5. a, Ferataett ¢

S, Hag

--- PAGE 376 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa Seas

agecared eiRncar airfare ararg t
afeacarea 2afir noes afeanharaa*
BUSTAASATATSS TATA sAAAN |
aiftrararararea soar: afrat rar: *

. amqareadeat aaeutsfr Paraky t
aaa waasaa wena aeafret Ray
areafafguqrarea aaeitrarorg t
aafufgagranrsa atreet opfiret fra
ararsrafeenraren eraser Sarg A
aegentRreenatieatird at
Talerareiweaarg apr |
agianaaete vafhairdiaa*
graa: Sfararg weagearg agar Fae
Gurenrmagracarg gif aftathrar*
ayaigeawrcaregepfa rarcorg |
aRamaiTegearaydt aired Prat
qrargiarsacn Raagenporararg |
ofaaarrarefa araftreafirdaa*
arggatisacargrazafrarale |
ceorght areearaé g Frgefar:*
aigeasiararater dfaagracqaiaras |
wagaftacarea ure geahredtae
gaara aay lacghrareong |
aepinagaa gafe aPrar Pa

* Pafgaefer: w geats orftifeerar geared |
1. 3, qa t
494923

353

wu
u ou
u&iu
Toe
u&3n
u &8 \
w&Su
neu
NACH
u&2 a
ue&u

wlson

--- PAGE 377 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

354 portant

anfenagered agebinersrarg t

aaa? adjarmmdat aqaeay udu
axarnper Seer aRamgaar at

aataega serena? ager WR Qn
nefarare dl ahaararercrarereg |
wistasartred sea geahilae non
STANTAMST ATT SM AP AGRATE I
pagenfigrararng afer sraa* ub3n
sreagrarre pourer* qftrensrawerag
argreracacorere arerat: aftan Rerar: non
qurdagareanht ardtaraferca: |
genariagmrred® gefteafdtae nin
weaitrareaagaareanaraa: |

wTAsqeTeaTgT gah non
Pafareragrearcaregeaastarg
qraxanarered dra geafirdiaa nedu
Aeardmraary safarabraroreg” 1
Roawunarettest aaa |

worat met dra afer alerarifarararet: nou
aghad pom: goose aga 1
fragacgagkatad aggreny n dou
aguanrefaacgareantfranranraS |
fecaarangmanrgiotiea Prdftae TAR

* Pafkersiar: a, gras arfaRear gered

1. 3, agar t

2. U, Prererequserearradc 5 1, carers Ta

3. 3, mfrramr

4. U, armmaarg Hour; SF, srearaqwararee t

5. 5, TTT 6. , Gepataregarared 3 w, Gene
Harare t 7. &, WaseAPraorg; B, eTATAAT 5
Uy GATE | 8. &, Fafrarzorg 1

--- PAGE 378 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ATM SEO:

araaahagtg: arreaqeartarrat: (et

355

aranenreagearercaan ra ear wdQit
agtinaranang Soa araraoreargy |
aormatqacaeage® afira a un
STAN AST ATTTTTAAT AT: |

aelenrg azaxaen care? afr wert usu
medgenkts reaper Prarcoreg? t

qrererrey werner rat Perea firefteret udsu
ator arat arar wafaearg aaar

enfiadar faftraq” sarktaffa sere uc&n
WMH AAAATTTA ofterarerars |

guaade waren ag garareot Fae néon
anarenfgnatfir steer grasraftr 1

fafttaracot ated scerefifar aL ndécu
argea argha® aq dtetteqarets 1

TATU Tat Agree fe udu
ad qarefargermrengethter apa |

ara aferden car arcs paahhas 1 0 0
welerargarens: alserarrarARag |

na pacraead ofeach Rat w8Tn
aay segrat sare: ware aenettephe: i

ara aykerapoat hear neu
* & Grats asiarging afta 1
t aqui wteré = geais after

1. S, RT 2. &, deaPaar: 3. S, Away

4. 4 S, arerem
6. &, Sarat 7. W, F, RaPererr 4

5. 3, Tae ore |
8. S, argqa t

--- PAGE 379 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

356

polars

aetat Gayqgrar? arqetapcot HB 1
ereacassfesfa? azrrarcor FAA 1

wand puss Prrgtaama: u 83
oret soraresgatsafacmreahreere |
sidimaguanl aeararan ala ary u8Bu
aasramrnargagaagarg t

sainagrered areiftreahy eft aa* u88n
fagringasta padi? Frata at

ad meq: Hes? Gonergied wating nX&u
ararsaghiht: dtaat mga: goealy t

sangeet carat Gnfarahss: ae u Son
weg laeqapeqviamnyereeare t

aergafrorneg afira aeqet Prt u8cu
qaraurat’ ad Raftreahrdag 1

aq aa oferta Faces: a seas u88u
afer & aire Rssaq yearafearaarr 1

ana sealer at orenfa a gaem:7 =n 100
weanrfacecntat teenst aeeale 1

wrgitara: aareora: wareat at Paerergq 1070
pormtatd ened alfreftett xf Reraq?

getficd aor aia Masta gocerast WOR

* a qeam erarsaaftianr gee 1
tm, 7, w Geary ga ame ae wart aT aWAET

1. &, aiARAGAIeA 2. Sy THAT BES

3. H, HOH 4. %, OT, Warm |

5. H, NAT 6. HT, TATA AIT 5 1, TAZEATLT
7. @, Sfirs: 3 s, wifes: 1

8. %, a, Hirarguafitag; a, adarefad fre

--- PAGE 380 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aaa Tear: 357

geaasa Heater TYAS 7 Ferfeatret |

a Far TWYEt AT adq tga 1

a adaraatcorat weet wet at fafa un 103 u
Prat argadgacar srelarg Ywaraa |

argara naaced ariftreart Haraat 0 108 u
aresargargacar eisfaxrecrafa gag? t

afa afgeaa ara? att ReBaeatea 0 108n
araaprat Raat yfrargieanefiorry '
gealegirarrarencea FSH sSramatad un 10&n
araear oeerar Sfer a sgottfer er ar lesen: 1

we caret aoe aagarfaiea u 1019 wt
ag we atleg fra mera ara ATA: |

caqaizadt abaateara araf Praca 10¢ 0

afa sftgeria fraforirargrt Feet
wabrratat sargwaned wars
waaharadea Trager Seare: u WU
U aaredsd Weer:

1. w, Teer afereafer 1 2. , &fa arar aqme!
