Studies in the Religious Life 
of 
Ancient and Medieval India 


yaw 
tA 
vii 
. (C.) SIRCAR 
Carmichael Professor and Head of the Department of Ancient 


Indian History and Culture, 
University of Calcutta. 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
DELHI :: PATNA :: VARANASI 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Head Office : BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHARNAGAR, DELHI-7 


Branches : 1. GHOWK, VARANASI (U.P.) 
2. ASHOK RAJPATH (OPP, PATNA COLLEGE), PATNA (BIHAR) 


© 
First EDITION 
1971 
Price : Rs. 35.00 


Printed in India 
BY SHANTI LAL JAIN, AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR 
NAGAR, DELHI-7, AND PUBLISHED BY SUNDARLAL JAIN, FOR MOTILAL 
BANARSIDASS, BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHARNAGAR, DELHI-7. 


PREFACE 


The present volume is the fifth of the series of my Studies, 
its predecessors being those in Geography (1960 and 1971), 
Society and Administration (Vol. I—Society, 1967), Indian Coins 
(1968) and Political and Administrative Systems(in the press). 
It contains most of my papers on the Religious Life of Ancient 
and Medieval India, which appeared in various publications 
during the past three decades and a half. I am extremely 
thankful to the authorities of the said publications. 

The plan of the present volume is the same as followed 
in its predecessors, more than one paper having often been 
clubbed together for the facility of presentation. In one case, 
however, the matter for a dissertation has been distributed 
among three Chapters (I-III). Thus more than forty papers 
and notes have been offered in 17 Chapters and 3 Appendices. 
The papers have all been suitably edited, some of them being 
considerably modified in the course of revision. There are of 
course a few omissions. A note on the Sectarian Difference 
among the Early Vaisnavas appearing in the Bhdratiya Vidya, 
Bombay, Vol. VIIT, Nos. 9-10, September-October, 1946, pp. 
109 ff., has beer left out because its gist ha: been included in 
Chapter III. The paper on Ardhanari-Ganapati (Journal of 
Ancient Indian History, Calcutta, Vol. IV, pp. 181-86) could not 
be included in this volume as it had not been completed in time. 

The sources of the varicus Chapters of the volume are 
indicated below. 


Chapter 1—The Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV, ed. 
H.D. Bhattacharya, R.K.M. Inst. Cult., 
Calcutta, 1956, pp. 108 ff. (cf. History and 
Culture of the Indian People, Vol. 11—The Age 
of Imperial Unity, ed. R. CG. Majumdar, 
Bombay, 1951, pp. 431 ff.); Quarterly Fournal 
of the Mythic Society, Bangalore, Vol. XXV, 
No. 4, April, 1935, pp. 301-02; Bhakti Cult 
and Ancient Indian Geography, ed. D. G. Sircar, 
Calcutta, 1970, 36ff. 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 


( iv) 


I1—The Cultural Heritage of India, op. cit., pp. 114 


ff. (cf. The Age of Imp. Unity, op. cit., pp. 434 ff. ). 


Il1—The Cultural Heritage of India, op. cit., pp. 131 


ff. (cf. History and Culture of the Indian People, 
Vol. I1I—The Classical Age, ed. Majumdar, 
1954, pp. 414 ff.). 


IV—-Indian Studies Past and Present, Calcutta, Vol. 


VIII, No. 3, April-June, 1967, pp. 269 ff. 
(cf. Indo-Asian Culture, Vol. II, New Delhi, 
Neo. 2, October, 1963, pp. 120 ff.); Journal 
of Orientol Res-arch, Madras, Vol. XVII, Part 
IV, June, 1948, pp. 209 ff.; Epigraphia Indica, 
Delhi, Vol. XXXII, 1959-1960, pp. 181 f£.; 
ibid., Vol. XXXV, 1963-1964, pp. 171 ff. 


V—Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXXI, 1955-1956, pp. 


67 ff.; ibid., Vol. XXX, 1953-1954, pp. 85 ff.; 
Quarterly Fournal of the Mythic Society, Bangalore, 
Culture and Heritage Number, 1956, pp. 
221 ff. (cf. Proceedings of the Indian History Con- 
gress, Waltair, 1953, pp. 39 ff.); Our Heritage, 
Calcutta, Vol. VIII, 1960, pp. 69 ff.; Maha- 
raja Ranjit Singh Centenary Volume, Cawnpore, 
1940, pp. 101 ff. 


VI—The Sakti Cult and Tara, ed. D.C. Sircar, 


Calcutta, 1967, pp. 26 ff., pp. 128 ff.; Journal 
of the Kalinga Historical Research Society, Bolan- 
gir, Vol. 1, No. 1, June, 1946, pp. 87-88. 


VIL-—Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXX, 1953-1954, pp. 


59 ff.; ibid., Vol. XXXV, 1963-1964, pp. 44ff. 


VII1—Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXX, 1953-1954, pp. 


210ff.; ibid., Vol. XXXII, 1957-1958, pp. 55 ff. 


1X—Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXX, 1953-1954, pp. 


237 ff.; Journal of the Bihar Research Society, 
Patna Vol. XXXIX, Parts 1-2, 1953, pp. 41 
ff. (cf. Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 
Gwalior, 1952, pp. 58 ff.). 


(v) 


Chapter X—Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXX, 1953-1954, pp. 
46 ff.; Calcutta Review, Calcutta, June, 1938, 
pp. 320 ff. 


Chapter XI—The Successors of the Sadtavahanas in the Lower 
Deccan by D. CG. Sircar, Calcutta, 1939, pp. 
50 ff. (cf. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
London, 1934, pp. 729 ff.); ibid., pp. 343ff.; cf. 
Indian Culture, Calcutta, Vol. I, 1934, pp. 311 
ff.; ibid., Vol. II, 1936, pp. 789 ff; ibid., Vol. 
IV, 1937, pp, 272-73; Prof. P. Sundaram Pillai 
Commemoration Volume, Madras, 1957, pp. 93ff.; 
Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta, Vol. XXI, 
No. 2, June, 1945, pp. 143ff. 


Chapter XII—Bhdratiya Vidya, Bombay, Vol. XIII, 1952, 
pp. 55 ff; Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, Letters, Vol. XV, No. 2, 1949, pp. 
101 ff.; Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXX, 
No. 3, September, 1953, pp. 302-03; Epi- 
graphia Indica, Vol. XXXIII, 1959-1960, pp. 
271 ff. 


Ghapter XIII—Calcutta Police Journal, Vol. III, Nos. 1-2, 
January-June, 1955, pp. 766; Epigraphia Indica, 
Vol. XXX, 1953-54, pp. 42 ff. 


Chapter XIV—Foreigners in Ancient India and Laksmi and Saras- 
vati in Art and Literature, ed. D.C. Sircar, Cal- 
cutta, 1970, pp. 25-34. 


Chapter XV—Dr. P. B. Desai Felicitation Volume, Dharwar, 
1971, pp. 151-62. 


Chapter XVI—Read at the Inter-University Seminar held 
at the Centre of Advanced Study in AIHC, 
Calcutta University, February, 1971. 


Chapter XVII—CF. Journal of Ancient Indian History, Vol. 1V, 
(1970-71), 1971, pp. 304-05. 


(vi) 
Appendix I—Read at the All-India Oriental Conference, 
Jadavpur Session, October, 1969. 


Appendix II—Cf. Journal of Ancient Indian History, Vol. III 
(1969-70), 1970, pp. 290-91; ibid., Vol. IV 
(1970-71), 1971, pp. 308-09. 


Appendix I1I—Satkori Mookerji Felicitation Volume, Varanasi, 
1969, pp. 42 ff. 


I crave the indulgence of sympathetic readers for the 
mistakes and blemishes that may have crept into the book in 
spite of my sincere efforts to make it useful to the students. 


For the index of the volume, I am indebted to Dr. 
Sm. K. Saha, Dr. Sm. J. Maitra and others. 


Department of Ancient Indian D. GC. SIRCAR 
History and Culture, 

Calcutta University, 51/2, 

Hazra Road, Calcutta-19. 


July 15, 1971. 


CONTENTS 


Subject 
Chapter I. Vedic Visnu and the Bhakti Cult ... 
Chapter II, Vasudeva-Krsna and Narayana in Early 
Vaisnavism a 
Chapter IH. Vaisnavism in the Gupta ‘and Post 
Gupta Ages ase 
Chapter IV. Purusottama-Jagannatha 
Chapter V. Balabhadra and Other Divinities 
Chapter VI. Sakti or the Mother-goddess 
Chapter VII. Kumara and Vindyaka in Uttarpatha 
Chapter VIII, Bhayillasvamin and Bhillamaladeva .. 
Chapter IX. The Nagas and Yaksas 
Chapter X. Vamadeva and Vitvesvara 
Chapter XI. Hiranyagarbha and Afvamedha 
Chapter XII. Decline of Buddhism in Bengal 
Chapter XIII. Religious Suicide 
Chapter XIV. Ardhanari-Narayana 
Chapter XV. Mahisamardini 
Chapter XVI. Guardians of the Quarters 
Chapter XVII. Sun Temple at Mundira 
Appendix I. Repudiation of Buddhism by the Candras 
Appendix ‘II. Gems for the Propitiation of Planets... 
Appendix III. Narasirnha Cult 
Index 


Page 


Cuaprer I 
VEDIC VISNU AND THE BHAKTI CULT 
I 


The age covered by the composition of the Rgvedic hymns, 
not to speak of the various works of the entire Vedic literature, 
is considerably wide—between c. 1400 and 1000 B.C. according 
to some writers. It‘can be shown that, possibly owing to the 

. wide prevalence of the union of Aryan males with Nonaryan 
females, the speech as well as the social and religious life of the 
Aryan people began to be modified very early on the Indian 
soil. Attention may be drawn in this connection to the borrowing 
of the cerebral consonantal sounds from Nonaryan speech, to 
the gradual amalgamation of the Rgvedic god Rudra and the 
pre-Aryan Father-god Siva-Pasupati, and to the germ of the'sm, 
a Nonaryan institution later completely absorbed in Indian 
(i.e. mixed Aryo-aboriginal ) religious life, possibly to be traced 
in the reference in the Rgveda' itself to the Saris (meaning 
‘sectarian devotees of the god Visnu’ according to later works) 
as a class favoured by Visnu.? 

Visnu is represented as one of the great gods even in some 
sections of the Rgveda; but he was not regarded as the greatest 
god in early Vedic times. The Rgveda* conceives Visnu as one 
of the manifestations of the sun.‘ He is called Sipivista, i.e. 


1. I. 22. 20. 
2. Gf. Sircar, The Sakta Pithas, pp. 1ooff; see below. 
3. I. 155-56. 


4. Visnu is described as setting in motion, like a revolving wheel, his 
go steeds (days) with their four names (seasons), which apparently refers 
to the solar year of 360 days. According to some writers, the word means 
‘a bird’. Macdonell (Vedic Mythology, p. 39) interprets the name as ‘the 
active one’ representing solar motion (from the root vis.). In a paper on 
the Name of the God Vignu and the Krsna Legend (translated from French 
in QJMS, Vol. XXV, pp. 39-48), Jean Przyluski tried to prove that the 
Prakrit variants Vitha, Vighid and Vefha as well as Sanskrit Vignu are all of 
Nonaryan origin. Separating ‘the suffixal vowel -a, -d’ from the Prakrit 
variants, he found the Avstro-Asiatic radicals vifh and vefh which in his 


2 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


‘clothed with rays of light’ (‘bald’ according to some writers) 
and his greatness is said to be inconceivable. Visnu is des- 
cribed as enveloping the earth on all sides with his mayikhas, 
i.e. rays of light. He is believed by scholars to represent the 
sun in its daily and yearly courses. According to a legend in 
the Satapatha Brahmana,’ Visnu’s head was, by a trick of the 
gods, severed from his body and became dditya, i.e., the sun.” 
The later conception of him as udyat-kofi-divakar-dbha and 
savitr-mandala-madhyavartin® as well as his association with the 
cakra or disc resembling the disc of the sun and with the bird 
Garuda, adapted from the Rgvedic conception of the sun as a 
winged celestial bird, also point to his solar character. In 
many passages of the Rgveda, Visnu is mentioned along with 
the Adityas, while later works represent him as one of them. 
The three strides of Visnu, which no doubt formed the 
background of the Puranic legend of Vamana (an epithet 
of Visnu in the Satapatha Brahmana)® and Bali, as well as his 
highest place, are quite famous in the Rgveda.!° Vignu, the 
unconquerable preserver, strode the three steps over this 
universe, thereby maintaining fixed ordinances (dharmani). He 
is said to have three spaces associated with the three steps. Two 
of these spaces are called earthly, while the ‘highest’ of them is 
described as known to himself and visible only to the Saris 
‘like an eye fixed in the sky’.! This parama pada of Visnu, where 


opinion are the same as vid in Drdvida, Sanskritised form of Tami]. He 
further thought that Visnu was originally pronounced as Visinu. Przyluski’s 
philological speculation regarding the origin of the name Vignu is, how- 
ever, fanastic, because in several Neo-Indo-Aryan dialects Sanskrit yn is 
modified to sf from which #h, etc., can be easily derived. Cf. Bengali 
Krsna=Kesta or Krista, trsnd=testd, Vaisnava=Bostom, etc. 

5. VIL. 99. 13 100. 5-6. 

6. XIV. 1. 1. 

7. The word dditya is derived from the name of the female divinity 
Aditi, the personification of the boundless sky. Aditya indicates the sun as 
well as a group of divinities associated with the sun and the sky. 

8. Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. Visnu; Bhattacharya, Purohitadarpona p. 53. 

9. La. 5. 5. 

10. I. 22. 18, ete. 
. 1 T, 22. 20. 


VEDIC VISNU AND THE BHAKTI CULT 3 


there was a well of honey!a is said to be a land (pathas or vastu) 
beyond ordinary mortal ken which ‘man apprehends not, nor 
can the soaring winged birds pursue’!# and in which ‘gods 
rejoice’ and ‘god-seeking men delight.’* The Rgvedic 
poets pray’® that people may go to this blessed abode of Vignu, 
‘where he himself dwells, inscrutable’, to enjoy felicity. 
Hopkins! thinks that the later popularity of the god lies in the 
importance of his parama pada which is said to have been the 
home of departed spirits.” In later times, Vispu-pada became a 
synonym of the sky, and the abode of Visnu became the goal 
of the spiritual aspirations of the devotees of that god and several 
places (usually on the top of hills) came to be styled Visnupada. 

According to Aurnavabha, as indicated by Durgacarya 
in his commentary on Yaska’s Nirukta,!® the three steps of 
Visnu are the three periods of the sun’s course, i.e., his rise, 
culmination, and setting.” But some scholars point out that 
this interpretation is not in keeping with the ‘highest’ place 
of Visnu.%® Another ancient commentator, named Sakapiini,2* 
believed that the three padas refer to the threefold manifestation 
of light in the three divisions of the universe, viz. fire on earth, 
lightning in the atmosphere, and the sun in the sky. Accord- 
ing to the Satapatha Brahmana™ also, the three places of Visnu 
are the earth, air and sky. Visnu’s three imperishable steps 
or places, mentioned in the Rgveda, were endowed in later 
times with a spiritual meaning. The Besnagar inscription®® 


ria. TL. 154. 5. 


I. 154. 6. 

16. Religions of India, p. 56. 

17. 1. 154. 5-6. 

18. XID. 19. 

19. Cf. Samarohane Visnu-pade Gaya-siras=iti Aurnavdbhah. Samarohona, 
Vignu-pada, and Gaya-siras have been explained as accessian, meridian sky, 
and the hill of setting respectively. This tradition seems to have bad something 
to do with the recognition of the Visnupada hill at Gaya as a holy place 
(Sircar, Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. Ina., p. 229). It should be noticed that the 
word pada is of ambiguous import, meaning ‘foot’, ‘step’, ‘station’, etc. 

20. Cf. Macdonell, Vedic Mataley, p. 38; Kieth, Religion and Philosophy 
off the Veda and the Upanisads, Vol. I, p. 108. 

Qt. fone aa Vedic Mythology, loc. cit. 

22. 

23. Sitar, tect Inscriptions, Vol. I, pp. gof. 


4 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of the close of the second century B.C. interprets the ‘immortal’ 
padas as denoting ‘self-control, renunciation, and vigilance 
which lead one to heaven’, apparently pointing to the dwelling 
of Visnu as the God of gods. 

” The Reveda* also regards Visnu as a youth who is no 
longer a child, and as a leader in battle who is said to have 
defeated Sambara. In the capacity of a warrior, Visnu is 
often associated with Indra and the two gods are supposed to 
be masters of the world.2® Visnu is described as the worthy 
friend of Indra and is said to have walked the three strides with 
Indra’s energy.** Indra is sometimes represented as deserted 
by all the gods excepting Visnu whom he asked to exert his 
greatest prowess in the slaying of Vrtra.*” According to a legend 
in the Aitareya Brahmana,*® Varuna, Brhaspati and Vignu suc- 
cessively helped Indra in turning out the Asuras. The Vedic 
legends no doubt contributed largely to the development of 
the Visnu mythology in later times. Barnett®® suggests that, 
according to lay imagination, a transfusion took place of 
some of the live blood of Indra, the most truly popular god of 
action among the Rgvedic deities, into the veins of Visnu, as 
a result of the close relation between the two gods in early 
Vedic conception. 

3 A passage of the Rgveda® calls Visnu the germ (garbha) 
of yta which may mean sacrifice or moral order. According 
to the Satapatha Brahmana,® ‘Vignu truly is the sacrifice; by 
striding, he obtained for the gods that all-pervading power 
which now belongs to them.’ The equation of Visnu with 
the spirit of sacrifice** was possibly suggested by the fact that 
both were considered to be helping or strengthening Indra and 
other gods. In later literature, Visnu is essentially connected 
with sacrifice and is endowed with such names as Yajfia, Yajfia- 
vayava, Yajfie‘vara, Yajfiapurusa, Yajfiabhavana, Yajfia- 


24. 155+ 
25. Vr 695 on. 99. 

26. I. 22. 19; VIII. 12. 27. 
a7. IV. 18. 11. 

28. III. 50. 

29. Hindu Gods and Heroes, p. 41. 
go. 156. 3. 


3-9- 
32. Bee op. cit., pp. 39 ff. 


VEDIC VisyU AND THE BHAKTi CULT | 5 


varaha, Yajfiakrt, Yajfiatratr, Yajfiabhoktr, Yajfiakratu, 
Yajfiavahana, Yajfiavirya, etc. According to the Aitareya 
Brahmana,** he averts the evil consequences of the defects in 
sacrifice, while Varuna protects the fruits of its successful per- 
formance. This work regards Agni and Visnu as the two 
diksdpalas or guardians of initiation. 

The Satapatha Brahmana* contains a legend which, with 
some variations, recurs in the Taittiriya Aranyaka*®® and Paftca- 
vimSa Brahmana.** According to this legend, there was a con- 
tention among the gods as to which of them was the greatest. 
It was proposed that he who by his deeds reached the end of 
sacrifice should attain to the highest place among them. In 
this contest, Visnu was victorious and hence it was said, 
‘Visnu is the most excellent of the gods.’ That Visnu had 
already become the greatest god in the later Vedic period, at 
least with a section of the people, is also indicated by the 
Aitareya Brahmana®? which calls him the parama (highest) and 
Agni the avama (lowest) among the gods, unless we understand 
by these two terms a ‘heavenly’ and an ‘earthly’ god respec- 
tively. But the same work also regards Visnu as the dvdrapa 
or door-keeper of the gods.** This is no doubt an uncompli- 
mentary epithet, although the idea is probably that Visnu 
regulated entrance into the heavenly world. 

In the Maitri Upanisad,** food that sustains the universe is 
called Bhagavat Visnu, while, in the Katha Upanisad, the 
progress of human soul is compared to a journey, the goal of 
which is said to be Visnu’s parama pada, the abode of eternal 
bliss.41. This shows that Visnu was often regarded as the 
greatest god in later Vedic times. According to the Apastamba, 
Hiranyakesin and Paraskara Grhyasiitras, the bridegroom is 
required to say to the bride at the time of taking the seven 
steps, ‘May Visnu be with you !’ This is a development of 


33. III. 385 1. 4. 
34. XIV. 1. 1. 
v. 


Sie 
36. VIL. 5. 6. 
Ton 


38. I. 30. 

39. VI. 13. 

40. III. g. 

4. Cf. RV, 1. 22. 20. 


6 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the Rgvedic idea of the god as the protector of embryos and 
promoter of conception.‘* 

Visnu’s association with cows is probably indicated by 
the epithet gopa, meaning ‘protector of cows’ or ‘herdsman’, 
found in the Rgveda.“® The same work‘ also describes the 
highest place of Visnu as the dwelling of ‘many-horned swiftly- 
moving cows’. The Baudhayana Dharmasiitra*® calls him govinda 
(cow-keeper or chief herdsman) and damodara, ‘one with the 
cord round one’s belly’, i.e. a herdsman. This last name is 
usually believed to be derived from wheat-sheaf; but herds- 
men, in some parts of India, are known to tie a rope round 
‘their waist, from which coils of rope hang.** In later times, 
spiritual interpretations were offered for both the names.‘7 

In the Rgveda, Visnu is sometimes** compared to an animal 
causing depredations (kucara), and is represented as stealing 
cooked mess. In later Vedic literature, he is often found to 
have recourse to cunning devices to help Indra and other 
friends and to defeat the Asuras. These legends, some of which 
may be of Nonaryan origin, were no doubt responsible for 
some aspects of the Visnu mythology in the epic and Puranic 
literature. 


Il 


The Indian religious life is characterised by the existence 
of a number of theistic religions, the votaries of a particular 
divinity worshipping him as the Supreme God. Thus Visnu 
is greater than any other deity to the Vaisnavas, and Siva is 
the greatest god to the Saivas. The personal approach of the 
votaries of a theistic order to the deity worshipped is distin- 


42. Cf. VII. 36. 9; X. 184. 1. 

43. I. 22. 18; X. 19. 4. 

44. 1. 154. 6 

45. Il. 5. 24. 

46. Cf. D. GC. Sen, Varigasdhityaparicaya, Vol. 1, p. 721—Kathoksane 
Sahad:va godla-vesete, Go-puccha-lomer dadi vediva katfite. 

47. Cf. Mbh., V. 70. 8. 

48. 1. 154. 2. 

49. Sayana and others interpret kucara often as meaning ‘pervading 
all the quarters.” 

30. I. 61. 7; VIII. 77. 10. 


VEvic visid AND tHe BHAkTI GuLt 4 


guished by an intense devotion and a sense of absolute surrender 
to the god, the technical name for which is bhakti explained 
as ‘exceptional attachment to God’ (par:=dnuraktir:=Isvare). 
This may be regarded as an un-Aryan concept gradually adopt- 
ed by the mixed Aryo-Nonaryan population of the country, 
because the religious life of the Rgvedic Aryans is known to 
have been dominated by the sacrificial cult having a different 
basis and approach. 

While dealing above! with the origin of the sectarian 
religion called Vaisnavism, we have pointed out that its germ 
is traceable even in the Rgveda, since, of the three padas of Visnu 
whereby the god maintained the dharmas or fixed ordinances, 
the highest is described in the said work as known to himself 
and visible only to the Sariss* who must, therefore, have been 
persons or spirits favoured by the god Visnu and remind us 
of the name Siri applied to the sectarian devotees of Visnu 
in later works like the Padma Tantra.5* We have also drawn 
attention, at the same time, to the Rgvedic poets’ prayer that 
the people may go after death to the blessed abode of Visnu, 
which was his highest station beyond ordinary mortal ken and 
in which god-seeking men delight, as well as to the later 
Vaignava conception of Visnu’s abode as the goal of the spiri- 
tual aspiration of the devotees. 

The adoption of an un-Aryan religious approach by the 
people, in whom Aryan and Nonaryan blood became mixed 
up in the several centuries (c. 1400-1000 B.C.) covered by the 
composition of the Rgvedic hymns,® is not at all unexpected.®5 
But J. N. Banerjea has expressed doubts about the plausibility 


5t. Cf. also The Age of Imperial Unity, ed. Majumdar, p. 431 and 
note. % 

52. RV,I. 22. 20—tad=Visroh paramam padam sada pasyanti Siirayah/ 
div=tva caksur=dtatam || * 

53. JRAS, 1911, p. 935—Sirik Suhrd=Bhagavatak Satvatah Paiicakélavit | 
Ekéntikas=Tanmayas=ca Paiicardtrika ity=api || The name Tanmaya is the 
same as Tamil Alvar (literally, ‘one who is in deep meditation on the 
attribates of the Supreme Being’), the name applied to a well-known class 
of Vaisnava saints of the South. Suhrt may have been the name of a group 
that worshipped the god as the Friend and emphasised the mode of worship 
called Sakhya (cf. R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
mee Moon Vol. I 00-800 

i q , Vol. ie CT B.C. 
2. Sircar, The Satta Bn, ppz08 of 





8 RELIGIOUS LIEE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of our views in his Paurdnic and Tantric Religion recently pub- 
lished by the Calcutta University. This led us to reconsider 
our position and we are inclined to draw the attention of 
scholars to a few more traces of sectarianism in ancient Indian 
literature and in our antiquities. 

In the first place, we would like to quote three stanzas of 
the Rgveda, which appear to have some bearing on the problem. 


1. Yah piroyaya vedhase naviyase 
samujjanaye Visnave dadasati | 
jo jatam-=asya mahato mahi bravat 
sedu Sravobhir:=yujyam cid-=abhyasat |/ (I. 156.2) 

“He who presents [offerings] to Visnu, the ancient, the 
creator, the recent, the self-born; he who celebrates the great 
birth of that mighty one; he verily, possessed of abundance, 
attains [the station] that is to be sought [by all]” (Wilson). 

2. tamu stotdram piroyarh yathavida 

rlasya garbhar janusd pipartana | 
asya jananto nama cid-=vivaktana 
mahas:=te Visno sumatin bhajamahe || (1. 156. 3) 

“Hymnors, propitiate, of your own accord, that ancient 
Visnu, since you know him as the germ of sacrifice; cognizant 
of his greatness, celebrate his name; may we, Visnu, enjoy 
thy favour” (Wilson). . 

3. pra tat:=te adya Sipivista-nam:=a- 

yak Samsami vayanasi vidvan | 
tam tod grndmi tavasam-=atavyan 
‘ksayantam:-=asya rajasah pardke || (VII. 100. 5) 

“Resplendent Visnu, I, the master of the offering, know- 
ing the objects that are to be known, glorify today thy name: 
I, who am feeble, praise thee who art ‘powerful, dwelling in 
a remote region of this world” (Wilson). 

The word bravat used in connection with Visnu’s birth. 
in the first of the three stanzas, which Wilson translates as 
‘celebrates’, has been explained by Sayana as briyat, samkir- 
tayet. Likewise the word vivaktana, used in the second stanza 
in relation to Visnu’s name and translated by Wilson in the 
same way, has been interpreted by Sayana as vadata, sankir- 
tayata. Thus the first of the three stanzas refers to the recita- 


veptc visyu AND THE BHAKTI CULT $ 


tion or singing of the birth of Visnu, while the second speaks 
of the recitation or singing of his name by the people who knew 
him. The third stanza alludes to the praising of Visnu’s name. 
It seems that we have here a reference to the recitation or 
singing of Visnu’s birth-story and his name. This would sug- 
gest that a mythology around the birth of Visnu was already 
developing and this may be the root of the later growth of 
the birth-story of Vasudeva-Krsna identified with Visnu. The 
recitation or singing of Visnu’s name likewise reminds us of the 
importance later attached by the Vaisnavas to the ndma-japa 
or ndma-sankirtana of the god worshipped by them.® It is well 
known that later’works often offer lists of the Sata-ndma or 
sahasra-nama of the god Visnu-Krsna.5? That such lists of the 
hundred or thousand names of certain deities were compiled 
even as early as the days of the later Sarmhitaés (c. 1000-800 
B.C.) is proved by the Satarudriya section of the Yayurveda’® 
and the expression sahasra-ndman occurring in the Atharvaveda.® 
It therefore seems to us that the passages of the Rgveda quoted 
above, if they are read together, suggest the existence of some 
sort of sectarian worship of Visnu at least at a particular stage 
of its development. 

Similar is the case with the god Rudra, later identified 
with Siva. We have referred above to the Satarudriya section 
of the Yajurveda, which contains one hundred names of Rudra. 
This shows beyond doubt that considerable importance was 
attached to the recitation or singing of the names of Rudra 
apparently by a section of his devotees. Rudra is described 
as Mahddeva and Mahan Deva, i.e. the Great God, in the 
Yajurveda® and Satapatha Brahmana*! respectively, while the 
KeSi-siikta of the Rgveda® refers to the devotees of the said god 
as Kefin (people having long or matted hair), who were half- 
naked, wearing short garments of brown colour soiled with 


56. Cf. the texts cited by the Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. sankirtana; see also 

Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 57. 
. See Monier-William’s Sans.-Eng. Dict., s. v. Visnu (Visnu-sata-néma- 

stotra and Visnu-sahasra-ndma). 

58. TS, IV. 5. 1; VS, 16. 

59- See Monier-Williams, op. cit., s. v. sahasra. 

bo. VS, 39.8 

61. 6. 1. 376 

62. X. 136. 


10 RELIGIOUS Lite iN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


dust and frenzied by the performance of austerities. This 
description reminds us of that of the sectarian Pasupata devo- 
tees of Rudra-Siva as found in later works and suggests that 
these were the people who recited or sang the Satarudriya incor- 
porated in the Yajurveda. The reference in the said siakta of 
the Rgveda to the Kesi-muni drinking a cup of poison with 
Rudra may have the germ of the later conception of Siva as 
Nilakantha.# 

It may be mentioned in this connection that Siva as the 
name of a people occurs in the Rgveda,“* and, according to 
some scholars, it means ‘having Siva as their chief god.’#® 
Pataiijali’s Mahdbhdgya** mentions Sivapura, ‘the city of the 
Sivas’, which has been identified with modern Shorkot in the 
Jhang District of West Pakistan.*? Alexander’s historians 
mention the same people as Sibae who lived in the said area 
and are reported to have dressed themselves with the skins of 
wild beasts and had clubs for their weapon.** It has been 
pointed out that the above description of the people reminds 
one of that of the god Siva and his disciples found in later 
works,®® 

Clearer traces of the cult of Rudra as some sort of a sectae 
rian god have been noticed in the Svetdsvatara Upanisad which 
describes the god in such passages as the following— 


tam:=ifvardndm paramarh Mahesvaram 

tarh devaténarh paramar: ca daivatam (VI. 7); 
yo Brahmanar vidadhati pitroarh 

‘yo vai veddms:=ca prahinoti tasmai (VI. 18). 


The first of the two passages represents Rudra as_ the 
MaheSvara (Great God) among the gods (ifvaras) and as the 
Supreme Deity among the divinities, while the second passage 
mentions him as one who created the god Brahman and pre- 


63. Cf. J. N. Banerjea, op. cit., pp. 72-73. 

64. VII. 18. 73 cf. Ved. Ind., Vol. II, s. v. Siva. 

65. Dandekar, Some Aspects of the History of Hinduism, p. 5. 
66. On Panini, IV. 2. 2. 

67. Raychaudhuri,PHAI, 1938, p. 204. 

68. Loc. cit.; Banerjea, Paur. Tant. Rel., p. 71. 

6g. Banerjea, loc. cit. 


vente vigyd AND Tat BHAKTt curt it 


sented the Vedas to the latter. Thus, in the days of the 
SvetaSvatara Upanisad, Rudra was regarded by a class of his 
votaries as the greatest god who was the creator of other gods 
like Brahman. This approach is of course remarkably similar 
to that of a sectarian devotee. 

Reference should also be made in this context to two well- 
known seals from Mohenjo-daro representing a god in the yoga 
posture with a kneeling human figure, with hands uplifted in 
prayer, on either side of him. This ascetic god has been identi- 
fied with the well-known Pagupati-yogin represented on 
another Mohenjo-daro seal and regarded by most scholars as 
Proto-Siva.” The kneeling human figures may suggest the 
existence of a kind of sectarian devotees of the prototype of 
Rudra-Siva as early as the days of the Indus Valley civilization. 

In the same context, attention may be drawn to the 
existence of tutelary deities during the age covered by the com- 
position of the Rgvedic hymns. It is well known that the 
Apri hymns”! refer to the goddess Bharati, regarded as the 
personified divine protgctive power of the Bharata people who 
lived on the Sarasvati, conceived as a river-goddess. In the 
said hymns, Bharati is associated with Sarasvati, while, in 
later mythology, the former is usually identical with the latter. 
Whatever that might be, there is little doubt that the goddess 
Bharati was at first exclusively worshipped by the Bharatas, 
that is to say that Bharati was something like the tutelary deity 
of the Bharata people. Needless to say that the conception 
of a tutelary deity is analogous to that of a sectarian divinity. 
The name Bharati reminds us of those of Kausiki and Katya- 
yani which some scholars associate with the fact that the two 
aspects of the Mother-goddess were originally worshipped by 
the sages of the Kausika and Katya clans.7? 

When all the points raised above are taken into considera- 
tion together, it appears that sectarianism of some sort was the 
characteristic of the religious life of India even before the advent 
of the Aryans some of whom had gradually adopted it before 
the latest hymns of the Rgveda were composed. 


70. See ibid., pp. 64-65. 
a1. RV, I. 22. 10; 142. 9; 188. 8; IT. 1. 113; 3. 8; III. 4. 8; etc. 
72. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 119. 


12 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
“TIT 


The Vedic Aryans tried to please Visnu and other gods 
by means of sacrifice; but this sacrificial religion was funda- 
mentally different from the later religion characterized by 
bhakti (devotion of the faithful to God) and prasdda (God’s 
grace to the faithful). We have reason to believe that the 
conception of devotion and grace was borrowed from the Non- 
aryan religious thought. According to Sandilya, as we have 
seen, bhakti is par-=dnuraktir=Isvare, ‘supreme attachment 
to God.’ Some resemblance to bhakti is noticeable in the 
Rgvedic hymns addressed to Varuna (with whom Visnu was 
associated as a benefactor of the sacrificer in later Vedic lite- 
rature), but not in those addressed to Visnu. In the Vedic 
texts, Visnu is associated more with sacrifice than with devo- 
tion and grace. Bhandarkar?’ thinks that the origin of the 
bhakti doctrine may be traced to the Upanisadic idea of updsand 
or fervent meditation, which magnifies what is meditated upon 
and represents it in a glorious form in order to excite admi- 
ration and love. He also draws our attention to the Brhada- 
ranyoka Upanisad"* which conceives the internal Atman (soul) 
as dearer than the son, wealth and everything else. But, 
as we have seen above, bhakti seems to be a much older belief 
of the Nonaryans adopted by the composite Indian society 
at a later date. 

Some scholars find an early reference to the bhakti doc- 
trine in the rule in the Asfddhydyi?® of Panini (fifth century 
B.C.) for the formation of the words Vasudevaka and Arjunaka 
in the senses of ‘a person whose object of bhakti is Vasudeva’ 
and ‘a person whose object of bhakti is Arjuna’ respectively. 
‘As Vasudeva seems to have been held in esteem by the people 
of Mathura in the days of Megasthenes in the fourth century 
B.C. and was undoubtedly regarded as the highest god in the 
days of the Gitd (third century B.C.) and the Besnagar inscrip- 
tion (second century B.C.), Raychaudhuri”* may be right in 
his contention that the word bhakti, in regard to Vasudeva, 


73. Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems, p. 28. 
74. I. 4. 8. 
75. IV. 3. 98. . | 
Materials for the Study of the Early History of the Vaignava Sect, 


76. 
and ed., pp. 30 f. 


VEDIC VISNU AND THE BHAKTI CULT 13 


is used in the above sitra by Panini in the sense of religious 
adoration. But the word is also used in the Asfddhydyi with 
reference to cakes, and the possibility of the meaning ‘fond- 
ness’ is not altogether precluded. The reference to two 
groups of persons as Vasudeva-bhakta and Kamsa-bhakta in 
Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya"” also is not quite clear. We do not 
know if Vasudeva’s deification by his own people at Mathura 
was recognized, at such an early date, in Gandhara where 
Panini flourished. More important is therefore the Svetas- 
vatara Upanisad™® (a work nearly of the same age as the A;{d- 
dhyayi) which teaches paré bhakti (supreme devotion to 
God). That the idea of religious adoration for a leader of 
thought was not unknown in the days of Agoka (c.272-232 B.C. ) 
is indicated by the Rummindei pillar inscription,” according 
to which the Buddhist king went in person to, and offered 
worship at, the birth-place of Sakyamuni Buddha, styled the 
Bhagavat (the holiest or most worshipful one).® Reference 
may also be made in this connection to the installation of 
the Buddha’s relics for worship, referred to in early Buddhist 
literature as well as in records belonging to the time of 
ASoka and king Menander (close of the 2nd century B.C.),8! 
to the implication of bhakti, in the reference to religious adora- 
tion, in the stanzas of the Therigathd, and to the representation 
of some cult-deities of the Brahmanical pantheon on the pre- 
Christian coins of India. 

The elaborate and mechanical system of sacrifice offered 
to the gods by the Vedic Aryans did not satisfy the religious 
aspiration of all sections of the people, especially after they 
had intermarried with the pre-Aryan population and became 
familiar with the religious and philosophical beliefs of the latter. 
This led to religious speculations of a different type, and 


77.. Patafijali was a contemporary of Pusyamitra Sunga (c. 185-149 
B.C.); but the Mahdbhdsya appears to contain interpolations of about the 
beginning of the Christian era. Cf. Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. XV, 
pp. 633 ff. 

78. Cf. V. 14. This Upanisad inculcating devotion to Siva, origi- 
nally a Nonaryan god, points to the Nonaryan contribution to the develop- 
ment of the Bhakti doctrine. 

79. Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, p. 70. 

80. Cf. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. X1V, pp. 7-8. 

81. Ibid., pp. 102fF; Sclect Inscrifticns, Vol. 1, 1965 €d., p. 517. 


14 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


thinkers like the author of the Mundaka Upanisad** began to 
question the value and efficacy of sacrifice. The philosophical 
speculations of this age gave rise, among others, to religious 
sects like those of Vardhamana of the Jiatrkas, Siddhartha of 
the Sakyas, and Vasudeva of the Vrsnis (all three favouring 
the doctrine of ahims@) as well as to the philosophical ideas 
clothed in the words of the Upanisads.** We have to note that, 
even though the Jiiatrkas, Sakyas, and Vrsnis all claimed the 
status of the Ksatriya, the first and second clans were possibly 
Aryanized Mongoloids, like their kinsmen the Licchavis, while 
the third, if not originally Nonaryan, at least absorbed enough 
Nonaryan blood. At the beginning, the following of 


82. Cf. I. 2.7. 

83. A comparative study of the Upanisadic philosophy and the reli- 
gious and philosophical ideas of the Polynesians has led some writers to 
think that the common conceptions were of Austric origin. The history of 
creation is described in different parts of the Polynesian world in hymns that 
echo the Rgvedic hymn of creation. E. S. Craighill, who has studied the 
Polynesian religion, says : ‘The ancient esoteric teaching in cosmology 
postulated the pre-existence of a self-created world-soul which evolved the 
world and the universe out of itself and called manifest existences out of 
nothingness by the power of the Word. Many of the creational accounts 
make no mention of this Being; the evolutionary process by which the 
universe evolved from nothingness is stated merely as a succession of stages, 
the first of which is characterized as Void or Night. But other records 
describing the course of evolution in terms similar to these definitely attri- 
bute it to a Supreme Bejng as the cause of the emergence of tangible and 
visible reality out of or in the empty and lightless Void in which this Being 
existed alone.’ Cf. Bharata Kaumudi, Vol. I, pp. 204ff. The word tdbuva in 
the Atharvaveda (V.1B. 3.10) is believed to be an old form of the well-known 
tau (taboo) of the Polynesians. There are also other coincidences. 

84. The tradition of the Iksvaku origin of the Sakyas proves nothing 
as the Nonaryans often claimed to have belonged to the maternal grand- 
father’s family and as the Aryan origin of the Iksvakus themselves is as yet 
unproved. The Licchavis and Mauryas appear to have been two other 
Himalayan tribes of Mongolian origin claiming the status of the Ksatriya. 
Some of these tribes are known to have been regarded by the orthodox 
Brahmanas as Sidra, Vrsala, or degraded Ksatriya and were often classed 
with the Nonaryan peoples and foreigners. Cf. the case of the Dravidian 
$atavahanas (Andhras) who claimed the status of the Brahmana (pro- 
bably as a result of matrimonial relations with a Brahmana family}, but 
were called Vrsala in the Puranas. The Greek and Scythian foreigners 
were sometimes regarded as clean Sidras, but sometimes as degraded 
Kgatriyas (cf. Sircar, Stud. Soc. Adm. Anc. Med. Ind., Vol. 1, pp. 48-4¢)- 


VEDIC VISNU AND THE BHAKTI CULT 15 


Vardhanana, Siddhartha and Vasudeva (religious leaders of 
whose type are known to have flourished in India in all ages 
in numbers) was meagre; but their systems gradually 
became prominent. The later success of Vasudevism was 
principally due to the identification of Vasudeva with the Vedic 
god Visnu, with an ancient defied sage named Narayana, with 
a number of tribal deities, as well as with Parabrahman (the 
Supreme Spirit or All-Soul), conceived by the Upanisads.* 


85. Originally the Yadavas were looked down upon because of their 
Nonaryan association, though later the Yadava clan came to be regarded 
as aristocratic like the solar and Iunar houses. This was the result of the 
identification of Vasudeva with the Supreme God. See Sircar, Stud. Soc. 
Adm. Anc. Med. Ind., Vol. I, p. 46. 3 


: Cuapter IT 


VASUDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY 
VAISNAVISM 


I 


In the epics and the Puranas, the ruling clan of Mathura 
is called Yadu or Yadava, which was divided into numerous 
septs. WVrsni and Andhaka were the sons of the Yadava prince 
Satvata. The names Satvata and Vrsni are therefore both 
used often to indicate the same family in ancient Indian lit- 
rature, as the names Raghu and Iksvaku are applied to the 
solar dynasty, and Bharata, Kuru and Puru to the lunar. 
The Vrsni sept of the Yadava people was famous in later Vedic 
times as is proved by its mention in the Taittiriya Samhita’ 
and Brahmana,2 the Satapatha Brahmana,* and the Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana.* The Vrsnis and the Andhakas are men- 
tioned in Panini’s Asfadhydyi.® The Kaufiliya Arthasastra® 
refers to the sarigha or republican corporation of the Vrsni 
people. A coin assigned to the Vrsnirajanya-gana (republic 
of the Vrsni Ksatriyas) and to the first century B.C., bearing 
a cakra on the reverse and a pillar surmounted by an animal 
(believed to be half-lion and half-elephant, but may be really 
a crude representation of Garuda) on the obverse, was dis- 
covered probably in the North Punjab.” The Satvats, men- 
tioned in the Satapatha and Aitareya Brahmanas, are apparently 
the same as the Satvatas of the epic and Puranic literature. 
Yadu, possibly a Nonaryan clan, is mentioned in the Rg- 
veda occasionally with Turvasa.® In later literature, Yadu and 


III. 11. 9. 3- 





SI try’ ’s trans., 

See Allan, Catalogue y {indian Coins (Ancient India), pp. clv ff.5 
Banerjea, Development of Hindu Iconography, p. 145 and note 1._ The coin 
was really issued by the Vesni-rdja Jnagana (Sircar, Studies in Indian Coins, 
Pp. as7, Be No. IV/19)- 


SOE PS be 


Ved. Ind., 3. v- 


VASUDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAKNAVISM 17 


Turvasu are two of the four disobedient sons of Yay&ti, who 
were cursed by their father and became the progenitors of the 
Yadavas, Yavanas, Bhojas and Mlecchas respectively. We 
have to note in this connection the irreverent attitude of the 
Vrsnis towards the Brahmanas, which is attested by a number 
of authorities, and the fact that the most distinguished Vrsni 
hero was dark-complexioned  (atasf-kusuma-§yama). Thus, 
even if the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni people were not actually of 
Nonaryan origin, at least they must have absorbed a good deal 
of Nonaryan blood. 

The Bhagavad-Gitd, which seems to contain the earliest 
dogmatic exposition of the religion characterized by bhakti 
that may be called Vaisnavism, represents Vasudeva, other- 
wise called Krsna and identified with the god Visnu as well 
as with the Supreme Spirit (but not yet with Narayana), as 
a scion of the Vrsni (i.e. the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni) family. 
The Mahdbhaga and the Kasikd give the forms vdsudeva, bala- 

,deva and dniruddha, as derivatives of Vrsni names, meaning 
the sons of Vasudeva, Baladeva and Aniruddha respectively. 
The names of the five Vrsni heroes, referred to in the Mora 
(near Mathura) inscription of the first century A.D., are 
given in the Vayu Purdna as Sankargana (son of Vasudeva 
by Rohini), Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva by Devaki), Pra- 
dyumna (son of Vasudeva by Rukmini), Samba (son of 
Vasudeva by Jambavati of Nonaryan origin), and Aniruddha 
(son of Pradyumna), all of whom are known to have been 
apotheosized and worshipped.2 The Mahdbhdsya also speaks 
of the Vasudeva-vargya or Vasudeva-vargin to signify a follower 
of Vasudeva. Curtius says that an image of Herakles (i. ¢. 
Vasudeva-Krsna) was being carried in front of the Paurava 
army, as it advanced against the Greeks led by Alexander the 
Great. The Mahabharata (which sometime mentions V4asu- 
deva as the Sarighamukhya or Elder of the Republican Confe- 
deracy of the Vrsni, Andhaka and other associate peoples) 
and the Puranas usually identify Vasudeva-Krsna of the Satvata 
(ie. Yddava-Satvata-Vrsni) clan with the highest god, 
and represent him as the founder of the religion characterized 


1. Under Panini, IV. 1. 114. 
2. Cf. Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 1944., pp. 82ff. 
3. See Majumdar, The Classical Accounts of India, p. 119. 

4. XII. 81. 25. 


18 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


by bhakti and called the Bhagavata, Satvata, or Vaisnava 
Dharma. In the Bhdgavata Purana, the highest Brahman is 
stated to have been called Bhagavat and Vasudeva by the 
Satvata people, while the Mahdbharata states, apparently in 
reference to the Gitd, that the Satvata or Bhagavata Dharma 
was taught first by Vasudeva-Krsna to Arjuna. It has to be 
noted that the word sdtvata has been used together with sari 
and bhagavata in the sense of a devotee of Vasudeva-Visnu in 
a canonical work of the Vaisnavas.2 The Gita* speaks of 
the Bhagavata religion as yoga. The Tusam (Hissar Dis- 
triét, Punjab) inscription, of about the fourth century A.D., 
also mentions a bhagavad-bhakta (i.e. Bhagavata) as Arya- 
Satvata-yog-acarya, ‘teacher of the noble Satvata yoga’. 

Megasthenes (fourth century B.C.), the Greek envoy at 

the Maurya court, speaks of the Sourasenoi (Sirasena people), 
whose country contained the two cities Methora (Mathura) 
- and Kleisobora (probably, Krsnapura), and was watered by 
the great river Jobares (Yamuna), as holding Herakles 
(apparently the Greek substitute of Vasudeva-Krsna) in special 
veneration. The Siirasenas were a branch of the Yadava- 
Satvata-Vrsni people. This is indicated by the fact that the 
Ghaja Fataka* speaks of the ruling clan of Mathura in the 
North—as distinguished from Mathura (Madurai) in the 
South in the Pandya country,—of which Vasudeva-Krsna 
was a member, as having perished owing to the irreverent 
conduct of its members towards the Brahmana Krsna-Dvai- 
payana (Vy4sa), while the Kaufiliya ArthaSdstra’ refers to the 
destruction of the republican corporation of the Vrsni people 
as a result of their attempt against Dvaipayana (i.e. Vyasa). 
The epic and Purdnic traditions that associate the YAdavas, 
especially Vasudeva-Krsna, with Mathura and its neigh- 
Eeyehvod have already been referred to above. The worship 





Bhagavata, IX. 9. 50; Mbh., XII. 348. 6-8. 
is= Suhrd-Bhagavatas=Satvatah _ Paficakdlavit, etc. _ quoted 
above from the Paiima Tantra, one of the 108 Vaisnava Tantras or Samhitas 
(cE. Journ, Roy.” As.-Soc.,- 1911, P. 935). 
-. 3+. IN. 1. 
4. Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. III, p. 270. 
5. Majumdar, The Classical. Deccan of India, Ppp. 221-22. 
6. womens trans., Vol. IV, pp. 55 
7 1.6. 





VASUDEVA-KR$NA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAISNAVISM 19 


of Vasudeva in that locality is further proved by a Mathura 
inscription’ of the time of the Saka Satrap Sodasa (first quarter 
of the first century A.D.). This inscription records the erec- 
tion of a gateway, a terrace, and a devakula at the mahdsthdna 
of Vasudeva. : 

The Buddhist canonical work Aviguttara Nikdya* mentions 
a number of religious sects such as Ajivika, Nirgrantha (Jaina), 
Mundasravaka, Jatilaka, Parivrajaka, Magandika, Trai- 
dandika, Aviruddhaka, Gautamaka (Buddhist) and Deva- 
dharmika; but it does not speak of Vasudevaka or Bhagavata. 
The inscriptions of Asoka, which mention the Sramanas, 
Brahmanas, Ajivikas, and Nirgranthas,? do not speak of the 
followers of Vasudeva. However, in a passage occurring in 
the Buddhist canonical commentaries (first century B.C.) 
called the Mahdniddesa and the Cullaniddesa,* mention is made 
of the Ajivika, Nirgrantha, Jatila, Parivrajaka and Avarud- 
dhaka side by side with the worshippers of the elephant, horse, 
cow, dog, crow, Vasudeva, Baladeva (Sankarsana), Pirna- 
bhadra, Manibhadra, Agni (Fire), the Nagas, Suparnas, 
Yaksas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Mahdrajas (the four Lokapdlas),® 
Candra, Sirya, Indra, Brahman, Deva and Dik. The 
Bhagavata sect worshipping ‘Vasudeva may not have been so 
prominent outside the Mathura region (especially in the 
eastern part of India) about the third century B. C. The 
religion probably originated with the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni 
people of the said area and spread to Western India and the 
Northern Deccan with the migration of Yadava tribes to those 
regions. Vasudeva appears to have been deified and wor- 
shipped by his own people as early as the age of Panini or 
even earlier; but he may or may not have been regarded as 
the Supreme God. We have to note that the identification of 


1. Journ. Bihar Res. Soc., Vol. XXXIX, Parts 1-2, pp. 45-48. 

2 PTS. ed., Vol. IIL, pp, 2768 

3+ Sircar, Inscriptions of Aioka, and ed, pp. 77-78. 

4. Cf. R. G. Bhandarkar, Vainavism,  Saivism and Mincr Religious 
Systems, p. 3. : : 

5. This is the generally accepted meaning and accords best with the 
context, Divinity wasclaimed by kingsas, for instance, by Samudragupta 
(see infra). Reference may also be made to the Kusina title decaputra and 
the representation, on coins, of one early Kusina monarch as flying above 
the clouds and as having flames springing from the shoulder. 


20 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Vasudeva with the highest God is not recognised in the earlier 
sections of the Mahabharata. A well-known scene of the Sa- 
bhaparvan! proves that Vasudeva-Krsna’s claim to divine 
honours was sometimes openly denied. Sometimes Vasudeva 
is described as a pious hypocrite. Even the Gitd* represents 
Vasudeva-Krsna as lamenting that the person of great soul 
who says ‘Vasudeva is All’ is rare and that people scorn him 
when he dwells in human form. It is only some late passages 
of the Mahabharata that represent him as a friend of the Brah- 
manas and the origin of the Vedas, and also as perfectly identi- 
cal with Visnu.? The Mahdbhdjya refers to the antagonism 
between the Karhsa-bhaktas who were kala-mukha (dark-faced ) 
and the Vasudeva-bhaktas who were rakta-mukha (red-faced ),‘ 
although the reference may be to a dramatic representation 
of the slaying of Karnsa. 

The Besnagar (Vidisa District, Madhya Pradesh) ins- 
cription of the last quarter of the second century B.C. refers to 
the setting up of a Garuda-dhvaja (column surmounted by the 
figure of Garuda, the emblem or vdhana of Visnu) at Vidisa 
in honour of Vasudeva, the Deva-deva (the greatest God), 
by his Yavana (Greek) devotee Heliodoros of Taksagila in 
Gandhiara, who called himself a Bhagavata, i.e., a worshipper 
of the Bhagavat (Vasudeva-Visnu). Another inscription from 
Besnagar refers to the erection of a Garuda column for a 
temple of the Bhagavat. The Ghosundi (Chitorgarh District, 
Rajasthan) inscription® of the first century B.C. records the 
construction of a pija-sild-prakdra (stone enclosure for a place 
of worship, or an enclosure for the sacred stone called 
Salagréma, the symbol of Visnu as the liriga is of Siva), styled 
N&rayana-vataka (or °vdtika), by a Bhagavata who had per- 
formed the Agvamedha sacrifice in honour of Sankarsana and 
Vasudeva. They are both called here Bhagavat as well as 
anihata (unconquered or respected) and sarvefvara (supreme 
lord). The Nanaghat (Maharashtra State) inscription® of 

1. Ch. 
5 VIL. es 24; IX. 11; XVIII. 57. 

3. XII. 47. 94—Namo ‘Brahmanyadevdya go-Brahmana-hitéya ca | jagad- 
dhitaya Krgndya Govindéya namo namah |] 

"4+ CF. Ind. Ant., 1874, p. Toy JAAS, 1911, p. 1008. 


5. Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, 1 f. 
@ Rid, pp 186 f Reo? 


vAsupeva-KigiA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAIpNAVISM 91 


about the same age, belonging to the queen of a Satavahana 
performer of Vedic sacrifices including the ASvamedha, begins 
with an adoration to the gods Dharma, Indra, Sankarsana 
and Vasudeva, the moon and the sun, and the four Lokapdlas, 
viz. Yama (differentiated from Dharma), Varuna, Kubera 
and Vasava (differentiated from Indra). The epigraphs 
cited above support what we already know from literary sources 
as regards Vasudeva’s association with Garuda and therefore 
with Visnu, with the Vrsni hero Sankarsana and with 
Narayana, considerably before the birth of Christ. He is not 
called Krsna in the early Indian inscriptions ; but the use of 
Krsna, as another name of Vasudeva, in works like the Mahd- 
bhdrata, especially in the Gita belonging to its early stratum, 
Patafijali’s | Mahdbhasya, and the Ghafa ataka is probably 
pre-Christian. The spread of the Bhagavata religion out- 
side the Mathura region and Vasudeva’s own clan (i. e. the 
Yadava-Satvata-Vrsnis), especially amongst the performers 
of Vedic sacrifices, has therefore the support of epigraphic 
evidence. But some people did not regard Vasudeva, as late 
as the first century B.C., as the greatest of all gods, but only 
as an equal of deities like Dharma, Indra and others. Even 
in the second century A.D., the Satavahana king Gautami- 
putra Satakarni is described as an equal of Rama (Balarama), 
KeSava (Krsna), Arjuna and Bhimasena, referring to 
KeSava as a hero merely. But the Chinna (Krishna District, 
Andhra Pradesh) inscription of Yajfia-Satakarni (last quarter 
of the second century) begins with an adoration to Vasudeva 
alone and indicates the progress of Bhagavatism in the South. 

There is no iconic representation of the god Visnu- 
Vasudeva assignable to a date very much earlier than the 
beginning of the Christian era.* A  four-armed figure of the 
deity with cakra in the upper left hand is found on the coins 
of a Paficala king named Visnumitra in evident allusion to 
the name of the issuer. A similar representation of the four- 
armed Visnu, with fSankha, cakra, gad@ and an indefinite 


1. Select Inscriptions, op. cit., p. 198. 

2. One of the earliest Vaisnava images so far discovered in India is 
that of an attendant of Visnu (having his appearance and attributes), now 
worshipped as Caturbhuji Bhagavan at Burhikhdr near Malhar in the 
Bilaspur District of Madhya Pradesh. See below. 


23 RELIGIOUS LIFE 1N ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


object in the hands, is found on a Kusana seal-matrix! attri- 
buted by Cunningham to Huviska. The Kusana king is 
represented here as facing the deity in a reverential attitude 
with his hands in the afjali pose. Possibly he became, for 
some time, a worshipper of Vasudeva. Some of Huviska’s 
coins* bear the figure of the four-armed god named Ooshna in 
Greek characters (probably Visnu and not Siva as usually 
believed). The fact that Huviska’s successor assumed the 
name Vasudeva also indicates the Bhagavata leanings of the 
later Kusanas who had an important gubernatorial centre 
at Mathura. 

Patafijali® seems to make a distinction between Vasudeva 
the tatrabhavat (i. e. the most worshipful Vasudeva) and. the 
Ksatriya Vasudeva. The canonical Bhagavata work Pddma 
Tantra‘ similarly makes a distinction between the two Vasu- 
devas. It is said in a Mahabharata’ story that, besides Krsna 
of the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni family, there was another 
claimant for the status of Vasudeva in Paundraka-Vasudeva, 
ive. Vasudeva, ruler of the Paundraka people, probably of 
North Bengal. Paundraka-Vasudeva may have been really 
the leader of a rival religious sect. 

The age of Vasudeva-Krsna cannot be determined with 
certainty. The evidence of the Chandogya Upanisad would sug- 
gest a date in the sixth or seventh century B.C., to which the 
work is usually attributed. The story of his association with 
the legend of the Kuru-Pandava war, the authenticity, date 
and original form of which are uncertain, appears to be less 
reliable, although some scholars are inclined to accept tenth 
or ninth century B.C. as the date of the event. Jain tradition” 
makes the Ksatriya prince Vasudeva-Krsna a contemporary 
of the legendary twenty-second Tirthankara Aristanemi who 
preceded Parsvanatha, predecessor of Mahavira (6th-5th 
century B.C.), and may support the date suggested by the 
Chandogya Upanisad. 


1. Banerjea, Development of Hindu Iconografhy, pp. 143-44- 

2. Cf. Select Inscriptions, op. cit., pp. 155-56, note 5. 

3. Under Panini, IV. 3. 98-99. 

4. JRAS, 1911, p. 936; Raychaudhuri, op. cit., p. 3 

5. I. 186. 12; Il. 14. 20; ete. 

8. CE. Journ. Roy. As. Soc. Beng., Letters, Vol. ev p. 77. Cf. The 
Bharata War and Purnic Genealogies, ed. Sircar, pp. 18 

7. Uttarddhydayanasitra, XXI1. 


\ 
vASUDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN BARLY VAi§NAVISM 23 
II 


There is reference in the Satapatha Brahmana! to the purusa 
(a word used often in the sense of the Supreme Spirit) named 
Narayana who is stated to have thrice offered sacrifice at the 
instance of Prajapati. Narayana is, however, not identified 
here with Visnu or any of the Adityas. Elsewhere, the 
same work? mentions Purusa-Narayana as the performer of a 
paficaratra-sattra (sacrifice continued for five days), who ob- 
tained, as a result, superiority over all beings and ‘became all- 
beings’. Some scholars trace the name Paificaratra or Pajica- 
ratrika applied to the Bhagavatas (or to one of their important 
branches) to this five-day sattra attributed to Narayana. The 
earliest evidence in favour of the identification of Narayana 
with Visnu is probably to be traced in the Baudhdyana Dharma- 
siitra’ (about the fifth century B.C.). The Taittiriya Aranyaka* 
contains the passage : Nardyandya vidmahe Vasudevaya dhimahi | 
tan-=no Visnuh pracodajyat || in which Narayana, Vasudeva 
and Visnu are regarded as one and the same deity. Here 
Narayana is also called Hari and ‘the eternal Deity, the 
Supreme, and Lord’. But this part of the Taittiriya Aranyaka 
is a later addition, and appears to be considerably later than 
the Baudhayana Dharmasiitra. Several passages of the Maha- 
bharata support the identification of Vasudeva, Visnu and 
Narayana as found in the above passage. 

According to certain passages of the Mahabharata, 
Narayana was an ancient 7si who was the son of Dharma and 
was associated with another ssi called Nara.6 They both went 
from the world of men to the world of Brahman and, being 
worshipped by the gods and the Gandharvas, existed only for 
the destruction of the demons. Indra was helped by Nara. 
and Narayana in his struggle with the Asuras. In a passage 
which was apparently retouched by a Saiva, Narayana, son 
of Dharma, is stated to have practised austerities in the 
Himalayas (the exact place is sometimes specified as Badari) 
and thus become Brahman (the All-Soul); he is said to have 


a 
2. 
3 Th 543 "Rayehmudhurl, op. cit, p. 111: 
+ 
5. & Bhandarkar, op. cil., pp. 42-46- 


24 RiLiciovs LIFE iN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
become invincible by propitiating Siva. According to one 
story, the sage Nara, equal to Narayana himself, was born 
from Narayana’s austerities. Nara is identified with Arjuna 
and Narayana with Vasudeva-Krsna.1 The late Ndrdyaniya 
section of the Santi-parvan states how Narayana, the Eternal 
and Universal Soul, was born as the son of Dharma in the 
quadruple form of Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krsna. It 
also speaks of the white people of the White Island (Sveta- 
dvipa), on the northern shores of the Milk Ocean, engrossed 
in the worship of Narayana, a thousand-rayed deity, who, 
in consequence of his sun-like brightness, could not be seen by 
persons not devoting themselves exclusively to him. Accord- 
ing to some scholars, the Narayaniya section of the Mahabharata 
suggests a journey really undertaken by some Indian Vaisnavas 
to the Christian countries, and points to an attempt, in the 
Indian eclectic fashion, to include Christ among the incar- 
nations of the Supreme Spirit Narayana. Others, however, 
take the story to bea mere flight of imagination. Raychau- 
dhuri? seems to be right in emphasizing Narayana’s solar 
associations and in comparing Narayana in the Sveta-dvipa 
of the White Islanders with the Rgvedic Visnu in his highest 
station observed only by the Saris. According to Bhandar- 
kar,* Narayana has a cosmic character and is not an historical 
or mythological individual. He takes the word Narayana in 
the sense of the resting place or goal of nara, i. e. the multitude 
of naras (men). But it seems more reasonable to think that 
Narayana (cf. Kanvayana, Katyayana, etc.) was an ancient 
leader of thought, born in the family of another sage called 
Nara and that both of them probably advocated solar worship 
that ultimately led to the identification, especially of the former, 
with the solar deity Visnu. It is difficult to determine whether 
the family of Narayana had anything to do with the Yadavas. 
It is, however, not impossible that the followers of Narayana 

1. There is some evidence in favour of the deification of Arjuna and 
the existence of a sect that worshipped him. It is possible that the concep- 
tion of Nara as a companion of Narayana was based on the interpretation 
of the word purusa in the expression Purusa-Narayana in the sense of 
nara, as well as on the tradition regarding the association of Arjuna with 
Vasudeva-Krsna. 


2. Op. cit., pp. 135, 157. 
3. Op. cit., pp. 42-43. 


vAsuDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAISNAVISM 95 


were originally called Paficaratrika and were later merged 
into the worshippers of Vasudeva-Krsna. It is also possible 
to think that the Satvatas originally worshipped Narayana. 

We have referred to the Narayana-vataka mentioned 
in the Ghosundi inscription (first century B.C.). A fourth 
century record from the Guntur District speaks of a devakula 
of Bhagavat Narayana.1 


it 


The Mahabharata and the Puranas usually explain the 
name Vasudeva as ‘the son of Vasudeva’, although sometimes 
philosophical interpretations are also offered.2» Bhandarkar® 
draws our attention to the commentaries on the Asfadhydyt 
and the Ghata Jataka and suggests that Vasudeva is not a 
patronymic, but the proper name of the person whose name 
Krsna shows that he belonged to the Karsnayana-gotra. In 
his opinion, the Brahmanical otra called Karsnayana 
sprang from an ancient sage named Krsna with whom 
Vasudeva of a Ksatriya family of the Karsnayana-gotra was 
identified at a later date. Although Krsna may be a gotra 
name as suggested by the commentator on the Ghafa Jataka, 
later traditions, according to which a son of Vasudeva was 
called Krsna owing to the darkness of his complexion (cf. the 
names of Krsna-Dvaipayana and Krsna-Draupadi), appear 
to be more reasonable. Patronymics like Vasudeva as well 
as metronymics like Gautamiputra (as in the Vakataka 
family) were often used in ancient India exactly as proper 
names. Other names like Janardana, Keéava, etc., later 
applied to Vasudeva-Krsna, were derived in some cases from 
his identification with Visnu* and Narayana, and in others, 
probably, also from his equation with certain local and tribal 
gods. 
The Chandogya Upanisad,’ supposed to be a pre-Buddhistic 
work, mentions the sage Krsna-Devakiputra (i. e. Krsna, son 


1. Qf, Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, pp. 443 ff. 
2. Cf Mbh., V. 70. 33 Xl. 341, ot 
3. Op. cit., pp. r0f. 
4. The name or epithet Vamana is applied to Visnu in the Satapatha 
Brakmana i 2. 5-5) and to Krsna in the Mahabharata (XII. 43. 12). 
5. Ul. 17. 6. 


26 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANGIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of Devaki) who was a disciple of the rsi Ghora of the Angirasa 
family. Krsna is not called Vasudeva in this work, probably 
because the patronymic and metronymic of a person were 
not generally used together. His identification with Krsna 
who lived on the river ArnSumati and is mentioned in the 
Rgveda is doubtful; but it cannot be regarded as impossible 
in vew of the facts that the AmSumati, which flowed through 
the Kuru country, may be the same as the Yamuna, on 
the bank of which both the Kuru city Indraprastha and the 
Sirasena city Mathura stood, and that the said section of the 
Rgveda may belong to the latest stratum of the work. Some 
scholars are doubtful as regards the identity of Krsna-Devaki- 
putra of the Chandogya Upanisad with Krsna, son of Devaki 
by Vasudeva of the Ydadava-Satvata-Vrsni clan of the 
Mathura region, as suggested by the Mahabharata (especially 
its early stratum)* and the Puranas as well as by works like 
the Ghafa Jataka and Patafijali’s Mahabhdgya. Vasudeva’s 
association with Sarnkarsana (Baladeva, son of Vasudeva 
by Rohin?) in pre-Christian epigraphs, as well as such 
passages of the Mahabhdsya as  Sarikarsana-dvitiyasya balam 
Kronasya vardhatém, seems to support the epic and Puranic 
tradition. The Mahdbhdsya also speaks of popular dramatical 
representation of the life-story of Vasudeva-Krsna_ with 
special reference to the Bali-bandha and Karhsa-vadha episodes, 
and actually quotes passages like asddhur:=mdtule Kyrsnah and 
jaghana Karmsam kila Vasudevah, from a poem on a similar 
subject. Krsna’s association with the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsnis 
of the Mathura area seems also to be indicated by the name 
Krsnapura (Kleisobora), ‘city of Krsna’, applied to a town in 
the neighbourhood of Mathura by Megasthenes in the fourth 
century B.C. The story of Herakles and Pandaia, known to 
Megasthenes, points to the antiquity of the tradition regarding 


1, The name may have association with the solar rays. In later 
mythology, Yamun4 appears as the daughter of Vivasvat (Sirya) and sister 
of Yama to whom is ascribed, from the earliest times, the same father in 
both Indian and Iranian traditions. 

a. Cf. Gita, I. 41, etc. 

3. Under Panini, II. 2. 233 Raychaudhuri, op. cit., pp. 73, 105. 

4. Cf. Raychaudhuri, op. cit., p. 37- 


vAsuDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAI§NAVISM Py 


Krsna’s connection with the Pandavas.1 It has also to be 
noted that both the Chandogya Upanisad and the Mahd- 
bharata mention Krsna’s mother as Devaki which was 
rather an uncommon name.? The Angirasa family, to 
which the Upanisadic Krsna’s teacher Ghora belonged, was 
related to the Bhojas, (RV, III. 53. 7) who were, like the 
Vrsnis, a sept of the Yadava clan. In this connection, Ray- 
chaudhuri’s attempt® to trace some of the doctrines enun- 
ciated in the Bhagavad-Gita, sung by V4asudeva-Krsna to 
Arjuna, in the lessons received by Krsna-Devakiputra from 
Ghora-Angirasa,. according to the Chandogya Upbanisad, is 
very interesting. There is, of course, palpable difference bet- 
ween the character of the Upanisadic Krsna and that of the 
epic Krsna-Vasudeva; but this may be due to the latter 
representing a later stage in the development of the Vasudeva 
saga. In spite of the difference, the same person can pro- 
bably be discerned in the two figures. In the Chandogya 
Upanisad, Krsna appears in a passage where tapas, dana, 
Grjava, ahims@ and satya-vacana are extolled; the same 
virtues are inculcated by the epic Krsna in the Gitd® as well 
as in several other passages of the Mahabharata. Just as Ghora 
deprecates vidhi-yajfa, in the same way the Gita* belittles 
dravyamaya-yajfia or material sacrifice. Ghora says that all 
the actions of the virtuous life of a man constitute a kind of 
sacrifice to the deities and help him to attain to the God of 
gods. This seems to be essentially identical with the theory of 
absolute resignation (i.e. dedication of the results of all actions 
to God) inculcated in the Gita. While the Upanisadic Krsna 
and his teacher were worshippers of the sun, the Gita,’ attri- 

1. The story of Pandaia reminds us of the facts that the Pandyas 
had their capital at Mathura (Madurai) and that their name is derived 


by Katyayana, in a vdrttika, from Pandu. See below. It is thus possible 
that the ancestors of the Pandyas migrated from the north. 


2. The occurrence of the word Aguta in the Chdudogya Upanisad 
(III. 17. 6) is rather significant, as this appears as an epithet of Krsna in 
the Mahabharata. 

3. Op. cit., pp. 57 ff. 

4. See III. 17. 4. 

5: Cf. déna, dama, yajiia, svddhydya, tapas, arjava, ahimsd, satya, etc., in 
XVI. 1-2. 

6. IV. 33. 

7. VU. g-tr. 


$8 Rétictobs tke rv aNcimivr aid MebmeVaL tixbtA 
buted to Krsna, emphasized the importance of meditation 
‘at the last hour’ on the ‘word which knowers of the Veda call 
Imperishable’ and on ‘the sun-coloured being beyond the 
darkness’ as the best means of attaining to the Supreme Being. 
As both the Chandogya Upanisad and the Gité associate essen- 
tialy the same doctrines with one and the same person called 
Krsna, son of Devaki, it is quite probable that they were 
originally learnt by Krsna from ‘Ghora, and were later taught 
by the former to his disciples.1_ But although the teaching of 
Ghora-Angirasa to Krsna appear to be the kernel of the Gita, 
this work of the later followers of Vasudevism shows considera- 
ble development of the original doctrine. 

The Bhagavata religion, propounded by Vasudeva, which 
incorporated the earlier cult of Narayana and was the source 
of later Vaisnavism, was therefore the development of an 
original sun-cult. In the Mahabharata (XII. 335. 19), 
the Sdtvata-vidhi is stated to have been declared in old times 
by the sun. The Gita (IV. 1) says that the Bhagavata doctrine 
was first taught by the Lord to the sun, then by the sun to 
Manu, and ultimately by Manu to Iksvaku. 

At a later date a pastoral character was attributed to 
Krsna. In the Harivamsa (a supplement to the Mahabharata) 
and the Puranas (e.g. Visnu, Bhdgavata, etc.) are to be 
found stories about his tender babyhood and wanton child- 
hood as well as—conspicuously in some later works—about 
the dalliances of his youth. The popularity of the cowherd 
god can be gathered from the name of the Pallava king Visnu- 
gopa (fourth century A.D.) and literary evidence from the 
third or fourth century A.D. Hopkins? believes that it was not 
till Krsna became a very great, if not the greatest, god and 
condescended to be born in low life that such tales about 
his youthful performances began to grow. The stories regard- 
ing the early life of the pastoral Krsna probably developed 
partly out of the Vedic legends about Visnu, called gop and 
gopdla in the Rgveda* and govinda and démodara in the Baudha- 
yana Dharmasiitra.4 But there appear to be other factors 

1. For comments on these views of Rayhcaudhuri, see De, JHQ, Vol. 
XVIII, Pp. 297 ff. 

2. Op. cit., p. 467. 
3. Vedic Index, Vol. 1, p. 238. 
4 IL 5. 24. 


vASUDEVA-KR§NA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAISNAVISM 29 


that also contributed to the development of the mythology of 
the cowherd Krsna. The Yamuna valley was possibly cons- 
picuous for its cows as early as the age of the Rgveda,! and a 
Varsna (i. e¢. a member of the Vrsni clan) named Gobala 
(literally, ‘one strong in the wealth of cows’) is known from 
the Taittiriya Sarmhita® and the Jaiminiya Upanisad Bréhmana.* 
It is thus probable that the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni people 
possessed large herds of cattle as did their neighbours, the 
Matsyas (cf. the epic reference to Virata’s gogrhas). Most 
of the stories about Krsna’s early life, especially the late tales 
about his questionable relation with the cowherd women,‘ 
appear, however, to have been principally due to his identi- 
fication with certain gods worshipped by the Abhiras and 
other allied peoples. It may be noted in this connection that 
the god Siva was similarly brought into relation with Koch 
girls in some late mediaeval works (especially Tantras) of 
Bengal, apparently as a result of his identification with a 
tribal god of the Hinduized Koch people.® 

According to Barth* and Hopkins,’? Krsna was not a 
human being, but a popular divinity whose identification 
with Visnu resulted in the growth of sectarian Vaisnavism. 
Both the scholars admit the possibility of his solar association; 
but the latter considers Krsna to be the tribal god of the 


1. Raychaudhuri, op. cit., p. 46. 
2. IIL. 11.9.3. 
3. 1.6.1. 

A Pabhosa inscription (Ep. Ind., Vol. II, p. 482) of the seventh or 
eighth century refers to a maker of images of Sri-Krsna and the milkmaids. 
One of the earliest extant poetical compositions (cf. quotations in the Maha- 
bhasya from a work on the Karisavadha episode) on Krsna’s early life is the 
Balacarita attributed to Bhasa who was a predecessor of Kalidasa (c. 400 
A.D.). This work speaks of Damodara and Safkarsana as Vrpnikumdra, of 
Karisa, king of Mathura, as Sauraseni-mdta, ‘one whose mother is a Siira- 
sena girl’, and of Vasudeva as Yadavi-mata. It also refers to Damodara’s 
foster-parents, Nanda-gopa and Yasoda or Nanda-gopi, and to his rela- 
tions with the cowherds, but not to his amorous ecstasies. A Mathura 
sculpture representing Vasudeva as crossing the Yamuna with baby Krgra 
in a basket has been assigned to the age of the Kusanas (Arch. Surv. Ind., 
Annual Report, 1925-26, pp. 283-84, Plate LXIII V, Fig. c). 

5: Gf. Jour. Roy. As. Soc. Beng., Letters, Vol. XIV, p. 105. 
6. Religions of India, pp. 166 ff. 
7. Op. cit., pp. 466 ff., 488. 


30. RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Pandavas, supposed to be an aboriginal people, while the 
former regards him to be the kula-devatd or ethnic god 
of some powerful confederation of Rajput clans.1 But the 
theory of Krsna’s_ solar character has been rightly dismissed 
by Keith? with the remark that ‘the “dark sun” requires 
more explanation than it seems likely to receive’. Macnicol® 
and Keith* think that the conception of Krsna who is be- 
lieved to appear in the Mahabhaya in a ‘vegetation masque’, 
contending with Karhsa for the possession of the sun, deve- 
loped out of one of the vegetation deities extensively wor- 
shipped in all parts of the world. But the evidence discussed 
above seems to bear testimony to the human character of 
. Krsna, who was gradually associated with certain popular 
cults and festivals. The suggestion that Krsna is a myth is 
unconvincing. It reminds us of similar attempts to prove 


that the Buddha and Christ are imaginary figures. 
IV 


The method of salvation taught in the Gitd is that a man 
should live a life of actions without hankering after their results 
which should be dedicated to God. This is referred to as the 
Ekantika Dharma in the Narayaniya section in the Santi- 
parvan of the Mahabharata. Chapter I of the work is intro- 
ductory, while in the following five chapters the process of 
Karma-yoga (i.e. to do action without regard to results, having 
surrendered oneself to God), which leads to the attainment of 
freedom from passions, is described. In the next six chapters 
Bhakti-yoga (i.e. loving adoration of God) is delineated, while 
the remaining chapters sum up the discussion. Some of the 
teachings of the Gita are paraphrased _ below. 

By devoted performance of acts without attachment to 
other objects, man gets his desires uprooted, and finally attains 
inflexibility of will and complete serenity of soul. He obtains 
quiescence in Brahman (Supreme Spirit) at the time of death 
(II. 71-72). 


1. Barth, op. cit., p. 168. 
2. Journ. Roy. As. Soc., 1908, p. 171. 
3. Indian Theism, pp. 37-38. 

4. Journ. Roy. As. Soc., 1915, p. 841. 


VASUDEVA-KR§NA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAI§SNAVISM 3L 


By knowing God man is purified, has his passions des- 
troyed, and attains to the condition of God. The highest 
knowledge, by means of which man sees all things in himself 
and in God, makes man free from all sins and destroys the 
polluting effect of his actions. It makes man a totally free 
spirit (IV. 35-38). 

Both sannydsa (renunciation of work when Self is realized ) 
and Karma-yoga (performance of work, dedicated to God, 
before the dawn of Self-knowledge) lead men to the’ same goal 
(V. 2). By means of yoga, man obtains jfdna when all 
things are seen in the same light, and Brahman is realized 
(VI. 29). The best yogin regards all as himself in matters of 
happiness and misery. He becomes absorbed in God in peace 
(VI. 31-32). . 

God is the source and the resting place of the world, and 
there is nothing higher than He (VII. 6-7). When man 
takes refuge in Him, he gets rid of God’s maya consisting of 
the three gunas or qualities and conditions resulting from 
them (VII. 14). 

God is easily attained by a man who meditates on Him 
with concentration of mind and absolute devotion, especially 
at the time of death. A man who reaches God is freed from 
subjection to transmigration (VIII. 10, 15). 

Men worshipping various deities are also worshippers of 
God; but they do not get freedom from rebirth (IX. 23-24). 
A person who resorts to God attains the highest place and 
obtains perfect peace (IX. 31-32). 

God is the soul dwelling in the heart of man. He is the 
beginning, the middle and the end of all beings (X. 20). 
Persons with their souls centered on God enlighten one another 
about Him and become happy (X. 9). 

The universe js only a fractional aspect of God (X.42). 

A man should fix his mind on God and concentrate his 
will on Him; if this is not possible, he should obtain God by 
constant remembrance; if this also is not possible, he should 
perform deeds for God’s sake; if even this is not possible, he 
should give up desire for the results of his deeds (XII. 8-11). 

The virtues especially dear to God are absence of hatred, 
friendship for all, kindness, humility, indifference to praise 
and censure, etc. (XII. 13-19). 


32 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The thing to be known is Parabrahman that has no begin- 
ning or end, is neither existent nor non-existent; that has hands 
and feet, head and face, and eyes and ears everywhere, and 
that pervades all. The Supreme Spirit dwelling in the body 
is devoid of qualities and is unchangeable. It does not do 
any deed and is not contaminated (XIII. 12-14, 31). 

The man who resorts to God by Bhakti-yoga becomes 
immortal by being free from the three qualities (guna) that 
cause bondage (XIV. 26); he comes to possess a serene mood 
in which pleasure and pain are alike, and agreeable and dis- 
agreeable things have no difference (XIV. 24). 

There are two categories of beings in the world, of which 
one (viz. the body-mind complex) changes, but the other 
(viz. the soul) is unchangeable. There is also the highest Soul 
which is Paramdtman, i. e. God, the support of the three worlds 
(XV. 16-17). 

There are two classes of men, viz., good and bad. The 
second class includes men who do not care for God or morality 
and follow doctrines: other than the one preached in the Gita 
(XVI. 6ff.). Desire, anger, and greed constitute the three 
roads to hell and lead to spiritual death (XVI. 21). 

Men may be divided into three classes, according to the 
three elements (guna), as good, active and ignorant. Of these 
three classes, the first worships gods, the second evil spirits, 
and the third ghosts and spectres (XVII. 2, 4). This third 
class performs activities leading to attenuation (or mortifica- 
tion ) of the elements of the body wherein God dwells (XVII.6). 

True renunciation is attained not by complete inactivity, 
but by giving up actions arising from desires and by abandon- 
ing the fruits of actions. Worship, charity and austerity lead 
to purity of the soul and should not therefore be given up. 
Duty must be done without thinking of the result (XVIII. 
1,5-6). A person should surrender himself absolutely to God 
who will then free him from all sins (XVIII. 66). 


Vv 


The Vyiha doctrine’ is one of the principal tenets of the 
old Paficaratra system, which was absorbed in the Bhagavata 


1. The Mahabhéga (on Panini, VI. 3. 6) alludes to the doctrine in 
the passage Jandrdanas=to=dtma-caturtha eva. 


VASUDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAISNAVISM 33 


religion, as well as of the later Sri-Vaisnava philosophy. Ace 
cording to this doctrine, Lord Vasudeva in his para aspect is 
the highest object of bhakti. He created from himself the 
witha (phase of conditioned spirit) Sankarsana and also 
Prakrti (the indiscrete primal matter of the Sankhya). From 
the association of Sankarsana and Prakrti arose the oydha 
Pradyumna and also manas (buddhi or intelligence of the 
Sankhya). From the combination of Pradyumna and 
manas sprang the vyitha Aniruddha as also ahankdra (conscious- 
ness), and from the association of Aniruddha and aharkdra arose 
the mahdbhitas (elements with their qualities) and the god 
Brahman who made out of those elements the earth and all 
that it contains. While Vasudeva alone possesses the six ideal 
gunas or qualities, viz., jadna, bala, virya, aifvarya, fakti and 
tejas, each one of his three emanations possesses only two of 
the said gunas in turn.!_ This philosophical interpretation of 
the relation of Vasudeva with the other deified heroes of the 
Vrsni clan is apparently a later development. The Gita, the 
earliest religious text of the Bhagavatas, does not refer to the 
withas, although they are referred to in several other (pre- 
sumably late) sections of the Mahabharata (e.g. a section of 
the Bhisma-parvan, the Narayaniya section of the Santi- 
parvan, etc.). But these references do not give a consistent 
account of the vyihas. Bhandarkar? thinks that, out of the 
five prakytis of Vasudeva (viz. the five elements, mind, buddhi, 
egoism and jiva) as mentioned in the Gité, jiva, mind and 
egoism were later on personified into the zyihas Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The  yiha doctrine, as we 
have seen, may be alluded to in the Mahabhdsya passage Janar- 
danas:=tv:=Gtma-caturtha eva, quoted apparently from an un» 
known poem on the life of Vasudeva-Krsna. 

The Mora (seven miles west of Mathura) inscription 
of the first century A.D. speaks of bhagavatam Vrsninarh paiicay 
virdnam pratimah, ‘the images of the group of five divine heroes 
of the Vrsni family.” The Vayu Purana‘ mentions the five 


1. Schrader, Introduction to the Paficaratra and the Ahirbudhnya Sarithitd, 
pp. 32-35. For the sub-vydhas, sec ibid., p. 41. 


2. Op. cil, pp. 126 , 
3. Proc. Ind. Hist. Cong., Madras, 1944, pp. 82-90; Banerjea, 


Development of Hindu Iconography, pp. 114-15. 
4 97. 1-2. 


AAR 


34 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


vamSa-viras of the Vrsnis, and they were Sankarsana, Vasudeva, 
Pradyumna, Samba and Aniruddha. There can hardly be 
any doubt that the Vrsni heroes were apotheosized and wor- 
shipped with the title bhagavat in the Mathura region about 
the beginning of the Christian era, probably by people asso- 
ciated with the old Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni clan. In the 
Visnudharmottara, a work mentioned by Al-Birini (1030 A.D.) 
and probably used by Brahmagupta (628 A.D.), there are 
rules for the construction of images of various divinities related 
to the Bhagavata cult. These include the five Vrsni heroes 
mentioned above. Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita? (sixth 
century) also contains details for the making of the images 
of Visnu (Vasudeva), Baladeva (Sankarsana), Samba 
and Pradyumna; but it does not mention Aniruddha. The 
preference of Samba to Aniruddha exhibited in this work may 
point to the fact that its author Varahamihira belonged to 
the community of the sun-worshipping Maga-Brahmanas 
(hailing originally from Persia) who appear to have held 
Samba in special esteem. Samba, however, soon fell in the 
estimation of the Bhagavatas. This was probably because he 
was represented as the champion of solar worship in India 
and was sometimes identified with the Sun-god himself. 
Banerjea suggests that all the Vrsni heroes (i. e. the four 
tyihas together with Samba) were independently worshipped. 
He is inclined to identify Samba with certain sculptured 
figures hailing from the Mathura area. The custom of 
érecting dhvajas or votive columns in honour of different sec- 
tarian deities, especially near their temples, was popular in 
ancient India; and Banerjea thinks that the fragmentary capi- 
tals with the figures of Garuda, Tala (fan-falm) and Makara 
(crocodile), found at Besnagar and Pawaya, point to the 
existence of the dhvajas and shrines respectively of the deities 
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, and Pradyumna.* Certain early 
coins, including a few from Taxila, are supposed by the same 
scholar to bear the representation of columns with fan-palm 
capitals. The earliest sculpture representing Balarama comes 
from Mathura and is now preserved in the Lucknow Museum, 
1. 57: 31-40. 


2. Of. Proc. Ind. Hist. Cong., loc. cit. 
3. Banerjea, op. cif, p. 144- 


VASUDEVA-K§RNA AND NARAYANA IN EARLY VAI§NAVISM 35 


On stylistic grounds it has been assigned to the second century 
B.C., although it may actually belong to the early Kusna age. 

The catur-vyiha doctrine was undoubtedly an outcome 
of the deification of several Vrsni-viras besides Vasudeva. 
But the non-mention of Pradyumna and Aniruddha along with 
Sankarsana and Vasudeva in the Ghosundi and Nanaghat 
inscriptions, both belonging to the first century B. C., appears 
to suggest that the independent worship of the third and fourth 
wyithas, who are not known to have been great religious 
teachers, was perhaps limited to the Vrsni circle. Their 
apotheosis may have been influenced partly by the practice, 
prevalent in the Mathura region, of the installation of images 
of deceased ancestors in devakulas, as is indicated by an ins- 
criptions! of Huviska. Sankarsana, also called Baladeva, 
Balarama and Rama, however, appears to have been a more 
important figure and his independent worship spread over 
a wide area before the birth of Christ. The Ghosundi inscrip- 
tion, as we have seen, calls him bhagavat and sarvefvara jointly 
with Vasudeva. It is also interesting to note that, both in 
the Ghosundi and Nanaghat records, Vasudeva is mentioned 
after Sankarsana, apparently because he was the younger of 
the two brothers, and that these records do not give more 
prominence to Vasudeva, as is done in the works on the vyaha 
doctrine. In the Mahabharata, Sankarsana is represented as 
specially honoured by the Kuru king Duryodhana. The 
Kautiliya ArthaSastra* speaks of a class of ascetics who had 
shaven heads or braided hair and adored Sankarsana as 
their devata. “The votaries of Baladeva are also mentioned 
side by side with those of Vasudeva in the Buddhist Niddesa 
works. In the Jain Aupapdtikasitra,? mention is made not 
only of the votaries of Baladeva and Vasudeva, but also of 
Balarama who is referred to as one of the eight renowned 
Ksatriya teachers. Independent worship of Sankarsana, 
before the birth of Christ, is belived to be suggested by his 
image in the Lucknow Museum referred to above. In epic 
and Purdnic traditions, Sarfkarsana is sometimes represented 
.: 1. Journ. Roy. As. Soc., 4924 P. 403. ind goune: references to the 
woe Gt. the Pratindndjate, Act. TI atributed to Bhisa, 20" P* 43 


2. XIII. iii. 
3. Ed. Leumann, pp. 61, 69-70, 


36 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


as the incarnation of Sesa or Anantanaga.! This seems to 
point to his identification with some tribal god of the Nagas. 
The Ka4liya-naga episode in the Krsna saga probably sug- 
gests the victory of Bhagavatism over the tribal cult of the 
N&gas who are known to have ruled in the Mathura area 
about the 3rd-4th century A.D. In these traditions, Safkarsana 
figures as a great helper in the deeds of valour of his younger 
step-brother Krsna, especially in the latter’s struggle with 
Karhsa. The pastoral association of Safkarsana may have 
come partly from his relations with Krsna and partly also 
from his identification with some tribal god or gods. In the 
Bhisma-parvan of the Mahabharata and the Ahirbudhnya Sam- 
hitd, he is represented as an exponent of the Satvata or 
Pafivaratra system. The Narayaniya section of the Santi- 
parvan regards Vasudeva as identical with the Param-dtman 
(Supreme Soul) and Sankarsana with the Jiv-dtman (indi- 
vidual soul). In later times the devotees of Sankarsana appear 
to have merged themselves in those of Vasudeva. The inde- 
pendent worship of the last two vyihas, viz. Pradyumna and 
Anituddha, gradually declined. Even the worship of San- 
Karsana lost its popularity owing to the increasing enthusiasm 
for the worship of some of the Anatdras of Visnu since the age 
of the Imperial Guptas. 


VI 


The Ajivikas were the followers of a great champion of 
fatalism named Maskariputra Gogala who flourished, like the 
Buddha and Mahavira, in the sixth century B.C. Utpala 
(tenth century), while commenting on Varahamihira’s Brhaj- 
jataka, seems to include the Ajivikas amongst the Nardyan-dfrita 
(ie. devotees of Narayana or Visnu),? although this has 
been doubted by some scholars. In later days the Ajivikas 
appear to have mostly merged into the followers of Vasudeva. 

Jainism shares the doctrine of ahimsé with Bhagavatism 
and Buddhism, and is permeated with the influence of Hindu- 
ism, especially of the Krsna cult. The Jains regard Vasudeva 
and Baladeva as two of their sixty-three Salakd-purusas who 


1. Sesa and Ananta are often distinguished in literature. 
2. Cf. Ind. Ant., 1912, pp. 266f., in this connection. 


vAsUDEVA-KRSNA AND NARAYANA iN EARLY VAISNAVISM 37 


are believed to be directors of the course of the world, The 
legends of Mahavira’s birth as known from Jain mythology, 
again, appear to be modelled on those of Krsna’s birth. The 
later conception of the twenty-four forms of Visnu, on the 
other hand, was very probably imitated from that of the 
twenty-four Jain Tirthankaras. It may be noted that: the 
Jain Tirthankara Rsabha was regarded by some Bhagavatas! 
as an Avatéra of Visnu. 

Senart and Poussin suggest? that the worshippers © of 
Narayana exerted considerable influence on the making of the 
Buddhist doctrine from its very inception. The theory can 
hardly be accepted in its entirety, because the early centres 
of influence of the two creeds were different. It must be ad- 
mitted, however, that the importance of ahimsd is recognized 
by both the Bhagavatas and the Buddhists as by the Jains. 
There is also an obvious resemblance between the Dharam- 
cakra of the Buddhists and Visnu’s Sudarfana-cakra. The ado- 
ration of the Buddha’s footprints may have been borrowed from 
the conception of Visnu’s pada, a term, as already shown 
above, of equivocal import. The full development of the 
Avatéra-vdda, on the other hand, was probably influenced by 
the Buddhist conception of the former Buddhas who are known 
to have been worshipped in their own stipas as early as the 
age of Asoka (third century B.C.). The absorption of a large 
number of Buddhists into the fold of the Vaisnavas in the 
Gupta and post-Gupta periods seems to be suggested by the 
recognition of the Buddha as one of Visnu’s Avatdras before 
the mediaeval age. 

According to some scholars, much of Bhagavatism, in- 
cluding the idea of bhakti, was borrowed from Christianity. It 
has been suggested that Krsna himself was an adaptation of 
Christ. We should, however, remember that the origin of 
bhakti in India, the deification and worship of Vasudeva 
and his identification with Krsna are all pre-Christian concep- 
tions. Much has been made of the resemblance between the 


1. See below. 

2. Cf. Macnicol, Indian Theism, pp. 63, 241-48. 

3. Cf. Seal, Comparative Studies in Vaishnavism and Christianity, pp. 30 
ff.; also Asiatic Researches, Vol. 1, pp. 274 ff.; Ind. Ant., 1873, pp. 285 ff.5 
1874, pp. 21 ff.; ete. 


38 RuuicioUs LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


stories about the child Krsna and the child Christ. Hopkins! 
thinks that the coincidences are direct importations from 
Christian lands to India and points to the late date of the 
development of the Krsna legends. But the fact that the 
Mahdbhésya quotes passages from a kdvya on the Kamsa-vadha 
episode may suggest a pre-Christian origin of the Krsna 
saga. Krsna’s cowherd association was widely known before 
the rise of the Imperial Guptas in the fourth century A.D. 
It has been shown, on the other hand, that the adoration of 
Virgin Mary is not much earlier than the fifth century. 
Kennedy* rightly points out, ‘there is no Christian represen- 
tation of the suckling mother before the twelfth century; [but] 
there is a much earlier Hindu one.’ The influence of Chris- 
tianity on Vaisnavism cannot be proved satisfactorily with the 
evidence at our disposal. Bhandarkar’s theory? that the 
Abhiras were responsible for bringing Christian legends .to 
India and introducing them into the Krsna saga is not sup- 
ported by any evidence. 


1. Op. cit., p. 430. 
2. Journ. Roy. As. Soc., 1907, p. 484. 
g. Ind. Ant., 1912, p. 15. 


Cnaprter III 
VAISNAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 
I 


In the fourth century A.D., the Guptas established an 
empire comprising the major part of Northern India and 
extended their influence over the peninsula of the Deccan. They 
were devotees of Visnu as is suggested by their adoption of 
Garuda as the distinguishing emblem of the family. The coins 
of the Gupta emperors bear the representation of their Garuda 
standard. The Allahabad pillar inscription’ refers to the 
garutmad-anka (Garuda seal) of Samudragupta and represents 
him actually as the god Visnu in human fornmi. Samudra- 
gupta is described as equal to the four Lokapdlas, viz., Kubera, 
Varuna, Indra, and Yama, and also as ‘one who is a mortal 
only in celebrating the observances of mankind, but is other- 
wise a god dwelling on the earth’. This no doubt refers to 
the conception of a divine king similar to that found in the 
Manusmyti2 But more important is another passage of the 
same record in which Samudragupta is represented as identical 
with the Acintya-purusa or Inscrutable Being, i. e. Visnu, who 
is ‘the cause of the prosperity of the pious and the destruction 
of the wicked.’* It is quite clear that this passage is an echo 
of a verse of the Gita* which refers to the descent of God on 
the earth, in physical form, for protecting the pious and des- 
troying the sinners. 

Though Samudragupta was a Vaisnava, he was appa- 
rently not a Bhagavata. This is indicated by the fact that his 
successors apply the epithet paramabhagavata only to themselves 
and not to that king. Although in some cases the word bhaga- 


1. Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, pp. 254 ff. 

2. VII. 4-8. 

3- Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, 2nd ed., p. 266—sdddhv-asadh- tidaya- 
pralaya-hetu-purusasy= dcintyasya. 

4. IV. 8. 

5. Cf. Bharatiya Vidyd, Vol. VIII, pp. 109-11; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVI, 
pp. 318 ff. 


40 RELIGIOUS LIFE iN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


vata no doubt implies Visnu-worshippers in general,! it was 
sometimes also used in the sense of a particular sect of the 
Vaisnavas. Bana (seventh century) in his Harsacarita® 
mentions the Bhagavata and the PAficaratrika separately in 
a list of different religious sects. A late commentator explains 
these two expressions as Visnu-bhakta and Vaisnava-bheda res- 
pectively. If Bana and the commentator are believed to have 
taken Bhagavata in the sense of Visnu-worshippers in general 
and Pdfcaratrika as one of their sects, we have to assume the 
existence of sects among the Vaisnavas at least from the 
seventh century. A study of the early history of Vaisnavism 
makes it clear that the growth of sectarian or doctrinal differ- 
ence among the early worshippers of Visnu was inevitable. 
We have to remember that the Vaisnavas effected a synthesis 
of different elements, among which prominent mention should 
be made of the worshippers of various divinities such as the 
Vedic Visnu, the deified ancient sage Narayana, and the 
deified Vrsni heroes Vasudeva and Baladeva-Sankarsana. The 
followers of Arjuna, of the Vrsni heroes Pradyumna, Aniruddha 
and Samba, of the Avatdras including the Buddha before their 
identification with Visnu, and of such tribal gods as those of 
the Abhiras may be included in the above list. The fact that 
the early Vaisnavas were a combination of different religious 
sects no doubt points to the existence of some sort of original 
sectarian difference among them. But it is impossible to 
determine the nature of such difference in the present state of 
insufficient information. In a narrow sense, Bhagavatism 
may have indicated the worship of Vasudeva as Visnu, origi- 
nally advocated by the Vrsni people or a section of them. 
Samudragupta therefore probably followed some other form 
of early Vaisnavism like the original worshippers of the Vedic 
Visnu and of the deified sage Narayana who was first identi- 
fied with Vignu and later with Vasudeva. 

From the days of Samudragupta’s son Candragupta II 
(376-414 A.D.), the Gupta emperors were the most influential 
advocates of the Bhagavata form of Vaisnavism. Their patron- 
age seems to have been one of the causes of the great popu- 


1. Cf. Brhatsamhita, 60. 19. 
2. Ed. Parab, pp. 236-37 (Ch. VIII). 


Vatsyavism iN THE GUPTA AND Post-cUPTA AGES 4 


larity of this creed all over the country from the fifth century 
A.D. The title parama-bhagavata (in some cases parama- 
vaisnava or parama-daivata)' is noticed from this time in various 
royal families in different parts of India. On the obverse of 
the Cakravikrama type of the coins of Candragupta II, the king 
is represented as receiving a gift from the god Visnu.? 


II 


An important aspect of the Bhagavata religion of the 
Gupta age was the popularity of the worship of the Avatdras, 
i.e. descents or incarnations of Visnu. The origin of the 
Avatéra conception may be traced in the later Vedic literature. 
Even in the Rgveda,? we have reference to Visnu’s three steps * 
taken for, according to some, ‘the man in distress’. The con- 
ception of the Dwarf (Vamana), Fish (Matsya), and Tortoise 
(Karma) Avatdras, not yet associated with that god, are found 
in the Satapatha and other Brahmanas. There is a story in the 
Satapatha Brakmana,* which speaks of the contention between 
the gods and demons for a place of sacrifice. The latter are 
stated to have agreed to concede as much land as was equal 
to the size of a dwarf. Visnu, the dwarf, was then made to 
lie down. But he grew so big as to encompass the whole earth 
which consequently passed on to the gods. The same Brah- 
mana also says how, ‘having assumed the form of a tortoise, 
Prajapati created offspring’, and ‘in the form of a boar, he 
(Prajapati) raised the earth from the bottom of the ocean.’® 
According to the late Taittiriya Aranyaka, the earth was 
raised from the waters by a black boar with a hundred arms, 
The same work also alludes to the Nysiniha or Man-lion. The 
story of the Great Deluge in the Satapatha Brahmana’ represents 


1. Parama-daivata really means ‘devoted to the gods’. See Indian 
Studies Past and Present, Vol. V, No. 1 (October-December, 1963), pp. 89ff. 
2. Journ. Num. Soc. Ind., Vol. X, p. 104. 
3. VI 49. 13. 
4 125. 
5. XIV. 1. 2; cf. Taittiriya Samhita, VIL. 1. 5; Taittiriya Brahamana, 
3 
6. 
7 


. X16. 
. 1. 8. 18; Vedic Index, Vol. II, p. 130. 


42 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND mebiRVAL INDIA 


the fish that towed Manu’s vessel into safety as a form of 
Prajapati Brahman, and this is sometimes supported by epic 
and Puranic tradition. In later mythology, however, the 
function of the Boar, Fish, and Tortoise forms of Prajapati 
‘Brahman is attributed to Visnu, the most benevolent of the 
gods. In the Gita and some other sections of the Mahabharata, 
Visnu is represented as an ideal divinity and an almighty 
saviour of mankind, as delighting in both moral goodness and 
ritualistic purity, and as incarnating himself from time to time 
in human or animal form for the maintenance of the standard 
of righteousness in the world.! The theory of Avatdra, how- 
ever, presents only a stage of development in the Mahabharata, 
as the earlier sections of the epic contain no list of the incar- 
nations. 

Traditions as to the number of Avatdras varied and their 
later lists, though the usual number, i.e. ten, is generally adhe- 
red to therein, very often offer different names. But the Puranic 
verse enumerating Matsya, Kirma, Varaha, Narasirha, 
Vamana, the three Ramas, Buddha, and Kalki as the ten 
Avataras, almost universally recognized since the mediaeval 
period, is found in a Mamallapuram inscription of about the 
eighth century A.D.* The Avatdéra theory, which must have 
undergone several stages of evolution, appears to be based on 
old tales about strange animals exhibiting mysterious powers 
of helpfulness. Some of them, however, had originally little 
to do with Visnu. As already stated, the Buddhist concep- 
tion of the former Buddhas may have influenced the develop- 
ment of the conception. 

A passage of the late Narayaniya section of the Maha- 


1, The idea of the Gitd (IV. 7-8) that God manifests Himself in all 
ages for the protection of the pious, for the destruction of the wicked, and 
for the establishment of religious order seems to have a universal approach. 
The attempt appears to be to regard all religious teachers of the world as 
manifestations of God Himself. 

2. Mem. Arch. Surv. Ind., No. 26, p. 5- 

3. Cf. the conception of Daksinaraya, the tiger-divinity of the 
Sundarbans. Stories of mysterious helpers living in the waters of certain 
bils (lakes) are still current in rural Bengal; cf. Journ. Roy. As. Soc. Beng., 
Vol. XV, p. 106. 


vaigyavism in tHk cubta AND Post-cuUPta AGES 43 


bharata! mentions only four Avatdras, viz., Boar, Dwarf, Man- 
lion, and Man (i.e. Vasudeva-Krsna). Another passage 
of the same section? adds the deified heroes Rama-Bhargava 
and Rama-Dasarathi to the list making a total of six Avataras, 
while in a third passage* a list of ten incarnations is offered, 
by adding, to the above six, Harnsa, Kirma, Matsya and 
Kalki (or Kalkin). The Matsya Purdna,4 which also gives 
a list of ten incarnations, states that there were three divine 
Avataras, viz., Narayana, Narasirnha, and Vamana, besides 
seven human Avatdras, viz., Dattatreya, Mandhatr, Rama- 
Jamadagnya, Rama-D4asarathi, Veda-Vya4sa, Buddha, and 
Kalki. The above section also occurs in the Vayu Purana;5 
but there the name of Krsna _ replaces that of the Buddha. 
The Harivamsa* quotes another list of ten incarnations which 
omits Matsya, Kirma, one of the Ramas and the Buddha 
to make room for Pauskaraka, Datta (Dattatreya), KeSava 
(Krsna) and Vy4sa.?_ There are no less than four lists of the 
Avataras in the Bhdgavata Purdna;® but they are different from 
one another. One of these lists* admits that the incarnations 
are really innumerable (cf. the Avatara theory of the Gitd), but 
mentions Brahman, Varaha, Narada, Nara and Narayana, 
the philosopher Kapila, Dattatreya, Yajiia, the Jain Tir- 
thankara Rsabha, the ancient king Prthu, Matsya, Kirma, 
the physician Dhanvantari, Mohini, Narasirnha, Vamana, 
Rama-Jamadagnya, Veda-Vyasa, Radma-Dafarathi, Rama 
Haladhara, Krsna, the Buddha and Kalki. The Agni Purdna!® 
states that the incarnations including the past and future ones 


XIL. 349. 37- 
939: 77-99- 
. Cit. 104. 
a 237-48. 
71-104. 
i Dale CE also Brahma Puréna, Ch. 213. 
pans and the Buddha are represented as Avatdras in a Vaignava 
temple of about the seventh century at Sirpur in the Raipur District. The 
figures of Narasiraha, Vamana, Varaha, and Krsna (holding the Govar- 
dhana over the cow-settlement) are found in the Dasdvatira temple at 
Ellora attributed to the eighth century. Some of the Avatéras are also 
represented in the Pallava temple at Mamallapuram. 
8. I. 3; Il. 7; VI. 8; XI. 4. 
g I.3. 
10. Chs. 2-16; cf. Vardha Purdpa, Chs. 39-48. 


Yom sene 


44 RELiciovs LIFE iN ANCIENT AND MEDIAVAL INDIA 


are really innumerable; but describes only ten Avatéras inclu- 
‘ding the Buddha and Kalki, while the Garuda Purana! men- 
tions no less than nineteen Avatdras (called mirtis), viz., 
Matsya, Trivikrama, Vamana, Narasirnha, Rama, Varaha, 
Narayana, Kapila, Datta, Hayagriva, Makaradhvaja, 
‘Narada, Kirma, Dhanvantari, Sesa, Yajfia, Vyasa, the 
Buddha and Kalki. The Paficaratra work Ahirbudhnya Sam- 
hitd,? which may be assigned to a date earlier than the eighth 
century, mentions thirtynine vibhavas or manifestations of the 
Supreme Being, which include almost all the. well-known 
Avataras, viz., EkaSrnga-tanu (i.e. Matsya), Vihangama 
(ie. Harhsa), Kamathesvara (i.e. Kirma), Varaha, Nara- 
sirhha, Vamanadeha, Parasurama (i.e. Rama-Jamadagnya), 
Rama Dhanurdhara (i. e. Rama-Dafarathi), Ananta (i.e. 
Rama Haladhara), Kalki and Krsna. In other early Pajica- 
ratra works like the Visvaksena Samhita, the Buddha, Arjuna 
and others are included in the list of secondary Avatdras. The 
Buddha is mentioned as one of the ten Avatdras in the 
DaSdvataracarita of Ksemendra (c. 1050 A.D.) of Kashmir 
and in the Gitagovinda of Jayadeva (c. 1200 A.D.) of Eastern 
India, and also, as we have seen above, he is mentioned as an 
Avatéra in a Puranic verse quoted in an eighth century ins- 
cription of the Tamil country. Jayadeva eulogizes Krsna 
as Visnu himself and sings in praise of his ten Avatdras, viz., 
Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-lion, Dwarf, Rama-Bhargava, 
Rama-D&asarathi, Rama Haladhara, the Buddha and Kalki. 
This list came to be regarded as the most authentic since the 
early mediaeval period, though there was still some difference 
of opinion in regard to the position of Krsna. The Belava 
(Dacca District, East Bengal) inscription of c. 1125 A.D., 
which belongs to a paramavaisava ruler of East Bengal, 
mentions Krsna as gopi-Sata-kelikara and Mahabhdrata-siitra- 
dhara and also as arfakyt-dvatara, i.e., a partial incarnation. But 


1. I. 202. 

2. Schrader, Introduction to the Paiicardtra and the Ahirbudhnya Samhita, 
p. 42. For the origin of the Avatéras out of the wyiihas, as in the Visvaksena 
Sarhité and the Padma Tantra, see ibid., p. 48. 

3. Later Vaisnava literature recognized three kinds of Avatdras, viz. 
(1) complete incarnation (parpdvatéra), (2) incarnation of a portion of the 
power of a divine being called amédvatara, and (3) partial incarnation of 


VAI§NAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 45 


an Ajmer inscription’ of about the same age mentions Krsna 
as the eighth among the ten Avatdras of Visnu. 

The popularity of the worship of several Avatdras is 
attested by the Indian epigraphic records of the period between 
the fourth and the eighth century A.D. The name Matsya- 
gupta (literally, ‘protected by the Fish’) occurring in an 
inscription* of 101 A.D. seems to indicate the popularity of 
the Fish-god before the rise of the Guptas, although he may 
or may not have been identified with Visnu at that date. 

The worship of Parasurama in Western India is indicated 
by another early record of the second century A.D.; but his 
being conceived as an Avatdra of Visnu does not seem to be 
so early. An inscription® of Saka Rsabhadatta at Nasik men- 
tions Ramatirtha which is known from the Mahdbhdrata‘ to 
have been the holy abode of Rama-Jamadagnya situated 
in the suburbs of Sirparaka (modern Sopara in the Thana 
District of Maharashtra), not far to the north of Bombay. 

It is usually believed that the worship of Rama-Dasarathi 
was not popular in the Gupta age. But the idea seems to 
be wrong. As regards the Avatdra theory, it has to be remem- 
bered that the apotheosis and worship of an incarnation are 
earlier than his identification with Visnu. K4lidasa’s Raghu- 
varhsa (X. 44,XI.85, etc.) speaks of Rama, son of Dagaratha, 
as an incarnation of Visnu. The Vakataka queen Prabhavati 
(fifth century), daughter of Candragupta II, was devoted 
to Bhagavat RAmagirisvamin (lord of the Ramagiri, i. ¢., 
modern Ramtek near Nagpur), who appears to be identical 
with Rama-Daéarathi.6 The worship of the Iksvaku king in 
the sixth century is indicated by Varahamihira’s Brha- 
tsamhita® containing rules for the construction of Rama’s 


a more or less temporary character called dve‘a. Rama-Dasarathi and 
Krsna are often regarded as complete Avatdras. But there seems to have 
been difference of opinion on these points. 

1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXIX, p. 179. 

2. Ibid., Vol. XXVIII, p. 43. 

3. Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 161. 

4. IIL, 85. 42. 

5+ Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 415. Cf. the Meghadita (I. 12) re- 
ference to the footprints of Raghupati on the Ramgiri and the worship of 
Rama, Sita and Laksmana in the temples of Ramtek at the present time. 

6. 58.30. 


46 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


image. Saint KulaSekhara(c. 8th century), king of Kerala in 
the Malabar coast, was a votary of Rama. 

The Dwarf (Vamana) is implied by the epithets 
Indr-dnuja. and Upendra (both meaning Indra’s younger 
brother) applied to Visnu in records like the Bihar pillar 
inscription! of the fifth century. The Junagadh inscription*® 
of Skandagupta also refers to Visnu ‘who, for the sake of 
the happiness of the lord of the gods, seized back from Bali the 
goddess of wealth and splendour’. 

The identification of Krsna and Visnu is alluded to in 
the name Visnugopa,* popular among the early Pallavas from 
the fourth century, and in epigraphic passages mentioning the 
god Visnu as ‘a mighty bee on the water-lily which is the face 
of Jambavati’,“ or as ‘Madhava, whose feet are graced:by the 
attentions of Sri (Laksmi) and who is born from Vasudeva’.5 
The Maukhari chief Anantavarman installed an image of 
Krsna in a cave in the Pravara-giri (Barabar hills) in the 
fifth century.® 

The Narasirhha incarnation is alluded to in such epi- 
graphs as the Alina plates.? But the most popular Avatdra 
appears to have been the Boar. who was widely worshipped 
in different parts of India in the Gupta age. The legend of 
this Avatdra of Visnu seems to have been originally associated 
with that of the Great Deluge. A stone image of Varaha bear- 
ing an inscription® of the reign of king Toramana (c. 500 
A.D.) records the construction of a stone temple of ‘Narayana 
who has the form of a boar’ at Eran in the Saugor District 
of Madhya Pradesh. A Damodarpur (North Bengal) ins- 
cription® of the time of Budhagupta (477-95 A.D.) speaks 
of the gods Svetavarahasvamin and Kokamukhasvamin, both 
representing the Varaha Avatdra. The temples of these gods 


1. Select Inscriptions, Vo. I, p. 316. See also the Alina plates of 766 
A. D. (Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. III, p. 174). 
Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 300. 
Cf. Kalidasa’s Meghadita, I. 15. 
Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. III, p. 270. 
Ibid., p. 206. 
Ibid., pp. 222 ff. 
Ibid., p. 188. See Satkari Mookerji Vol., pp. 42 f. 
Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, pp. 396 £ 
Ibid., pp. 328 ff. See Sircar, Geog. Auc. Med. Ind., pp. 217 ff. 


eer agrees 


VAISNAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 47 


stood on the Himavac-chikhara (peak of the Himalayas) 
apparently at Varahachatra (Varaha-ksetra) at the junction 
of the rivers Kausiki and Koka in Nepal.1 In the fifth 
century, an inhabitant of North Bengal seems to have visited 
the Varaha-ksetra or Kokamukha-tirtha on pilgrimage and 
constructed temples for the installation of two deities of the 
same names near Damodarpur in the Dinajpur District of 
North Bengal. A Kadamba record* from Tagare belonging 
to the sixth century points to the popularity of the Varaha 
Avatara in the far south of India. The early Calukyas of 
Badami had the boar as their family emblem which they are 
said to have obtained through the grace of Narayana. Most 
of the inscriptions of these monarchs and their subordinates 
begin with a stanza in praise of the Boar form of Visnu. 
There is only one reference* to the independent 
worship of the Vyiiha or Avatéra Balarama-Sankarsana, but 
none to Pradyumna and Aniruddha, in the inscriptions of the 
Gupta age. The Vyaha doctrine, however, «finds a promi- 
nent place in the Paficaratra literature, some of the Sarnhitas 
being composed, according to Schrader, in Kashmir between 
the fourth and the eighth century. The Amarakosa (c. sixth 
century ) also refers to all the Vyihas. It seems that the doctrine 
was not quite popular with the ordinary Visnu-worshippers 
of the Gupta period. A modified form of the Vyitha-vdda can, 
however, be traced in the joint worship of Baladeva, Krsna 
and Subhadra or Ekanarns4 (sometimes identified with 
Subhadra, but sometimes with the Devi born as the daughter 
of Nanda-gopa). Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita* gives rules 
for the construction of the joint images of Baladeva and 
Krsna with Ekanarnéa standing between them. An inscrip- 
tion® of the thirteenth century from Bhubaneswar, referring 
to the adoration of Baladeva, Krsna and Subhadra, points 
to the popularity of their worship in mediaeval Orissa. 
Some scholars believe that Bhagavatism and Paficaratra 


1. Cf. Ind. Hist. Quart., Vol. XXI, pp. 56-60. 
2. The Successors of the Sitavahanas ia the Lower Deccan, p. 304. 
3. See the Umachal inscription (5th century A. D.) from the 
Kamrup District, Assam, in Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXI, pp. 67 ff. See below. 
4. 58. 37-39. 
5. Ep. Ind. , Vol. XIII, p. 155. 


48 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


had possibly been related at the beginning, but became comp- 
letely different in the Gupta period.1_ They further suggest 
that the Vyiha-vdda was exclusively associated with Paficaratra, 
and that it was completely different from the Avatdra-vada 
in its ideological basis. The first of the two suggestions cannot 
be proved in the present state of our knowledge. The second 
also seems to go against the evidence of Paficaratra works like 
the Ahirbudhnya Samhita and Visvaksena Samhita, discussed 
above. It is clear that, while the Vyihavddins were very much 
influenced by the Avatdra theory as early as the days of the 
early Paficaratra Sambhitas, Krsna and Balarama were re- 
cognized as Avataras in the Vaisnava literature from practi- 
cally the same age. We have, however, to note that there 
are indications regarding the existence of doctrinal differences 
amongst the Visnu-worshippers of the Gupta age, to which 
reference has already been made above. This difference, the 
nature of which cannot be determined with certainty, appears 
to be illustrated, as indicated above, by the Harsacarita and 
its commentary which make a distinction between ‘the Bhaga- 
vatas and the P&Aficaratrikas. Even in the Gupta age, the 
Pajicaratrikas, who may have favoured some of the doctrines 
inculcated by the ancient sage Narayana, were probably 
sometimes regarded as a sect of the Bhagavatas, the term 
bhdgavata (essentially, a worshipper of Vasudeva-Visnu accor- 
ding to the vidhi or rules of the Satvatas) being occasionally 
used, together with the term vaisnava, in the sense of Visnu- 
worshippers in general. The age of the Guptas witnessed 
the evolution of neo-Vaisnavism from the tribal form of 
Bhagavatism which was originally practised by the members 
of the Yadava-Satvata-Vrsni clan. 


Ill 


Another interesting feature of Vaisnavism in the Gupta 
age is the conception of Laksmi or Sri as the consort of Visnu. 
This goddess is called Srima Devata in a Barhut inscrip- 
tion’ of the Suiga age and Sri’s temple is referred to in the 


1. History of Bengal (Dacca University), Vol. I, p. 402. 
2. Barua and Sinha, Barhut Inscriptions, pp. 73-74. Barua distinguishes 
Siri and Sirima Devata. Prakrit Sirima actually stands for Sanskrit Srimati. 


VAISNAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 49 


Kautiliya ArthaSastra.1 Wer popularity is indicated by her 
appearance on early Indian coins such as the inscribed coins 
of Kausambi and Ujjayini, the issues of some early kings of 
Ayodhya and Mathura, and those of the Satraps of Mathura 
and of Pantaleon, Agathokles, Maues, and Azilises.* The 
representation of Laksmi is conspicuous on the coins of the 
Imperial Guptas and some of their successors. Sri-Laksmi 
is a Vedic goddess and, according to the Brahmana literature, 
she is full of riches, of which the gods despoil her.* Her con- 
ception as the wife of Visnu is, however, considerably late. 
The Junagadh inscription of Skandagupta mentions Visnu 
as a perpetual resort of Laksmi who is represented as Vasu- 
deva’s wife in the Sarnath inscription of Prakataditya. In 
the Aphsad inscription of Adityasena, Damodara is spoken 
of as the slayer of demons, and the feet of Madhava, son of 
Vasudeva, as graced by the attentions of Sri. The kings of 
Sarabhapura and some other royal families adopted the Gaja- 
Lakgsmi device, found on the Barhut sculptures and some 
early coins, as their emblem. A Kadamba record of c. 500 
A.D. begins with a stanza in adoration of the Bhagavat with 
Sti on his breast and Brahman on the lotus sprung from his 
navel.4 The Earth (Bhd), called Vaisnavi in the Mahabharata 
and many early epigraphic records, was conceived as a second 
wife of Visnu whose dhydna describes the god as Indira- 
Vasumati-sarSobhi-parsva-dvaya.6 The early Calukya emperors 
claiming to be Sri-Prthivi-vallabha (lord of Sri and Prthivi) 
apparently claimed to be incarnations of Visnu.* Sarasvati is 


Another carly representation of the godess has been traced in a Besnagar 

sculpture of about the second century B. C. Cf. Baner‘ea, op. cit., pp. 
0-71. 

a Me IL. 4. 

2. Cf. Allan, op. cit, pp. 131, 149, 173. ff, 252; Whitehead, 
Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, Vol. 1, pp. 16, 135; Banerjea, 
op. cit., p. 151. 

3. Banerjea, DHI, 1956, pp. 371-72. 

4. The Sue:ssors of the Sdtavahanas, p. 292, note 1. 

5: Sircar, Ind. Ep., p. 177; Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. Vignu— 

udyat =koti-tivdkar-abham=anifar: Sarikharh gadam pankojam 

cakrart bibhratam= Indird-Vasumati-samsobhi-pariva-dtayam | 
kotir-@ngada-héra-kundala-dharam — pitém*ararh kaustubh-od= 

diptam vifcadharam sva-vaksasi lasac-chrivatsa-cihnam bhoje \l 
6. Cf. Ind. Cult., Vol. I, pp. 131-33- 


50 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


not referred to in the inscriptions of the Gupta age as Visnu’s 
wife. Indeed it is a late conception popular only in certain 
parts of the country, especially in Eastern India. 

The Sri-Laksmi cult may have something to do with 
the worship of Greek goddesses, especially Pallas Athene, which 
was introduced in India by the Indo-Greek kings as suggested 
by their coins from the beginning of the second century B.C. 
The Sankhya doctrine of Purusa and Prakrti also appears 

* to have considerably influenced the conception of Laksmi 
as the consort of Visnu, as well as of the Devi as the consort 
of Siva, 


IV 


In the Gadhwa inscription! of Kumaragupta I and many 
other records, Visnu is mentioned, without reference to 
his name, only as the Bhagavat. The Eran inscription* of 
484 A.D. describes the god Janardana as ‘the four-armed lord 
whose couch is the broad waters of the four oceans, who is 
the cause of the continuance, production, destruction, etc., of 
the universe, and whose ensign is Garuda’. A Kadamba 
inscription of the sixth century refers to the god Hari as jagat- 
pravrtti-samhdra-srsti-mayd-dhara. The god Cangu-Narayana, 
ive., Narayana on Cafgu or Garuda, seems to have been 
in worship in a temple on the Dola-parvata in Nepal before 
the incision of an inscription of 464 A.D.‘ The god is des- 
cribed in various epigraphs as the troubler of the demons called 
Punyajana, as the supporting pillar of the three worlds (in 
the form of the boar), as the slayer of the demons Madhu and 
Mura, and as the bearer of the disc, the club, the bow of 
horn, the sword called Nandaka, the jewel called Kaustubha, 
and the garland of lotuses. The slumber of Madhusiidana 
during the four months of the rainy season is alluded to in 
the Gangdhar inscription of 423 A.D. The Alina copper- 
plate grant (766 A.D.) appears to refer to the Parijataharana 


1. Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. III, p. 41. 

2. Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, pp. 326 ff. 

3. The Successors of the Sétavahanas, p. 297, note 1. 
4+ Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, pp. 366 ff. 

5+ Ibid., pp. 379 ff. 


VAISNAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 51 


episode. The Mandasor inscription’ of 404 A.D. probably 
refers to the Sakra festival as dear to Krsna. The same 
record describes Vasudeva as the lord (vibku) who is Saranya, 
jagad-vasa, aprameya, and aja (cf. atma-bhi of the Jaunpur, 
inscription of the Maukharis)* and as a great tree with the gods 
as its fruits, the heavenly damsels as its fine shoots, the celes- 
tial palaces as its many branches, and the rains as its flow 
of honey. In this, there seems to be an imperfect allusion to 
the Visvaripa conception of Visnu, the germ of which is pro- 
bably to be traced to a Rgvedic idea* and to the Upanisadic 
concept of Brahman. 

The influence of Vaisnava mythology is also noticed in 
the archaeological remains in different parts of the country. 
The bas-reliefs at Badami, which belong to the age of the early 
rulers of the Calukya family, some of whom were paramabhaga- 
vatas, depict Visnu lying on the serpent Ananta with Laksmi 
rubbing his. feet, the Boar, Dwarf and Man-lion incarnations, 
and also Hari-Hara. They also depict many legends of the 
Krsna saga. A temple at Deogarh (Jhansi District, U.P.), 
probably assignable to the sixth century, has the representation 
of Visnu reclining on Ananta-naga, while a sculpture at 
Pathari in Central India, probably belonging to the sixth 
century, is believed to represent the new-born Krsna lying by 
his mother’s side. There are representations of the Avatdras 
and other deities of the Visnu pantheon also in the Dasavatara 
and Kailasanatha temples at Ellora, attributed to the eighth 
century, as well as in the works of art at Mamallapuram near 
Madras, assignable approximately to the same age. A sculp- 
ture from Paharpur (North Bengal), attributed to the sixth 
or seventh century, represents Krsna and his consort (pro- 
bably Rukmini). Her identification with Radha is rendered 
improbable by the fact that we have no undoubted reference 
to Radha in genuine epigraphic or literary records of an 
early date. 

Some scholars believe that the Khoh copper-plate ins- 
cription of the fifth or sixth century® records a grant of land 
Ibid., pp. 377 ff. 

See Corp. Jus. Ind., Vol. IIT, BP: 229. 
X. 90; cf. 1. 155.65 VIL. 106.6. 


See R. D. Banerji, Bas-reliefs of Badami, pp. 24 ff. 
Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 370. es 


gee es 


52 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


in favour of the Bhagavat and Aditya-bhattaraka, pointing to 
the solar association of Vaisnavism. But the suggestion is 
unjustifiable as the language of the record seems to suggest that 
a person named Visnunandin constructed a temple of the 
Bhagavat and obtained from the king half of a village on behalf 
of the god, while three merchants named Saktinaga, Kuma- 
ranaga and Skandanaga who had built a temple of the Sun- 
god, secured for that deity the other half of the same village. 
The inscription therefore does not prove that the same person 
worshipped both Visnu and the Sun-god. That the Sun-god 
was not adored by the Vaisnavas in the fifth century is indi- 
cated by the degradation of Samba, a champion of the solar 
cult and sometimes identified with the Sun-god, in the esti- 
mation of the Vaisnavas. This seems to be also supported by 
verses 21-22 of the Gangdhar inscription of 423 A. D. This 
epigraph, however, speaks of the building of a temple, full of 
dakinis, by a devotee of Visnu, in honour of the divine Mothers, 
‘who utter loud and tremendous shouts in jov and stir up the 
oceans with the mighty wind rising from the magic rites of 
their religion (tantra). It evidently points to the influence of 
the Tantra cult on the Vaisnavas of the fifth century A.D. 
It may be pointed out in this connection that the Maukhari 
chief Anantavarman installed in the same century an image 
of Krsna in one of the caves in the Nagarjuni hills and also 
the images of Bhitapati (Siva) and the Devi, ic. Durga (or 
probably a joint image styled Ardhandrifvara), in another 
cave in the same hill. This apparently points to an early 
accord between Vaisnavism, on the one hand, and the 
worshippers of Siva and Sakti, on the other.1 The early 
Calukyas of Badami, who had Visnu as their family god, 
similarly proclaimed their devotion to the god K4rttikeya and 
the Seven Mothers. In this connection we may also mention 
the cult of Hari-Hara (a combination of Visnu and Siva), 
Devi’s réle as the daughter of Krsna’s foster-father Nanda- 
gopa,? and the Trimirti conception of the gods Brahman, 
Visnu and Siva. The attempt to identify different gods and 
to conciliate rival religious sects is old. But, although one 
1. Cf. Journ. Roy. As. Soc. Beng., Letters, Vol. XIV, pp. 104 ff. 


2. Cf. the Harivamsa and Bhisa’s Balacarita. 
3- The same attempt is noticed jp the enumeration of the 1c8 or 





VAISNAVISM IN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 53 


god, viz., Agni, is represented as the same as Varuna, Mitra 
Indra and some other gods and goddesses, in such an early 
text as the Rgveda,! both sectarianism and attempt at conci- 
liation were probably due mainly to Nonaryan inspiration. 
A gold coin of Huviska is believed to represent a composite 
image of Visnu and Siva, while a Gandhara relief has been 
supposed to be the representation of a three-headed and six- 
armed Trimirti.2 These cases are, however, not entirely free 
from doubt. Adoration to Hari-Hara-Hiranyagarbha or to 
Hara-Narayana Brahman are found in several early Kadamba 
inscriptions of the fifth and sixth centuries.? As already noted 
above, the representation of Hari-Hara is found in a cave 
temple of the sixth century at Badami. 


Vv 


We have already referred to the adoration of Vasudeva 
in the Chinna (Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh) inscription 
of the close of the second century A.D. and to the name of 
Pallava Visnugopa in records dating from the fourth century. 
Reference has also been made to an inscription from the 
Guntur District, which may be assigned to the middle of the 
fourth century, as speaking of a temple of Narayana.‘ The 
inscriptions of the Gupta age occasionally refer to temples or 
flagstaffs of the god Visnu-Narayana-VAsudeva in all parts of 
India—in Nepal and the upper reaches of the Beas in the north, 
in Bengal in the east, in Kathiawad in the west, and in the 
trans-Krishna region in the south. In the southernmost parts 
of India, some of the early Pallava and early Western Ganga 
kings were devout Bhagavatas. The worship of Visnu was also 
prevalent in the kingdom of the early Kadambas; but the 
popular religion appears to have been Jainism in that area. 
Some of the early Kadamba rulers, who called themselves 


1,000 names of gods and goddesses. Cf. Journ. Roy. As. Soc. Beng., Letters, 
Vol. XIV, p. 24 and note. 

1. See Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, p. 95. 

2. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 1373 Arch. Surv. Ind., Annual Report, 1913- 
14, pp. 276 ff., Plate LXXII, fig. a. 

3- Cf. The Successors of the Satavhanas, pp. 278, 190- 

4. Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, pp. 443 ff. 


{2 bel os 


; J 
Jana vels Chaya Swah 


“2 Geuinde 


fae Arsns 


\V 


<= 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MéDiEvAL inDiA 


brahmanya or parama-brahmanya,1 may have been Vaisnavas. 
Several southern rulers claim to have been kaliyuga-dos-dvasanna- 
dharm-oddharana-nitya-sannaddha.* Probably they tried to 
suppress heretical doctrines like Buddhism and Jainism, to 
revive the Brahmanical religion, and possibly also to represent 
themselves, like king Samudragupta of the North, as incar- 
nations of the god Visnu, emulating his doings in the Boar form. 
There is another indication of the influence of Vaisnava Brah- 
manism in the Far South of India. This is the importance 
attached to go-brahmana (i.e., the cow and Brahmana) in 
some Pallava and Kadambarecords,® exactly asin the Vaisnava 
records from Eran.‘ Certain later sections of the Mahabha- 
rata® represent Visnu as the benefactor of the cow and the 
Brahmana (go-Brahmana-hita). ‘This indicates the association 
of the Brahmanas with Vignu-worship, and also the amportant 
position they attained in social estimation. 

There is some evidence to show that the association of 
Vasudevism with the Pandya country is old. In the fourth 
century B.C., the grammarian Katyayana® explains the word 
Pandya as ‘one sprung from an individual of the clan of the 
Pandus or the king of their country’. Katyadyana therefore 
associates the Pandya country with the Pandus or Pandavas 
whom epic traditions intimately connect with Vasudeva. Greek 
tradition, attributed to Megasthenes,’ associates the name 
of the Pandya country with its queen named Pandaia who is 
said to have been the daughter of Herakles (Vasudeva-Krsna). 
It is possible to think that there was a section of the Vrsni 
people among the colonizers of the Pandya country. At least 
this seems to be suggested by the name ofits capital Madurai 
which is the same as Mathura and is often specifically called 
the Mathura of the South. This probably explains how the 
Tamil country soon became the greatest stronghold of the 
Bhagavata religion and gave birth to the Alvars and their 
compositions in Tamil on bhakti and the Krsna cult. Ancient 


Cf. Suc. Sat., pp. 130, 266. 

Ibid., pp. 156, 199 

Sce ibid., pp. 194, 198, 269, 298. 

Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, and ed., pp. 336, 422. 

XII. 47. 94- 

On Panini, IV. 1.168. 

Majumdar, The Classical Accounts of India, pp. 222-23. 


yoyte rs 


VAIsNavism in THE GUPTA AND Post-cUPTA AGES 55 
Tamil works prove the popularity of the worship of Krsna 
and Baladeva in the Tamil land about the.age of the Guptas. 
In the Silappadikaram (sixth century A.D.) there are refe- 
rences to temples of the two gods at Madurai, KAveripattinam 
and other cities... They are described by the poet Kari- 
Kannan of KaAveripattinam as the dark-complexioned god 
bearing the wheel and the white-complexioned one having the 


flag of the palmyra.? 
VI 


The best evidence of the great influence exercised by the 
Bhagavata religion over the Tamil country is furnished by 
the devotional songs of the Alvars consisting the Vaisnava 
Prabandham of four thousand verses in classical Tamil. The 
Alvars sang in praise of Narayana and Krsna as well as the 
Avataras DéaSarathi-Rama, Balarama and Vamana. Krsna’s 
dalliance with the gopis or cowherd girls was also well known 
to them. A female Alvar is known to have regarded her- 
self as a gopi and the god (in the form of Sri-Ranganatha of 
the Srirangam temple) as her lover. The Alvars knew the 
principal Puranas and revered the Vedic literature. The reci- 
tation of God’s names, meditation on His different forms, 
and their worship in temples like those at Srirangam, Tirupati 
and Alagarkoil were inculcated by them. The activities of 
the Alvars, representing the emotional side of Tamilian 
Vaisnavism, and their successors, the Acaryas, representing 
its intellectual side, must have given rise to the tradition re- 
corded in the Bhagavata Purdna,* a work referred to by Al- 
Birani‘ about 1030 A.D., that large numbers of the wor- 
shippers of Vasudeva-Visnu flourished in the Dravida or 
Tamil country in the Kali age when they were rare elsewhere 
in India. 7 

The date of the Alvars is a disputed question; but they 
may be roughly placed between the sixth and ninth centuries 
A.D. All of them appear to have flourished before the early 


1. Kanakasabhai, The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago, pp. 13, 26. 
2. Ibid., pp. 68-69. 

3. XI 5. 38-40 

4. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, Vol. I, p. 131. 


56 erictéus LiPe IN ANGiENT AND MEDIEVAL iNDiA 


Vaisnava Acaryas—Nathamuni (tenth-eleventh century) and 
his disciple Pundarikaksa (eleventh century) and grandson 
Yamunacarya (eleventh century). The Vaisnava tradition 
of the Tamil country speaks of twelve Alvars, viz. (1) Poygai 
Alwar or Saro-yogin, (2) Bhitattalvar or Bhiita-yogin, (3) 
Pey Alvar or Mahad-yogin or Bhranta-yogin, (4) Tirumalisai 
Alvar or Bhaktisara, (5) Nammialvar or Sathakopa, (6) 
Madhurakavi, (7) Kulasekhara, (8) Periyalvar or Visnu- 
citta, (9) Andal or Goda, (10) Tondaradippodi or Bhak- 
tanghrirenu, (11) Tiruppan Alvar or Yogivahana, and (12) 
Tirumangai Alvar or Parakala. The first four Alvars are 
believed to have flourished in the land of the Pallavas and the 
last three in that of the Colas. The seventh hailed from 
Kerala and the rest from the Pandya country. They came 
from different strata of the society. Only the eighth of the 
above list is stated to have been a Brahmana, although some 
regard him as a Pariah. The fifth was a VellaJa (agriculturist ) 
by caste and, while the seventh was a king, the twelfth came 
from a Kalla family, i.e., a family of robbers. 

The three earliest Alvars, who were supposed to be 
mythical in origin, are said to have composed a hundred stanzas 
each. They often refer to the Avataras of Visnu, especially 
Trivikrama and Krsna, and cannot be assigned to a date 
earlier than the Gupta age, as has sometimes been suggested. 
Tirumaligai, the fourth Alvar, is regarded by some to 
have been a contemporary of Pallava Mahendravarman I 
(c. 600-30 A.D.). The fifth Alvar, named Namma]var or 
Sathakopa, composed nearly one thousand and three hundred 
stanzas in four works, of which Tiruvdymoli (‘the holy word of 
the mouth’), with 1102 stanzas, forms the fourth and the last 
part of the Nédlayira Divya Prabandham. Madhurakavi, the 
sixth Alvar, was a worshipper of his guru Nammal]var. The 
seventh Alvar Kulusekhara was a king of Travancore. The 
Mukundamala, attributed to him, quotes a verse from the 
Bhagavata Puréna.1 Bhandarkar* is inclined to assign him to 
the first half of the twelfth century; but there are no sufficient 
grounds for the date. Visnucitta, the eighth Alvar, composed 


1. XL. 2. 36. 
2. Op. cit., pp. 4g f. 


Vaigyavism iN THE GUPTA AND POST-GUPTA AGES 57. 


numerous songs. The ninth Alvar, named Andal was Visnu- 
citta’s daughter. She has 173 stanzas to her credit, which are 
highly mystical. Tondaradippodi, the tenth Alvar composed 
two small works, and the eleventh Alvar named Tiruppan 
composed only ten stanzas. The twelfth and last Alvar Tiru- 
mangai composed 1361 verses (in six works) out of the 4000 
constituting the celebrated Nalayira Divya Prabhandham attri- 
buted to the Alvars. There is a story that Tirumangai was 
a contemporary of the Saiva saint Tirujfiana Sambandhar who 
was himself a contemporary of the Pallava king Narasirnha- 
varman I (c. 630-68 A.D.) of Kaiici. If this tradition be true, 
Tirumangai Alvar has to be assigned to the seventh century 
A.D., although he is placed by some scholars in the eighth 
century. 


VII 


There is evidence to show that, with the spread of 
Indian culture outside the limits of India, the Visnu cult also 
spread abroad, at least from the early centuries of the Christian 
era. In Java, a king named Pirnavarman, probably be- 
longing to the fifth century A.D., is compared to Visnu in 
the Ci-arutén rock inscription.1 He was deified probably as 
an incarnation of Visnu and his footprints are known to have 
been worshipped. 

The earliest incription of the ancient kingdom of Campa 
in Annam, referring to Visnu together with MaheSvara, 
Uma, Brahman and other deities, is on the My-son stelae 
belonging to the fifth-sixth century.? Laksmi, Sri or Padma, 
wife of Visnu, was also a well-known goddess in Campa. In 
a later period the kings of Campa, like some of the Indian 
rulers, often claimed to have been incarnations of Visnu. 

The earliest inscriptions referring to the the spread of 
Vaisnavism in Cambodia (earlier Fu-nan and later Kambuja) 
are to be assigned to the beginning of the sixth century. The 
Neak Ta Dambang Dek (province of Treang in South 


1. Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 468, note 4. 
2. Ibid., p. 474. 
3+ Cf. Majumdar, Kambujadeéa, pp. 33, 40-42- 


56 Ruticiods Like in ANcIRNT AND mibmeVAL iNDIA 


Combodia) inscription’ begins with an invocation to Visnu 
and refers to Sri as the wife of that god, while the Thup Muoi 
inscription of Gunavarman records a donation to the image 
of Visnu called Cakratirthasvamin, which is said to have 
been consecrated by Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, Upa- 
vedas and Vedangas as well as sages versed in the fruti. This 
record also speaks of the Bhagavatas and refers to the cult of 
bhakti and to the theory of Karman. Although, as in India 
itself, the most popular god in early Cambodia, as also in other 
parts of Greater India, seems to have been Siva, the com- 
posite form of Siva and Visnu, styled | Sankara-Narayana, 
Sambhu-Visnu (name applied to a liga), Hara-Acyuta, 
Hari-Sankara, etc., was also in great favour. 


1. Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, 1965 ed., pp. 5oof. 
2. Ibid., pp. 511 ff. 


Cuapter IV 


PURUSOTTAMA-JAGANNATHA 
I 


The town of Puri in the District of the same name, on the 
sea coast of Orissa, is celebrated throughout the world for the 
great temple of the god who is called Purusottama or Jagannatha 
and is identified with Visnu. As a matter of fact, the name of 
the town is a part of the fuller name Purusottama-puri or 
Jagannatha-puri, i.e. the city of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha. 
It is sometimes also called Purusottama which is likewise a part 
of the fuller name Purusottama-puri or Purusottama-ksetra. 
Puri is now considered to be the greatest of the East Indian 
tirthas (holy places), although this status was originally enjoyed 
by Gangasagara situated at the junction of the Bhagirathi and 
the Bay of Bengal. Garngasagara gave place to Puri, as_ the 
greatest tirtha about the eastern border of India, finally during 
the reign of the Imperial Gangas of Orissa (from the 12th cen- 
tury onwards ),! although the latter had already become popular 
a few centuries earlier, as we shall see below. 

The Mahdrajas of Puri may be regarded as the modern 
representatives of the imperial rulers of medieval Orissa, and 
it is well known that they consider themselves to be servants of 
the god Purusottama-Jagannatha, sweeping the compound of 
the Puri temple being one of their important duties on the 
occasion of the Car Festival (Ratha-ydtrd) of the said god.* 
There is evidence to prove that the Hindu rulers holding sway 
over medieval Orissa considered the god Purusottama-Jagan- 
natha to be the ruler of their empire and regarded their own 
selves as mere viceroys of the deity. 


1. Proc, IHG, 1947, pp. 91 ff.; Sircar, Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. Ind., 
pp. 178 ff. 

2, The car festival of gods and godesses is popular in South India and 
was probably a Dravidian religious institution. It seems to have been intro- 
duced in the worship of Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri by the Gaigas who 
had come to Orissa from the South. See JAS, 4th Series, Vol. VI, No. 1, 
1962, p. 9. 


60 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The fiction of the real ruler of a country being placed in 
the position of a subordinate either to a god or to a spiritual 
guide (whether alive or dead) is well known to the students of 
Indian history and is not unknown even in the annals of other 
countries. The dedication of one’s landed property and other 
belongings in favour of the family deity or of the spiritual guide 
of the family and its administration and enjoyment as a repre- 
sentative of that deity or saint is a familiar custom in all parts 
of India,! there being also a number of instances of similar dedi- 
cation of an entire kingdom in favour of a god or saint in the 
history of India. Thus the rulers of Travancore regarded the 
god Padmandbhasvamin as the king of their territories and 
considered themselves as the god’s viceroys, while the Guhilot 
kings of Mewar represented themselves as the Dewans (chief 
administrators) of the god Ekaliiga who was believed to have 
been the real lord of their dominions. Likewise, Sivaji, the 
great founder of the Maratha kingdom in the latter half of the 
17th century, is said to have dedicated his dominions to his 
spiritual guide Ramadasa and to have administered the country 
in the saint’s name. In’ the same way, the Kalacuri monarch 
Gangeyadeva Vikramaditya (circa 1015-41 A. D.), also 
called Sahasika (Sahasanka), is known to have dedicated his 
empire covering the present Jabalpur region in favour of his 
preceptor, the Saiva saint Vamasambhu or Vamadeva, and, 
from that date for several centuries, his descendants are known 
to have regarded themselves as the viceroys of the saint.2- The 
conception of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri as the 
ruler of Orissa, so far as we know, originated in the days of the 
Imperial Gangas. 

The mighty Ganga monarch Anantavarman Codaganga 
(1078-1147 A.D.) had his capital at Kalinganagara which is 
identified with modern Mukhalingam near Srikakulam 
(Chicacole) in Andhra Pradesh. He is known to have con- 


1. Cf. devottara and Bhegetlaré a ie Glossary. For the issue 
of coins in the names of deities, below, pp. 87 ff. 

2. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, Oe 46 ff. Vile the dedication of Saha- 
sika’s kingdom to the ascetic Vamadeva is known from the commentary of 
Jayanaka’s Prthvirdjavijaya (twelfth century), ), Gangeya’s descencendants 
continued to call themselves Vamadeva-pad-anudh; peat greet from the days of Karna 
(1041-71 A.D.) to the end of the dynasty, the Malkapuram inscription 
of 1263 A.D. speaks of Vamaéaribhu’s worship by the Ralacuri kings for 
centuries till that date. See below. 


PURUSOTTAMA*JAGANNATHA 61 


quered the whole east coast region up to the Gangetic Delta 
and to have annexed the Puri-Cuttack area to the Ganga empire 
after having extirpated the rule of the Somavamsi kings in the 
said territory. The inscriptions of Codaganga’s descendants 
state that it was he who built the great temple of the god 
Purugottama-Jagannatha on the shore of the sea as the earlier 
rulers of the country had neglected to do it.! It may be pointed 
out that the Somavarnsis, who held sway over the Puri-Cuttack 
region before Codagariga’s conquest, were Saivas and may not 
have been much enthusiastic about the deity regarded as a 
form of Visnu. Like his ancestors who worshipped Gokarneé- 
vara-Siva on the Mahendragiri in the Gangam District; Coda- 
gariga also was a staunch Saiva in the early years of his reign. 
Soon after his conquest of the Puri-Cuttack area about the 
beginning of the twelfth century, however, we. find him inclining 
gradually more and more towards the worship of Visnu, appa- 
rently in the form of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri. 
Codaganga calls himself both a Saiva and a Vaisnava in one 
of his charters’ dated 1112 A.D., while in his later documents, 
the reference to his devotion to Siva is totally omitted and the 
king is represented only as a Vaisnava.* 

A tradition recorded in the Utkala-khanda (otherwise 
called Purusottama-mahatmya) section of the Skanda Puréna 
shows beyond doubt that Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri was 
originally worshipped by the aboriginal Sabara inhabitants of 
the Nilacala (Puri hills) and that the worship of the deity 
became gradually popular with the orthodox Hindus at a later 
date.* Like Minaksi of Madurai in South India, Kamakhya 
near Gauhati in Assam and numerous other gods and goddesses 
in various parts of India, the aboriginal god of Puri was absor- 
bed in the Brahmanical pantheon in course of time and was 
ultimately identified with Visnu. The identification of the 
god, originally worshipped by the Sabaras of the Puri region, 
with Visnu was apparently well established considerably before 
the beginning of the twelfth century when Anantavarman Coda- 
gafiga annexed the Puri-Cuttack region to his empire. 


1, Ibid., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 251-52, verses 27-28 which are also found 
in other records. See below, p. 66 note 3. 

2. Ibid., p. 240. See below, pp. 67-68. 

3. See Chapters VII-VIII below. 


62 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The fact however that Hiuen-tsang, the Chinese pilgrim 
who visited Orissa in 638-39 A.D., does not speak of Purusottama- 
Jagannatha in his account of the Odra country! shows that 
the god was no better than a local deity of limited celebrity and 
‘importance till as late as the seventh century A.D. His position 
in the religious life of Eastern and Central India must have 
been well established in the tenth and eleventh centuries as we 
know from epigraphic and literary references? and in the 
twelfth century, the conversion of Anantavarman Codaganga 
to Vaisnavism under his influence set him on the way to all- 
India importance. 

The sucessors of Codaganga were all worshippers of Visnu 
in the form of Purusottama-Jagannatha. But it was his great- 
grandson Anangabhima III (circa 1211-38 A.D.) who was 
really responsible for raising the god Purusottama-Jagannatha 
to an all-India figure and the temple of Puri to its present 
position of pre-eminence amongst the places of pilgrimage in 
India. The rise of Puri must have been facilitated by the 
gradual obscuration of Gangasagara due to many factors 
including the Muslim occupation of Bengal and consequent 
want of royal patronage, as also the similar obscuration of 
Viraja (modern Jajpur), the oldest Brahmanical ftirtha in 
Orissa, which enjoyed an important position during the age of 
the Bhauma-Kara kings (from the ninth to the beginning of 
the twelfth century A.D.) who had their capital in that city 
or its neighbourhood. By the time of Anangabhima III, the 
Gangas had already transferred their capital to Cuttack 
(Kataka). This king issued his charters from Abhinava- 
Varanasi-kataka or Varanasi-kataka which is modern Cuttack. 
According to a tradition recorded iri the Oriya chronicle entitled 
Madala Pafji, a king named Anangabhima who at first had 


1. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Trarels in India, Vol. 11, pp. 93-64 

2, An inscription of the tenth century A.D., from Maihar in the 
Satna District of Madhya Pradesh, refers to the pilgrimage of a Brakmana 
youth of that area to the sea-shore in the Odra country in order to have a 
daréana of the god Purusottama (Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXV, p. 173). The popu- 
larity of Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri in the said region about the same 
time is further proved by Krsnamiéra’s Prabcdhatandrodaya composed in the 
cighties of the eleventh century A. D. at the court of the Candella king Kirti- 
varman (c. 1063-1100 A.D.). See ibid., Vol. XXXIII, p. 184, note 1. 
See below, pp. 76 ff. 


PURUSOTTAMA*JAGANNATHA 63 


his capital at Caudavara-kataka, built a new city named 
Vanarasi (Varanasi )-kataka at the site of a village called Vara- 
vati on the opposite bank of the Mahanadi and removed his 
residence there.!_ The Maddala Pafji further says that the Ganga 
king named Anangabhima built the temple of Purugottama- 
Jagannatha at Puri. This king is no other than Anangabhima 
III who may have completed the Puri temple begun by his 
great-grandfather and is actually known from the Nagari 
plates to have installed a god named Purusottama-Jagannatha 
in a new temple built by him at his capital at Varanasi-kataka 
(Cuttack).? The earliest records in the Puri temple are four 
inscriptions of the reign of Anangabhima III.* 

According to another tradition recorded in the Médala 
Paiji, a king named Anangabhima (apparently Anangabhima 
III) dedicated all his possessions including the empire in favour 
of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri and began to rule 
as a Réuta (i. e. feudatory) of the said god, and his successors 
did not celebrate a formal coronation at the time of their acces- 
sion as they considered themselves to be mere feudatories of the 
god. These traditions have remarkable support from a large 
number of Ganga inscriptions. 

In many of the inscriptions of king Anangabhima III 
himself and his successors, the Ganga monarch is described’ as 
a Rduta, Réutta or Révuta, which is derived from Sanskrit Raja- 
putra (literally ‘a prince’, but really a title of nobility ) and was 


1. See ibid., Vol. XXX, p. 21 and note 7 : ¢ ultdre Anangabhimade- 
vanka —séna-bhdi Bhima-parirdenku Bhimanagara-dandopaluh ani roja kalec- 
duti Anangabhimadeva hoile. ¢ raja nagara Caudvdre kajaka vije kari thanti. 
emantare eka-dinare rajae vije kari dsi Mahénadi para hoi e-nadiru daksina-tire dekhile 
Kolinda-dandapatara Varavati-gramare Visvesvaradevankara-sanidhe sdmala-paksiki 
vaga mari vasiachi. ehd dekhi raja vada akcarya pai Subha-yoga-dinare e-Vérat ati- 
gramare Subha dei nara toldi kajaka kari e-kafaka-néma Vépardtika{aka * voli 
nama dei nagara-Caudvdra-kataka chadi asi kataka kari rahile. The pithet 
Abhinava-Yaydtinagara-Viseu applied to the said king in the Maddala Paaji 
suggests that he had his capital previously at ‘New Yayatinagara (Yay&ti- 
pura)’, i. e, modern Jajpur. 

2. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 247-48. 

3. Ibid., Vol. XXX, pp. 97 ff. 

4. Ibid., p. 19 : € nagara-Kataka thai sri-Purusottama Sri-Faganndtha- 
devanku samasta sanarpi Réuta-pane thadnti. raja anka abhigeka na hele. Odiié- 
rdjya-rajé. Sri-Faganndtha-mahdprabhu emanta kaki abhigeka nohile. 


64 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


often assumed by subordinate rulers. An inscription’ from 
the Lingaraja temple at Bhubaneswar in the Puri District 
spéaks of the dominions of Anangabhima III as Purusottama- 
samrajya, i.e. the empire belonging to the god Purugottama- 
Jagannatha. The Kanchipuram inscription of the said Ganga 
king and the Kapilas inscription of his son Narasirhha I (1238- 
64 A.D.) represent the two monarchs as obeying the orders of 
the god Purusottama.? Out of the four inscriptions of Ananga- 
bhima III in the Patalesvara shrine within the inner compound 
of the Puri temple, all of them recording grants made in favour 
of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha, one gives its date in the 
passage Sri-Purusottamasya pravardhamdnavijaya-rajye Rautta-srimad- 
Anankabhimadevasya srahi sam 29 which clearly mentions the 
Ganga king as a vassal of the god of Puri. Two other Linga- 
raja temple inscriptions of Anangabhima III again describe 
him as the son of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha.4 Another 
inscription of the king from the same place shows how he was 
mentioned even by his Saiva subjects as a Bhagavat (god or 
Lord). This undoubtedly points to the fact that the said 
Ganga king was a saintly Vaisnava highly respected by differ- 
ent religious communities. This also reminds us of Ananga- 
bhima’s representation as a devotee of MaheSvara and a son 
of Rudra and of Durga, to which reference has been made 
above. 

We have observed above that, like Anangabhima III, 
his successors called themselves Rauta, Rautta or Rdavuta.6 But 


1. Ind. Gult., Vol. VI, p. 73. 
2. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXI, p. 97; Vol. XXXII, p. 43. 
3. Ibid., Vol. XXX, pp. 201-02. 

. 4+ ,ibid.. p. 234. That these kings were not antagonistic to the wor- 
ship of Siva and Sakti is indicated by a few inscriptions in Siva temples, 
in which Anangabhima III and Narasirnha I are represented as both 
Vaisnava and Saiva; cf. the epithets Paramavaisnava, Paran.amahespara, 
Purusottama-putra, Rudra-putra and Durgd-putra applied to the former and 
ParamamahrSvara, Durgé-pulra and Purusottama-pulra to the latter (itid., Vol. 
XXXIIL, pp. 43, 126-27). Likewise, Kapilesvara (1435-66 A.D.), founder 
of the Siryavarnii Gajapati dynasty of Orissa, is called Mah stara-putra, 
Durgé-putra’ and Purusottama-pulra in the Warangal inscription which des. 
cribes his nephew Raghudeva as Durga-vara-putra and Jacanndthadeva (latdha* )- 
caraprasdda (ibid., p. 127). 

~~" 5: Ibid., Vol. XXX, p. 19. 

6. Cf. SH, Vol. V, Nos. 1264 and 1294 for Narasimha I. (1238 


PURUSOTTAMA=JAGANNATHA 65 


most of them do not specifically mention the god Purugsottama- 
Jagannatha as their overlord as Anangabhima III himself does 
in some of his inscriptions already referred to. An interesting 
exception to this is Bhanu II who was the great-great-grandson 
of Anangabhima III and ruled in circa 1305-27 A.D.1 This 
fact shows that, amongst the descendants of Anangabhima III, 
who were all no doubt continuing to suffer the fiction created 
by the dedication of the Ganga empire to the god Purusottama- 
Jagannatha by that king, Bhanu II alone was as religiously 
minded as his distinguished ancestor. Indeed, Bhanu II may 
probably be regarded as more zealous in this respect that even 
Anangabhima III himself since, in several records of his time, 
the god alone is mentioned as the lord of the realm and the king’s 
name is altogether omitted. Unfortunately, this fact gave rise 
to certain unwarranted theories regarding the interpretation 
of the records in question. Writers like R. D. Banerji? believed 
that during the early years of Bhanu’s reign, a person named 
Purugottama usurped the Ganga throne for several years, while 
others like R. Subba Rao® suggested that Bhanu II was also 
known by the names or titles, Purusottama and Jagannatha. 
An inscription (1309 A. D.)* from Srikurmam is stated to 
have been dated in the reign of Jagannatha when Bhanu II, 
described in the record as Jiyyana (Oriya end which is the 
same as Rajaputra-=Rdutta) was governing, while according to 
the Puri plates,5 Bhanu II, endowed with the subordinate title 
Réutta, made certain grants in 1313 A.D., during the reign of 
Purusottama. Another Srikurmam inscription, dated 1327 
A.D., mentions Purusottama as the reigning king and omits 


64A.D.), and idid., Vol. VI, No. 1118, for Narasithha IT (1278- 
1305 A. D.). 

1. JKHRS, Vol. I, pp. 251 ff. 

2. History of Orissa, Vol. I, pp. 277-79. 

g. History of Kalitge (offprint), p. 192. 

4. SII, Vol. V, No. 12143 Ep. Ind., Vol. V, pp. 35-96 : ét-Jaganné- 
thadeva-vijaya-vliya-samvatsarambulu' 3 Sri-vira-Béyacleca-joyanamgéri vehorana- 


‘The reference here is to the reign of Jagannatha and the administration 
of Bhanu Jena (Prince). 

5. JAS, Letters, Vol. XVII, pp. 19 ff. : $ri-Purusottamadevasya pra 
vardhaména-vijaya-rajye " saptame=" ike...vira-srimad-Bhanudrca-rdutla-varma. 

6. SII, Vol. V, Nos. 1154-55 


66 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the: name of Bhanu II altogether. Two of the Simhachalam 
inscriptions! offer valuable evidence in this regard. Neither 
of these records mentions the name of Bhanu II, even though 
they are dated respectively in 1319 and 1314 A.D., both the 
dates falling in the reign of the said Ganga monarch (circa 1305- 
27 A.D.). It should, however, be noted that the regnal reckon- 
ing of Bhanu II has been attributed in the first of the two ins- 
criptions to Devddideva Jagannatha and in the second to 
Devadideva Purusottama. There can be no doubt that this 
Purusottama-Jagannatha, described as Devadideva, i.e. ‘the 
foremost god amongst all the gods’, is no other than the deity 
worshipped in the Puri temple, to whom Bhanu II and other 
rulers of the Ganga family owed fictitious allegiance as a theo- 
retical viceroy or subordinate.? 


Ir 


In an interesting paper entitled ‘The Date of the Jagan- 
natha Temple in Puri, Orissa’ published in ASB, Vol. LXVII, 
1898, pp. 328-31, M. M. Chakravarti quoted two verses* found 


1. Ibid., Vol. VI, Nos. 714 and 938. No. 714 of Saka 1241=1319 
A.D. gives the date as sri-devddideva-sri-Faganndthadevarala-vijaya-rdjva-scrhvat- 
sarambulu 13, while No. 938 has Sri-devédideva-sri-Purusottamadevasya pravar- 
dhaména-vijaya-rdjya-samvatsarambulu 9. 

2. See Indo-Asian Culture, Vol. 11, Nos. 2, October, 1953, pp. 120ff. 


3. Padau yasya dhar=dntariksam—akhilarh ndbhis=tu sared difah 
Srotre netra-yugarh rav-indu-yugalam mirdh=dpi ca dyaur=asau t 
prasddarh Purusottamasya nrpatih ko ndéma karttush ksamas= 
tasy=ety=ddya=nrpair=upeksitam=ayarh cakre="tha Ganig-esvarah W 
Laksmi-janma-erharh payo-nidhir=asau sambhdvitasya sthitir= 
no dhamni Svasurasya piljyata iti ksirabdhi-vasad—dhruvam 1 
nirvinnah Purusoltamah —pramuditas—tad-vésa-ldbhad=Ram=é- 
fy=ead=bharty-grhar varam pitr-grhat prépya pramod-dnvitd 





Translation : “What king can be named that coula erect a temple to such 
a god as Pursottama, whose feet are the earth, whose navel the entire sky, 
whose ears the cardinal points, whose eyes the sun and moon and whose 
head that heaven above ? This task which had been hitherto neglected by 
previous kings, was fulfilled by the Lord of the Gangas (i.e. Codaganga). 

“The ocean is the birth-place of Laksmi, so thinking, in his father-in- 
law’s house Visnu lodged with some shame, though he got full adoption. 





PURUSOTTAMA-JAGANNATHA 67 


in the copper-plate grants! of the successors of Anantavarman 
Codaganga (1078-1147 A.D.) to show that a great temple was 
erected in Orissa on or near the sea coast by order of that Ganga 
monarch. He concluded that the temple erected by Coda- 
ganga could be no other than that of the god Purugottama or 
Jagannatha at Puri. Chakravarti no doubt meant the Vimdna 
or sanctum and the agamohana or the first Mandapa of the 
Puri temple, as its Natyafala@ (now called Ndatamandira) and 
Bhoga-mandapa were erected at a much later date. He further 
pointed to a pilgrimage to Purusottama (i.e. Puri, otherwise 
called Purusottama-puri, Purusottama-ksetra, Jagannatha- 
puri, etc., as we have seen) referred to in the Govindapur (Gaya 
District) inscription of Saka 1059 (1137-38 A.D.)® and to 
the god Purusottama existing in the vicinity of the eastern 
ocean mentioned in the Nagpur inscription of the ParamAras of 
Malwa, dated in Vikrama Sarnvat 1161 (1104-05 A.D.),& in 
connection with the digvijaya of Paramara Laksadeva (whose 
known date is Vikrama Samvat 1151:=1084-85 A.D.) and 
suggested that the Puri temple might have been built in 1085- 
90 shortly after Codagariga’s conquest of that part of Orissa 
early in his reign before 1085 A.D. Elsewhere’ the same 
scholar drew attention to the astronomical work Bhasvati which 
was composed in Saka 1021 (1099-1100 A.D.), according to 
a commentary of the Siryasiddhanta, by one Satananda of 
Purusottama (Puri) who is said by the commentator to have 
based his calculations on the meridian of his native city. 

In this connection, it may be pointed out that the Gangas 
were Saivas being devoted to Gokarnegvara (Siva) installed in 
a temple on the top of the Mahendragiri peak in the Ganjam 
District. Anantavarman Codaganga is also described as a 


Thus ashamed, the god Purusottama was glad to get this new house; and 
Laksmi, too, gladly preferred living in her husband’s new house to living 
in her father’s house.” 

1. Cf, ZASB, Vol. LXIV, 1895, p. 130; Vol. LXV, 1896, p. 240. 

2. Cf. R. D. Banerji, History of Orissa, Vol. I, p. 251. 

3. Ep. Ind., Vol. IL, p. 334. For Puri as a contraction of Purugottama- 
puri or Jagannitha-puri and Purugottama as a similar contraction of Purvgottcma- 
puri or Purugottama-ksetra, cf. Satyabhama called both Satya and Bhama, 

4. Ibid., p. 187. 

5. FASB, 1903, Pp. 110, 


68 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


parama-mahefvara (i.e. devout worshipper of Maheévara or Siva) 
in his earlier copper-plate grants;!_ but the Korni plates? of 
Saka 1034 (1112-13 A.D.) describe him both as a parama- 
méahesvara and as a parama-vaisnava (devout worshipper of Visnu), 
while the Visakha-pattanam plates* of 1040 (1118-19 A.D.) 
omit parama-mahesvara and call him a devotee of Visnu only. 
It is interesting to note that both these grants refer to the con- 
quest of the Utkala country by Codagafga apparently from 
the Somavarhsist whose dominions in Utkala comprised the 
Puri District. It is therefore probable that Codagafiga’s con- 
quest of Utkala had something to do with his change of religious 
faith from Saivism to Vaisnavism. Another interesting fact 
is that, unlike the earlier grants, these later records do not copy 
the genealogical portion from the copper-plate inscriptions of 
Codaganga’s grandfather Vajrahasta III Anantavarman 
(1038-70 A.D.),5 but that they offer a more elaborate genea- 
logy apparently fabricated by Codagafiga’s court poets. This 
forged genealogy is important in regard to the king’s leaning 
towards Vaisnavism as it traces the descent of his family to the 
god Visnu.* 

Another interesting information about the god Purusot- 
tama or Jagannatha at Puri seems to be supplied by the passage 
of the verses quoted above saying that the task of building a 
temple for the god Purugsottama was neglected by the previous 
kings of the Puri region and that therefore Codaganga took 
it up and fulfilled it. This no doubt suggests that the 


1. Cf. the Korni and Visakhapattanam plates of Saka 1003 (1 81- 
82 A.D.) in JAHRS, Vol. 1, pp. 40-48; Ind. Ant., Vol. XVIII, pp. 61-65. 
Codagafiga conquered Utkala after 1081-82 A.D. and before 1112-13 A.D. 
The Somavarhiis appear to have been extirpated about the beginning of the 
twelfth century. . 

2. JAHRS, Vol. 1, pp. 113-24. 

3. Ind, Ant., Vol. XVIII, pp. 165-72. 

4. IHQ, Vol. XXII, pp. 300-07. 

5. Cf. the Nadagam plates in Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, pp. 188 ff. 

6. It must be admitted that the Visakhapattanam plates of Saka 1057 
(1135-36 A.D.) describe Codaganga as a parcma-méhesvara and do neither 
refer to his suzerainty over Utkala nor offer the fabricated genealogy (Int. 
Ant., Vol. XVIII, pp. 472-76). But there are many other cases of the utili- 
sation of an earlier draft of the prasasti even after the introduction of a later 
draft. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIII, p. 330, note 2; Vol. XXXV, p. 203. 


PURUSOTTAMA-JAGANNATHA 69 


god Purugottama was being worshipped at Puri before the 
date of Codaganga’s conquest of that region, but that the 
Somavarhsis, whom the Ganga king ousted, being staunch 
devotees of the god Siva," neglected the construction of a suit- 
able temple for Purugottama. As indicated above, the deity at 
Puri, like Venkatesvara-Balaji at Tirupati, Minaksi at Madurai, 
Vindhyavasini near Mirzapur, Kamakhya near Gauhati and 
numerous other gods and goddesses in different parts of India, 
was originally being worshipped by the aboriginal inhabitants 
of the locality and came gradually to be identified with a god 
of the recognised Brahmanical pantheon.? But, as also pointed 
out above, the identification of Purusottama or Jagannatha of 
Puri with the Brahmanical god Visnu seems to have been fully 
recognised before Codaganga’s occupation of the Puri region. 

The celebrated Oriya chronicle called Maddala Pafji, how- 
ever, attributes the construction of the temple of Purusottama- 
Jagannatha not to Anantavarman Codaganga, but to his great- 
grandson Anangabhima III (1211-38 A.D.), and it is usually 
believed by scholars that the Puri temple and the buildings 
connected with the shrine ‘may have been actually finished 
during his reign.’ We have seen‘ that Anangabhima III was 
a staunch devotee of the god Purusottama and considered the 
deity as the de jure lord of his dominions and himself as a mere 
deputy of the god. It has also been shown that his successors 
ruled their dominions as subordinates of the theoretical overlord 
Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri. As Anangabhima III was 
the Ganga monarch who dedicated his kingdom to the god 
Purusottama, he must have been regarded as the most remark- 
able royal devotee of the deity’ and popular tradition may have 
attributed to him, wrongly of course, his great-grandfather’s 
achievement of building the temple for the god. But another 
fact seems to lie at the root of the confusion. 


1. The Somavarhsi kings are described as parama-mdheévara in their 
inscriptions. 

2. Cf. JRASB, Letters, Vol. XIV, 1948, pp. 103-6. 

3. Ray, Dynastic History of Northern India, Vol. 1, p. 478. 

4. See above, pp. 63 ff.; JKHRS, Vol. I, pp. 251-53. 

5. As we have seen above, Anafigabhima was a saintly Vaisnava, so 
that even his Saiva subjects called him a Bhagavat. See p. 64; Ep. Ind., Vol. 


XXX, p. 19. 


to RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
There is evidence to show that Anangabhima III installed 
an image of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha in a temple at 
Cuttack! which became the later capital of the Ganga kings 
who were ruling first from Kalinganagara (modern Mukha- 
lingam in the Ganjam District), and then from Jajpur (called 
‘New Yayatinagara’ or Yayatipura) in the Cuttack District. 
We know that Sivaji’s patron-deity was the goddess Bhavani 
at Tuljapur near Osmanabad in the old Hyderabad State; but, 
since Tuljapur was not within easy reach to him, Sivaji, when 
he built the fort of Pratapgarh near Javli, set up there a new 
image of his patron deity. The Ganga king Anangabhima III 
seems to have similarly set up an image of his patron-deity 
Purugottama-Jagannatha at his capital at Cuttack owing to 
his desire to live constantly near the god. 

That there was a temple of Jagannatha (Purusottama) 
at Bandrasi (ie. WV4aranasi-kataka or the present Cuttack), 
capital of Jajnagar (i.e. the Orissan kingdom of the Gangas) 
was long ago known from the T4rikh-i-Firfiz Shahi of Shams-i- 
Siraj. According to this work, Sultan Firiz Shah of Delhi led 
an expedition against the kingdom of Jajnagar (the Ganga 
kingdom) about 1360 A.D. when the kingdom was under the 
rule of Bhandeo, i.e. Bhanudeva III (1352-78 A.D.), who had 
his, headquarters at Banarasi (i.e. WVaranasi-kataka or the 
present Cuttack). The Sultan is said to have occupied Banarasi 
when the ie fled from the capital. In connection with this 
expedition, the Tarikh-i-Firiiz Shahi says, “It is reported that, 
inside the Rai’s fort (i.e. king Bhanu’s fort at Banarasi or 
Cuttack), there was a stone idol which the infidels called 
Jagannath and to which they paid their devotions. Sultan 
Firiz in emulation of Mahmid-i-Subuktigin, having rooted 





1. The city is called Varanasi-kataka in the Gafiga inscriptions and 
Banarasi in the Muslim chronicle. See Ray, op. cit., pp. 491-04. As will 
be seen below, this.city called ‘New Banaras’ was already th fe idence of the 
Ganga king during the reign of Anafgabhima III. As Puri is a contraction 
of Purusottama-puri or Jaganndtha-furi, Kafaka (Cuttack) is an abbreviation 
of Vardnasi-kajaka or Abhinava-Vardnasi-kafaka, For Atak-Banaras, named 
by Akbar after Katak-Bandras, see Akbarndmd, trans., Vol. II], pp. 520-213 
Muntakhabut Tawarikh, trans., Vol. II, p. 301. 

2. See J. N. Sarkar, History of Aurangzeb, Vol. IV, p. 32. Cf. Sircar, 
Stud, Geog. Anc. Med. Ind., p. 223, for imitation gods. 

3. See Elliot and Dowson, The History of India as told by its own Histor- 
ians, Vol. III, pp. 312-15. 





PURUSOTTAMA-jAGANNATHA WW 


up the idol, carried it away to Delhi, where he subsequently 
had it placed in an ignominious position.”” Recently evidence 
has come to light to show that this image of Jagannatha (Puru- 
gottama) at Cuttack was installed by the Ganga king Ananga- 
bhima III. 

Sometime ago, a new set of copper-plates was discovered at 
a place called Nagari in the Cuttack District.1 This interesting 
record belongs to the Ganga king Anangabhima III and gives 
details of a number of grants made by the king in favour of 
several Brahmanas. We have to analyse them before discussing 
the light the record throws on the problem under discussion. 

1. On the occasion of the Mina-sankranti on Saturday, 
Caitra-sudi 9, in the Saka year 1151, king Anangabhima- 
rautta-deva, while he was taking a bath in the Mahanadi bet- 
ween the temples of Citresvara and Visvesvara at Abhinava- 
Varanasi-kataka (literally, at the camp or residence of ‘New 
Banaras’), granted twenty véfis of land at Piranagrama in 
the Sailo visaya (district) to a Brahmana named Sankarsana- 
nandafarman. The date of the grant corresponds to the 23rd 
February, 1230 A.D. 

TI. Next year (i.e. in Saka 1152) on Thursday, Magha- 
badi 6, while the king was taking a bath in the same river, he 
granted a township covering 30 véfis of land in the villages of 
Piranagrama and Jayanagaragrama in the same visaya to 
the same Brahmana Sankarsanandafarman. The date cor- 
responds to Thursday the 26th December, 1230 A.D., which 
was the day of the Makara-sankranti. 

III. In the same year (ie. Saka 1152) king Ananga- 
bhima III also made the following gifts : 

(a) While he was taking bath in the Mahanadi, on the 
occasion of a lunar eclipse on Thursday, Margasirsa-sudi 15, 
he granted 18 vdfis of land in the said Piranagrama to Diksita 
Rudrapanigarman. The date corresponds to the 21st November, 
1230 A.D. 

(b) On the occasion of the Makara-sankranti (Thursday, 
the 26th December, 1230 A.D.) he granted 5 vatis of land ap- 
parently in the same village to the Brahmana Somapilasarman. 

(c) He granted, on the occasion of the installation of the 


1. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 235 ff. 


2 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


god Purusottama, 2 véfis of land, apparently in the same 
village, to the Brahmana Candrakarasarman. 

IV. Apparently in the same year (Saka 1152), on the 
occasion of a solar eclipse on Karkatak-Amavasya,! while the 
king was at Purusottama-ksetra (i.e. Puri) on the bank of the 
Southern Ocean, he granted 5 véfis of land in the same Pirana- 
grama to Kayadifarman and some other Brahmanas. 

V. Apparently in the same year (Saka 1152) when the 
king was standing before the god Purusottama at Abhinava- 
Varanasi (New Banaras or Cuttack)? on the occasion of the 
Makar-amavasy4 on Sunday, he granted 4 vdfis of land in 
Vilasapuragrama in the Kuddinda visaya to the Brahmana 
Devadharagarman. The date corresponds to the 5th January 
1231 A. D. 

It will be seen from the details quoted above that they 
refer to a deity called Purusottama at Cuttack and to its ins- 
tallation not very long before Sunday the Makar-amavasya day 
in Saka 1152, corresponding to the 5th January 1231 A.D., 
no doubt by king Anangabhima III (1211-38 A.D.). This 
Purusottama-Jagannatha was worshipped at Cuttack for 130 
years and was desecrated by Sultan Firiz Shah about 1360 A.D. 


Il 


Some time ago, the removal of a coating of plaster from the 
walls of the temple of Siva called Markandesvara at the well- 
known city of Puri in Orissa revealed the existence of a number 
of inscriptions which had previously been hidden from the eye. 

All the epigraphs record the installation of perpetual lamps 
in the temple of the god Markandesvara. The earliest of 
these records is engraved on the right wall of the second gate 
and belongs to the time of the great Anantavarman Codaganga 
(1078-1147 A.D.) who conquered the Puri-Cuttack region from 
the Somavarnsis about the beginning of the twelfth century.* 


1. In Saka 1152, the Karkatak-amavasya fell on Thursday the 11th 
July, 1230 A.D, According to Svamikannu Pillai’s Indian Ephemeris, there 
‘was a solar eclipse this year on the Vrsabh-dmdvayya (Tuesday the 14th May, 
1230 A.D.) and not on the Karkatak-amavasya day. The Vrisabh-amavasya 
may be intended in the inscription in the place of Karkafak-amatasya. 

2, The inscription has Abhinava-Varénasyyém bhagatatah sri-Purusoltema- 
devasya sannidhau. 

3. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIII, pp. 181ff. 


PURUSOTTAMA-jAGANNATHA 3 


The inscription of Codagaiga appears to have been 
engraved in 1114-15 A.D. It begins with the Siddham symbol 
and the date referred to above. The first sentence in lines 1-4 
apparently means to say that, in the year 37 during the reign 
of the illustrious Codagangadeva, Sddhu Bhimadeva, a resident 
of Niralo-grama called an Avigabhoga of the god Purusottama, 
as well as Ruda (Rudra ?) and Hari (both probably of the 
same place) accepted some amount or coins of gold for one 
chaya-dipa meant to be a perpetual lamp to be burnt before 
the god Markandesvara: The epithet sdédhu applied to Bhima- 
deva shows that he belonged to the mercantile community. 
Possibly Ruda and Hari were also members of the same com- 
munity. The expression aviga-bhoga often occurs in Telugu 
and Kannada inscriptions in association with’ rariga-bhoga (cf. 
also ariga-ranga-bhoga) and is sometimes translated as ‘decorations 
and illuminations of a god’.1 In the present case, the epithet 
anga-bhoga is applied to a village, the income from which appears 
to have been utilised for the aviga-bhoga or decoration of the 
deity in question. Thus the village of Niralo seems to have 
been a rent-free holding in the possession of the god Purusottama- 
Jagannatha of Puri. The expression chdyd-dipa means a lamp 
held in the hand of an image generally of the donor. 
The word chayd, ‘image’, is known from other inscriptions 
also. A Srikurmam inscription* of Saka 1275, belonging to the 
reign of Ganga Bhanu III, speaks of the dedication of the chayas 
of the king’s father Narasithha III and the latter’s wife Ganga- 
mbika, which were represented as holding lamps for offering 
light to the god in the Srikurmam temple. The responsibility 
of Bhimadeva and his two colleagues was no doubt to supply 
oil for the lamp in lieu of the interest of the gold deposited with 
them. 

The next sentence in line 4 states : “Now Bhimdeva’s 
son Nana arranged for the discharge [of his obligation].” This 
shows that, probably after Bhimadeva’s death, his son Nana 
refunded the deposit and thereby freed himself from the obli- 
gation of supplying oil for the perpetual lamp. That the res- 

1. See loc. cit, Cf. Sreenivasachar, A Corpus of Inscriptions in the 
Telingana Districts, Part II, p. 201. For bhoga, ‘a jagir’, see p. 170. See 


also Sircar, Ind. Ep. Gloss., s. v. 
2. SII, Vol. V, No. 1205. 


4 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Pponsibility fell upon the son of Bhimdeva alone may further 
suggest that Ruda and Hari were his own brothers or sons. 
From the above two sentences we learn that formerly an endow- 
ment had been created by depositing some amount or coins of 
gold with Bhimadeva and others and ‘that, in the 37th regnal 
year of the Ganga king Anantavarman Codaganga, Bhimdeva’s 
son Nana freed himself from the responsibility. But who 
created the endowment that. was terminated by Nana is not 
mentioned in these sentences. The names of the persons res-, 
ponsible for the creation of the endowment are, however, 
possibly known from the following sentences which describe 
the creation of a new endowment in the place of the terminated 
one. 

The next sentence in lines 4-6 mentions three person and 
refers to an image representing all the three of them. The 
following sentence in line 6 states that Jivanta-sresthin accep- 
ted the gold for the lamp. This apparently means that the said 
three persons had originally created an endowlment for the 
supply of oil for a perpetual lamp held in the hands of their 
own images in the temple of MarkandeSvara and that, on the 
termination of the old endowment, they created another endow- 
ment by depositing the same gold with another person named 
Jivanta-Sresthin. The condition binding Jivanta-Sresthin is 
found in the following sentence in lines 6-7, which states that, 
in respect of the said perpetual lamp, the god Markandesvara 
would receive two hundred [measures] of oil every month.: The 
name of the measure is not given in the record. In a similar 
context in the Bhubaneswar inscription of Anantavarman Coda- 
ganga, mention is made of the kararka, i.e. a small pot usually 
made out of coconut-shell and used in measuring oil.1_ The 
same karaika measure may be referred to in the present case 
as well. The names of the three persons who created the 
endowment are given as : (1) Hari, the Piayahari of the god 
Markandesvara (2) Vandau (probably another Pijahdri of the 
same god), and (3) Vasu, the Pijahdri of another god whose 
name appears to be Kohrinesvara. Pijahari is the same as 
Pijari meaning ‘a priest.’ 

Lines 7-9 at the end of the record mention the names of 


1, Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, pp. 30-31. 


PURUSOTTAMA-jAGANNATHA 45 


the persons who were witnesses to the above transaction. These 
were (1) Mudrahasta Devadhara; (2) Nilakamunda (possibly 
another Mudrahasta); (3) Pasapalaka Sridhara; (4) Narayana 
(possibly another Pasapalaka); (5) Sammavaji Mahadeva; 
(6) Devamendi (possibly another Sammavdji); and (7) 
Srikarana Hari. Mudrahasta (Oriya Mudiratha) is now the 
designation of a class of servants of the god Purusottama-Jagan- 
natha of Puri. Devadhara may have been a similar servant of 
the god MarkandeSvara. Pasdpalaka may be the same official 
designation found in inscriptions in the forms of Pasdyita, Pasdita 
or Pasdyati.! Sdrmavaji may be mistake for Somaydjin. Sri- 
karana is the designation of a scribe. These people appear to 
have been temple officials. 

The inscription is interesting from several points of view. 
It is the only inscription of Anantavarman Codaganga so far 
discovered at Puri where the Ganga king is known to have 
built the great temple of Purusottama-Jagannatha after ° its 
annexation to the Gafiga empire and the transference of his 
allegiance from Saivism to Vaisnavism in the early years of 
the twelfth century. It is not possible to determine when exactly 
and by whom the MarkandeSvara temple was built. But it is 
not unlikely that this temple had been in existence when Coda- 
ganga built the temple for Purusottama-Jagannatha. We do 
not. know whether the Purusottama-Jagannatha temple was 
built by Codaganga before or after the 37th year of his reign, 
though the absence of any reference to the achievement in any 
of his own records may probably suggest that the construction 
was undertaken in the later years of his life. We also do not 
know as to who was responsible for granting the village of 
Niralo in favour of the god Purusottama-Jagannatha, although 
it is clear that this deity was already enjoying considerable 
influence when the inscription under study was engraved. The 
suggestion is supported by the reference to sdgara-tira-sannivese 
Purusottama-Sabditam devdyatanam in Krsnmisra’s Prabodhacandro- 
daya which was staged in the presence of the Candella king 
Kirtivarman (c. 1065-1100 A. D.).? 

It is difficult to say whether the suggestion is further sup- 

1. Cf. ibid., Vol. XXIX, p. 107 and note 3; Sircar, Ind. Ep. Gloss. 


8. v. Pasdyita=prasddita, probably ‘a Jagirdar’. 
2, Or, Hist. Res. Journ., Vol. lil, pp. 1 ff. See above, p. 62, note 


46 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


ported by the fact that the Anarghardghava of Murarimisra 
(ninth or tenth century according to some, but c. 1050-1135 
A.D. according to others) was staged on the occasion of the yaira 
of the god Purusottama of Puri since the epithet lavan-oda-veld- 
van-dli-tamala-taru-kandala, applied to the deity, does not refer 
to his worship on the sea-shore and since Visnu’s name Puru- 
gottama was not unknown elsewhere.2 It has to be noticed 
that Murari’s drama gives a rapid description of well-known 
places like Ujjayini, Varanasi, Kailasa, Prayaga, Tamraparni 
on the sea, Campa in Gauda, Paficavati, Kundina in Maha- 
rastra, Kafici in Dravida and Mahismati in the Cedi-mandala, 
but not of Purusottamapuri or Puri.? 


IV 


The town of Maihar is the headquarters of the former 
State which now forms a Tahsil of the Satna District of Madhya 
Pradesh. A prafasti is engraved on a slab of stone lying in the 
temple of Sarada on the hill near the town. 

The prafasti was noticed by J. D. Beglar, who visited 
Maihar (spelt by him as Mahiy4r ) in 1871-72, in Cunningham’s 
A.S.I. Reports, Vol. VII, p. 51, in the following words: 
s to the right of the steps leading upto the chief statue 
(in the shrine of Devi Sarada) is a large slab, now eracked, 
which contains an inscription perfectly illegible from the effects 
of weather.......... » This description of the record with 
reference to the state of its preservation is not quite correct. The 
characters of the epigraph belong to the Early Nagari alphabet 
of the tenth century A.D. The language is Sanskrit and the 
record is written in verse. 

The inscription begins with the margala: Om namah 
Sarasvatyai which is followed by a fairly big prafasti in fiftyone 
stanzas composed in various metres. Verses 1-2 of the prasasti 
describe the goddess [Sarasvati] as identical with Brahmi, 
Kamala and Gauri and as installed ‘on this peak [of the hill]’. 


1. For the date of Murari, see De, Hist. Sans. Lit., p. 4493 Kieth, 
Sanskrit Drama, p. 225; ABORI, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 88; etc. 

2. The other references pertaining to dates earlier than the eleventh 
century, cited in Or. Hist. Res. Journ., Vol. III, pp. 6 ff., are even more 
dubious. 


PURUSOTTAMA-JAGANNATHA 77 


The reference is no doubt to the hill at Maihar, on which the 
inscribed slab has been found. The following stanza records 
the author’s obeisance to the goddess Sarasvati. 

Verses 24-35 of the epigraph narrate a story relating to 
the antecedents of the Brahmana Damodara. It is said that he 
was really the son of the goddess Sarasvati and was living in 
Brahma-loka along with the preceptor of the gods (Brhaspati) 
and that once there was a Sastric dispute between the two, in 
which Brhaspati was defeated by the young boy (verses 24-26-) 
Being angry at his defeat, the preceptor of the gods cursed the 
boy to be born on the earth (verse 27). The boy’s mother 
Sarasvati then appeased Brhaspati (verse 28) who consoled 
the daughter of Brahman (Sarasvati)! by predicting that her 
young son would be born in a family of pious Brahmanas and 
would become a great scholar (verses 29-34). The last stanza 
of this section (verse 35) puts the following words in Brhaspati’s 
mouth: “Verily, this child will again come back to you as a 
result of being drowned in ° [the waters of] the sea after having 
seen Purusottama in the Odra country.”? The reference here 
is to the god Purusottama-Jagannatha of Puri in Orissa. 

Verses 35-40 describe Damodara’s career on the earth, 
the first two stanzas (verses 35-36) stating that, at the time 
Brhaspati was consoling Sarasvati in heaven, Damodara was 
born as the son of Devadhara on the earth. It is further stated 
that, as predicted by the preceptor of the gods, he stayed in 
his (i.e. his father’s) house till be became sixteen years old. 
The following two stanzas (verses 37-38) state how then Damo- 
dara left his parents, friends and relations and, resolving to set 
out on pilgrimage, reached in due course the sea-shore where 
he saw the god Purugottama.® Verse 40 states that Damodara 


1, Attention may be drawn to the representation of the goddess Saras- 
vati as identical with Brahmi, Kamala and Gauri and also as the daughter 
of the god Brahman. We know that our goddess of learning is various: 
represented in Puranic literature as the daughter or wife of Brahman (though 
Brahman’s more well-known wife in Gayatri or Savitri) and sometimes 
also as identical with Durga, the wife of Siva, as the wife of Vispu or Manu, 
and as the daughter of Daksa. Sec Monier-Williams, Sans.-Eng. Dict.. s. v. 


2. Samudra-majjanén=niinam=Odresu  Purugottamam 
drstud tav=amtike bhiyak pur=dgacchaty=ayom Sisuh |) 

3. Tatas=tu ganitair=eva divasair—deva-durlathch | 
praptavan jaladhes=tirath drstas=ca Purusottamah \\ 





78 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


went back to the world of Brahman where he told the people 
the story about himself. As indicated by the prediction in 
verse 35, he must have lost his life while bathing in the waters 
of the Bay of Bengal near the temple of Purusottama-Jagan- 
natha in Orissa. The next stanza(verse 41) says how his father 
became greatly mortified at the news of his son’s death. 

The reference to Damodara’s pilgrimage to Puri is very 
interesting. As we have seen, there is evidence to show that 
the god Purusottama-JagannAtha of Puri in Orissa was a cele- 
brated deity in the latter part of the eleventh century A.D. when 
Krnsamisra wrote his Prabodhacandrodaya at the court of the 
Candella king Kirtivarman (c. 1065-1100 A.D.). It is now 
clear from the present record that the god was enjoying the 
same celebrity as early as the middle of the tenth century and 
probably even some time earlier. 


Cuaprer V" 
BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 
I 


Due to the uprooting of a very old banyan tree several 
years back, a huge rock bearing an inscription in very bold 
characters was exposed to view near the Umachal Asram 
on the north-eastern slope of the Kamakhya or Nilachal hill near 
Gauhati. This part of the hill is known as the Umachal hill. 
The inscription was found to be in a perfectly satisfactory state 
of preservation. 

The inscription consists of four lines of writing and _ its 
characters belong to the Eastern variety of the ‘Gupta’ alphabet 
assignable to a period between the fourth and the sixth century 
A.D. On palaeographical grounds, the inscription may be 
assigned to a date near about that of the Barganga inscription! 
of Bhativarman (circa 518-42 A.D.), with which it has very 
close resemblance in respect both of palaeography and style. 
The language of the inscription is Sanskrit. There isa gram- 
matical error in the passage bhagavatah Balabhadrasvamindya in 
lines 3-4, the intended reading apparently being either bhaga- 
vatah Balabhadrasvaminak or bhagavate Balabhadrasvamine. It is 
clear that, for °sodmindya, Sanskrit °svdmine was the intended 
reading, although the word bhagavatah suggests that the scribe 
had originally °sudminah in his mind. 

The inscription was meant to serve the purpose of a label 
.of an artificial cave (guha)* or cave-temple constructed by 
Maharajadhiraja = Surendravarman for Bhagavat Balabhadra- 
svamin. The epigraph is small; but its contents have some 
importance in view of the fact that Maharajadhiraja Surendra- 
varman, known from this record to havesheld sway over the 
heart of the Pragjyotisa or Kamariipa country during the age 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, pp. 62 ff. and Plate. 

2. The use of the word guha in the neuter, probably in the sense of 
Sanskrit guhd, ‘cave’, is of lexical interest. The word guka, as used in the 
epigraph, does not appear to be derived from Sanskrit grha under the in- 
fluence of local pronounciation, 


80 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of the Imperial Guptas, is not known from any other source, 
while the deity Bhagavat Balabhadrasvamin is not mentioned 
in any epigraphic records of the Gupta period so far known. 
The construction of artificial caves and the installation of deities 
therein are well known to the students of Indian history and 
epigraphy.1 But the present inscription supplies the only ins- 
tance of the kind for Assam. The record also appears to be the 
earliest so far discovered in that State. 

We know that, from the middle of the fourth till the middle 
of the seventh century, Pragjyotisa or Kamaripa was under 
the rule of kings of a family called Bhauma or Naraka and 
rarely also Varman. This dynasty was founded by Pusya- 
varman who seems to have flourished in circa 350-74 A.D. 
His successors were his son Samudravarman (c. 374-98 A.D.), 
grandson Balavarman (c. 398-422 A.D.), great-grandson 
Kalyanavarman (c. 422-46 A. D.) and great-great grandson 
Ganapativarman (c. 446-70 A.D.). Ganapativarman’s 
successor was Mahendravarman (c. 470-94 A.D.) whose son 
Narayanavarman (c. 494-518 A.D.) and grandson Bhiti- 
varman or Mahabhitavarman (c. 518-42 A.D.) were both 
performers of the horse-sacrifice. The Barganga inscription, 
which seems to be slightly later than the record under review 
was incised during the reign of the said Bhitivarman. It there- 
fore appears that the Umachal rock inscription was 
engraved during the reign of one of the said rulers of the Bhauma- 
Naraka dynasty. It has to be remembered that the Umachal 
hill lies within a short distance from Gauhati where (or, in 
the vicinity of which) the capital of the Bhauma-Naraka kings 
is believed to have been situated. The question is therefore 
whether Surendravarman of the present record was identical 
with one of the above kings or he was a usurper. In the latter 
case, we have to determine whether he was a scion of, the 
Bhauma-Naraka dynasty or belonged to a different family. 
None of these questions can be settled satisfactorily in the present 
state of insufficient information. Since, however, in ancient 
India kings often enjoyed a number of different names, it may 


1. Cf. Corp, Ins. Ind., Vol. 111, pp. 221 ff., 223 fF, 226 
2. Cf. P. N, Bhattacharya, Kémaripatésandvali, intro., pp. 8, 22; 
Ep. Ind,, Vol. XXX, p. 92. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 81 


not be unreasonable to identify Surendravarman of our inscrip- 
tion with one of the known rulers of the Bhauma-Naraka dy- 
nasty, who flourished about the fifth century. Since again, in 
ancient India kings were sometimes mentioned by synonyms 
of their names, Surendravarman may be tentatively identified 
with Mahendravarman of the Bhauma-Naraka dynasty, who 
flourished in c. 470-94 A.D. The names Surendra and Mahendra 
both indicate Indra, the lord of the gods. 

As regards Bhagavat Balabhadrasvamin, for whom 
king Surendravarman is stated in the record to have built an 
artificial cave or cave-temple, it may be argued that he was 
a saint held by the monarch in special esteem. It is, however, 
more likely that Bhagavat Balabhadrasvamin of the present 
inscription is no other than the well-known Vaisnavite deity 
variously called Balabhadra, Baladeva, Balarama, Sankarsana, 
etc. He was one of the five deified heroes of the Yadava-Satvata- 
Vrsni clan, the others being Vasudeva (Krsna), Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha and Samba. Of these, Vasudeva, Balabhadra- 
Sankargsana, Pradyumna and Anirudha came to be worshipped 
as the four Vyithas by the followers of the Bhagavata or Pafica- 
ratra‘ form of early Vaisnavism, although Balabhadra-Sankar- 
sana and Vasudeva were the more respected among the four. 
There is enough evidence regarding the independent worship 
of Balabhadra in the period before the rise of the Imperial 
Guptas in the fourth century A. D. The inscriptions of the 
Gupta age do not refer to his independent worship, although 
the Vyiha doctrine finds a prominent place in the Paficaratra 
Samhitas, some of which were composed between the fourth and 
eighth centuries. The Amarakosa, composed during this period, 
speaks of all the four Vyihas. A modified form of the Vyiha 
doctrine is also noticed in the joint worship of Balabhadra, 
Krsna and Ekanamé4 (or, Subhadra), their combined image 
being referred to by Varahamihira in the sixth century A.D. 
Gradually Balabhadra came to be regarded as one of the 
Avatéras of Visnu.1 The importance of the Umachal rock ins- 
cription therefore lies in the fact that it testifies to the indepen- 


1, For the worship of Balabhadra, see above, pp. 32ff., 473 also 
History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. 11 (The Age of Imperial Unity), 
PP. 447 ff.; ibid., Vol. III (The Classical Age), p.418. 


82 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


dent worship of Balabhadra in Assam about the fifth century 
A.D.. Thus it appears that, even though the independent wor- 
ship of this Vaisnavite deity was no longer popular, it did 
not die out in the Gupta age. 


II 


A terracotta plaque was discovered in a village under the 
Teghra Police Station of the Begusarai Subdivision in the 
Moghyr District, Bihar. It is semi-circular in shape and has a 
flat obverse and raised reverse. The base of the semicircle is 
about 2} inches long while its bisector is about 1? inches in 
length. There are four or probably five lines of writing engra- 
ved on the obverse. A few letters from the right end of the 
inscription on the obverse have broken away. 

The characters employed in the inscription on the ob- 
verse of the plaque belong to a cursive form of the Gaudiya 
alphabet while those in the writing on the reverse have the 
standard forms of the letters of the same script. It is obvious 
that the two lines of writing on the reverse were impressed on 
the plaque when the clay was quite soft before it had dried up 
or had been baked in the sun. An examination of the letters 
of the inscription on the obverse shows that they were engraved 
before the plaque had been burnt in fire. It is not certain 
whether this record was engraved when the clay was still a little 
soft or it had already quite hardened as a result of baking in the 
sun, although an examination of the engraving appears to sup- 
port the first alternative. In any case, there could not have 
been a long interval between the impressing of the sealing on 
the reverse of the plaque and the engraving of the inscription 
on its obverse. But there is no doubt that the record on the 
reverse is earlier, at least by a few hours, than the epigraph on 
the obverse. 

"The cursive Gaudiya characters of the inscription on the 
obverse of the plaque resemble in some respects the letters of 
the modern Bengali and Maithili alphabets. On palaeographi- 
cal grounds, the record may be assigned to the thirteenth or 
fourteenth century A.D. As indicated above, the writing on 
the reverse of the plaque should also have to be assigned to the 
same age. The language of both the records is Sanskrit. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 83 


The date, quoted in line 1 of the inscription on the obverse, 
reads : Sam 67 Dhausa-dine no doubt standing for Sarwat 67 
Pausa-dine. The record was therefore incised on a day of the 
solar month of Pausa (i.e., Dhanus) in the 67th year of some 
era. Considering the provenance of the plaque and the date 
of the epigraph suggested by its palaeography, it is possible to 
think that the era to which the year has to be referred is none 
other than the Laksmanasena-samvat or La-Sarh which started 
in the Gaya region of South Bihar and later spread to Mithila 
(North Bihar). There is considerable confusion in regard to 
the epoch of this era, and it has been said that ‘the initial year 
of the era, as reckoned at different times and places, varied bet- 
ween 1108 and 1120 A.D.!_ But the earliest dates of the era, 
viz. years 51, 74, and 83, are supposed to have been counted 
from 1179 A.D. which is the date of king Laksmanasena’s 
accession.? The date of the record under study, viz., year 67, 
thus may correspond to c. 1245 A.D. 

Both the lines of writing, impressed on the reverse of the 
plaque by means of a sealing, read Sri-Suhmakasya, the Passage 
being followed by a double danda and a symbol. The sealing, 
used iri imprinting the lines, therefore belonged to a person 
named Suhmaka. It is clear that the same sealing was employ- 
ed twice. The reason for this may be that the letters of the 
lower line, originally impressed, did not all of them come out 
quite clearly. 

The inscription on the obverse of the plaque consists of 
four or probably five lines of writing, of which the first, giving 
the date of the record, has been quoted and discussed above. 
The object of the inscription appears to be that three persons 
named Sadhi, Eci and Aka made a gift of a lotus at the feet of 
Keéava at Nagaldamaka. KeSava appears to have been the 
name of a god or goddess worshipped at a place called Nagal- 
damaka. Whether the name is a mistake for KeSava, meaning 
Visnu, cannot be determined. It seems that Suhmaka was 
the chief priest of the temple of the deity in question or a royal 
official whose seal was believed to impart the required authenti- 
city to the decd of gift. 


1. History of Bengal, Vol. I (Dacca University), pp. a; of. 
JBRS, Vol. XXXVI, Parts 3-4, pp, 10°13. 
2. Sircar, Ind. Ep., p. 276. 





84 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The fact that the offering of a lotus in favour of a deity 
was regarded as important enough to be recorded in an inscrip- 
tion, albeit on a terracotta plaque, appears to suggest that the 
flower was not an ordinary one. It was probably a lotus made 
of gold or silver.1 The inscription points to the custom of 
using clay plaques or tablets as writing material side by side 
with other objects such as copper plates. Terracotta plaques, 
which were not as durable as copper plates, but were much 
cheaper and more easily procurable, were probably used to 
record minor donations of poorer people. 


It 


Burhikhar is a small hamlet adjacent to the famous village 
of Malhar in the Bilaspur District of Madhya Pradesh. A small 
Brahmi inscription was noticed sometime ago on a stone image 
that is being worshipped now at the village under the name of 
Caturbhuji Bhagavan. Unfortunately the image being cover- 
ed with a thick coating of white paint which filled in much of 
the fairly deep incision of the inscription, the writing was found 
to be almost undecipherable. 

I was told in 1950 that the image of the so-called Catur- 
bhuji Bhagavan was formerly not an object of special veneration 
in the locality. Of late a Sadhu came to the village and his 
attention was attracted by the neglected image. It was this 
Sadhu who was responsible for raising a thatched shelter over 
the image and painting it with the white coating referred to 
above. He also instituted a sort of regular worship of the 
image. 

The Caturbhuji Bhagavan, as the name would suggest, 
is a male figure with four arms. It is about two and a half feet 
in height; but its feet are built into the floor apparently because 


1. Flowers made of gold have been discovered at such ancient sites 
as Salihundam (Srikakulam District, Andhra Pradesh) in the course of 
excavations (cf. Indian Archaeology, 1953-54, p. 11). For an offering of 
silver flowers, cf. SI, Vol. IV,No. ro1g. The Kathmandu inscription (Ind. 
Ant., Vol. IX, pp. 178 ff.) of Jayadeva speaks of the gift of a precious 
silver lotus in favour of a Sivaliiga made by the queen-mother Vatsadevi 
daughter of Maukhari Bhogavarman and granddaughter of king Adityasena 
of Magadha. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 85 


the lower part of the image was broken. The figure holds the 
cakra (discus) in the upper left hand and the top of a big gad@ 
(mace) by the upper right, while the palms of the lower two 
hands are folded in the afjali pose. The gadé is a rather long 
flat staff and stands under the right arm of the image. He 
wears a karanda-mukuja (a particular kind of conical crown), 
usually found on the head of subordinate deities. There is a 
globular object below the ears probably representing kundala 
or curled hair loops. The inscription in question is engraved 
in one line on the flat shaft of the gada@. The line begins in the 
upper part of the gad@ and comes downwards. 

The characters of the inscription are Early Brahmi. They 
resemble the alphabet of the Nanaghat cave inscriptions,’ but 
may be slightly later in date. The letter ra is of the straight 
and not of the older corkscrew type. Da has the cursive form, 
occasionally found in the Nanaghat and some other early 
inscriptions side by side with the unmodified older form. The 
downward projection of the left member of bha is shorter than 
in the Nanaghat alphabet and seems to suggest a little later 
date. Ya is usually of the Indian-plough type; but, in one case, 
the straight upper stroke joins the lower curve not in the middle, 
as is usual, but above its right end. Ya with a slanting stroke like 
this is only rarely found in inscriptions and coin legends.?_ The 
epigraph may be palaeographically assigned to a date about 
the close of the first century B.C. or the beginning of the first 
century A.D. 

The language of the inscription is Prakrit. Interesting 
from the orthographical point of view is the ya-fruti in the james 
PayGvati for Prajdvati and Bharadayi for Bharadoaji. 

The object of the inscription was to record the fact that 
the image on which it is engraved was the gift of a lady named 
Prajavati and that it was caused to be made by another lady 
named Bharadvaji. The relation between the two ladies has 
not been stated and cannot be determined. The image was 
no doubt installed in a Vaignava religious establishment that 
must have existed in the Burhikhar-Malhar region in ancient 
tumes. 


1. See Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, Plate facing p. 186. 
2. Cf. Ojha, Pracin Bharatiya Lipimala, Plate X, 1; cf. Plate XII, ii, 
and Plate XIII. 


86 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The importance of the inscription lies not so much in its 
contents, but in the fact that its early characters prove the anti- 
quity of the image on which it is engraved. The description of 
the sculpture will show that it isa Vaisnava image. The lower 
hands in the afjali pose suggest that it is not Visnu, but is pro- 
bably a parivdra-devata of that god. The discovery of the image 
no doubt points to the existence of a Vaisnavite religious esta- 
blishment in the Burhikhar-Malhar region of the Bilaspur District 
of Madhya Pradesh. Considering the antiquity of the image, 
the Vaisnavite establishment, to which it belonged may be 
regarded as the earliest in that part of India and one of the 
earliest in the whole country. 


Iv 


While writing on the history of Northern India after the 
downfall of the Kusana empire,! we tried to draw the attention 
of scholars to two interesting points among others. These two 
are: (1) that the appearance of legends on early Indian money 
including the so-called tribal coinage was due to the influence 
of foreign coins, particularly those of the Indo-Greeks who 
established themselves in North-Western India about the begin- 
ning of the second century B.C., and (2) that the word bhaga- 
vata sometimes used in the legend of certain tribal coins in 
relation to a deity has often been wrongly taken to be Bhdgavata 
and as an epithet of the people who circulated the monetary 
issues. The second of these two suggestions relates to the in- 
teresting custom of issuing coins sometimes exclusively in the 
name of a god and sometimes in the names both of a god and 
the human issuer or issuers of the money, the former no doubt 
being the tutelary deity of the latter. 

The Prakrit legend on two silver coins in the British 
Museum, which are attributed to the Audumbaras, has been 
read in both Kharosthi and Brahmi as bhagavata mahadevasa. 
This has been taken to stand for Sanskrit Bhagavata-Mahadevasya 
and translated into English as ‘of Mahadeva, the worshipper 


1. The Age of Imperial Unity, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay, 1951, 
pp. 159 f. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 87 


of the Bhagavat’.t_ There is, however, little doubt that the 
legend really stands for Sanskrit Bhagavato Mahadevasya, “‘[This 
is the coin] ‘of Lord Mahadeva.” That the coins were not 
issued by a Bhégavata, meaning ‘a devotee of the god Visnu,’ 
seems to be suggested by the fact that they bear the representa- 
tions of a humped bull and a trident (or trident-battle-axe) 
among others. While the trident is the typical weapon of Siva, 
the bull here has to be regarded either as Siva’s vahana or as the 
animal form of the god.?_ Thus the coins were issued in the name 
of the god Mahadeva-Siva. 

There is the word rajarata in Kharosthi in the exergue 
on the obverse of these coins, which is given in Brahmi on the 
reverse as rdjardja. These stand for Sanskrit Rdjardjasya, ‘of 
the king of kings,’ which refers to the god Mahadeva in the 
main part of the legend. We have several instances of a king- 
dom being dedicated to the tutelary deity by a king so that the 
said ruler and his successors regarded themselves as the viceroys 
of the deity who was considered to be the real king of the 
country. Mention may be made in this connection of the later 
Eastern Gangas of Orissa, the Guhilas of Mewar and the Mahd- 
rajas of Travancore, who respectively regarded the gods Puru- 
sottama-Jagannatha, Ekalinga and Padmandbhasvamin as 
their overlord. Of course it is difficult to be sure whether the 
Audumbaras considered the god Mahadeva to be the ruler of 
their country. But another class of their coins leaves no room 
for doubt that the said god was their tutelary deity. 

The full Prakrit legends on four types of Audumbara coins 
have been read respectively as follows : 


(1) Mahadevasa rata Sivadasasa Odubarisa; 
(2) Mahadevasa rata Rudradasasa Odubarisa; 


1. Allan, Catalogue (Anc. Ind.), pp. Ixxxv, 123-24. 

2. Cf, the representation of the bull with the legend jayatu Vrsah on 
the reverse of the coins of the Hina king Mihirakula who was a staunch 
Saiva (Smith, Catalogue, p. 236; Select Inscriptions, p. 401, note 3). 

3. See above, p. 60; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 19. 

4. Likewise, the Kalacuris regarded themselves as the feudatories of 
the Saiva ascetic Vamadeva or Vamasambhu (Ind. Ep., op. cit. pp. 46 ff.). 
Cf. also the story of Chatrapati Sivaji’s dedication of his kingdom to his 
guru Ramadasa. For Vamadeva, sec below. 


83 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


(3) Mahadevasa raita Dharaghosasa Odubarisa; and 

(4) Mahadevasa rata Odubarisa.» 

In Nos. 1-3, Mahadeva (Mahadeva) has been regarded as 
the regal title of the kings Sivadasa, Rudradasa and Dharaghosa, 
while, in No. 4, the same word has been taken to be either the 
personal name of an Audumbara king or the regal title as in the 
other cases.* But in all these cases, Mahadevasa (Mahddevasya) 
has to be separated from the rest of the legend, viz. rafia Siva- 
dasasa Odubarisa (rajiiah Sivadasasya Audumbareh), etc. Thus 
the whole legend would mean, “[This is the coin] of Mahadeva 
[and] of king Sivadasa of the Audumbara clan.” There is 
no doubt that, in No. 4, a royal name like Sivadasa, Rudradasa 
and Dharaghosa is cut off. We have also no doubt that 
Mahadeva of these coins is identical with the god of this name 
known from the silver coins discussed above. Thus, in Nos. 
1-4, the coins are represented as having been issued in the names 
of both the Audumbara king and his tutelary deity. That the 
kings were Saivas is indicated by the appearance of the trident- 
battle-axe on the coins. 

The legend on a type of coins attributed to the Kunindas 
has been finally read by Allan as Bhagavata-Catresvara-mahatmanah 
which appears to have been taken to mean, “This is the coin 
of the exalted Catresvara who is the devotee of the Bhagavat,”” 
as in the case of Bhagavata-Mahadevasa® discussed above. But 
the fact that the figure of the god Siva holding a trident appears 
on the obverse of these coins shows that they were not issued by 
a Bhdgavata or devotee of the god Visnu. The legend is thus 
apparently Bhagavatah Catre§vara-mahatmanah . meaning, “ [This 
is the coin] of Lord Catresvara who is the Supreme Spirit.” 
Thus Catresvara was the name not of a king, but of a form 
of the god Siva. He was the deity in whose name the coins 
were issued probably by the Kunindas as in the case of the 
Mahadeva issues attributed to the Audumbaras. 

On some specimens of the coins of the Yaudheyas, the 


1. Allan, op. cit., p. lxxxiv. 

2. Cf. ibid., p. Ixxxiii : “As Mahadeva is also found as a regal title 
on these coins, it is possible that some of the specimens attributed to him in 
‘he Catalogue are really incomplete specimens of other rulers.” 

3. Ibid., p. ciii; cf. pp. 167-68. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 89 


legend has been read as Yaudheya-bhdgavata-svémino Brahmanyasya* 
which has been -translated as, ‘of Brahmanya (a name of 
Karttikeya), the divine lord of the Yaudheyas’. But the in- 
tended reading of this legend is apparently either Yaudheyandm 
Bhagavatak Svamino Brahmanyasya or Bhagavatakh Svamino 
Bramanyasya Yaudheydnam. The first of these may be translated 
as either (1) “(This is the coin] of the Yaudheyas and of the 
Divine Lord Brahmanya,” as in the case of the Mahadeva 
issues of the Audumbara kings Sivadasa, Rudradasa and Dhara- 
ghosa, or (2) “[This is the coin] of the Divine Lord Brahmanya 
who is the tutelary deity of the Yaudheyas.” The alternative 
reading, which may really be the same as the first, can also be 
interpreted in the same way. 

As in the case of the Mahadeva and Catregvara coins 
ascribed respectively to the Audumbaras and Kunindas, some 
specimens of Yaudheya coins appear to mention the god Brah- 
manyadeva Kumara without reference to the Yaudheyas. This 
legend has been read as Bhdgavata-svimino Brahmanyadevasya 
Kumérasya? and translated as ‘of Kumara, the divine lord 
Brahmanyadeva.’ But the intended reading is no doubt 
Bhagavatak Svamino Brahmanyadevasya Kumarasya, “(This is the 
coin] of Lord Brahmanyadeva alias Kumara.” 

There is a group of interesting coins coming from Agroha 
and its neighbourhood in the Hissar District of the Haryana 
State. There are two types in this group, the first bearing 
the legend : Agodakdé Agdca-janapadasa probably standing for 
Sanskrit Agrodakat Agratya-janapadasya, “[This is the coin] 
of the Agratya-janapada issued from Agrodaka.’’* This reminds 


1, Allan, op. cit., p. cxlix. The legend read as Bhdgavata-svdmino 
Brahmanya-Yaudheya also belongs to the same class, 

2. Ibid., p. cl. Kumardsya is apparently a misprint like many others 
in this part of the book. 

3. Ibid., pp. clvii ff.; L. D. Barnett in BSOS, Vol. X, pp. 279 ff.; 
P. L, Gupta in 7NSI, Vol. IV, pp. 49ff. Gupta quotes the views of several 
other writers on the coins. See also 7NSI, Vol. VIII, p. 32. 

4- For Agratya=Agéca, cf. dgatya=dgéca in the Rummindei pillar 
inscription (CII, Vol. 1, p. 164). Bernett speaks of the Sanskrit form as 
Agratya or Agrattya while Gupta and others derive Agaca from Agreya, a 
People known from the Mahdbhdrata. We do not agree with the latter 
view, though Agratya and Agreya both mean ‘the people of Agra’. K. N. 
Dikshit derived it from Agatya, Agastya or Anigatya (cf. JNSI, Vol. V. p. 50). 


90 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


us of the legend on the Sibi coins, which reads Majhamikaya 
Sibi-janapadasa (Sanskrit | Madhyamikayah Sibi-janapadagya), 
“(This is the coin] of the Sibi-janapada [issued] from Madhya- 
mika.” 

The form Agdca seems to be derived from Agratya through 
the intermediate Prakrit form Aggacca by simplifying the re- 
duplication of cca and compensating the loss by lengthening 
the preceding vowel, though the simplification of gga to ga is 
due to the avoidance of reduplication in the Prakrit of early 
inscriptions and coins, i.e. Agratya>Aggacca>Aggdca:=Agaca. 
The word Agratya would literally mean the inhabitants of 
the Agra country? while Agrodaka seems to have been the 
headquarters of the janapada or republican corporation of the 
Agratyas. This Agrodaka is no doubt the same as modern 
Agroha where many of the coins under study were discovered.® 

On the second type of the Agroha coins, Barnett read the 
legend as : Agdcamitrapadabhisthayinam or Agacamitrapadabhi- 
Sthayinah, in which he understood the expression mitrapada in the 
sense of ‘an allied state’, i.e. a state allied with the Agaca or 
Agratya people. But the legend does not give any satisfactory 
sense in that case, and it looks rather unusual. It appears 
to us that the intended reading of the legend is : Agdcamitra 
(Agratyamitra )-pad-abhisthayinam, “[This is the coin] of those 
who dwell at the feet of Agratyamitra.”” The name Agratya- 
mitra would literally mean ‘the friend of the Agratyas’, and 
Agratyamitra would appear to have been a god who was the tu- 


1. Cf. Allan, op. cit., p. cxxiv. 

2. That the name of the land was Agra seems to be supported by the 
name of the Agravala (Agrawala=Sanskrit Agrapdla) community which 
hails from it. It may be that the name Agrodaka was also often indicated 
by its first part, viz. Agra. The geographical name Purusottama-puri is 
known to have been shortened as Purusottama or Puri (above, p.67, note 3). 

3. The headquarters of the Agra country may have been called Agr- 
odaka, ‘the Agra water’, owing to the existence of a big tank (cf. JNSI, 
Vol. IV, p. 54). In that case, both the country and its capital were 
called Agra originally, though the latter was later called Agrodaka in 
order to distinguish it from the former. There is also the possibility that 
the Agratyas lived in a small area forming a sort of city-corporation. But, 
even in such a case, the locality where the administrative office of the cor- 
poration was situated may have been called Agrodaka to distinguish it from 
the rest of Agra. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 91 


telary deity of the Agratyas of Agrodaka. Thus these coins were 
issued by the Agratyas not directly in the name of their tutelary 
deity, as in the case of some of the coins of the Audumbaras, 
Kunindas and Yaudheyas, but in the name of themselves re- 
presented as the devotees of the god Agratyamitra of Agrodaka. 


Vv 


The religion of the Hindus is not guided by the personality 
of a single man like Christ or Muhammad. In fact, it has been 
catholic enough to acknowledge the guidance of any religious 
teacher. Early Indian law-givers really believed that they 
wrote not for the people of a particular locality, but for all the’ 
peoples they knew. Manu, e.g., includes the following peoples 
in a list of degraded Ksatriyas— 

Paundrakas-=c-=Audra-Dravidah Kamboja Yavanah Sakah 1 

Péradah Pahlava$-=Cinah Kirata Daradah Khasah \* 

These are the Paundraka (people of North Bengal), 
Odra (people of Orissa), Dravida (Tamil people), Kamboja 
(Iranian settlers of the Kandahar region and elsewhere ), Yavana 
(Greek), Saka (Scythian), Parada (Parthian), Pahlava 
(Persian or Sassanian), Cina (Chinese), Kirata (Nepalese), 
Darada (people of the Kishenganga Valley in Kashmir) and 
Khasa (a people of Kashmir or the Himalayan region). Again 
the Lord says in the Gita— 

Yada yadé hi dharmasya glanir=bhavati Bharata \ 

abhyutlhanam = adharmasya tad=dtmanarh srjamy = aham \\ 

paritrandya sddhiindm vindsaya ca duskytam 1 

dharma-sarhsthapan-drthaya sambhavami yuge yuge (I? 

“Wherever there is decline of Dharma and rise of Adharma, 
O descendant of Bharata, there I create myself. For the relief 
of the pious and for the destruction of the sinners, and for the 
establishment of Dharma, I am born in different ages.” This 
was said not with reference to the people we now call Hindu, 
but with reference to all peoples. And thus, not only the Buddha, 
but Christ, Muhammad, Nanak and other great religious 


1. X.4q. For c=Audra, Coda is a variant reading. 
2. IV. 7-8. 


92 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


teachers may all be taken as Avatdras, the number of which is 
sometimes said to be asankheya (innumerable). 

All Indian religious teachers drew more or less upon the 
philosophical teachings of India and stood upon her traditions 
and customs. Like other religious teachers, the Gurus of the 
Sikhs could not be immune from such influence. It is not very 
difficult to prove that the philosophical and practical sides of 
Sikhism have both Hinduism as their background. Let us 
consider the peculiar reverence which the Sikhs exhibit to the 
sword. This sword-worship is not an innovation. 

According to Manu— 

Kuruksetram$-=ca MatsyathS ca Paitcélan=Sirasenakan \ 

dirghdn laghim$-=c-=aiva nardn-~agramikesu yodhayet \\* 

This verse shows that at least certain ancient Indian kings 
recruited their soldiers chiefly from the peoples of Kuruksetra 
(the Eastern Punjab and its vicinity), Matsya (country to the 
west of Mathira), Paficala (Ahicchatra and Kanauj regions) 
and Siirasena (Mathura region). It is, therefore, not with- 
out a traditional background that the Sikh Gurus, eager as 
they were to save their community from Muslim aggression,tried 
to make a martial class of their followers who were generally 
people of the land round about the Eastern Punjab. In this 
connection, it is also interesting to note that the Mahabharata 
considers sword to be ‘the foremost of weapons’ (agryah 
praharananan-=ca khadgo Médravati-suta)* and enjoins— 

aseS:=ca pija kartayya sada yuddha-visdradaih,® ie. “the 
sword should always be worshipped by the people expert in 
fighting.” The psychology of this custom may even today be 
noticed in the implement-worship of the Navasakhas or Nava- 
sdyakas of Bengal. These nine middle castes of the Hindu 
society are the peasant, the florist, the oilman, the weaver, the 
confectioner, the betel-dealer, the potter, the blacksmith and 
the barber. On the last day of the month of Bhadra, members 
of these castes perform worship of the god Visvakarman. The 
things actually to be worshipped in this connection are, how- 
ever, the plough for the peasant, flowers and garlands for the 


1. VIL. 193. 
2, XII. 85. 
3. XII. 87. 


BALABHADRA AND OTHER DIVINITIES 93 


florist, the oil-presser for the-oilman, the weaving machine for 
the weaver, sweets for the confectioner, betel leaves for the betel- 


dealer, pots, etc., for the potter, the anvil and bellows for the 
blacksmith, and the razor, etc., for the barber.! 


1. Cf. Risley, People of India, p. 235 : “The soldier worships his 
sword; the cultivator his plough; the money-lender his ledger! the Thags... 
the pickaxe with which they dug the graves of their victims; and...the 


operatives in the jute mills near Calcutta...the Glasgow-made engines which 
drive their looms.” 





Cuapter VI 
SAKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 
I 


The objects unearthed at the protohistoric sites of the 
Indus valley culture appear to point to the prevalence of the 
cult of the Father-god and the Mother-goddess amongst the 
pre-Aryan peoples of North-Western Bharatavarsa. Recent 
explorations and excavations have shown that the said proto- 
historic civilization spread its influence over considerable parts 
of Western India. It is thus possible to think that the worship 
of the Mother-goddess was not unknown in Western India in 
the protohistoric times. 

The Mahisamardini form of the Mother-goddess has been 
popular in the Rajasthan area since very early times. The 
earliest representation of the deity is said to be offered by 
certain terracotta plaques discovered at Nagar near Uniyara 
in the Tonk District, which are now preserved in the Amber 
Museum. One of these has been assigned to the first century 
B.C. or first century A.D.1_ Stone images of the said deity have 
been discovered in large numbers from all parts of Rajasthan, 
and the Rajputs, both the rulers and the common men, are 
known to have been generally devoted to the goddess and to 
have been worshipping her under various local names.* 

A stanza in adoration of the same form of the Mother- 
goddess is found at the beginning of an inscription from the 
Bhramaramata temple near Chhoti Sadri not far from the 
Neemuch station on the Ajmer-Khandwa railway line.® 
Another stanza of the inscription speaks of the Ardhanarisvara 
conception, the right half of the form being Siva and the left 
half Sakti. The epigraph records the construction and conse- 
cration of a temple of the Devi in January, 491 A.D. The 

1. V. S. Srivastava, Gatlogue and Guide to the Ganga Golden Jubilee 
Museum, Bikaner, 1961, p. 

2. Loc, cit. The "Mahabharata represents Skanda generally and Siva 
and Durga occasionally as the destroyer of Mahisa (Soerenson’s Index, 


P- 458). cf. Ind, Mus. Bul..January, | 1969, pp. 60-61. 
3. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, pp. 120 ff. 


S$AKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 95 


goddess is described in the stanza referred to above as Asura- 
darana-tikna-Sila (holding a sharp spear piercing the Asura, 
i.e. Mahis-dsura) and as simh-ogra-yukta-ratham:=dsthita-canda- 
vega (moving in terrific speed in a chariot drawn by a fierce 
lion). The second of the two epithets is interesting because, 
in the early representations of Mahisamardini, the lion is 
sometimes absent and, even when present, does not usually 
figure as drawing a chariot carrying the goddess.’ 

It is well known that the Brhatsamhita (LX. 19) by 
Varahamihira, the celebrated Maga-Brahmana astronomer 
of the Ujjayini school,- refers to the worship of the Divine 
Mothers by the Matr-mandala-vidah or mandala-krama-vidah. 
The first of the two variant readings, means ‘those who know 
fully the circle of the Divine Mothers’, while, in the other 
reading accepted by Utpala, the word krama means ‘custom 
or rule sanctioned by tradition’. Utpala_ explains mandala- 
krama as piija-krama, i.e. mandala-pija-krama (traditional rules 
regarding the worship of the mandala), and further says, mdtrnam 
sva-kalpa-vihita-vidhanen =aiva, i.e. the worship of the Divine 
Mothers should be performed in accordance with their indi- 
vidual precepts. The same meaning of krama is evident from 
the names of such works as Odiyana-Tard-krama, ‘the traditional 
process of worship of the goddess Tara of Uddiyana’.? Instead 
of Matr-mandala, the expression Matr-cakra is sometimes used. 
Thus Kalhana’s Réjatarangini (V. 55) speaks of ‘the temple 
of Bhairava who together with the Matr-cakra (circle of the 
Mothers), is worshipped close to Bhittega’. 

As regards thé word mandala, we have of course its use 
in expressions like Siva-mandala-diksd and Arya-Tard-mandala- 
vidhi-ndma-sddhana.* In these cases, mandala seems to mean 
‘the magic circle’. But the Matr-mandala, which is also referred 
to in the passage Matrndm loka-matrném mandalam occurring in 
a sixth century inscription from Udaygiri (Jhansi District, U.P.) 
recording the construction and consecration of a temple of the 


1, Banerjea, Development of Hindu Iconogrophy, 2nd ed., pp. 498ff.; 
cf. pp. 134ff. - 

2. 
stotra, p. xii. 
3. Eb. Ind., Vol. XXXII, p. 181. 
4 Cf. S. G. Vidyabhushan, op. cit., p. xi. 






C. Vidyabhushan, Bauddhastotrasamgraha, Vol. 1: Sragdhara- 


95 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Divine Mothers, seems to be the same as the Matr-gana or ‘the 
group of the Divine Mothers’ as mentioned in the records of 
the Early Kadamba kings. These rulers claimed to have been 
favoured by the god Sadanana or Mahasena (i.e. Skanda 
Karttikeya) and the Divine Mothers or their group, while the 
Early Calukyas of Badami are stated to have been nourished 
by the Seven Mothers described as Sapta-loka-mdtr, often inter- 
preted as ‘the Seven Mothers of mankind’, though the real 
meaning may be ‘the Mothers of the Seven Worlds’! The 
reference in all these cases seems to be to the collective worship 
of the Divine Mothers regarded as seven in number and pro- 
bably known as the Circle of Seven. 

Although the number of the Divine Mothers is often given 
as eight and sometimes also as nine and sixteen, originally the 
goddesses appear to have been counted as seven, enumerated 
in certain texts as (1) Brahmi or Brahmani, (2) Maheévari, 
(3) Kaumari, (4) Vaisnavi, (5) Varahi, (6) Indrani, Aindri 
or Mahendri and (7) Camunda. But the names in the differ- 
ent lists giving the same number of goddesses, not to speak of 
the bigger lists, are not exactly the same. Even in the popular 
list of eight deities, Yami, Candika, Carcikaé, Narasimhi, etc., 
are variously introduced. The Puranas represent the Divine 
Mothers as attending usually on Karttikeya, but sometimes on 
Siva. Their association with Karttikeya, possibly determined 
their original number being seven, since the said god, though 
he is famous as SanmAtura or ‘the son of Six Mothers’, may be 
regarded as having seven mothers lncluding the six Krttikas 
together with Parvati or Ganga. 3 

It will be seen that, in Western India as in some other 
parts of the country, at least in the age of the Guptas, the Mother- 


1. Gf. Sircar, The Successors of the Satavéhanas, pp. 239-40. 

2. See Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. matrké; Monier-Wlliams, Sans.-Eng. 
Dict., s. v. matr; Apte, Pract, Sans.-Eng. Dict., s. v. matr. Under the Brhat- 
samhitdé, LVII.56, Utpala speaks of Varuni and Kauberi in the list of the 
Mothers. 

3. Cf. Monier-Williams, op. cit.,s. v. Karttikeya. There is a slab 
bearing the representation of only three Divine Mothers, viz. Brahmant, 
Kaumari and Vaisnavi (Banerjea, op. cit., p. 505). But, at the place 
of worship in question, there may have been other slabs bearing the 
figures of the other Matrkas. 


SAKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 97 


goddess was worshipped in her individual aspects as well as - 
collectively in a Circle of Seven. That there was a pronounced 
Tantric element in the Mother-goddess cult of the said area 
is clear from an Aulikara inscription of 423 A.D.1 This epi- 
graph records the construction and consecration of the god 
Visnu by a person who had apparently both Sakta and Vaisnava 
leanings. 

This is an interesting feature of West Indian religious life, 
and another important fact is that the temple of the Mothers is 
described as a terrible abode full of Dakinis or female ghouls 
(dakini-samprakirna) and the goddesses themselves are repre- 
seted as uttering loud and tremendous shouts of joy and stirring 
up the very oceans with the winds rising from the tantra or 
magical rites (pramudita-ghan-dtyartha-nihradini and tantrodbhita- 
prabala-pavan-odvartit-dmbhonidhi ). 

The above description of the Divine Mothers and their 
temple in a West Indian epigraph of the fifth century A.D. is 
especially interesting because, in the said region, the later phases 
of Buddhism do not appear to have influenced Tantricism in 
any appreciable degree. The case is thus unlike that of 
East Indian areas like Bengal where Brahmanical Tantricism 
and the later phases of Buddhism became almost inextricably 
mixed up particularly in the age of the Palas who were Bud- 
dhists. 

The popularity of the Mother-goddess in Western India 
during the post-Gupta age is indicated by a Bhilsa inscription 
of 878 A.D. It says how a person named Hatia ' purchased 
two vithis (shops) and dedicated them in favour of the Mothers, 
ive, the Mother-goddesses worshipped in the Bhayillasvamin 
(Sun-god) temple or in the shrines in its precincts.? 


Il 
Of the many varieties of the image of the Buddhist goddess 


Tara, which are emanations of the various Dhyani-Buddhas, 
Khadiravani-Tara (i.e. the Tara worshipped at or in Khadira 


1. Select Inscriptions, Vol. 1, pp. 284f. 
2. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 213; also below. 


98 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


+ vana), an emanation of Amoghasiddhi, is the commonest. 
She is also called Syama-Tara owing to her green (dark) colour 
and is represented as seated or standing, as holding a nilotpala 
in her left hand and as usually accompanied by Agokakanta- 
Marici and Ekajata. 

The representation of a deity of the same class is found ina 
manuscript of the Asfasahasriké Prajfdpdramita copied in Eastern 
India in the year 1015 A.D., which describes the goddess as 
Candradvipe Bhagavati Tard, i.e. the goddess Tara worshipped 
in Candradvipa.* Tara, installed in a temple of Candradvipa 
was thus one of the most celebrated Buddhist deities in Bengal 
during the age of the Palas. Among the images of the same 
deity worshipped in other areas of the Pala empire, one of the 
most important is the Hilsa (Patna District, Bihar) statue bear- 
ing the Tantric formula Om Tare Tuttare Ture svadha and an ins- 
cription of the 35th regnal year of Devapala (c. 810-50 A.D.).® 

In the second quarter of the seventh century A.D., the 
celebrated Chinese pilgrim Hiuen-tsang speaks of a Mahayana 
Buddhist establishment at Tiladhaka in Magadha, wherein a 
temple of the Buddha was flanked by those of ‘To-lo’-bodhisattva 
and Avalokitesvara-bodhisattva.* Elsewhere he mentions ‘To 
lo’-bodhisattva as a popular object of worship installed in a 
brick temple at Nalanda.° 

Watters points out that, in both the cases, ‘To-lo’-bodhi- 
sattva is referred to without any indication of sex and that this 
Bodhisattva became ‘the Holy Mother Tara, the spiritual wife 
of Kuan-yin (AvalokiteSvara)’.6 She is said to be residing 
at the foot of a mountain in the Southern Ocean, i.e. the Indian 
Ocean or the Bay of Bengal. There may be reference here to 
Tara’s temple in Candradvipa, literally ‘the Dwab or island 
of Candra’.” 


1. History of Bengal, Vol. I, ed. Majumdar, p. 472. 

2. Ibid. p. 422; Bhattasali, Catalogue of Buddhist and Brakmanical 
Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, p. 12. There was also Buddhardhitara 
worshippped in Samatata. 

3. JBORS, Vol. X, pp. 31 ff. : 

4. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, Vol. ‘II, p. 105. 

5. Ibid., p. 171. 

1. Ibid., p. 107. 

2. If such was the case, the hill near the Tara temple may be re- 
garded as a big mound like the hillocks at Chittagong. 


SAKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 99 


In the 16th and 17th centuries, Candradvipa was a small 
principality in the Buckergunge District, and it had its head- 
quarters first at Kachuwa and then at Madhavapasa. It has 
been identified with the Pargana of Bagla or Bakla in the 
Sarkar of the same name known from the ‘Ain-i-Akbari.? Tara 
of Candradvipa was thus worshipped in the Bakla-Candradvipa 
or Kachuwa-Madhavapasa area of the Buckergunge District. 
Some scholars are inclined to identify Candradvipa of earlier 
records with modern Sandvip, an island (dvipa) in the Bay 
of Bengal between the Buckergunge and Chittagong Districts.? 
There is, however, no support in favour of this suggestion ex- 
cepting the similarity of the names, the word dvipa being often 
used to indicate the dwab or land between two rivers. The 
same meaning is noticed in the name of Bakla-Candradvip 
which is not an island. 

The antiquity of the goddess Tara of Candradvipa is sug- 
gested by the fact that the celebrated Buddhist grammarian 
Candragomin, who is said to have settled in Candradvipa and 
is called Dvaipa (an inhabitant of the Dvipa, i.e. Candradvipa), 
wrote his stotra of Tara, entitled Arya-Tar-dntarbali-viddhi,? very 
probably inspired by the goddess of Candradvipa. Candra- 
gomin is supposed by many scholars to have flourished in the 
Gupta age‘ in the 5th and 6th centuries, since he is believed to 
refer to the Gupta victory over the Hiinas, which is to be as- 
cribed to Skandagupta (455-67 A.D.) or to Baladitya (sixth 
century). As the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen-tsang noticed the 
prevalence of the Tara cult in the first half of the 7th century 
A.D., the worship of the goddess seems to have been prevalent 
also in the 5th and 6th centuries, while Hirananda Sastri has 
tried to show that the goddess does not date further back than 
the 5th century A.D.* Tara worshipped in a temple of Candra- 
dvipa seems to be one of the earliest representations of the goddess. 
It also appears that Syama or the green (dark) variety is one 
of the earliest forms of Tara, Syma as the name of the Mother- 


Majumdar, op. cit., p. 18. 
Ibid., p. 298, note 6. 
Ibid., p. 299, note 2. 
See ibid., p. 297. 

Cf. loc, cit., note 6. 

Ibid., p. 299, note 2. 


PERS St 


100 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


goddess being still very much popular in Bengal. It is, how- 
ever, difficult to say whether Khadiravana, from which Kha- 
diravani-Tara received her name, was a locality situated in 
ancient Candradvipa.! 

The recently discovered Nesari plates of the Rastrakita 
king Govinda III (794-814 A.D.) refer to the great veneration 
in which the goddess Tara was held by the Pala kings of Eastern 
India. The official records of the Palas speak of their seal as 
the Dharmacakra-mudra representing the Buddhist Wheel of Law 
flanked by a deer oneither side, and the said seal was affixed 
to the top of the copper-plates on which their charters were 
engraved. But the Nesari plates show that the Pala standard 
or banner bore the representation of Bhagavati Tara. As in the 
case of several other ruling families of early medieval India, the 
Palas thus appear to have had two different emblems, viz. the 
Dharmacakra for their seal and the goddess Tara for their 
standard or banner.? 

It is stated in the Nesari plates that Govinda III defeated 
the contemporary rulers and snatched away their standards or 
banners: (1) the fish from the Pandya king, (2) the bull 
from the Pallava rulers, (2) the tiger from the Cola, (4) the 
elephant from the Ganga (Western Ganga), (5) the bow from 
the Kerala, (6-8) the boar from the Andhra (Eastern Calukya), 
Calukya and Maurya, (9) the board bearing the kettle-drum 
and serpent from the Gurjara king, (10-12) the name from 
the kings of Kosala, Avanti and Sirhhala, and (13) Bhagavati 
Tara from Dharma (Dharmapila), the king of Vangala. 

It will be seen that, excepting Dharmapila, no other ad- 
versary of the Rastrakiita king has been mentioned, in the 
list, by name and that, excepting the kings of the Kosala, 
Avanti and Simhala countries, who had their individual names 
on their banners, the reference is generally to dynastic emb- 
lems on the rulers’ banners or standards, which were often the 

" same as those on the seals of the royal families in question. 
Tara on Dharmapila’s standard or banner was very probably 


1. It isa matter of investigation whether Khadira was grown in the 
Sundarbans or elsewhere in the Buckergunge District. Of course even a 
single Khadira tree in a wood near about the Tara temple would have 
justified the name. 

2. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIV, p. 137. 


SAKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 101 


the dynastic emblem of the Palas for their standard or banner 
just as the Dharmacakra was for their seals. 

That Dharmapala alone is mentioned by name in the 
whole list is no doubt due to his recognition as one of the most 
powerful monarchs of his time, while his mention merely as 
the lord of Vangala, which was originally a small part of Vanga, 
in spite of his suzerainty over much wider areas including Bengal 
and Bihar, indicates a sneering tone in the language of the 
RaAstrakiita court poet whose purpose was to belittle his patron’s 
strongest adversary. 

In the 16th century, Abu’l Fazal regards Vangala as 
another name of Vanga, the derivation of which he explains 
by saying that the former rulers of Vanga raised huge mounds 
or embankments called dl, all over the area. Since such em- 
bankments are made even today to keep off sea-water from the 
corn-fields in coastal Bengal including the Buckergunge District, 
Abu’l Fazal’s derivation of Varigdla from Variga-al would sug- 
gest that Vangala was originally situated in the coastal areas 
of South Bengal.1 This is probably supported by the fact that, 
while the inscriptions of the Candra dynasty represent the early 
Candra king Trailokyacandra as the ruler of Candradvipa, the 
Tirumalai epigraph of Rajendra-cola speaks of the later Candra 
monarch Govindacandra as the king of the Vangala country 
exactly as Dharmapala has been described in the Nesari plates 
of Govinda III. Thus Candradvipa would appear to be 
essentially identical with Vangala, although the conquest of 
East Bengal by the Candras of Candradvipa or Vangala led 
to the application of the name Vangala to the whole of that 
area, while the emergence of Vikramapura in Vanga, also 
called Vangiala since the days of the later Candras, as the capital 
of the rulers of Bengal finally made Vangala, in the medieval 
period, the name of the entire Bengali-speaking region.> 

With the representation of Dharmapala in the Nesari 
plates as the king of Vangala, we have to compare the Tibetan 
tradition speaking of Dharmapila’s father Gopala, the founder 
of the Pala empire, as originally ruling in the Bhangala or 


1. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medicral India, p. 132. 
2. Cf. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIV, pp. 139-40. 
3. Of. Sircar, op. cit., p. 126. 


102 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Vangala country. This would appear to suggest that the 
Palas began their career as the rulers of Vangala otherwise 
called Candradvipa. Thus, probably, the great devotion of 
the Pala kings to Tara, the celebrated goddess of Candradvipa, 
whose representation they adopted as the emblem of their 
standard or banner, is easily explained. 

It may be mentioned here that the goddess Tara appears 
to have been originally worshipped by some aboriginal people 
(probably of Eastern India) and was adopted in both the 
Brahmanical and Buddhist pantheons in the early centuries 
of the Christian era. Several goddesses, including a few 
Mongoloid ones, merged in Tara in the course of time. 


I 


According to the Harivamfa,2 Himavat or Himalaya, the 
lord of the mountains, had five children by his wife Mena or 
Menaka. Two of them were sons and three were daughters. 
The sons were Krauficha and Mainaka and the daughters 
Aparna, Ekaparna and Ekapatala. Aparna, while practising a 
severe penance, gave up food altogether. Mena in her anxiety 
to dissuade her daughter cried out u mé, i.e. ‘oh [my daughter], 
do not [practise penance]” whence Aparna came to be known 
as Uma. Aparna-Uma was given in marriage to Mahadeva 
(Siva), while her sisters Ekaparna and Ekapatala were 
married respectively to the sages Asita-Devala and Jaigisavya. 
The Amarakosa* supports the tradition recorded in the Hari- 
vaméa as it enumerates Uma and Aparna as two of the names 
of Durga, daughter of the Mountain (Himalaya) and Mena 
and the wife of Igvara-Siva. Kalidasa also explains the word 
Uma‘ as the name of Himalaya’s daughter and Siva’s wife in 
the same way as the Harivamsa. The poet further explains 
the name Aparna® by referring it to the fact that Uma, during 
the latest stage of her penance, did not take any food, not even 


Majumdar, op. cit., p. 1843 cf. IHQ, Vol. XVI, pp. 227-35. 
I, 18. 15 ff. 

I. 36 ff. 

Kumarasambhava, 1. 26. 

Ibid., V. 28. 


Pree se 


SAKTI OR THE MOTHER-GODDESS 103 


dried leaves (parma) which she had been taking earlier. The 
story of the Harivarfa is found in a slightly modified form in 
works like the Matsya Purana! where the identification of Uma 
and Aparna is not maintained. It is said that the three daughters 
of Himalaya and Menaka were named Uma, Ekaparna and 
Aparna who were married respectively to Rudra (Siva), Asita 
and Jaigisavya. The section of the Matsya Purépa in question 
seems, however, to be a medieval interpolation. 

Indian traditions represent the great Mother Goddess 
(Adya Sakti) with a very large number of names; but it has 
been suggested that they are not merely names of the same 
goddess, but that they originally indicated different goddesses 
worshipped by different tribes in different parts of the country 
and that they were afterwards identified with the Mother 
Goddess. It is also believed that aboriginal elements have 
largely contributed not only to the conception of Siva, but also 
to that of his wife. Siva’s relation with hill tribes is indicated 
by his name Girifa, ‘one who dwells on the mountain’. His 
wife on the other hand is intimately associated with the 
Himalayas and therefore with the Himalayan mountaineers. 
There is reason to believe that a number of deities wor- 
shipped by hill tribes are traceable in Durga. The aboriginal 
tribe of the Sabaras is actually mentioned in the Kaliké Purdpa* 
in connection with the ceremonial worship of that goddess. It 
is now usually admitted that the traditional interpretation of 
the name Umi is merely a fabrication and that the word is 
apparently the same as Dravidian amma meaning ‘mother’ 
used in the sense of the Mother Goddess. 

The traditional interpretation of the name Aparna, like 
that of Uma, seems also to have been fabricated. As the use of 
leaves for covering the loins can be traced among some of the 
primitive tribes of India even to-day, it is very probable that 
the word Aparna really means ‘one without leaves covering 
one’s loins’, that is to say, ‘naked’. The Brhatsamhita* refers 
to two branches of the well known Sabara people as Nagna- 


11367 
2. 61.17 ff. 
3. XIV. 10. 


104 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Sabara (the naked Sabaras) and Parna-Sabara (the leaf-clad 
Sabaras).1 It is interesting to note that there is a Buddhist 
deity called Parna-Sabari, apparently named after the Parna- 
Sabaras. Very probably this goddess was originally worshipped 
by the above branch of the Sabara people. In representations, 
the deity is actually found with leaves round her loins: Aparna, 
‘the naked goddess’, may likewise have been originally wor- 
shipped by a naked aboriginal tribe such as the Nagna-Sabara. 
It is well known that one of the celebrated names of the Indian 
Mother-Goddess is Digambari, ‘the naked woman’, 


1. Cf. reference to tammidala Sabara, ‘the Sabara having turmeric 
leaves for his garment’, in Vakpati’s Gaudavaha, verse 338. 


Cuapetr VII 
KUMARA AND VINAYAKA IN UTTARAPATHA 


I 

An inscribed stone slab was discovered from a spring- 
tank about three miles from Abbottabad in the Hazara District 
of the former North-West Frontier Province of what is now 
West Pakistan. It was secured for the Lahore Museum and 
was noticed by Daya Ram Sahni in the Annual Report of the 
Superintendent, Hindu and Buddhist Monuments, Northern Circle, for 
the year ending 3\st March, 1919. There are two notes on the 
record in the said work, ont at p. 18 and the other in Appen- 
dix C(No. 2). The date of the epigraph is quoted in the 
latter as the year “25 or 125 of an unknown era, possibly the 
Gupta era,” while in the former it is said, “It is dated in 
the year 25 on the first day of Margasira. The era employed 
is not specified; but there seems to be no doubt that the era 
intended is the Gupta era. The date of the inscription would 
then correspond to A.D, 344.” The latter quotes the name of 
the ruler mentioned in the inscription as Maharaja Kadamb- 
eSvaradasa; but the former says, “The name of the reigning 
chief was Mahéraja Kadambesvara; but nothing is known of 
him from any other source.” As regards the object of the 
record, Sahni says, ‘“The purpose of the inscription is to record 
the making of something, the nature of which cannot be clearly 
made out. But as the slab bearing this record was found in a 
spring-tank three miles from Abbottabad, it is possible that the 
construction of the tank itself is meant. The author of the work 
was a certain person named Saphara Kumara Sthanamgasira. 
Both the names are curious and appear to be foreign.” 
Unfortunately, these observations regarding the purport of the 
inscription contain a number of errors.2. The record has not 
been noticed in D. R. Bhandarkar’s List of the Inscriptions of 

Northern India. 
1, Diacritical marks are wanting in this publication. We have sup- 
plied them in our quotations. It is said that West Pakistan is again 


going to be divided into its old provinces in the near future. 
‘2. It will be seen that, with reference to “Saphara Kumara Sthanarnga- 


106 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The epigraph is written in Brahmi characters and may 
be assigned on palaeographical grounds to a date about the 
third century A.D. The palaeography of the inscription may 
be regarded as showing the characteristics of a period between 
the second and the fourth centuries and may therefore be 
roughly assigned to the third century A.D. although it does 
not appear to be earlier than the middle of that century. The 
characters of the present epigraph resemble those of the Shorkot 
(Jhang District, West Pakistan) inscription,’ assigned to 403 
A.D., but exhibit earlier traits especially in the formation of the 
medial vowel-marks. The most. interesting fact about the 
palaeography of the present inscription in Brahmi characters © 
in that it was discovered in an area where Kharosthi was the 
popular script. The popularity of Kharosthi in the Peshawar- 
Hazara region as late at least as the third century A.D. is indi- 
cated by inscriptions and accepted by scholars.? The discovery 
of the epigraph under study has therefore some bearing on the 
gradual ousting of Kharosthi by Brahmi in the area about 
the former North-West Frontier Province. Again the language 
of the Kharosthi inscriptions discovered in this region is Prakrit 


SGra”, Sahni speaks of oné personal name as well as two personal names. 
‘This is apparently because he had in his mind Sdphara-kumdra Sthdnamgasiira, 
ive. “Sthanarhgasdra, son of Saphara’’. Unfortunately, no such passage 
actually occurs in the inscription. 

1, Ibid., Vol. XVI, pp. 15 ff. and Plate, 

2. G.H. Ojha, Précin Bharatiya Lipimala (The Paleography of India), 
p- 373 Buhler, Ind. Ant., Vol. XXXIII (Appendix), p. 18. Sten Konow 
assigns the latest known Kharosthi inscriptions, found in India, to the 
fourth or fifth century A.D. (Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. Il, Part i, p. xiii), He 
reads the dates in some records as the years 318, 359, 384 and 399 and refers 
them to an old Saka era starting from 84-83 B.C. (ibid., p. xci). Cf. also 
the inscriptions bearing dates in the years 303 (Ef. Ind., Vol. XXIV, pp. 
8 if.) and 359 (ibid., Vol. XIX, pp. 203 ff.). But even if the old Scytho- 
Parthian era is identified with the Vikrama Samvat of 58 B.C. (cf. The 
Age of Imperial Unity, p. 125, note; p. 144, note; Sircar, Indian Epigraphy, pp. 
244 tf.), the latest date in Konow’s list (year 399) would correspond to 
343 A.D. It is also not very easy to be definite about the era, Liiders in 
the Aca-y2-puspdiijali Volume (D.R. Bhandarkar Volume), pp. 281 ff., refers 
dates in the years 270 and 292 (or 299) found in two carly Brahmi inscrip- 
tions trom Mathura to the Parthian era of 248 B.C. although the dates of 
the Kharosthi inscriptions cited above cannot be assigned to that era. A 
few Kharosthi records from Taxila have been assigned to the fifth century 
(Marshall, Taxila, Vol. I, pp. 374-76). 





KUMARA AND VINAYAKA IN UTTARAPATHA 107 


while the present record is couched in Sanskrit. We know 
that Prakrit was originally the language of Indian records, but 
that it was ousted by Sanskrit from the Brahmi inscriptions 
of Northern India by the third century and from South Indian 
records about a century later. The inscription under study is 
interesting from this point of view also. 

The inscription begins with the date Sa 25 Margasira- 
di pratha, i.e. Samwatsare pafichavimSe Margasira-dine prathame. 
Thus the record was incised on the first day of the month of 
Margasira or MArgasirsa in the year 25 of the regnal reckon- 
ing of a ruler. The object of the inscription is given in the 
following passage which reads kdrito=yam Kumara-sthanam, i.e. 
karitam =idam Kumdra-sthanam, “this Kuméara-sthana has been 
made (i.e. constructed).” As regards the mistake kdritah for 
karitam, it may be pointed out that the use of nominative singular 
for accusative singular is sometimes noticed in the Prakrit 
records from the old North-West Frontier Province and has 
been regarded as a dialectic peculiarity of the area in question.’ 
The expression Kumdra-sthana appears to mean ‘a temple of 
the god Kumara’. The inscribed stone thus originally belonged 
to the structure referred to in this passage. Kumara is regard- 
ed as another name of the god Skanda, also called Visakha 
and Mahasena. But Patafijali’s Mahabhasya* mentions the 
images of the gods Siva, Skanda and Visakha, while certain 
coins of the Kusana king Huviska bear representations of two 
gods called in the legend by the names Skando Komaro 
(Skanda-Kumara) and Bizago (Visakha) or of three gods 
named in the legend as Skando Komaro, Maaseno (Maha- 
sena), and Bizago.? The facts show not only that Skanda 
and Kumara, Visakha and Mahasena had been originally the 
names of different deities who were identified at a later date, 


1, Ep. Ind., Vol. XXIV, p. 9. 

2, See under Panini, V. 3. 99; Kielhorn’s edition, Vol. II, p. 429. 

3. See R.B. Whitehead, Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, 
La'ore, Vol. I, p. 207; R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaignavism, Saivism and Mincr Reli- 
gious Systems, pp. 214-15; D. R. Bhandarkar, Ancient Indian Numismatics, pp. 
22-23. For two early images of the god Skanda found in the ancient 
Gandhara count:y in the present Rawalpindi-Peshawar region, see JHQ, Vol, 
XXX, pp. 81 ff. The Skanda cult was very popular with such north-western 
tribes ‘as the Yaudheyas (cf. Allan, Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India, 
pp. 270 ff.). See Sircar, Stud. Ind. Coins, p. 213. 


108 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


but also that Kum4ra was an important popular god in the 
dominions of the Kusanas. _ This is interesting in view of the 
fact that the Kusana emperors are known to have had their 
headquarters at Peshawar, not far away from the find-spot 
of our inscription in the Hazara District. 

The following passage, giving the name of the person 
responsible for the construction of the Kuméra-sthana referred 
to above, reads: GaSirana Maka-putrena Sapharena, i.e. GaSirena 
(or Gafiirdnam) Maka-putrena Sapharena, “‘by the Gasiira Saphara, 
son of Maka” or “by Saphara who is the son of Maka and 
a member of the Gasira clan or class.” Both the names, Maka 
and Saphara, are apparently foreign. Maka reminds us of such 
non-Indian names as Maka (Greek Magas) and Moga or 
Moa (Maues) found in Indian epigraphic and numismatic 
records.! The name SAphara similarly rem.nds us of the well- 
known Pahlavi name Shahpuhre (Shapir) borne by three 
Sassanian emperors ruling respectively in 241-72, 310-70 and 
383-88 A.D. The epithet Gasiira, applied to the name of 
Saphara, also points to his foreign origin. This word seems 
to be the same as Krorayina gufura and Kuchean Sanskrit 
gausura standing, as H. W. Bailey has shown, for Sanskrit 
kulaputra, ‘a person of good family.”* Elsewhere Bailey ex- 
plains the word gaufurya occurring in the Derge text as “a 
lady or princess of the Gausura class of nobility.”? Thus 
Saphara, who constructed a temple for the Indian god Kumara, 


1. The thirteenth Rock Edict of Agoka gives the Greek name Magas as 
Maka (Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra), Maga (Girnar) and Maka (Kalsi). 
See Hultzsch, Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. I, p. 210. A Scythian name is given as 
Moga, Mevaki and Moa in the Indian script and Maues or Mauakes in Greek; 
ct. Sixcar, Select Inscriptions, pp. 115, 120; V. A. Smith, Catalogue of the Coins 
in the Intian Museum, Vol. I, pp. 38-413 The Age of Imperial Unity (The 
History and Gulture of the Indian People, Vol. 11), ed. Majumdar, p. 120, 
note; etc. 

2, Trans, Phil. Soc., 1947, pp. 149 f. 3 BSOAS, Vol. XIII, 1949-50, 
p. 121. The word guéura occurs in the Central Asian Kharosthi document 
No. 702; cf. T. Burrow, Language of the Kharogthi Documents from Chinese 
Turkestan, p.87 ; A Translation of the Kharogthi Documents from Chinese Turkestan, 
p. 141. 

3. BSOAS, Vol. XIII, p. 3935 cf. H. Liiders, Zur Geschichte und Gevg- 
raphie Ostturkestanes, p. 255+ 


KUMARA AND VINAYAKA IN UTTARAPATHA ss 109 


seems likewise to have been a member of the Gusura or Gagiira 
class of nobility. 

The next passage of the inscription reads: _mahdraja- 
Kadambesvaradasa-rajye, “in the reign (or, kingdom) of Maha- 
raja Kadambesvaradasa”. It is probable that the 25th year 
of this ruler has been quoted in the date at the beginning of 
the record. This presupposes the fact that Mahardja Kadam- 
beSvaradasa was an independent or at least a semi-indepen- 
dent ruler of the Hazara region. It should, however, be 
noted that the Chinese writer Yu-houan, author of the Wei-lio, 
speaks of Yueh-chi or Kusana sovereignty over the Punjab, 
the former North-West Frontier Province and Afghanistan 
about the middle of the third century A.D., while the promi- 
nent mention of the Kusana king as the Daivaputra-Sahi-Saha- 
nusahi in a Gupta inscription of the middle of the fourth cen- 
tury A.D. shows that the Kusanas_ were still regarded as a 
notable power in the Uttarapatha division of Bharatavarsa.? 
The relation of KadambeSvaradasa with the Kusana im- 
perial:family cannot be determined without further evidence. 
If he actually belonged to that imperial line, the inscription 
under study should probably have borne a date in the Kaniska 
era and not in his regnal reckoning. Even if it is believed that 
the later members of the Kusana dynasty discontinued the 
use of the Kaniska era of 78 A.D.,° it is not easy to regard 
KadambeSvaradisa definitely as a Kusana of Kaniska’s house 
as he is mentioned without the typical title Devaputra. Of 
course the king’s Sanskrit name does not offer any serious obs- 
tacle as we have a Vasudeva with such a name amongst the 
immediate successors of the founder of the Kusana era (i.e. 
Kaniska I). Similar difficulties are also felt if it is proposed 
to refer the year of the date of our record to the regnal reckon- 
ing of an unknown Kusina overlord of Kadambesvaradasa.‘ 


1. The name of a Central Asian people is written as Khazar, Gazar 
Ghyssr and Ghusar which are supposed to have been Indianised as Gujar 
or Gurjara. See Ind. Ant., Vol. XL, 1911, p. 30. 

2. The Age of Imperial Unity, pp. 152-53. Uttarapatha was also called 
Udicya. 

3. Ido not now entertain the view that a Mahdrdja Devaputra Kaniska 
started a new era in the 3rd century A.D.; cf. ibid., p. 146; Ep. Ind., Vol. 
XIX, pp. 96-97. See now Sel. Ins., 2nd ed., p. 518 and note. 

4. For a sketch of the history of the area about the-former North-West 








110 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Sahni was inclined to refer the year 25 in our inscription to 
the Gupta era. But it is difficult to believe that the suzer- 
ainty of the Guptas and the use of their era ever spread over 
the Hazara District where the inscription was found. 

The name of king Kadambesvaradasa literally means 
“the servant (i.e. devotee) of Kadambegvara”, in which 
Kadambeévara is certainly the name of a deity, probably Siva 
in the Linga’ form. Siva-lingas with names ending in the 
word ifvara are known from all parts of India. Kadamba is 
primarily the name of a particular tree (Nuclea Cadamba), 
but may also be taken to be the names of a person, family or 
clan. But whether the name of the deity Kadambeévara was 
due to his installation by a person named Kadamba or his 
association with a particular Kadamba tree cannot be deter- 
mined. 

The inscription ends with the letters looking like 
Dathasaka in line 4. This seems to refer to the locality where 
the temple of the god Kumara was built by Saphara. In that 
case, we may suggest the emendation Dathasake. 


Il 


A marble image of the god Ganefa is stated to have been 
discovered some years ago somewhere at Gardez (famous for 
its fortress called Bala Hissar), about 70 miles to the south of 
Kabul, and was later removed to Kabul where it is being wor- 
shipped by the Hindu residents of the city at Dargah Pir Ratan 
Nath near the Pamir Cinema. At Gardez, however, the local 
people could not confirm the story of the discovery of the image 
at that place. The image under worship at Dargah Pir Ratan 
Nath measures 28 inches in height and 14 inches in breadth. 
There is an inscription in two lines on its base. The image has 
been illustrated by G. Tucci in. his article entitled ‘Preliminary 
Report on an Archaeological Survey in Swat’ appearing in the 
East and West, Vol. 9, No. 4, December 1958, pp. 276-328, 
figure 40 (at p. 323). Tucci also quoted the epigraphic text, 


Frontier Province about the third and fourth centuries, see The Classical Age 
(The History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. 11), pp. 50 ff. 
1. Gf. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIIL, p. 182, note 4. 


KUMARA AND VINAYAKA IN UTTARAPATHA 111 


as read by him on the basis of a photograph of the image, in 
foomote 29 (at pp. 327-28) of his article. But the published 
transcript of the inscription is not free from errors. 

The characters of the Kabul Ganega image inscription 
belong to the North Indian (Siddhamatrka) alphabet of the 
sixth or seventh century A.D. That it is not much later than 
the middle of the seventh century is clear from the use of the 
tripartite form of the letter y. The latest occurrence of this 
form of the said letter has been noticed in Eastern India in such 
early seventh century inscriptions as the Patiakella plate! of 
Sambhuyafas, dated 602 A.D., and the Dubi plates? of Bhas- 
karavarman (c. 600-50 A.D.), while, in the Rajasthan area of 
Western India, it is also found rarely in the late seventh century 
epigraphs like the Dhulev plate* of Bhetti, dated in the Harsa 
year 73 corresponding to 679 A.D. The number 13 has been 
written in the inscription with the symbols for 10 and 3. In 
some cases (cf. Sahi-pddaif in line 2), the letter A looks like 
bh. The language of our record is Sanskrit although there 
are a few errors of grammar and orthography in the text. 

The inscription begins with a siddham symbol followed 
by a sentence, at the end of which there is a floral design indi- 
cating the completion of the writing. The sentence states that 
an image of Maha-Vinayaka was installed by Paramabhatjaraka 
Mahérajadhiraja Sahi Khingala on the thirteenth of the bright 
half of the month of Jyestha in the year 8, apparently of the 
Sahi king’s reign, when the constellation was Visakha and the 
lagna Sirmha. The last passage containing the Sahi king’s name 
has been read by Tucci as °Khirgal-otydna-sahipadaih. He 
observes, “I am not absolutely sure about the reading otyana; 
it could also be odyana or odyana ........ A good rubbing can 
settle the point. If the reading is confirmed, we have here the 
first mention of a king of Udyana, Uddiy4na (i.e. the Swat 
Valley). The name of the king is, however, Khiigala and 
not Khirigala, while the vowel-mark with the letter / is clearly 
au and not o as read by Tucci. Outside this passage, the 
letter n occurs only once in Mahd-Vindyaka, while ¢ occurs 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. IX, Plate between pp. 286 and 287. 
2. Ibid., Vol. XXX, pp. 287 ff. and Plates. 
3. Ibid., Plate facing p. 4. 


112 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


several times. In 2 in this case, both the left and right lower 
limbs are shorter than those of ¢._ If this is a purposeful distinc- 
tion made by the engraver, we should better read the two 
aksaras following lau as tyata, though the readings nydna, nydta 
and tydna cannot be regarded as altogether impossible, since, 
as indicated above, the distinction between the letters bh and 
h is not carefully indicated by the engraver of the record. In 
any case, the readings khydta, dydna or dydna are not supported 
by the photograph. As regards Tucci’s suggestion that the 
king might have been a Sahi ruler of Udyana (Udyana-sahi), 
it is doubtful whether the Sahis of Swat, if any Sahi house 
ruled there, can be regarded as in occupation of the Gardez 
region within the dominions of the Sahis of Kapiga or Kabul 
since, in the period in question, the latter were probably the 
strongest amongst the Sahi houses, although it may of course 
be conjectured that the image in question was carried to Gardez 
from the Swat Valley. 

In the second quarter of the seventh century A.D., when. 
the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen-tsang was passing through Uttara- 
patha or the north-western division of Bharatavarsa, the 
emperor of Kapisa which then dominated over ten neighbour- 
ing States and comprised Lampaka (Laghman), Nagara or 
Nagarahara (Jalalabad), Gandhara (the Peshawar region)! 
and probably also Jaguda (Southern Afghanistan with Ghazni 
as the chief city), had a residence (i.e. a secondary capital) 
at Udabhanda or Udabhandapura (modern Und near 
Attock).? It appears that under pressure of the Turks and 
Chinese from the north and the Arabs from the south-west, the 
Sahi kings of Kapisa left the western provinces of their empire 
in the hands of viceroys and gradually made Udabhanda their 
main seat. This is suggested by the Arabic work Hududul 
Alam (982-83 A.D.) and Kalhana’s Rdjatarangini (c. 1150 


1. The Taksasila region about the Rawalpindi District had been 
formerly subject to Kapisa, but was at Hiuen-tsang’s time a dependency of 
Kashmir (Watters, Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, Vol. I, p. 240). 

2. Ray, DHNI, Vol. I, pp. 60-61; Beal, The Life of Hiuen-tsiang, 
p. 192. 


KUMARA AND VINAYAKA IN UTTARAPATHA 113 


A.D.)! which mention the said city as the capital of the Sahi 
emperors. While Hiuen-tsang mentions Udabhanda as the 
residence of the king of Kapis&A about the middle of the 
seventh century, Kalhana speaks of it as the capital of the $ahis 
since the time of Lalliya Sahi (c. 875-90 A.D.).2 He further 
mentions Lalliya’s kingdom as lying between the lands of the 
Darads (i.e. Dardistan) and the Turuskas (Turks).* 

The name of Sahi Khingala reminds us of Khinkhila 
alias Narendraditya mentioned as an ancient king of Kashmir 
and as a successor of Mihirakula, apparently the Hina king 
of that name who ruled in c. 510-35 A.D., in Kalhana’s Raje- 
tarangini. There are some copper coins with the legend 
Khingi® (the fuller form may have been Khirgila) while another 
coin is known to bear the legend Deva-Sahi-Khingila.* It is 
difficult to say whether Khingala of our inscription is identical 
with Khingila of the coins and Khinkhila of the Kashmir 
chronicle. His identification with Khinkhila Narendraditya 
would, however, suggest that, at the time of the ruler in 
question, Kashmir formed a part of the $ahi empire. 

The names of the following Sahi kings have been recently 
revealed by the Gilgit manuscripts: (1) Patoladeva-sahi 
Vajraditya Nandin; (2) Sri-Devasahi Surendravikramaditya 
Nanda (Nandin) who seems to have had a queen named 
Samidevi Trailokyadevi; and (3) Sahanusdhi Patola-sahi Sri- 
nava-Surendraditya Nandideva who had a queen named 
Anangadevi and is apparently identical with Paramabhatjaraka 
Mahérajadhiréja Paramesvara Patola-sahi Sri-nava-Surendra- 
ditya Nandideva claiming descent from the Bhagadatta family 
and mentioned in the Hatun inscription.? These Sahis, who 
probably ruled about the seventh century A.D., have been 
supposed to have ruled over the Darad country in the upper 
valley of the Kishenganga. Their names, in which several 
names have been clubbed together, are interesting in view of 


Proc. IHC, 1939, p- 670; Rajatar., V. 155. 


1 
2. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India, p. 235. 
3. Ve 155. 
4. Cf. I. 364; Stein’s trans., Vol. I, verse 347, note 107. 
5. Smith, Catalogue of Coins, pp. 265, 267. 
6. Cunningham, Later Indo-Scythians, 1893, pp. 97- 110; Plate. VII, 
No. 11, 


7. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 229. 


114 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the double name of the king mentioned in our record. Otyata- 
sahi seems to be a second name of Sahi Khingala and is pro- 
bably not connected with the territory over which he ruled. 

The image of Ganefa, called Maha-Vinayaka in the 
inscription, represents the deity as standing in the dlidha pose. 
His limbs are muscular. The trunk, which was turned to the 
left, is broken. The tusk, indicated on the left, is also broken. 
He has a close-fitting coronet on. the head and a close-fitting 
necklace on the neck. The ears look like foliage. There were 
four hands, all of which are broken. The god has a snake as 
his yajf-opavita and his under-garment is decorated with a 
lion’s or tiger’s head and claws apparently to satisfy the pres- 
cription that Vinayaka’s cloth should be the tiger’s skin.1 The 
image is characterised by the god’s usual pot-belly (/amb-odara) 
and also the drdhva-medhra. It is difficult to say whether the 
image represents a Brahmanical or a Buddhist deity. 

The elephant-headed god Ganeéga or Vinayaka is a Non- 
aryan divinity adopted in the Brahmanical pantheon not much 
earlier than the third or fourth century A.D.* The earliest 
images of the deity are supposed to be those found in the 
Sankisa mound (Etah District, U.P.) and Bhumara. (Satna 
District, Madhya Pradesh), both of about the fifth century 
A.D., while its representation on a terracotta bas-relief from 
Akra (Bannu District, West Pakistan) is also assigned to the 
same age. The discovery of the Akra bas-relief and the image 
bearing the inscription discussed above points to the popularity 
of the god in the Uttarapatha division of Bharatavarsa not 
long after he was adopted in the Brahmanical pantheon. 


1. Cf, Ind. Cult. Vol. IX, p. 124. ; 
ec: Cf. IHQ, Vol. XIX, p. 14, note 7; Hopkins, Epic Mytholegy, pp- 
206-07. 
3. A. Getty, Ganega, p. 26. 


Cuapter VIII 
BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 
I 


Bhilsa or Bhelsé (24° N, 76° E), standing on the bank 
of the Betwa (ancient Vetravati), is the headquarters of a 
District of the same name in the old Gwalior State now forming 
a part of the State of Madhya Pradesh.! Near it, on the op- 
posite bank of the river, lies the village of Besnagar representing 
the ancient city of Vidisa or Vaidiga, capital of the Akara or 
Dasarna janapada, roughly corresponding to East Malwa. 
As the principal city in this area, Vidiga gave place to Bhilsa 
in the early medieval period. Such facts as the issue of the 
Vadner plates? of the Kalacuri king Buddharaja in the Kalacuri 
year 360 (608 A.D.) from Vaidiga and the mention of Vidisa 
in Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita* (sixth century) and Raja- 
Sekhara’s Kdvyamimdmsd* (earlier part of the tenth century) 
show that the old city retained some of its importance even in 
the post-Gupta period. But soon we notice the total eclipse 
of Vidisa and the rise of Bhayillasvamin, Bhaillasvamin or 
Bhailasvamin, of which Bhilsa or Bhelsa is a later corruption. 
Bhayila’, Bhailla® or Bhailasvamin was originally the name 
of an image of the Sun-god worshipped in a great temple at 
the place which became gradually famous under the deity’s 
name. 

An inscription’, noticed by F.E. Hall at Bhilsi nearly 
a century ago, has the passage Bhdyillasvémi-ndma ravir =avatu 
bhuvah svdminam Krsnardjam. This shows that Bhayillasvamin 
was regarded as a representation of Ravi or the Sun-god and 
that the record was incised during the rule of king Krsna. 
This ruler has been supposed to be the Rastrakita monarch 
For some years now Bhilsa is being called ‘Vidisha’ (i.e. Vidisl). 
Bhandarkar’s List of Inscriptions, No. 1207. 
Chapter XVI, verse 


G.O.S. edition, p. 
See JASB, Vol. KaSk1, 1862, p. 1115 Ep. Ind., Vol. XXIX, p. 21, 


gh eps 


note, 


116 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
Krsna III (circa 939-68 A.D.).1 Another inscription,  dis- 
covered at Bhilsi and supposed to be written in characters 
of the tenth century, is stated to contain a eulogy of the said 
god;? but, as will be shown below, the earliest Bhilsa inscrip- 
tion referring to the temple of Bhaillasvamin bears a date in 
the second half of the ninth century. About 1030 A.D., 
Al-Birini mentions the city of Bhailsin (Bhayilla® or Bhaila- 
svamin ) and places it on the road from Mathura to Ujjayini 
and Dhara. He further says that it was ‘a place most famous 
among the Hindus’ and that ‘the name of the town is identical 
with [that of] the idol worshipped there’. A charter of the 
Candella king Madanavarman, dated Vikrama 1190 (1133 
A.D.), was issued from his camp near Bhailasvamin, appa- 
rently meaning the deity who seems to be also mentioned as 
‘Bhasvat on the bank of the Malavanadi (Vetravati)’ in an 
earlier Candella record’ of Vikrama 1011 (954 A.D.). An 
inscription* from Udaypur (founded by and named after 
Paramara Udayaditya) in the Bhilsa District, dated Vikrama 
1229 (1173 A.D.), speaks of the surrounding area as Bhiilla- 
svami-mahadvadagaka-mandala_ (i.e. the district called 
Bhiillasvamin consisting of twelve sub-divisions) which in- 
cluded Bhrngarika-catuhsasti-pathaka (i.e. sub-district called 
Bhrngarika consisting of sixty-four villages) governed by a 
Danda (i.e. Dandanayaka) probably having his headquarters 
at Udayapura (i.e. Udaypur, the findspot of the record). 
The name of the district was no doubt derived from that of 
its chief city which again assumed the name of the deity wor- 
shipped there. 


1. An inscription (No. B 159 of 1952-53) in the Gwalior Museum, 
seems to lend some colour to this identification. The epigraph, assignable 
to a date about the tenth century on palacographical grounds, records the 
death of a warrior in a battle with the Karnatas who may have been no 
other than the Rastrakitas. 

2. Anwal Report of the Archaeological Department, Gwalior State, Sarnvat 
1979, No. 25; Hariharnivas Dvivedi, Gwalior Rajyake Ablilkh (in Hindi), 
p. tor, No. 743. 

3. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, Part I, p. 202; cf. Elliot and Dowson, 
History of India-as told by its own Historians, Vol. 1, p. 59. See Sircar, Ccsm. 
Geog. E. Ind. Lit., p. 156. 

4. Bhandarkar, op. cit., No. 231. 


5 Ep. Ind., Vol. I, pp. 124ff. (cf. Malavanadi-tira-sthiter=Bhasvatah in 
verse 45). 
6. Ind. Ant., Vol. XVIII, pp. 344ff- 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 417 


In 1233 or 1234 A.D., Sultan TIltutmish of Delhi sent 
or led an army against Malwa and the Muhammadans ‘took 
the fort and city of Bhilsa or Bhilasin’. While describing the 
said expedition, Minhajuddin’s Tabagat-i-Nasiri! says that, 
at Bhilsa, the Muhammadans destroyed a temple which was 
one hundred and five gaz (yards) in height. The same work 
seems to indicate that the temple was built three hundred years 
earlier; this refers its construction to a date about the tenth 
century, although, as indicated above, we have now evidence 
regarding the existence of the Bhayillasvamin temple at Bhils& 
as early as the second half of the ninth century. However, 
the glory of the god Bhayillasvamin did not totally eclipse with 
the demolition or desecration of his temple in 1233-34 
A.D. But it was not destined to continue for a long time. 
According to Badaiini’s Muntakhab-ut-Tawérikh,? in 1292 A.D., 
during the reign of the Khalji Sultan Jalaluddin Firaz of Delhi, 
his nephew ‘Alaiiddin, governor of Karra, obtained permis- 
sion ‘to proceed to Bhilsa and attacked that country and 
brought much booty thence to present to the Sultan, and the 
idol which was the object of worship of the Hindus he caused to 
be cast down in front of the gate of Badaiin to be trampled 
upon by the people’. Thus ended the worship of the god at 
the city which received his name and is still continuing to enjoy 
it in its colloquial form. 


Il 


There is a stone inscription in the Gwalior Museum, 
which was collected from Mahalghat at Bhilsa. It was noticed 
in the Annual Report of the Archaeological Department of the former 
Gwalior State for Sarnvat 1970 (Inscription No. 8) as well 
as in H. N. Dvivedi’s Gwalior Rajyake Abhilekh (p. 3, No. 10), 
published by the same Department. According to the account 
published in these works, the inscription is fragmentary and 
illegible and its purport not clear. But the major part of the 
inscription has now been satisfactorily made out and it has 


1. Elliot and Dowson, of. cit., Vol. II, p. 328; cf. Hodivala, Studies 
in Indo-Muslim History, p. 217; Raverty, Tabagat-i-Nasiri, trans., pp. 622-23, 
2. Banking’s trans,, Vol. I, p. 96. 


118 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


been found that it is the earliest among the known inscriptions 
mentioning the temple of Bhayillasvamin at Bhilsa.1 The 
record bears the date [Vikrama] Sarnvat 935, Vaisakha-sudi 
3. This date falls in 878 A.D. 

The inscription records the grant of an aksayanika made 
in favour of the dyatana or temple of the illustrious Bhaillasva- 
min. The expression aksayaniké is apparently a mistake for 
aksaya-nivika® which means ‘a permanent endowment (pro- 
viding a periodical income to be regularly and perpetually 
enjoyed by the donee)’. The donor was a merchant of the 
Paravada (Poravada)* community (jati). His name was 
Hatia and that of his father Cacchia. It is stated that the 
grant was made by the libation of curds and water at the 
various firthas or bathing ghdfs of the locality. This reminds 
us of the fact that the inscription was actually found at Mahal- 
ghat at Bhilsé. The inscribed stone seems to have been 
originally embedded in the stairs of the ghaf in question. We 
know that grants were made in ancient India by the donor 
by pouring water in the donee’s name or, when the latter was 
@ person present to receive the donation, in the cavity of his 
folded hands.‘ The mention of curds along with water in the 
same context in the present inscription is interesting. 

The endowment consisted of the income derived from 
three vithis. The word vithi is used in Sanskrit literature in 
the sense of ‘a market, a stall, or ashop in a market’,® although 
in some parts of ancient India it was often used in the sense 
of a territorial unit smaller than a district. That the word 
vithi in this inscription means ‘a stall or shop in a market’ is 
suggested by certain early medieval records of the Malwa region, 


1, See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, pp. auiff. 

2. Some early medieval inscriptions of the Malwa region use the form 
axsayanimi or aksayanimika (Ep. Ind. , Vol. 1, pp. 160, 165). 

. This may be the same as the Por, Porwar or Porwal caste, often 
called Pragvata-varaéa in inscriptions, See Bhandarkar’s List, No. 287 (cf. 
also Nos. 1523, etc.); Wilson’s Glossary, s. v. Porwél. 

4. Cf. The Successors of the Sétavahanas, p. 192. The practice is still 
prevalent in some parts of the country. 

5. Cf. Sifupdlavadha, 1X. 32. 

6. Majumdar, Inscriptions of Bengal, Vol. UI, p. 713 Dacca University 
History of Bengal, Vol. I, p. 23. See Sircar, Ind. Ep. Gloss., 8. v. 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 119 


incorporated in the Siyadoni (Jhansi District, U.P.) inscription’ 
(in corrupt Sanskrit). Vithis are frequently mentioned in 
these records as lying in hajfas or market-places and as objects 
belonging to persons or deities, or gifts made in favour of 
deities worshipped in a local temple, or standing on the 
boundaries of other vithis. They are sometimes stated to have 
stood on the hafja-rathya or market-road and often to have 
faced this or that direction. Some of the epithets (such as 
Gcchanna, avalipta, krt-opasannad and uvafaka-sahita), applied to 
the vithis, are also used in the records in relation to houses. 
An dodsaniké or house is stated to have been granted with all 
the rooms and vithis in it (asy=abhyantare samasta-grha-same- 
tam samasta-vithi-sametam) and in this connection it is further 
said : yah=ko=’pi vithisu pravasati sa ca gosthi-bhavitam bha- 
ftakam dadati dayadasya adhikéram n=4sti. The reference to 
bhaétaka (rent) for staying at the vithi makes its nature fairly 
clear. As will be seen from our discussion below, the word 
vithi has been used in the Siyadoni inscription and the present 
record in exactly the same sense. 

The first of the three vithis, the rent of which appears to 
have been assigned by the merchant Hatia as an aksayanivikd, 
is said to have been purchased by Hatia from its owner Vuvaka. 

The inscription seems to say that the vithi in question 
which fetched a monthly or annual rent of pa 13 or 130, i.e. 
13 or 130 Paficiyaka-drammas,? was granted by Hatia as an 
agrahdra in favour of the god Narayana (Visnu) worshipped 
in the Bhayillasvamin temple apparently as a subordinate:deity. 
The custom of installing the images of various gods and god- 
desses in the temple (or in shrines built in the temple pre- 
cincts) of a well-known deity is not only prevalent even today, 
but is also evidenced by numerous epigraphs including the 
Siyadoni inscription referred to above. The word agrahdra 
usually means an area of land granted in favour of Brahmanas 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. I, pp. 173ff. 


2. The word dramma was derived from the Greek drachma weighing 
originally 67.5 grains, although the Indo-Greeks adopted a modified stan- 
dard for their silver issues many of which weigh about 37 grains. The 
Paficiyaka-dramma may have been a heavy copper coin like the Yaudheya 
drammas (cf. Smith’s Catalogue of Coins., p. 182, coin, No. 18 b). 


120 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


as a rent-free holding. But, in inscriptions, we have some- 
times reference to other kinds of agraharas such as the Vaisy- 
a@grahdra (i.e. land given as a rent-free holding in favour of 
certain Vaigyas).! In the record under study, the vithi in 
question was made what may be called a dev-dgrahara. 

The second of the three vithis belonged to a merchant 
whose name cannot be fully read. It was situated at Khaha- 
nasithi which seems to have been the name of a market place. 
Its rent was pa 50 (i.e. 50 Paficiyaka-drammas). The third 
vitht belonged to a person named Govinda. Its rent was 
fa 40 (i.e. 40 Paficiyaka-drammas). These two vithis were 
purchased by Hatid who granted them in favour of the 
Mothers (i.e. the Mother-goddesses worshipped in the 
Bhayillasvamin temple or in shrines in its precincts) for the 
merit of his parents. The rent of the three vithis was expected 
to meet the expenses of the regular offerings (niyata-bhoga) to 
the god and goddesses in question. The intention of the 
donor seems to have been that the vithis themselves could be 
utilised (somalabhyah), probably implying their sale or mortgage, 
at critical junctures (sandhi-pate) or emergencies, 

The importance of the inscription lies in the fact that it 
refers to the existence of the temple of Bhayillasvamin at 
Bhilsa as early as 878 A.D. So long we had no definite 
evidence regarding the worship of the said god at Bhilsa before 
the tenth century. In regard to the name of the god Bhayil- 
lasvamin, it is possible to suggest that the deity was originally 
installed by and named after a person called Bhayilla. Such 
@ personal name is not unknown in the records of the Malwa 
region. An inscription* in the Gwalior Museum mentions 
one Bhiilla-bhatta, although, as the epigraph is palaeogra- 
phically assignable to a date about the ninth or tenth century, 
it is uncertain whether the person in question was named after 
the Sun-god of Bhilsé. That sometimes other representations 
of the god in different parts of the Malwa region were named 
after the famous deity of Bhilsa is possibly suggested by a 
Siyadoni (Jhansi District, U.P.) epigraph® of Vikrama 1005 
(948 A.D.), which mentions a god named Bbhiillasvamin 
installed in a temple of that locality by a merchant named 


1. Gf. JRAS, 1952, p- 5- 
2. No. B 169 of 1952-53. 3. Ep. Ind., Vol. 1, p. 177. 


SHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA t21 


Vikrama; but it is also possible to think that Bhaillasvamin 
of Siyadoni was named after another person called Bhiilla. 
Bailla-bhatta, mentioned in a Gwalior inscription! as a person, 
after whom the god Visnu established in a local temple was 
called Baillabhatta-svamin, may be a variant form of the same 
personal name.? 


Il 


As Bhilsa was once the famous seat of the Sun-god 
Bhiyilla® or Bhailasvamin, two stone inscriptions in the local 
collections of antiquities are specially interesting because they 
contain each a eulogy of the Sun-god. There is little doubt 
that the inscribed stone slabs were originally embedded in the 
walls of the Bhayilla® or Bhailasvamin temple at Bhilsa. 

The first of the two epigraphs is extremely damaged. The 
right hand side of the stone has broken away and the writing 
of the lower lines is completely obliterated. Of the first six 
or seven lines of the inscription, a few expressions only can be 
satisfactorily deciphered. Each of the lines contains about 
thirty aksaras in a space about 17” in length. The charac- 
ters are Nagari and the epigraph may be palaeographically 
assigned to a date about the eleventh century. The language 
of the record is Sanskrit. The inscription begins with one of 
the several forms of the Siddham symbol which is followed by 
the passage Om namak Sirydya. Then follow the stanzas in 
praise of the Sun-god. The first half of verse 1 in line 1 begins 
with the expression Udayagiri and seems to end with the word 
vihdya. The second half of the stanza begins with ambara- 
ciigama, the following letters of the line (line 1) being 
broken away and lost. Line 2 begins with the expression 
anita® possibly introducing the first or third foot of a different 
verse. The mention of Udayagiri and ambara-ciidamani in 
verse 1 suggests that the stanza speaks of the Sun-god. About 
the beginning of line 4 we have the word jayati, while about 
the end of line 6 we can read mohahara-dipaka namas=te. As 
the latter passage undoubtedly refers to the Sun-god and occurs 

1. For the same name and its variants, see also ibid., p. 168; 


Bhandarkar’s List, Nos, 287, 1537; Cunningham’s Réforts, Vol. III, p. 433 
etc. 


122 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


in a stanza far removed from the beginning of the inscription, 
it seems that the whole record was a pragasti of the deity in 
question. 

The other inscription is more interesting. In the Quin- 
quennial Administration Report of the Archaeological Department 
of the old Gwalior State, for Sarnvats 1998-2002 (years 1942- 
46), pp. 1-2, it has been described as follows: “.... a loose 
fragment picked up in ruins is written in old Nagari script 
assignable to the 12th century A.D. on_ palaeographical 
grounds. This is broken at the top and left side. It seems to 
have been a prafasti recording the merits of a distinguished per- 
sonage, perhaps a king or a minister, who is compared to 
the Sun, but whom, unlike the Sun, Rahu could not hold in his 
grips. As the inscription is badly mutilated, its object cannot 
be made out. The pragasti was composed by Mahdkavi- 
cakravarti Sri-Dvittapa (?) at the instance of Dandandyaka 
Sri-Candra.”! Elsewhere in the same work, while repeating 
the same views, it is said that the record ‘does not convey any 
sense nor any purport can be extracted from it’.? Unfortu- 
nately most of these statements are wrong. In the first place, 
the major part of the writing on the stone, mutilated though 
it is, can be satisfactorily deciphered. Secondly, the theme 
of the record is not the pragasti of a king or minister, but the 
stuti of the Sun-god. Thirdly, the name of the author of the 
eulogy is not Dvittapa, but Chittapa who is fortunately well 
known from several sources. It may be pointed out in this 
connection that Dvivedi’s Gwalior Rajyake Abhilekh (also a 
publication of the Archaeological Department of the former 
Gwalior State or Madhya Bharat), referred to above, con- 
tains a similar misleading note on the same _inscription.® 
Dvivedi quotes the poet’s name quite confidently as Dvitraya 
which is, however, even more erroneous. 

The piece of stone bearing the inscription is fairly big in 
size. The writing occupies only its upper part and covers 
an area about 38" in length and about 11.5” in height. 
The top and left sides of the inscribed stone have broken away. 


1. See op. cit., p. 25. 
2. Ibid., p. 69, No. 2. 
3. See op. cit., p. g2, No. 666. 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 123 


The number of aksaras lost at the beginning of the lines is about 
four in some cases, but slightly more in others. Thus line 
4 of the extant part of the record originally contained seventy 
aksaras (without counting the five cases of the use of the single 
or double danga) of which only four are now lost. There are 
traces altogether of twelve lines of writing in the inscription; 
but the last line is less than half the other lines in length. 
Of the first line, only traces of the lower part of a few aksaras 
at the end can be seen. It is impossible to determine whether 
one or more lines of writing are lost above this, although for 
the sake of convenience it may be regarded as line 1 of the ori- 
ginal record. Many of the aksaras in line 2 are also ‘either 
completely or partially broken away. Even in the extant 
part of the epigraph some letters here and there are more or 
less rubbed out. 

The characters of the inscription are Nagari and may 
be assigned to a date about the eleventh century. Two floral 
designs in line 11 and the ornamental lengthening of the head 
of medial ¢ and that of the tail of medial i or e in some cases 
are interesting to note. Medial ¢ has been written both as 
a prstha-matré as in Gaudi and as a Siro-mdtré as in modern 
Nagari. The language of the record is Sanskrit. With the 
exception of a few passages at the end in lines 11-12, the whole 
record is written in verse. The metre of all the stanzas is 
Anusjubh. The record bears no date; but, as will be shown 
below, there is reason to assign it to a date in the eleventh 
century. 

The inscription under discussion originally contained 
at least twenty-three stanzas in the Anusfubh metre. They 
are all addressed to the Sun-god and the last of them speaks 
of the composition as a stuti (eulogy). Out of these, the 
text of ten stanzas (verses 6, 8-9, 11, 13, 15, 17-18, 20, 22) 
only have been fully deciphered, although there is some doubt 
about the reading of a few letters in one of them (verse 17). 
Of the remaining thirteen stanzas, two (verses 1-2 in line 1) 
are completely lost, while the other eleven (verse 3-5, 7, 10, 
12, 14, 16, 19, 21, 33) are partially preserved. The meaning 
of some of the damaged verses is not clear. 2 

Verse 5 refers to the sage Agastya who is famous in the 
solar mythology of India not only as the son of Mitra (the Sun- 


124 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


god) and Varuna, but also as one who prevented Vindhya 
(the Vindhyan range) from his attempt to obstruct the sun’s 
passage in the sky. Verse 6 says how the Sun-god’s youngest 
brother (i.e. Visnu the youngest of the twelve Adityas includ- 
ing the Sun-god, according to some accounts)! cut off the 
head of Rahu, although the demon’s life was spared as a result 
of his entreaty. Verse 8 represents the sun’s rays as the 
source of the splendour of such objects as the jewel on the hood 
of Sega-naga, the pearls in the bed of the sea and the stars 
in the sky. The next stanza (verse 9) says that the sun’s rays, 
when they come into contact with the moon, the horizon and 
the clouds, become respectively the moonlight, the twilight 
and the rainbow. In regard to the idea that the moonlight 
is nothing but the sun’s rays reflected on the moon, it may be 
pointed out that it was fairly popular with ancient Indian 
writers.2 The ancient Indian conception about this is made 
quite clear by Mallinatha in his commentary on the Raghu- 
vamsa, III. 22 : atra Vardha-sarmhita-vacanam ‘Salilamaye Sasini 
raver =didhitayo mircchitds=tamo naifam ksapayanti darpan-odara- 
nihitaé iva mandirasy =4ntar’ =iti; _yatha darpan-odara-nihita ravi- 
didhitayas =tad-gatam =andhakdram nd§ayanti tathd svatah salila- 
maye candre tah pratiphalita naifam tamo ghnant =ity =arthah. 
The other idea, reflected in the verse in question, that the 
rainbow is produced by the sun’s rays falling on the dripping 
clouds is also very interesting. Although it is supported by 
modern scientific observation, it does not appear to have 
been quite popular with ancient Indian writers. 

Verse 11 illustrates the maxim—premno hi kutila gatik 
(love’s way is tortuous) by pointing out how Svarbhanu (i.e. 
Rahu) prefers the moon to the sun in spite of the latter having 
his own name (Bhanu) and how the sun hides himself from 


1, See Mahabharata, 1. 123. 66-67; XIII. 150. 14-153 Harivamsa, 1. 
9. 48; Bhagavata Puréna, V1. 6. 39; etc. 

2. Ct. Raghucaasa, III, 22; Hayungthal plate (lines 24-25) of king 
Harjaravarman of Assam (Kémaripaédsandvali, p. 51) ; etc. P.C. Sengupta 
pointed out to me that the same idea can be traced in ancient Indian astro- 
nomical works such as Varahamihira quoted in Prthidaka’s commentary 
on Brahmagupta’s Khandakhddyaka (Chapter VIII), the Siryasiddhdnta 
quoted in the commentary of Utpala (966 A.D.) on Varahamihira’s 
Brhatsamhitd, etc. 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 125 


the lotus [at night] in spite of the latter’s attachment for him. 
Verses 18 and 20 are remarkable for their pleasant idea and 
sweet expression and are really worthy of a great poet. Verse 
23 refers to the conclusion of the eulogy. Then follow refe- 
rences in prose to the author of the said eulogy, the person who 
was responsible for tracing the inscription on the stone and the 
devotee of the Sun-god who got the stone inscribed and appa+ 
rently embedded it in a wall of the temple of the deity 
at Bhilsa. The eulogy is stated to have been the composition 
of Mahakavicakravartin Pandita sri-Chittapa. The name of 
the lekhaka who traced the writing on the stone with a view 
to facilitating the work of the engraver cannot unfortun- 
ately be made out. The person who got the eulogy written 
and the stone inscribed for embeddeding it in a wall of the Sun- 
god’s temple was Dandandyaka $ri-Candra. We have seen above 
how a Danda (Dandanayaka) was probably in charge of a sub- 
division of the Bhayillasvamin (Bhils4) district according to 
an inscription of 1173 A.D. Candra of the inscription under 
study appears to have been a similar Subdivisional Officer 
of the Bhilsa region. He was apparently a devotee of the Sun- 
god of Bhilsa and got a eulogy of the deity composed by the 
poet Chittapa who may have been an inhabitant of the same 
area. 

The importance of the inscription lies in the mention of 
the poet Chittapa, who enjoyed the title Mahdkavicakravartin, 
as the author of the khandakdvya in praise of the Sun-god, quoted 
in the record. 

A number of stanzas of a poet Chittapa are found in the 
Sanskrit anthologies and some other works. But no complete 
work of the poet has so far been discovered. The pratikas of 
all the stanzas attributed to Chittapa have been quoted in 
alphabetical order by F. W. Thomas in the excellent intro- 
duction of his Kavindravacanasamuccaya.1 Six stanzas of Chittapa 
are quoted in the Sarasvatikanthabharana of the Paramara king 
Bhoja (circa 1000-55 A.D.), one in the Kavindravacanasamuccaya 
compiled before the end of the twelfth century, and forty-nine 


1. The name of the work is really Subhdsitaratnakosa (by Vidyakara). 
It and its translation have been recently published in the Harvard Oriental 
Series. The work was composed in the Jagaddala monastery in North Bengal 
about 1100 A.D. 


126 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


in the Saduktikarnémrta compiled by Sridharadasa at the court 
of king Laksmanasena in 1205-06 A.D. Poet Chittapa there- 
fore could not have flourished much later than the middle of 
the eleventh century. A stanza in the Saduktikamamrta (III. 
36) suggests that Chittapa was a contemporary and probably 
a court poet of king Bhoja who has been identified with the 
Paramara king of that name. 


IV 


Two copper-plate grants of the time of the Rastrakita 
emperors of Manyakheta (Malkhed in the Gulbarga District, 
Mysore) were discovered at Chinchani in the Dahanu Taluk 
of the Thana District, Maharashtra. One of them was issued 
by a Tajika (Arab) ruler who was the viceroy of Sanjan under 
Indra III, while the other is a private record belonging to 
the reign of Krsna III. 

The second inscription is written on a single plate measur- 
ing about 17.5” in length, 8.8" in breadth and .1" in thick- 
ness. It weighs about 130 tolas. There is no seal fixed with 
the plate which is engraved only on one side. There are 50 
lines of writing. The language is Sanskrit and the document 
is written in prose and verse. The inscription bears no date. 
Since, however, it refers itself to the reign of the Rastrakiita 
king Krsna III (939-67 A.D.), it may be assigned roughly 
to the middle of the tenth century A.D. 

The record begins with the pranava which is followed in 
lines 1-35 by 19 verses. Verse 1 is in adoration of the Mother- 
goddess. The next stanza (verse 2) introduces the Yadu or 
Yaddava dynasty, to which the Rastrakita kings are stated to 
have belonged. Verse 3 speaks of the following rulers of the 
family : (1) Dantidurga (c. 742-56 A.D.); (2) his successor 
Krsnaraja (Krsna I, c. 756-75 A.D.); (3) Govindaraja 
(Govinda II, c. 775-80 A.D.), successor of Krsnaraja; (4) 
Nirupama (Dhruva, c. 780-94 A.D.); (5) Jagattunga (Govinda 
III, c. 794-814 A.D.); (6) Amoghavarsa (i.e. Amoghavarsa 
I, c. 814-78 A.D.), and (7) Amoghavarsa’s son Akalavarsa 
(Krsna I, 878-915 A.D.) The next stanza (verse 4) 
refers to Indraraja (Indra III, c. 915-28 A.D.), while verse 5 
speaks of Amoghavarsa (i.e. Amoghavarsa c. II, 928-29 A.D.) 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 127 


who succeeded Indraraja. Verse 6 mentions Govindaraja 
(Govinda IV, c. 929-34 A.D.), surnamed Suvarnavarsa, and 
verse 7 Amoghavarsa (i.e. Amoghavarsa III, c. 934-39 A.D.). 
The following four stanzas (verses 8-11) describe the reigning 
king Krsnaraja (Krsna III, 939-67 A.D.), son of Amogha- 
varsa. It will be seen that all the rulers of the Imperial 
Rastrakita dynasty from Dantidurga to Krsna III are men- 
tioned in correct order, although the relationship between the 
successor and his predecessor has not been indicated in all the 
cases. It is interesting to note that the reign of Amoghavarsa 
II has been recognised in the record.! 

About the reigning monarch Krsna III, verse 10 says 
that he conquered certain enemies even when he was a crown- 
prince, while verse 11 enumerates the following as bowing down 
to his feet: the Pandyas, Odras, Sirhhalas, Colas and Para- 
sikas, the Andhra king, the Dravidas, Varvaras and Taijjikas, 
and the Varhkinas, Hiinas, Khasas, Girjaras and Mala- 
viyas. The success of Krsna III against the Pandyas, Sirh- 
halas, Colas and Girjaras (i.e. the Gurjara-Pratiharas of 
Kanauj)? is referred to in some of his records. The name 
Dravida seems to have been applied to the Pallavas. A 
Pallava king named Anniga is known to have been subdued 
by him. The Malaviyas were probably the Paramaras who 
owed allegiance to him. The Tajjikas (i.e. Tajikas) were 
the Arabs, some of whom were serving under the RAstrakita 
kings, while the Parasikas or Persians appear to be the 
Parsees who had settled at places like Sanjan in the western 
coast-land forming a part of the Rastrakita empire. The 


1. Cf. Bomb. Gaz., Vol. I, Part II, p. 416, note 5. The fact that 
Amoghavarsa II obtained the throne is also recognised in some other records 
of Krsna III (cf. Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 283, verses 18-19). 

2. The suggestion that the Gurjara contemorary of Krsna III was 
the Caulukya king Miilaraja (cf. Bomb. Gaz., Vol. I, Part IL, pp. 283, 420) 
seems to be wrong as the territories of the Caulukyas were outside Gurja- 
ratra in the age in question (cf. below, p. 131, note 4). 

3. Cf. verses 30, 31 and 95 of the Karhad plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, 
pp. 278A"). See also Altekar, The Réstrakitas and thir Times, pp. 115 ff. 

4. Ep. Ind, Vol. IV, p. 289 (verse 29). 

5+ Ct. the Harsola plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. XIX, pp. 236ff.). 

6. See Smith, £. Hist. Ind., 1924, p. 444. 


128 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


king’s relations with the remaining peoples mentioned in the 
verse are not known from any other source. 

Verses 12-14 speak of the god Bhillamaladeva, also called 
Madhusiidana (i.e. Visnu), worshipped at the unspecified 
place whence the character was issued. The deity is stated 
to have been installed by the descendants of the merchants 
of Bhillamala which is the modern Bhinmal in the Jodhpur 
region of Rajasthan. Verses 15-19 state that, at the same 
place, there was another mafhika, i.e. ‘monastery or temple’, 
which had been constructed by Kautuka and at the gate of 
which the goddess called Bhagavati had been installed for 
worship. It is clear that the god Bhillamaladeva alias Madhu- 
sidana was installed in the temple standing near another 
made by Kautuka for the Mother-goddess. There is little 
doubt that Kautuka’s mathika enshrining Bhagavati was the 
religious institution built by Annaiya (Annamaiya), Kautuka 
and Revana at Sarhyana and that the goddess is no other than 
Bhagavati Dafami installed in it, both mentioned in the 
grant of the time of Indra III. Verse 19 of the record under 
study refers to the Anagha-parsad (called Mahdparsad in line 
35) in connection with the goddess and this is apparently the 
Arya-defiya-mahdparsad or Patca-Gaudiya-mahaparsad of Sarh- 
yana mentioned in the other epigraph. 

The following section in prose in lines 35ff. records a 
vyavasthé which means ‘a legal decision in a dispute’ in the 
present context. It is very interesting to note that, in this 
case, the decision emanates from a deity and his attendants 
and not from any judicial or administrative authority. In 
this respect, the inscription under study offers a peculiar 
instance. 

It is stated that a vyavastha based on an order was offered 
to the mafhikd (i.e. the monastery or temple of the goddess) 
and the svddhydyikas or scholars belonging to the Mahdparsad 
attached to it, by the god Bhillamaladeva and his vdrikas. The 
word vdrika is known to have been used in the sense of 
‘an official’ and, in the present context, it no doubt means 
a priest or Panda of the temple of Bhillamaladeva at Sarhyana.1 
Apparently the decision of the temple authorities was passed 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, pp. 171-725 cf. Vol. XXXI, p. 164, note r 


BHAYILLASVAMIN 4ND BHILLAMALADEV’ 129 


as the order of the god; but whether any device was adopted 
to convince the people that it was really the will of the god 
is uncertain. The terms of the vyavasthé, which follow, were 
that the mafhika of the goddess should pay forty drammas to the 
god Bhillamaladeva and his vérikas as Srotaka for a small piece 
of land that belonged to the god, but had been enclosed within 
the northern compound wall of the mafhika. The word 
Srotaka.1 is not found in Sanskrit lexicons, but was appa- 
rently a kind of rent, since the periodical nature of its pay- 
ment is indicated by the stipulation that the amount was to 
be paid on each occasion of dip-otsava-bhariga, ic. the end of 
the festival of lights, obviously in the mafhikd of the goddess. 
The dip-otsava seems to be no other than the dipavali, a festi- 
val with illuminations held on the new moon of Agvina or 
Karttika in honour of the goddess Parvati. The dramma was 
a coin of copper or silver.* The inscription seems to specify the 
payment in coins minted by a trader named Sresthin Gam- 
bhuvaka. It appears that this tradesman of Sarhydna enjoyed 
a license for minting coins on behalf of the ruling authority.* 

It is further stated that, now that the opavasthd was offer- 
ed (cf. adhund), if any devotee of the god (i.¢. Bhillamila- 
deva), whether he is a Brahmana or a merchant, commits 
suicide or creates any other trouble with a view to increasing 
the amount of the Srotaka or to the removal of the wall of the 
mathika enclosing the piece of land belonging to Bhillamala- 
deva, he should be looked upon as a dog or a donkey or a 
Candala even if he is dead. If a merchant was involved in 
such a case, his whole property should have to be confiscated 
by the government. On the other hand, in case the srotaka 
was not duly paid to the odrikas of the god Bhillamaladeva, 
if any one out of the persons belonging to the Mahéparsad 
attached to the majhika, who kept the door of the mathikd open 
to the public, or of outsiders who canducted worship of the 
goddess, committed suicide, he would also share a similar 
fate even if he was dead. It is stated that this vyavasthd, based 
on the stkiti or decree, was a permanent one and had to be 


1. For Srotaka, see Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXII, p. 36. For the meaning of 
bhaiga, see Apte, Pract. Sans.-Eng. Dict., s. v. nidré-bhaniga, ydtré-bharga. 

2. Qf. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 213 and note 2. 

3. Cf. ZNSI, Vol. VIL, pp. 79. 


130 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


observed by both the parties of the dispute, viz. the devotees 
of the god Bhillamaladeva and those of the goddess worshipped 
in the mathika. To the above is added the statement that 
anybody who would appropriate the piece of land in his 
attempt to avoid the payment of the Srotaka should be endow- 
ed with all the greater and minor sins. 

It is clear from the words of the inscription that a small 
piece of land belonging to the temple of the god Bhillamila- 
deva, which seems to have been situated in the vicinity of the 
mathika of the goddess, was lying within the compound wall 
of the latter and was in wrongful possession of the devotees of 
the goddess. It is also clear that, while the devotees of the 
god were trying to recover the land by all means including 
the offer of hunger-strike, the other party attached to the 
goddess was trying to obstruct the release of the plot equally 
obstinately in the same way. The decision to ease this state 
of tension by fixing an amount of annual rent for the piece 
of land, payable by the party in the possession of it, was there- 
fore a good one. The respectful mention of the goddess in the 
present record exhibits a spirit of compromise which is commen- 
dable. 

The above section of the record is followed in lines 46- 
47 by a sentence meaning to say that the giver of the decision, 
viz. the god BhillamAladeva along with his vdrikas, expressed 
hus desire in the words of the document as written by the 
scribe. The following sentence saying that the god favoured 
the document with his assent is a well known formula with 
which the royal donors put their signature to a charter ori- 
ginally written on a perishable material and later incised on 
copper plates. This section is in the style of the charters 
issued by the contemporary rulers of the area in question.’ 

The charter ends with a stanza (verse 20) followed by 
a short benedictory passage. The verse mentions the person 
who was responsible for writing the document with the con- 
sent of both the parties, viz. the devotees of the god and those 
of the goddess. This writer was a Kéyastha named Sambhu- 


1, Similar statements are found, ¢.g., in the grants of the Silaharas of 
the Northern Konkan, see Ind. Ant., Vol. V, p. 279 (Plate III, lines 10-11); 
Ep. Ind., Vol. IIL, p. 275, lines 82-84; etc. 


BHAYILLASVAMIN AND BHILLAMALADEVA 131 


deva who was the son of Ambaipa shale: ?) and grand- 
son of Joggapaiya. 

The place where the temples of the god and the goddess 
were situated is not mentioned in the record. But, as we 
have seen, they must have stood at Sarhyana within the do- 
minions of the Rastrakita king Krsna III. Sarhyana is 
modern Sanjan in the Thana District of Maharashtra. Among 
the geographical names mentioned in the inscription, Bhilla- 
mila, as already pointed out, is modern Bhinmal about 100 
miles to the south-west of Jodhpur in Rajasthan. It is inte- 
resting to note that there was a well-organised settlement of 
merchants of Bhinmél origin at Sanjan and that they had 
installed a Vaisnavite deity of their own and named it after 
their home town. A large number of peoples of various 
countries are mentioned in the description of Krsna III. 
Most of these tracts are well known. The Pandyas lived in 
the Madurai-Ramanathapuram-Tirunelveli region, the Odras 
in modern Orissa and the Sirhhalas in Ceylon. The original 
territory of the Colas was in the Tanjavur-Tiruchirappalli 
area and of the Parasikas in Persia. The name Andhra was 
apparently used to indicate the kingdom of the contemporary 
Eastern Calukya king of Vengi, while the name Dravida was 
probably applied to Tondamandalam, the territory of the 
Pallavas in older times. The Varvaras probably occupied 
a part of the Lower Indus valley. The Tajjikas or Tajikas were 
the people of Arabia and Vankina may be the same as 
Vokkana mentioned in Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita (XIV. 
20) and identified with modern Wakhan in Central Asia.) 
The Hinas* appear to have lived in the Punjab and the 
Khasas* in Kashmir and Nepal. The Pratiharas of the 
Gurjara stock ruled over wide areas of North India; but, 
even as late as the first half of the eleventh century, Al-Birini 
speaks of the Jodhpur-Alwar-Bharatpur region of Rajasthan 
as Gujarat, ic. Gurjaratra or the home of the Gurjaras.* 


1. Cf. Ind, Gult., Vol. VILL, p. 55. 

2. Qf, Pargiter, The Markandeya Purdna, p. 379, note; Ind. Cult., 
op. cit, p. 59. 

3. See Pargiter, op. cit., p. 346, note; Stein, Rajatarangipi, trans., 
Vol. I, pp. 47-48 (note on I.317); Vol. II, p. 430. 

4. Of. JNSI, Vol. VII, pp. 135ff. The Daulatpura plate (Zp. Ind., 


132 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Malava, the land of the Malaviyas, seems to have included 
in this age Hiuen-tsang’s Mo-la-p’o in the Mahi valley in 
Gujarat.1 The same mahdparsad being called both Aryadesiya 
and Paficagaudiya would identify the Aryadesa or Aryavarta 
with Pafica-Gauda. 


Vol. V; pp. 2trff.; cf. Bhandarkar’s List, No. 28) of 843 A.D. includes 
the Jodhpur region in Gurjaratra. In the seventh century A.D., the 
Chinese pilgrim Hiuen-tsang mentions Pi-lo-mo-lo (i.e. Bhillamala or 
Bhinmal) as the capital of Ku-che-lo (i.e. Gurjara). 

1. See Bhar. Vid., Vol. XXV, pp. 1ff.; Sircar, Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. 
Ind., 2nd ed., pp. 205ff. 


Cuarrer IX 
THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 
I 


I had an occasion to examine the impressions of two ins- 
criptions relating to the worship of the Nagas or serpents in 
ancient and medieval India. The first of these records is en- 
graved on the pedestal of a Naga image now preserved in the 
Lucknow Museum. The second epigraph is incised on a 
stone slab which was discovered at Biharsharif (Patna District, 
Bihar) or in its neighbourhood, but is now exhibited in the 
Patna Museum. 

The Nagas enjoy a prominent place in ancient Indian 
legends and folklore. There are literary references to numerous 
Nagas, the most famous among them being Sesa or Ananta, 
Vasuki, Taksaka, Dhrtarastra, Elapatra or Airavata, Karkota 
or Karkotaka, Kauravya, Sankha, Mani and others. The 
cult of the Nagas, allied to that of another class of semi-divine 
beings called Yaksa, was widely prevalent in ancient India.’ 
The worship of snake-deities is popular in different parts of 
India even to this day.? In ancient times, there were many 
great centres of the Naga cult in Northern India. The chro- 
nicles of Kashmir speak of the worship of several Nagas in 
that land, the most important among them being Nila who 
had his abode in the waters of the Vitasta and was regarded 
as the guardian deity of Kashmir.’ An illustrious royal house 


1. See James Fergusson, Tree and Serpent Worship, 1873; J. Ph. Ve 
The Intian Serpent Lore, 1926; N.K. Bhattasali, Iconogrophy of Buddhist 
and Bra'manical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, pp. 21afi.; K. K. Gupta in 
Proc. IHC, 1939, pp. 223-29 (The Nagas and the Naga Cult in Ancient 
Indian History); etc. An inscription at Gurzala and another at Macherla, 
both in Andhra Pradesh, invoke the preseace of the eight Nagas, viz.. Sesa, 
Vasuki, Taksaka, Karkota, Abja, Mahambuja, Sarkhadhara and Kulika, 
to decide the auspicious or inauspicious nature of the grants recorded in the 
epigraphs. See A.R.S. Ind. Ep., 1910, p. 107. 

Cf. Vogel, op. cit., pp. 247ff.; _ Bhattasali, loc. cit.; Whitehead, 
The Village Gods of South India, 19163 v. N. Mandlik, JBRAS, Vol. IX, pp. 
188-89 (Serpent Worship in Western Ih 3 
3- See Vogel, op. cit., pp. 220ff.; ‘Kalhana’s Réjatarangipi, 1. 28, 





182, ete, 


134 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of ancient Kashmir, represented by the celebrated Mukta- 
pida Lalitaditya (eighth century), claimed descent from the 
Naga Karkotaka who is also famous in the Mahabharata episode 
of Nala, king of the Nisadhas probably living near the Pari- 
yatra (the Western Vindhyas and the Aravalli range).1 The 
Naga kings Elapatra and Cakravaka are mentioned in certain 
old Brahmi inscriptions* from Barhut and were probably 
worshipped in pre-Christian times in the region in question. 
In Buddhist literature, Elapatra is mentioned as the Naga of 
Takgasila (in Gandhara),* where the great serpent-sacrifice 
of the Kuru king Janamejaya is sometimes supposed to have 
taken place.‘ Numerous ancient Naga images have been 
discovered at Mathura and in its neighbourhood. An ins- 
cription® of the year 26 of the Kaniska era, corresponding 
to 104 A.D., records the installation of a Sila-patta by some 
persons, described as ‘the sons of the actors of Mathura, who 
are being praised as the Candaka brothers’, at the sthdna of 
Bhagavat Dadhikarna, lord of the Nagas. The existence of 
a temple of Dadhikarna-naga at Mathura during the age 
of the Kusdnas is also indicated by another inscription’ on 
a pillar base originally belonging to the Huviska monastery 
of that place. It states that the object was the gift of Devila 
who was ‘a servant of the shrine of Dadhikarna’. Another 
Mathura inscription? on a Naga image, dated in the year 8 
of Kaniska’s reign (78-101 A.D.), records the consecration 
of a tank and a garden dedicated to Bhagavat Bhimi-naga. 
A Naga image, discovered at Chhargaon (five miles to the 
south of Mathura), bears an inscription stating that the Naga 
was installed by two persons in their own tank. The epigraph 
ends with the marigala: “May the Bhagavat Naga be pleased!” 
But no name is applied to the Naga in this case. This reminds 
us of the custom of erecting a Naga-kastha (i.e. a pole 
with its top fashioned in the shape of a serpent), at the centre 


Vogel, op. cit., pp. 214-15; IHQ, Vol. XXI, p- 311. 
Barua and Sinha Barkui Inscriptions, pp. 71-72. 
Vogel, op. cit., pp. 106f., 208ff., 216. 
pice 

A. R. Arch. Surv. Ind., 1908-09, p- 159 

Ind. Ant., Vol. XXXII, pp. 1o2f., No. 13. 

Ep. Ind., Vol. XVII, p. 11. 


yop ee pe 


THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 135 


of a tank at the time of its consecration, which is prevalent in 
some parts of India even to this day. 

The popularity of the Naga cult in the Mathura region 
is also indicated by the Harivamsa episode of the famous Kaliya- 
naga who lived in the waters of the Yamuna? as well as by 
the well-known conception of Balarama as the incarnation of 
Ananta-naga. The episode of Akrira in the world of serpents, 
as given in the Harivarhfa and referred to in the Bhdgavata 
Purdna, is also interesting to note in this connection. Akrira is 
stated to have reached the abode of the snakes in the Nether 
World by diving down in the waters of the Yamuna. There 
he found the Naga Ananta or Sega worshipped by the other 
Nagas.* The description of the Naga deity here is strikingly 
reminiscent of the iconography of Balarama as indicated by 
Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita* and also known from sculptures.5 

A great centre of Naga cult in the eastern part of Northern 
India was Rajagrha (modern Rajgir in the Patna District, 
Bihar), the ancient capital of Magadha, and its neighbour- 


1, Bhattasali, op. cit, p. 216. 

2. Cf. Vogel, op. cit., pp. 87ff. 

3. Ibid. p. g2: “Now Akrara dived down in the pool of the Yamuna, 
and in the Nether Region (rasdtala) he beheld the world of snakes. In the 
middle thereof, he saw the thousand-headed lord of the serpents who carried 
a plough in one hard and whose frame was supported by a mace. His lofty 
banner was a golden fan palm. He was of white complexion and was wrap- 
ped in a dark-coloured garment. He wore a single ear-ring and, being 
intoxicated, he slept. He was seated at his ease on the shining seat formed 
by the mass of his coils. Long-armed was he; his breast was covered by a 
wreath of golden lotus flowers and his limbs were anointed with red sandal. 
He was worshipped by the chiefs among the Nagas headed by Vasuki. The 
two Nagas, Kambala and ASvatara, holding chowries, were fanning the 
deity who was seated on the seat of justice. The other snakes, Karkotaka 
foremost, attended him and laved their monarch by means of golden jars. 
Seated in his lap was Visnu, dark like a thunder ‘cloud, and wearing a 
yellow garment, his breast adorned ,with the érivatsa.” In Buddhist tradi- 
tion, Kambala and Aévatara are sometimes called the Nagas of the Ganga 
See Vogel, op. cit., p. 118. 

4. Cf, LVIII, 36: “Baladeva must be made having a plough in his 
right hand, with eyes lively from drink, and wearing a single ear-ring. His 
complexion is fair like a conch-shell, the moon or lotus-fibre.”” 

5. Cf. The Age of Imperial Unity (The History and Culture of the Indian 
People, Vol. IL), ed. Majumdar, p. 452. 


136 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


hood. A tradition recorded by Hiuen-tsang' seems to suggest 
that a Naga named Nalanda was the guardian deity of the 
city of Nalanda (modern Bargaon in the Patna District), not 
far away from Rajgir. According to the Mahabhérata,? there 
were temples of the Naga gods, Svastika-naga and Mani- 
naga, at Rajagrha which was also the abode of the Nagas, 
Arbuda and Sakravapin. Ancient Naga. images have been 
discovered at Rajgir and the area around it, and the Maniyar 
Math at Rajgir has been supposed to represent an old 
Manindga-majha.* A sculpture, discovered in the ruins of 
Maniyar Math, is known to bear the representation of two 
male Naga figures with a diminutive female figure between 
them, and these three figures have tentatively been identified 
respectively with Maninaga, Svastika-naga and Sumégadha, 
supposed, on the basis of a damaged inscription on the sculp- 
ture itself, tq have been the sister of the Naga brothers, Mani 
and Svastika.‘ In connection with the suggestion regarding 
the female snake-deity Sumagadh, it is interesting to note 
that the worship of the Naginis does not appear to have been 
popular in other parts of India in ancient times. Although 
Naginis figure in some of the epic and Puranic episodes, the 
Nagas are always more prominent in ancient Indian litera- 
ture. We have many lists in early works enumerating the 
names of numerous Nagas;® but there is hardly any list of the 


1. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, Vol. U1, p. 165. 

2. Cf. Vangavasi edition, II. 21, 9: Arbudak Sakravépi ca pannagau 
Satru-tépanau | Svastikasy-=Glayas:=c-= dlra Manindgasyac:=ottamah |/ The place 
of Manindga is also located near Rajagrha elsewhere in the same work (III. 
84. 104-108). 

3. Gf. ALR. Arch. Surv. Ind., 1905-06, pp. 10gff.; Vogel, op. cit., 
pp. 218-9; Ghosh, A Guide to Rajgir, p. 16; etc. The existence of a Mani- 
naga-matha in Orissa is known from the Kanas plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. 
XXVIII, pp. 328ff.). Maninaga was probably sometimes identified with 
the popular Yaksa deity Manibhadra or Manibhadra who was regarded 
as the guardian of caravans (7BRS, Vol. XXXIX, Parts 1-2, pp. 41ff.). 
For the name Manibhadra and the god’s association with the safety of a 
merchant's journey in Jain tradition, see also Dhanapala’s Bhavissattakahé 
(tenth century ) in Journ, Or. Inst., Vol. II, pp. 352, 354+ 

4: JNSI, Vol. XI, p. 181. 

5. Cf. Mahabharata, I. 35. 65 and 229; V. 102; Harivaméa, I. iii. 31 
and 196; Matsya Purdna, 6; Padma Purana, Srstikhanda, 63 etc.; Vogel, 
op. cit., pp. 190ff. 


THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 137 


names of Naginis. Curiously enough, a Nagini cult is known 
to have developed in Eastern India. Elsewhere’ we have 
seen how the snake-goddess worshipped in various parts of 
Bengal and Bihar in the medieval period under such names 
as Bhajtini Mattuva contributed to the growth of the cult of 
Manasa whose worship is now popular in Eastern India, The 
continuity of Naga worship at Rajgir down to quite recent 
times is indicated by an inscription? of Vikrama 1837 (1781 
A.D.), recording the setting up of the footprints of Salibhadra- 
naga. 


I 


In Bengal and its neighbourhood, people are sometimes 
found to worship the Vastu-sarpa, which is a serpent that li es 
in a particular house for a long time and is believed to do no 
harm to the inmates, as a household deity. We have also 
evidence to show that some ancient Indian ruling families 
had a snake-god as their tutelary deity. 

Kings Dyutivarman and Visnuvarman, who ruled the 
Parvatakara-rajya with their capital at the city of Brahmapura, 
issued two copper-plate grants discovered at Talefvara in the 
Almora District, U.P.*| King Agnivarman, father of Dyuti 
and grandfather of Visnu, who flourished about the sixth 
century A.D., is described as a devotee of the god Viranesvara- 
svamin, in favour of whose temple the Talesvara charters were 
issued. The said god is stated to have been an incarnation 
of the snake-god Ananta and had the form of the lord of the 
snakes (Ananta-marti and Bhujagardja-ripa). Viranesvara is 
described in Dyutivarman’s record as  sakala-jagan-mil-orvi- 
caksa-mahdabhara-vahana-guna-vamana-phana-sahasra, “one whose 
thousand hoods were the base of the world, carrying the great 
load of the circle of the earth and spreading good qualities.’ 
The other epigraph describes the god as “one observing con- 
centration capable of supporting the earth; who reddens the 
surface of the lower region by the rays of the collection of the 
jewels growing about the array of the expanded hoods, large 

Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 138-39. 
Vogel, op. cit., p. 219. 


1 
2. 
3. Ep. Ind., Vol. XIII, pp. 10cff. 
4. Ibid., p. 117. 


138 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


and wide as the surface of the earth; the excellence of whose 
power is without beginning, unknowable, unthinkable, won- 
derful, elevated and extensive; who causes the apportioning 
of existence and destruction of the whole world.”! 

The purpose of Dyutivarman’s grant is stated to have 
been the continuance of bali, caru and saira in the temple; the 
bathing of the god with curds, milk and clarified butter; 
the worship of the god with perfumes, incense, lamps and 
flowers; sweeping and cleansing the temple compound and 
ploughing the temple lands; and repairing dilapidated, broken 
and fallen parts of the temple of Bhagavat Viranesvarasvamin 
described as worthy of the honour of the gods and demons and 
the whole world. 


I 


The Naga image inscription in the Lucknow Museum, 
referred to above, shows that the representation in question 
is of none other than the great Taksaka-naga. 

One of the most famous of the Nagas in ancient Indian 
literature is Taksaka.2. He seems to be mentioned in the 
Atharvaveda* and Sankhdyana Grhyasiitrat as Taksaka Vaisaleya. 
The Kausikasitra’ and the Visnusmrti® prescribe food offering, 
for the protection of the house, to various deities including 
Taksaka and Upataksaka. Taksaka is the chief Naga hero 
in the Mahabharata stories about the Kuru kings, Pariksit 
and his son Janamejaya. He killed Pariksit and escaped 
death with great difficulty in the well-known serpent sacrifice 
of Janamejaya.’? Taksaka also figures prominently in the 
episode of the burning of the Khandava forest (lying near 
Kuruksetra, i.e. about the modern Eastern Punjab), which was 


1. Ibid., p.  120—sakala-bhuvana-bhava-bhaniga-vibhaga-kérino...anddy- 

dvedy-dcinty-dtyadbhut-odbhita-prabh ita-prabhdo-dtifayasya ksamdtala-vikata-sphaja- 

patala-nikata-prar idha-mani-gana-kiran-arunita-patalatalasya dharani-dharana-yoryc- 

dharana-dharino.. 
2. Vogel, op. cit. pp. 203ff. 
3. VII. 10. 

4. IV. 18. 1. 

5. LXXIV. 8. 

6. 

7 





. LXVII. 5. 
. Vogel, op. cits, pp., 66ff., 6. ff. 


THE NAGAS AND YAKS$AS 139 


his abode.!_ This story of the Mahabharata states how the Fire- 
god consumed the forest with the help of the Kuru hero Arjuna 
and his friend, Yadava Krsna, during Taksaka’s absence in 
Kuruksetra and how Taksaka’s son, Aévasena, escaped from 
the burning forest with the greatest difficulty. There are 
several references in the Raémayana* to Ravana’s victory over 
the Naga king Vasuki and his conquest of the Naga capital 
Bhogavati, in connection with which the king of Lanka is 
stated to have carried away Taksaka-naga’s wife. 

Considering the importance of Taksaka in the Indian 
serpent lore, his worship seems to have been widespread in 
ancient India. The prevalence of the Taksaka cult in Kashmir 
is referred to in the Mahabharata as well as in Kalhana’s 
Réjataranginit and Bilhana’s Vikramdarkadevacarita. Unfor- 
tunately, very little is known as regards the worship of Taksaka 
in other parts of Northern India. As to the survival of the 
Taksaka cult in modern times, we may only refer to his 
shrine near Navali or Naoli in the old Indore State (now in 
Madhya Pradesh). Here the snake deity is worshipped under 
the name Taksakesvara or Takhaji whose image represents 
the Naga as standing with a sevenfold hood, the coils being 
visible on both sides. He has two arms possibly holding a 
cup and a fruit in his hands. The deity is accompanied by 
a male and a female attendant, the former holding a serpent 
in his right hand.* Unfortunately, in the absence of any 
inscription on the sculpture, it is impossible to determine 
whether the image was identified with Taksaka-naga even in 
earlier times. 

Under the circumstances, the only early image of Taksaka 
so far discovered in India and definitely known as such, seems 
to be that now housed in the Lucknow Museum with the 
Exhibit No. G-72.7 The sculpture is stated to have been 


Ibid., pp. 62, 77. 


1h 
2, IIL. 32. 13-145 VI. 7. 3 and 73 VII. 23. 4-5. 

3. IIL. 80. 970. a 

4. I. 222. 

3. XVIII. 170. 

6, See Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Vol. I, p. 7185 Prog. 


Rep. ASL, W.C., 1919-20, p. 88, Plate XIII; Vogel, op. cit., pp. 206f. 
7. An inscription (A.R. Ep., 1953-54, No. B 48) of about the 8th century 
in the Nageévara temple at Narnuru (Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh) 


140 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


purchased for the Museum in 1925 from B.C. Bhattacharya 
of Durgakund, Banaras. But its exact findspot is unknown. 

The pedestal of this Naga image bears an inscription in 
one line only, which was apparently meant to serve the pur- 
pose of a label. The characters belong to the Siddhamatrka 
alphabet and may be assigned to the eighth century A.D. on 
grounds of palaeography. The orthography of the record ex- 
hibits the influence of local pronunciation. 

The inscription begins with the siddham symbol and ends 
with a double dagda. In between the siddham symbol and the 
double danda, there are only six aksaras which read: Sri- 
Takhaka-naga, the intended reading no doubt being si- 
Taksakaenagak, ‘the illustrious Naga Taksaka’. Nothing is 
said in the inscription regarding the person by whom and the 
purpose for which the image was set up. But there is little 
doubt that it was installed in a temple for worship. 


IV 

The inscribed stone slab in the Patna Museum, referred 
to above, bears the exhibit No. 10601 and looks like the broken 
piece of a door jamb. The slab measure 4’ 9" by 1’ 5%, 
and contains four lines of inscription on one side only. It was 
presented to the Patna Museum in January 1943 by the Sub- 
Divisional Officer of Biharsharif in whose quarters it had been 
lying for some time uncared for. Nothing is known as regards 
its discovery and original findspot. But it appears that it was 
found at Biharsharif itself or in its neighbourhood. 

The inscription was noticed by A. Banerji-Sastri in a 
very short note entitled “Evolution of Magadhi Script”, pub- 
lished in JBORS, Vol. XXVIII, 1942, pp. 440-41. Unfor- 
tunately, he read and interpreted only the last line of the record 
and that also not quite correctly. He also failed to understand 
the real nature of the document. Thus he says, ‘The inscrip- 
tion is of the usual votive donation type. The last line runs— 
likhitam sittrakdrena Kamadevena karmmina Sake 1322 Nrpa- 
Vikramarke Sark 1458....Saka 1322 =1322+78=1400 A.D.: 
Sarn 1458—58=1400 A.D. Thus the inscription is written 
in the Maghadhi script, dated 1400 A.D.” 


refers to a deity called Taksakeivara-bhatra. But the name seems to have 
been applied to the Siva-liiga worshipped in the temple in question. 


‘THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 141 


There are several mistakes in the above reading and 
interpretation of the last line of the inscription, quoted above. 
What Banerji-Sastri has read as sittrakarena, Sake 1322 and 
Sark 1458 are actually svarnnakdrena, Sake 1317 and Sam 1452 
respectively. The date of the inscription is therefore not 1400 
A.D. but 1395 A.D. Moreover it does not speak of any do- 
nation, but records the construction of a temple for a Naga 
deity. The script of the inscription is again not Magadhi, but 
early Bengali resembling the modern Bengali alphabet very 
closely. This script may also be called Gaudi,! although this 
name may more-properly be applied to an earlier stage of the 
characters on the way of their development. 

The four lines of writing in the inscription cover a space 
about 27.5 inches by 3.5 inches. The preservation of the 
writing is not satisfactory. The usual symbol expected at the 
beginning of the record and twelve aksaras that followed it in 
line 1 are almost completely lost owing to the peeling off of 
a layer of the stone. The same defect has also obscured some 
letters here and there in other parts of the inscription. But 
fortunately the purport of all the lines of the inscription is quite 
clear. 

The characters closely resemble those employed in other 
records of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, written in 
the Gaudiya script prevalent in Bengal and the neighbouring 
regions including parts of Bihar, such as the stone inscription*® 
(from the Patna District) of Vikrama Sarhvat 1553 (1496 
A.D.). They exhibit characteristics slightly earlier than the 
letters of the Barakar (Burdwan District, West Bengal) ins- 
criptions® of Saka 1382 (1460 A.D.) or 1383 (1461 A.D.) and 
Saka 1468 (1546 A.D.). It may be noticed that the anusvdra 
is written in both the Nagari (cf. varém in line 3) and the 
Bengali (cf. sam in line 4) fashions; the figure 2 in line 4 
resembles its form occasionally found in the Mehar plate of 
Saka 1156 (1234 A.D.).4 The language of the inscription is 


1. See IHQ, Vol. XXVIII, pp. 130-31. 

2. JRASB, Letters, Vol. KIV, pp. 114-16 and Plate. The early 
Bengali script was prevalent in Bihar in the medieval period. Originally 
the same alphabet was used in the whole of Eastern India. 

3. Ibid. Vol. II, pp. 21ff. and Plates. 

4. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIL, pp. r82ff. (cf. e.g., 2 in ‘20’ in line 32). 


142 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Sanskrit ; but it cannot be regarded as quite elegant and 
chaste. The inscription bears the date in Saka 1317 and 
Vikrama 1452, in figures, at the end. At the beginning of 
line 3, the Vikrama year is quoted in words as yugm-esasya-kyt- 
aik-abde. The words yugma, ifdsya, krta and eka mean res- 
pectively 2, 5, 4 and 1 and, according to the well-known 
principle arkdnadm vamato gatih, give the year 1452. The lost 
letters at the beginning of line 1 appear to have similarly indi- 
cated the Saka year 1317 in words. The said lost letters are 
followed by the passage c=Afvine masi Sukle vare Sukre dasamyém 
indicating the date : Asvina-sudi 10, Friday. The same 
.day is further referred to in the passage nrpa-guros =tithau 
occurring in line 3 along with the year of the Vikrama era 
given in words. The expression nypa-guru has apparently 
been used to signify ‘the foremost of kings’ as in the Raghu- 
varfa.1 The date Asvina-sudi 10 is here called ‘the royal 
tithi’ because it is the celebrated Vijaya-da‘ami day which was 
the time prescribed for Indian monarchs to set out on dig- 
vijaya.2 Thus the date mentioned in the inscription is the 
Vijayadasami tithi on Friday, Vikrama 1458 =Saka 1317. It 
regularly corresponds to Friday, September 24, 1395 A.D. 
With the exception of the concluding passage giving the 
years of the Vikrama and Saka eras, the whole inscription is 
written in verse. There are altogether three stanzas, the first 
in the Sragdhara metre and the remaining two in Anustubh. 
The first verse says that (in the Saka year 1317, given in 
words) on Afvina-sudi 10, Friday, several persons named 
Akrara, Srilega, Pati and Kufala erected (ropitd) the kirti of 
the celebrated Naga called Kausika, endowed with the 
hood-jewel, who grants whatever is prayed for and removes 
all obstacles [in the way of his devotees]. As in many other 
cases,’ the word kirti here seems to indicate a shrine meant for 
the Naga deity Kausika who may have been already in wor- 
ship in the locality where Akrira and others lived. Verse 2 
says that in the Vikrama year 1452 (given in words), on 
‘the royal tithi’ (i.e. the Vijaya-dafami), a person named 
DeSananda (apparently an architect or a mason) constructed 
See II. 68. 


1b 
2. Cf. Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. Durga. 
3. Cf. JRASB, Letters, Vol. XIV, p. 115. 


THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 143 


(akari) the beautiful Kirti (i.e. the temple of the Naga deity 
Kausika). The last word of this stanza goes with the follow- 
ing verse (verse 3) which says that a Kayastha named Pre- 
teSvara who was a good teacher (sad-upddhyaya), composed 
the verses (contained in the inscription) and that the inscrip- 
tion was likhita (literally, ‘written’, but apparently meaning 
‘engraved’) by a goldsmith named Kamadeva. The word 
Kayastha apparently refers to the caste of the author of the 
verses, who was probably the teacher of a village school. Con- 
sidering the fact that it was only the Brahmanas who usually 
learnt Sanskrit in medieval India, this Kayastha’s knowledge 
of the sacred language (although not very deep) is quite 
interesting.' Another interesting fact is that a goldsmith was 
engaged to engrave the record on stone. 

The worship of Kausika-naga at Biharsharif or in its 
vicinity is of great interest in view of the fact that the Mahd- 
bharata associates the same Naga with Rajagrha, i.e. modern 
Rajgir which is not far away. We have referred above to a 
verse occurring in Chapter 21 of the Sabha-parvan, which 
mentions Rajagrha as the abode of the Nagas, Arbuda and 
Sakravapin, and the place where the temples of the Nagas, 
Svastika and Mani stood. The verse that immediately follows 
the above reads: 

aparihdrya meghanam Madgadhé Manund krtah | 

Kausiko Manimams =c =aiva cakrate c =dpy =anugraham |/ 

“The Magadha country has been so made by Manu that 
the clouds cannot keep away from it. Kausika and Manimat 
also have shown it their favour.” This seems to suggest that 
the Nagas, Kausika and Manimat, were worshipped at 
Rajagrha as givers of rains, although that particular charac- 
teristic of Kausika is not mentioned in our inscription. Ancient 
Indian literature speaks of various powers of the Nagas in- 
cluding that of causing rains.* It is interesting to note that 
Buddhist tradition also associates the scarcity of water at Raja- 
grha on account of drought, on one occasion during the reign 
of Bimbisara, with the absence on exile of two Nagarajas 


1. For some good poems composed by Kayastha authors, see £p. 
Ind., Vol. XXXII, pp. 341, 3453 Vol. XXXII, pp. 33, 38, 66. 
2. See Vogel, op. cit., pp. 4, 19, 184f., 207, 220, 233, 244, 2Beff. 


144 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


named Girika and Vidyujjvala (probably elsewhere called 
Nanda and Upananda).* 


Vv 


A stone inscription was edited by Daya Ram Sahni in 
the Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XVIII, pp. 158-59, with Plate. 
About the stone bearing the inscription, Sahni says, “The 
epigraph is incised on a stone slab measuring 2’ 10" high, 
1’ wide and 2” in thickness. The stone was fixed in the 
parapet of a well in the village of Masharfa situated about 
a mile and a half to the north-west of the stone pillar at 
Kosam, The inscription is engraved on the front face of the 
slab and consists of fourteen lines. Each line consists of five 
to seven aksaras except the last line which probably contain- 
ed only three characters, now mostly defaced. For the rest, 
the epigraph is in an excellent state of preservation.” 

The characters employed in the inscription resemble 
those in the Mathura inscription of the time of Sodasa (first 
quarter of the first century A.D.),? but are slightly earlier 
than the latter. The epigraph may thus be assigned, on palaeo- 
graphical grounds, to a date in the latter part of the first 
century B.C. The language of the inscription under review 
is Prakrit with a little influence of Sanskrit. 

Sahni says, “The inscription begins with a salutation to 
a certain Bhagavat whose name unfortunately is not given and 
ends with the wish that ‘the deity may be pleased’. Here too 
unfortunately the name of the deity is not given or, if it was, 
it has been destroyed in the last line of the inscription. We 
are thus left to guess the identity of this god. I am inclined 
to think that it was the Yaksa Manibhadra, the favourite 
deity of the grandfather of the donor.” Unfortunately, it is 
not possible to agree entirely with Sahni’s contentions quoted 
above. 

The first three lines of the inscription read namo bhagavato 
sathavahasa Manibhadasa, ‘Adoration to Lord Manibhadra, the 
leader of caravans’, and the epigraph clearly ends with the 
sentence piyatam [bhagava], ‘May the Lord be pleased’. The 


1. Ibid., p. 118. 
2. JBRS, Vol. XXXIX, Parts 1-2, 1953, pp. 5ff- 


THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 145 


deity is called simply ‘the Lord’ in the concluding sentence, 
as his name is already mentioned as the Lord Manibhadra in 
the marigala at the beginning of the record. Sahni imagined 
a fullstop after bhagavato in line 1, which he wrongly read as 
bhagavate. He regarded the expressions sathavahasa Manibhadasa 
as epithets of the following name of the donor’s grandfather. 
The expression manibhada was taken by him to denote ‘a 
votary of Manibhadra’. It should, however, be pointed out 
that Manibhadra is just another well-known form of the name 
of Yaksa Manibhadra. This form of the name is not only 
found in the Padmavati Manibhadra statue _ inscription,! 
quoted by Sahni himself,* but is also recognised by Monier- 
Williams in his Sanskrit-English Dictionary (s. v. mani) on the 
authority of the Samavidhana Brahmana and the Mahdbhdrata. 
The Vangavasi edition of the Mahabharata (II. 10. 15), while 
giving the names of the Yaksas in Kubera’s palace, says : 

Manibhadro =’tha Dhanadak Svetabhadras=ca guhyakah | 

Kaserako Gandakanduh Pradyotaf =ca Mahabalah |/ 

Although therefore there was in ancient India a class of 
people (called Manibhaddavattika in the Pali work Mahdniddesa 
and Manibhadda in the Milindapatha)* who worshipped the 
Yaksa Manibhadra, there is no necessity of taking the expres- 
sion ménibhada occurring in the Masharfa inscription in the 
sense of a votary of Manibhadra, in view of the fact that 
Manibhadra and Manibhadra are but different forms of the 
name of the same Yaksa. 

The word sathavaha=Sanskrit sdrthavdha meaning ‘the 
leader or conductor of a caravan’, ‘a merchant’, ‘a trader’, 
used’ in the inscription as an epithet of the Yaksa Manibhadra 
seems to have induced Sahni to take the expressions satha- 
vahasa Manibhadasa as epithets of the donor’s grandfather. 
That, however, the Yaksa Manibhadra or Manibhadra was 
regarded in ancient India as the deity especially worshipped 
by travellers and caravans is definitely established by the 
Mahdbharata.4 In the section in question, the Mahabharata 


1. ASR, A.R., 1915-16, Part II, p. 106. 

2. Op. cit., p. 159, note 1. 

3. Cf. Malalasekera, Dict. Pali Proper Names, Vol. IL, p. 426. 
4. Vangavasi ed., III. 65. 22. 


146 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


describes the great plight of a caravan of merchants attacked 
by a herd of wild elephants in a forest. When those of the 
caravan that escaped unhurt gathered together, the first 
question they asked one another was : 

[te ="briivan sahitah sarve] kasy =edam karmanah thalam | 

niinam na pijito =’smabhir =Manibhadro mahdyasah || 
The first thing that occurred to the merchants was that the 
calamity was probably due to their negligence in worshipping 
the god Manibhadra. This shows beyond doubt that Mani- 
bhadra was regarded as the protector of the caravans, while 
our inscription makes it clear that he was also conceived as a 
leader of caravans.! As most of the facts relating to the my- 
thology and cult of the Yaksa Manibhadra are now lost, the 
information supplied by the inscription is extremely interesting. 
Another interesting fact regarding the inadequately preserved 
Manibhadra mythology is that the Yaksa was very probably 
identical with the deity called Maninaga (sometimes believed 
to have been a son of the Naga-mata Kadru) whose tirtha at the 
ancient city of Rajagrha is mentioned in the Mahabharata®? and 
whose matha or temple somewhere in Orissa is referred to in 
the two Kanas plates of the sixth and seventh centuries A.D. 

The inscription records the construction of a vedikd appa- 
rently in honour of the god Manibhadra or Manibhadra on 
behalf of a householder called Gotiputa, i.e. Gauptiputra. 
Gotiputa or Gauptiputra is essentially a metronymic meaning 
‘the son born of a girl of the Gupta clan’, although it is used 
here as if it were a personal name. There are other instances 
of a metronymic being similiarly stereotyped as a personal 
name. 
The vedika was caused to be made by Gauptiputra in a 


locality called Asika. Whether this was the ancient name of 


1. It is also possible to think that here the word sdrthavaha is used in 
the modified sense of the protector of caravans. With reference to this 
characteristic of Manibhadra, the deity may be compared to the South 
Indian god Valitunai-nayanar (Sanskrit Mérgasahayesvara) who was wor- 
shipped by merchants for the safe transport of their commodities. 

2. Op. cit., IIT. 84. 106ff. 

3. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, pp. 328ff. 

4. One interesting case is that of Vakataka Gautamiputra (literally, 
‘the son born of a girl of the Gautama-gotra or clan’), who was a son of 
Pravarasena I. 


THE NAGAS AND YAKSAS 147 


modern Masharfa (the findspot of the inscription) near Kosam 
(ancient Kaugambi) about 35 miles from Allahabad cannot 
be determined in the present state of our knowledge. Monier- 
Williams’ Sanskrit-English Dictionary recognises Asika or Asika 
as the name of a people on the authority on Varahamihira’s 
Brhatsamhita, although the name seems to be based on a variant 
reading of a passage in the work in question. It is not easy to 
say whether these Asikas were actually inhabitants of Asika 
mentioned in the present record. But it is really difficult to 
agree with Sahni who says, ‘“‘Afikd=dfikd corresponding to 
the Sanskrit démikd, the taddhita form of afman,?? and trans- 
lates the passage Asikdyam karita vedika as “This railing of stone 
was caused to be made.” 

The inscription may be translated as follows : 

“Adoration to the Lord Manibhadra, the leader (protector ) 
of caravans. [There was] a householder named Kufapala who 
was born of Seliya (Sailika) [and] was the son of Vari, the 
householder who was born of Ejavati. By his son Gaupti- 
putra, the householder, was caused to be made a railed plat- 
form (or covered balcony in the courtyard of the temple of 
Manibhadra) at Asika. May the Lord (i.e. Manibhadra) 
be pleased.” 


CuapTeR X 
VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 
I 


V.V. Mirashi has published the Saugor inscription of 
Sarikaragana in the Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXVII, pp. 163ff. 
According to his reading, Paramabhattdraka Maharajadhiraja 
Paramesvara Sankaragana, during whose reign the inscription 
was incised, has been described in the record as paramabha- 
ttaraka-maharajadhirdja-paramesvara-Sri-Vamarajadeva-pad-anudhyata, 
although what has been read as Vamardja appears to us from 
the published facsimile to be Vavardja.1 The inscription has 
been assigned on paleographical grounds to the middle of the 
eighth century. In view of this date of the record, kings 
Vamaraja and Sankaragana, who would appear to have 
belonged to the Kalacuri family, have been regarded, without 
any reason whatever, as ancestors of the Kalacuri emperors 
of Tripuri. Similarly, without any convincing argument, 
Vamaraja has been placed a few generations earlier than 
Sankaragana, roughly about the second half of the seventh 
century. It is well known that the Kalacuris of Tripuri, from 
the time of Karna (1041-71 A.D.), described themselves in 


1. Hiralal read the name as Vaghardja. But the disputed aksara_ is 
not gia, and apparently also not ma as suggested by Mirashi who thinks 
that the loop of ma. not to be found on the facsimile, is still visible on the 
stone. It will be seen from the facsimile of the inscription that the upper 
and lower left strokes of ma join its loop in an acute angle, whereas the back 
of the letter in question is fully rounded exactly as in the preceding ra. 
Indeed much has been made on the slender basis of the reading of the letter 
as ma, which appears to be merely conjectural. For other references to the 
word Vasa or Bava in inscriptions, see pranabhattdraka-sri-Bava-pad-dnudhy éta 
in the Lohata plate (JHQ, Vol. XXV, p. 288) and paramabhattaraka- 
mahdrdjathiraja~_paramesvara-dri-Ba:a-pad-dnudhvdta in the Maitraka records 
(Corp. Ins. Ind, Vol. III, p. 186, note). The use of the word has to be com- 
pared with that of Bappa in epigraphic passages like mahdrdja-Bappa-svdmin 
(Sel. Ins., p. 438), paramabhattaraka-mahdrajadhi ‘Param¢Svara-$ri-Bappa- 
pad-inudhydta and Bappa-bhat{araka-maharaja-Sri-pad-anudhydta (Corp. Ins. Ind., 
loc. cit). N. Lakshminarayan Rao who carefully examined the letter agrees 
with us that the reading of the name is not Vamardja. He thinks that it 
may be Vapardja or Voparaja. 





VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA e 149 


their official charters as paramabhattaraka-mahdrdjadhirdja-parame- 
Svara-paramamdahesvara-Sri-Vamadeva-pad-anudhyata.1 Mirashi thinks 
that Vamadeva mentioned in the records of the Kalacuris of 
Tripuri is no other than the king of the Saugor inscription 
of the eighth century, whose name is Vamaraja according 
to his reading. 

Mirashi further refers to the Malkapuram inscription of 
Saka 1183 (1261-62 A.D.) which speaks of the Saiva pontiff 
Vamasambhu as the third in spiritual descent from Sadbhava- 
Sambhu who founded the Golaki-matha in the Dahala or Cedi 
country (Jabalpur region) with the help received from the 
Kalacuri king Yuvaraja (either Yuvaraja I who reigned about 
the middle of the tenth century or his grandson Yuvaraja Il 
who flourished about the end of the same century as he is known 
to have been defeated by Paramara Muiija, 974-96 A.D.) 
and incidentally says that ‘even now’ the Kalacuri kings 
are honoured for worshipping Vama‘ambhu’s feet. He further 
refers to my paper in the Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. XV, 
1938, pp. 96 ff., and says, ‘Dr. D.C. Sircar has recently 
suggested that this Vamasambhu was the spiritual preceptor 
of the Kalacuri king Karna and flourished in the middle of 
the eleventh century A.D. The description in the Malkapuram 
inscription that even then (i.e. in the middle of the thirteenth 
century A.D.) the feet of Vamasambhu were worshipped by 
Kalacuri kings squares with the fact that the expression Vama- 
deva-pdd-dnudhyata occurs in almost all records of the Kalacuris 
of Tripuri from Karna downwards.” But he next sets forth 
certain ‘‘reasons” for which he is ‘inclined to look with suspi- 
cion on the statements in the Malkapuram inscription about 
the early pontiffs of the Golaki-matha.” These “reasons” are, 
however, extremely unlikely to satisfy all students of history. 
As for instance, Mirashi points out the absence of epigraphic 
evidence to prove the existence of Kalacuri rulers at Tripuri 
about the time when the Malkapuram inscription was engrav- 
ed. But the possibility of the scions of the Imperial Kalacuri 
house of Tripuri ruling over parts of Dahala in the thirteenth 
century at least as minor chiefs can hardly be ruled out. A 
writer on the history of the Kalacuris says at the end of his 


1. Ray, DHNI, Vol. IL, p. 815. For fuller lists of the Kalacuri rulers 
of Chattisgarh (Ratanpur and Raipur branches), see Hiralal, Inscriptions 
in the C. P. and Berar, 1932, pp. 205-07. 


150 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


account of the Tumm4na Kalacuris who represented a branch 
of the Tripuri house : “It is certain that the Muslims never 
succeeded in establishing their power in the Chhatisgarh Divi- 
sion and there is evidence to show that the Kalacuris continued 
to figure as chiefs of Chhattisgarh right up to the 18th cen- 
tury. The Khalari stone inscription of the Kalacuri king 
Haribrahmadeva (son of Ramadeva and grandson of Sirnhana) 
is dated in 1415 A.D. while the Arang plates of the Haihaya 
king Amarasirnhadeva is dated as late as 1735 A.D.”! The 
absence of Vamadeva’s name in the records of the Kalacuris 
of Chhattisgarh scarcely proves that the Saiva saint was not 
held in veneration by the Kalacuris of the thirteenth century. 
This may merely show that their esteem for Vamadeva was 
not as remarkable as in the case of the Kalacuri monarchs of 
Tripuri.? Mirashi’s doubt regarding the authenticity of the 
statement in the Malkapuram inscription on the basis of such 
weak “reasons” can therefore hardly be taken quite seriously. 

‘Vamadeva, referred to in the records of Kalacuri Karna 
and his successors, is endowed with imperial titles just like the 
kings who are said to have been his pad-dnudhydta. Mirashi 
says, “the use of imperial titles in connection with him would 
be difficult to explain, for we have not till now come across a 
single instance of the assumption of such titles by spiritual 
teachers.” Of course, the epithet Paramabhaffaraka applied 
to the Saiva priest VimalaSambhu or °siva in the Mamdapur 
inscription of Saka 1127 noticed in the Corpus Inscriptionum 
Indicarum, Vol. II, 1888, p. 17, note 3, has been passed over 
in silence together with some of our observations published 
from time to time. It was pointed out by us that the Saiva 
saint Vamadeva (Vamasambhu) was represented as an em- 
peror because the Kalacuri kings, Karna and his successors, 
regarded their dominions as belonging to the saint and them- 
selves as the latter’s deputies just as the Guhilots of Chitor and 
the kings of Travancore considered themselves viceroys respec- 
tively of the gods Ekalinga and Padmanabhasvamin. The 
tradition regarding the dedication of the Maratha empire by 


1, See Ep. Ind., Vol. II, pp. 5, 309, etc. 
2. Cf, the case of the Gaaga devotees of Purusottama-Jagannatha 
(above, pp. 64-65). 


VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 151 


Sivaji in favour of his guru Ramadasa was also referred’ to. 
It was further pointed out with quotations from a number of 
epigraphic records that the god Jagannatha or Purusottama 
of Puri is mentioned as the overlord of the reigning Ganga 
monarch in several later Ganga inscriptions.1 Now it seems 
that Mirashi may be satisfied if he finds inscriptions in which 
a Saiva saint is unmistakably endowed with regal or imperial 
epithets. Fortunately, we have come across several such records. 

Among the epigraphic records on Mt. Abu (Sirohi 
District, Rajasthan), the Achalgadh (Mount Abu) inscription 
of the Devda Cahamana Tejahsirmha of Candravati was noticed 
in the Archaeological Survey of Western India, No. 2, Appendix, 
p. xv, No. 58; Progress Report of the Archaeological Survey of 
India, Western Circle, 1906-07, p. 28; and Bhandarkar’s List 
of Inscriptions of Northern India, No. 689. The inscription 
gives the following information regarding its findspot and con- 
tents : ‘In the vicinity and in front of the Acalesvara temple 
are standing some ancient temples, mostly Vaisnava, the ex- 
terior of which is profusely sculptured with erotic figures. At 
the back is a step-well, which, as the inscription attached to it 
tells us, was constructed by Mokala and others in Sarat 
1387 varse Magha-sudi 3 Bhargava-dine when Sarvesvara Maha- 
munindra was the high priest of the Acalesvara-maha-matha 
and king Tejahsirhha was reigning at Candravati.” The date 
of the inscription corresponds to Friday, January 11, 1331 A.D. 

The most important persons mentioned in the record 
are three : (1) Paramabhaj{araka-paramamahesvara Réja-Sri- 
Sarve$vara-mahamunindra of the Acaleévara-mahamatha on 
the Arbuda-mahaiaila (ie. Mount Abu), described in lines 
4-7; (2) Samastardjavalisamalamkrta-Paramamdahesvara Raja-sri- 
Tejahsirnha of the Candravati-bhimandala, described in 
lines 7-9; and (3) Gohilotra Mokala (described in lines 9-12 


1, See ‘Gafga Bhanudeva II and Purusottama-Jagannatha’ in 
JKHRS, Vol 1, June, 1946, pp. 251-53- According to the Oriya chronicle 
Matala Paiji, Anafgabhima III dedicated his kingdom in favour of the 
god Purusottama-Jagannatha and for that reason the said Ganga king and 
hus successors became Réutas (feudatories) of the deity (cf. Orissa Historical 
Research Journal, Vol. I, No. I, pp. 48-51; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 19). 
See also above, pp. 5off. 


152 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


and mentioned in line 13) who belonged to the family of 
Vapaka, i.e., Bappa, and was either himself a Rajan or was the 
son of Rdja-sri-Batha. Mokala was no doubt a subordinate of 
Tejahsirnhha ; but whether the latter has to be regarded as a 
subordinate of Sarvesvara is not made quite clear in the in- 
scription although that is probable as SarveSvara is mentioned 
before Tejahsimha and as the epithet Parama-bhatfaraka is 
applied only to the former. What is, however, very interest- 
ing to note is that SarveSvara, who was apparently the pontiff 
of the Saiva establishment which is called Acalesvara-maha- 
matha and is still today situated within the bounds of Achal- 
gadh on Mount Abu, has not only been called Paramabhatta- 
raka and Rajan, but his vijaya-réjya is also referred to. It 
seems that the Saiva saint SarveSvara was the spiritual guide 
of Tejahsirhha, the latter considering himself the deputy of 
the former in ruling his dominions. Whatever may be the 
value of this suggestion, Mirashi can hardly object to the 
Saiva saint Vamadeva (VAamaSarnbhu), like SarveSvara of the 
Achalgadh inscription, being endowed with regal titles in 
the inscriptions of the Kalacuri kings. 

With the above record mentioning the vijaya-rajya of a 
Saiva ascetic may be compared a Jain inscription in the 
Gwalior Museum (originally from Bahadurpur).1 This epi- 
graph, dated Vikrama 1573, Asadha-badi 4, records the 
construction of an Adinatha-caitya at Bhudravyapura 
(Bahadurpur) by the Srimalasangha and the installation 
ofan image therein by Acdrya Punyaratna-siri during the 
vijaya-rdjya of Jinaharhsa-siri of the Kharatara-gaccha. N. 
Lakshminarayan Rao kindly drew my attention to two 
Nolamba-Pallava records having a greater bearing on the 
question. The first? of those inscriptions, which has been 
assigned to a date about 870 A.D., mentions a Saiva pontiff 
as  samadhigatapaftcamahasabda- 
paramabha{{araka-maharajadhiraja-paramesvara. The other  ins- 
cription,® dated Saka 858 (936 A.D.), assigns the same titles 
to another Saiva pontiff named Varunasiva-bhattara. 

That Paramabhatfaraka Maharajadhiraja Paramesvara Vama- 
deva of the inscriptions of Karna and his successors was not 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXX, p. 49 
2. Ep. Carn., Vol. X,p. 376 (Srinivaspur Taluk, No. 27); trans., p. 276. 
3. SH, Vol. 1X, Part I, p. 12, No. 24. 





VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 153 


a king but a saint was also suggested by us on the strength of 
a verse of the Pythvirdjavijaya (attributed to Jayanaka) which 
is only known from Jonaraja’s commentary on that work.! 

Verse 16 of Canto VII of the above poem? refers to the 
marriage of Somesvara, father of the hero Cahamana Prthviraja 
II, while the former was at the court of Caulukya Kumarapala 
(c. 1141-73 A.D.), with the daughter of the Tripuri-puran- 
dara, i.e., the [Kalacuri] king of Tripuri. The commentary 
of Jonaraja says that Somesvara married Karpiradevi, 
daughter of Tejala.* Just to introduce the illustrious family 
to which the hero’s mother belonged, the poet, as do the 
authors of the Kalacuri epigraphs, begins with the mythical 
account of Candra (the moon), his son Budha and the latter’s 
descendant Kartavirya Arjuna surnamed Kalicuri,‘ after 
whom the family is said to have been known as Kalicuri (i.e., 
Kalacuri). The author then gives an account of the exploits 
of a very great Kalacuri king of Tripuri, named Sahasika 
(verse 95-112 and possibly also the lost verses up to the end 
of Canto VII), who was a predecessor of the maternal 
grandfather of his hero. Who was this Sahasika, predeccessor 
of the Kalacuri king Tejala who ruled at Tripuri about the 
middle of the twelfth century ? 

In this connection, a verse, the text of which is lost but 
the commentary with the exception of the commencing letters 
is preserved, appears to be very interesting. This commentary 
Tuns : ménavayés=sa (very probably ksiyamdna-vayds=sa as 
suggested by Ojha and Guleri) Sahasikas =tapasvine Vamadeva- 
ndmne nija-rdjalaksmim guru-daksindyai dattod sarvarh bhitmim jetum 
prasthitavén. Thus the Kalacuri king Sahasika of Tripuri is 
stated to have offered his kingdom as guru-daksind to his guru, 
the ascetic Vamadeva, and went out on a digvijaya. It is 
very probable that the Kalacuri king Sahasika of Tripuri men- 


1. See IHQ, Vol. XVIII, 1942, pp. 80-81. 

2, Edited by Gaurishankar H. Ojha and Chandradhar Sharma 
Guleri, Ajmer, 1941, p. 182. 

3. H.B. Sarda in his account of the work (JRAS, 1913, p. 277) gives 
the name of Karpiradevi’s father as Acalaraja. 

4. The author attempted a fantastic explanation of Kalicuri which 
(together with the variants Kafaccuri, Kalatsuri, etc.) is, however, stated ,to 
be in reality an adaptation of the Turkish title Kulchur. 


154 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


tioned in the Prthvirdjavijaya is no other than Gangeyadeva 
(c. 1015-41 A.D.) who was a great conqueror and established 
the imperial dignity of the Kalacuri family of Dahala on a firm 
basis. Gangeya assumed the title Vikramaditya after a famous 
hero of Indian tradition and folklore, whose other name was 
Sahasanka. The name Sdhasika, applied to the Kalacuri 
king in the Prthvirdjavijaya, seems to be another form of 
Sahas3nka =Vikramaditya.! 

This reference to the ascetic Vamadeva as the guru of a Ka- 
lacuri king who dedicated his kingdom in the former’s favour 
is supported by the mention of Vamadeva, for the first time, 
in the earliest record of Gangeya’s son Karna (c. 1041-71 
A.D.) as the latter’s overlord and also by the evidence of the 
Malkapuram inscription showing that the Kalacuri kings 
worshipped the Saiva saint Vamasambhu for about two cen- 
turies before the middle of the thirteenth century. This goes 
against Mirashi’s conjecture that Vamadeva of the passage 
Vamadeva-pad-dnudhydta in the Kalacuri records has to be identi- 
fied with a Kalacuri king of the seventh century whose name 
has been read by him as Vamardja, although it has appeared 
to others as Vagharaja, Vavardja, Vapardja or Vopardja. As 
Someévara’s marriage took place when he was staying at the 
court of Kumarapala (c. 1141-73 A.D.) and as his son Prthvi- 
raja III was born some time before the death of Vigraharaja 
IV (c. 1153-64 A.D.), it seems possible that the Tripuri- 
purandara Tejala was no other than Gayakarna (c. 1125- 
55 A.D.), great-grandson of Gargeyadeva Vikramaditya- 
Sahasika (Sahasanka ). 

If the Kalacuri kingdom was formally dedicated by 
Gangeya about the end of his career to his guru Vamadeva 
(Vamasambhu), it is easy to explain why that king’s son as 
well as the latter’s successors claimed to have been viceroys 
of Vamadeva just as in the case of the deputies of other theo- 
retical overlords like the gods Jagannatha-Purusottama, 
Ekalinga and Padmanabha. But what explanation can we 


1. See JUPHS, Vols. XXIV-XXV, 1951-52, p. 232. The charac- 
teristic epithet Sdhasika is very often found in the description of Vikrama- 
ditya; cf. Ind. Cult, Vol. VI, p. 1943 Vikrama Volume, ed. R. K. Mookerji, 
1948, pp. 637 ff. 


VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 155 


reasonably offer for the continuous mention of a seventh century 
ancestor in the records of his descendants from the middle of 
the eleventh century ? Is not the unjustifiability of Mirashi’s 
suggestion that Vamaraja was mentioned as being meditated 
on by all his descendants from the end of the seventh century 
quite clearly demonstrated by the total omission of 
the name of this alleged illustrious ancestor of the Kalacuri 
emperors from the elaborate genealogy of the early members 
of the family found in such records as the Bilhari inscription’ 
of Yuvaraja II and the Varanasi plates? of Karna ? If he 
was so important an ancestor as to be meditated on by all 
the Kalacuri emperors from Karna downwards, i.e., from the 
eleventh century onwards (as indicated by inscriptions, but 
from the seventh century as claimed by Mirashi), how is his 
omission from the genealogy to be explained ? In our 
opinion, there is no answer to the question except surmises 
which cannot be seriously considered. 

There is much in Mirashi’s paper which is imaginary 
as well as inaccurate. He says that ‘‘after the defeat of Bud- 
dharaja by Pulakesin II, they (i.e., the Kalacuris) seem 
to have remained for sometime in obscurity......the Kala- 
curis seems to have turned their attention to the north where 
there was no great king to check their advance after the death 
of Harsa in A.D. 647. WVamadeva seems to be the founder 
of this northern Kalacuri power. He overran Bundelkhand 
and Vaghelkhand and established himself at Kalafjara.”? 
Now, in the first place, what we know from inscriptions shows 
that Kalacuri Buddharaja was defeated by Calukya Manga- 
lega and not by Pulakesin II.‘ Secondly, the Abhona plates® 





1. See Bhandarkar’s List, No. 1577. 

2. Ibid., No. 1223. As regards the absence of the passage Vamadeve- 
pad-dnudhydta in Kalacuri records of a date earlier than the beginning of 
Karna’s rule, pointed out by us. Mirashi says that the expression “generally 
occurs in the copper-plate grants”. He also says, “In the absence of the 
grants of earlier kings, it is not safe to assume that Vamadeva was forgot- 
ten in the meanwhile.” But the occurrence of the passage in question in 
the Sarnath stone inscription of Karna (ASI, A.R., 1906-07, pp. 100 f.) and 
the Lalpahad rock inscription of Narasirnha (Ind. Ant., Vol. XVIII, pp. 
auiff.) clearly shows that the contention cannot be maintained. 

3. Op. cit., p. 167. 

4. See Ind. Ant., Vol. XIX, p. 7; Ef. Ind., Vol. VI, pp.1 5 
Bomb. Gaz., Vol. I, Part II, pp. 347-48. 


5+ Bhandarkar’s List, No. 1206. 


156 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


(Kalacuri year 347 =595 A.D.) of Sankaragana and Vadner* 
(Kalacuri year 360 =608 A.D.) plates of Buddharaja, which 
were issued respectively from Ujjayini and Vaidiga (i.e., 
Vidisa) show that they had established themselves in both 
West and East Malwa long before Harsa (606-47 A.D.) was 
tree from his struggles in U.P. It is therefore natural to 
think that king Sankaragana of the Saugor inscription, who 
was ruling over the country about East Malwa more than a 
century later, was a descendant of Buddharaja. Mirashi’s 
Vamadeva can hardly be described as the founder of Kalacuri 
power in that area. Thirdly, the conjecture that it was 
Vamadeva who conquered Bundelkhand and Vaghelkhand 
and especially K4lafijara is a mere flight of fancy. There 
is again nothing in the present state of our knowledge to sug- 
gest that the kings mentioned in the Saugor inscription were 
direct ancestors of the Kalacuris of Tripuri, although that may 
not be altogether impossible. 


il 


The Malkapuram stone-pillar inscription* is dated in 
Saka 1183 (1261-62 A.D.) and belongs to the time of the 
Kakatiya queen Rudradevi (Rudramba or Rudramma) who 
was the daughter of the celebrated Kakatiya king Ganapati 
(1199-1261 A.D.) and ruled over the Andhra country from 
1261 to 1296 A.D. The record is written partly in Sanskrit 
and partly in Telugu, and gives a very interesting account 
of a Saiva monastery of the Dahala-mandala (about the 
Jabalpur District, Madhya Pradesh), situated between the 
Bhagirathi and the Narmada. The name of the monastery 
was $ri-Golaki-matha and its founder was a Saiva Pontiff 
named Sadbhava‘ambhu who is said to have belonged to the 
[spiritual] lineage of Durvasas. The date of Sadbhavasambhu 
is determined by the fact that he is reported to have received 
as bhiksa (free gift) three lacs of gramas* from the Kalacuri 


1, Ibid., No. 1207. 

2. Journ. Andhra Hist. Res. Soc. Vol. IV, pp. 152ff.; Kakatiyasoricika, 
Rajahmundry, 1935, Inscription No. 31. 

3. The word grdma, ‘village’, may have been used in the present 
context in a modified sense or, probably, the number is inflated. Cf. Sircar, 
Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. Ind., pp. 158f. 


VAMADEVA AND ViSvESVARA 157 


king Yuvarajadeva, either Yuvaraja I or II both of whom 
ruled in the tenth century A.D. The Pontiff Sadbhava- 
fambhu was succeeded by Somasambhu, author of the 
SomaSambhupaddhati, a work on Saiva dgama. Somagambhu’s 
successor Vamasambhu was apparently the guru of the Kala- 
curi king Gangeva (c.1015-41 A.D.),! and had thousands of 
Sisyas and prasisyas. Then, after some years, came Saktiéambhu 
and his disciple Kirtigambhu. After them, flourished Vimalasiva 
who was honoured by the Kalacuri kings. Vimalasiva’s disciple 
was Dharmasambhu (also called Dharmasiva). The Bengali 
Saiv-dcarya Visvesvara was also a disciple of Vimalasiva. 

Visvesvara has been called VisveSvarafambhu or Vis- 
vesvarasiva, and also Visvesvara-desika (the Pontiff Visves- 
vara) and VisveSvara-Sivacarya. He is described as a native 
of Pirvagrama in the Radha division of Gauda. Elsewhere 
in the same record reference is made to his donation to the 
inhabitants of the village of Pirvagrama stated to have been 
situated in Daksina-Radha in Gauda. Sometimes the Pontiff 
is simply called Gauda-cidamani, ‘the head-jewel of Gauda’. 

Visvesvara was famous for his knowledge in the Saiva 
siddhanta, agama or rahasya. Sometimes he is described as a 
master in all the sciences (vidya). It is said that people were 
very pleased to have a look at this preceptor of king Ganapati, 
seated in the vidyd-mandapa (college) with his matted hair 
trembling, his face smiling and his ear-ornaments made of 
mukté striking the upper part of his shoulder. 

The tame of this Bengali Saiv-acarya spread far and wide, 
and some of the most influential monarchs of the time came 
to be his disciples. The kings of the Cola and Malava coun- 
tries became his Sisyas, and he was the diksd-guru of the Kala- 
curi king and of Kakatiya Ganapati, king of the Andhra 
country. It is difficult to determine which of the Cola, 
Malava and Kalacuri kings were Visvesvara’s disciples. The 
Cola kings Rajaraja III (1216-46 A.D.) and Rajendra III 
(1246-67 A.D.) appear to have been his contemporaries. The 
ruler of Malava referred to in the record may have been any 
one of the Paramara kings, Devapala (c. 1218-36 A.D.), Jai- 
tugideva (c. 1239-43 A.D.) and Jayavarman II (¢. 1256-60 


1. See above, pp. 153-54. 


158 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


A.D.). We know little about the Kalacuris of Dahala from 
the end of the twelfth century, though they may have conti- 
nued to rule as small chiefs. The mention of the Kalacuri 
king among the disciples of Visvesvara is interesting in view of 
the fact that the Malkapuram inscription mentions his spiritual 
ancestor Vamagambhu as being worshipped by the Kalacuris 
as late as the time when the record was issued.’ 

It is said that Kakatiya Ganapati orally ordered the grant 
of a village called Mandara in favour of his guru Visvesvara. 
This village was situated in Kandravati in the visaya (dis- 
trict) of Velivada, to the south of the great river Krsnaveni, 
je. the Krsna. After Ganapati’s death, his daughter 
Rudramba, following the order of her father, granted the 
village together with another village called Velarngapiidi and 
with the islets (Jaika@) formed in the bed of the river Krsna. 
The grant was made with the eightfold proprietary rights. 
In specifying the boundaries correctly, all the eight directions 
were represented, and they were described in the Andhra- 
bhasa, i.e., the Telugu language, so as to make them intelli- 
gible to all people of the locality. 

Visveévara established a monastery and a perpetual rest- 
house evidently within the area of the above two villages. The 
monastery was named after him as éri-Visvesvara-golaki, and 
the rest-house was endowed with an agrahéra for the enjoyment 
of all people. He became the Acdrya of this monastery and 
enjoyed one hundred niska coins (per month or year) as 
Acarya-bhoga. 

The record also gives an interesting account of the dona- 
tions made by Visvesvara. There were sixty Dravida Brah- 
manas who appear to have been merchants. Each of these 
60 Brahmanas received from Visvesvara residence and titles, 
and also each two Putfikds of land (measured by the rod known 
as Penumbika), a Puttikd being about 8 acres. The villages 
called Mandara and Velathgapidi, given to the Pontiff by 
Ganapati and Rudramba, were divided into three shares, the 
first of which was dedicated to the god Pinakin, i.e., Siva. 
The second share was awarded to the students of the college 
already referred to and also to the monastery of the Suddha- 


1, See above, p. 149- 


VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 159 


Saivas. The third share was granted in favour of three differ- 
ent institutions which were a Prasdati-sala, an Arogya-sala and 
a Vipra-satra. The reference to a Prasiti-fald, ie., maternity 
or lying-in hospital, in a record of the thirteenth century is 
very interesting. Arogya-Sala is a hospital. It may be inter- 
esting in this connection to recall that, according to the 
second Rock Edict of Asoka (c. 272-232 B.C.), the Maurya 
king claims to have established hospitals of two kinds, for men 
and for animals, not only all over his own kingdom, but’ also 
in the Tamil states of the Far South, in Ceylon and in the 
countries of the Greek kings of Syria, North Africa and 
Greece. The word Vipra-satra means a rest-house established 
for the use of Brahamanas, though it is stated that there was 
arrangement for feeding, at all times, without any obstruction, 
all people from Brahmana to Candala, who came and asked 
for food. 

We have already noticed the references to a college and 
to the students of that college. There were three Professors 
who taught the Rk, Yajus and Sama Vedas. There were also 
five teachers who lectured on Pada, Vakya, Pramana, Sahitya 
and Agama. A Vaidya and a Kayastha also appear to have 
belonged to the college. Each of these ten persons received 
from Visvesvara two Puftikds of land. The words vaidya and 
kayastha here appear to mean a physician and a scribe, and 
not members of the Vaidya and Kayastha communities. Ten 
nautch girls pertaining to VisveSvaradeva (probably the 
Siva-linga worshipped at Visvesvara-golaki and named after 
the Pontiff) and eight maddala (Bengali mddal) players, inclu- 
ding two bridlers, received 1} Puftikds each. Seventy-three 
other persons were given each a Puftikd and also +1; Nivar- 
tana of land in addition to the above. They were the follow- 
ing—an inhabitant of Kasmira; fourteen  songstresses; six 
karata players; two cooks who were Brahmanas; four servants; 
six Brahmanas belonging to the monastery and the rest-house, 
ten matted-haired persons from the Coda country, who were 
protectors of the villages and were known as Virabhadras 
owing to their duties such as bidaccheda (?), kuksiccheda and 
Sirascheda; twenty Bhatas (Paiks) and Viramustis (constables); 


1. See Sircar, Inscriptions of Asoka, 1967, p. 253 cf. p. 17. 


160 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


ten Karus, Napitas and Silpins, and Sthapatis who worked in 
gold, copper, stone, bamboo and iron. 

At the time of VisveSvara, there seems to have been a 
settlement of his co-villagers in the Andhra country. He is 
said to have given three hundred Puttikas of land to a number 
of Samavedin Brahmanas of the Srivatsa-gotra, who were 
natives of Pirvagrama in Daksina-Radha in Gauda. These 
Brahmanas appear to have kept written accounts of the income 
and expenditure of the estate (?) and possibly received 150 
Puttikas as vrtti for doing this work. It is also stated that, in 
case they would die without issue, their wives, if they would 
take up their work (?), would enjoy the lands. 

VisveSvara established a stone-monastery in a town 
called KaAlisvara, and made an agrahdra of a village called 
Ponnagrama. He established another monastery and a 
Siva-linga named after him in the town called Mandrakita 
(Mantrakita in the Karimnagar District). Two villages 
called Mane and Palyutlu were granted to two rest-houses 
pertaining to the god established there. A Siva-linga named 
atter him was also established in the town of Candravalli. In 
the locality called Nandapada, VisveSvara made a town and 
named it after himself. This town was granted for the 
enjoyment of the local god. He established a third Siva-linga, 
named after himself, at the village of Kommir and gave thirty 
kharis of land and five khdris of low land in favour of the Siva- 
linga. At Srigaila (in the Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh ) 
he established the Sanyeliévarapuri which appears to have 
been a monastery containing sixteen cells. WVisvesvara’s dis- 
ciple Ganapati, the Kakatiya king, made a gift of the village 
called Kandrakota in the Pallinada visaya to his guru as 
Gcarya-daksind, possibly in favour of a certain rest-house of the 
locality. 

Visvesvara seems to have established a fourth Siva-linga 
and to have given for its enjoyment the jungly part of a village 
called Dudyala’ and another village called Piniru. A fifth 
Siva-linga was established by the great Pontiff at North Soma- 
Sila, and the village of Aitaprollamana was granted in its favour. 


VAMADEVA AND visvEsvARA 161 
Il 


The account of the hospital and maternity home in the 
Malkapuram inscription reminds us of similar organisations 
in some other religious institutions of medieval India. Bud- 
dhist universities like the one at Nalanda maintained hospitals 
for the treatment of their employees and the students studying 
in the colleges attached to them. Mention may be made in 
this connection of Valabhi, Varanasi and Vikramagila. The 
royal grants in favour of Buddhist monasteries often mention 
glana-pratyaya-bhaisajya as one of the items for which the income 
could be utilised.1 The hospitals attached to the religious ins- 
titutions probably catered also to the need of the local people. 

Among medieval epigraphs of South India reference may 
be made to the Tirumukkudal (Chingleput District) inscrip- 
tion of Virarajendra-cola (1063-70 A.D.) and the Srirangam 
inscription of Garudavahana-bhatta (15th century A.D.).* 
The Tirumukkudal inscription, engraved on the east wall of 
the first prakdra of the Venkatesa Perumal (Visnu) temple, 
records the provision made for the maintenance of a Vedic 
college, a hostel and a hospital and for meeting the expenses 
relating to the services in the temple. Sick students of the 
hostel as well as the temple servants were treated in the 
hospital. It had fifteen beds for in-patients and was under 
the supervision of a physician who was assisted by a surgeon, 
nurses and maid servants, persons for collecting herbs and help- 
ing in the preparation of medicines. He received 90 kalam of 
paddy and 80 kdsu annually in addition to the land granted 
to him for prescribing medicine for the patients, the servants of 
the temple and the teachers and students of the college. 

There was also a surgeon attached to the hospital. He 
received 30 kalam of paddy while two persons who collected 
medicinal herbs and firewood and attended to the preparation 
of medicines received 60 kalam of paddy and 2 kdsu. There 
were two nurses who received 30 kalam of paddy and | késu. 
They attended on the patients and administered medicines. 
A barber was paid 15 kalam of paddy no doubt for his pro- 
fessional duties as well as for performing minor operations. 


1, See, e.g., Sel. Ins., 1965, p. 341 (Gunaighar plate). 
2. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXI, pp. 220ff.; Vol. XXIV, pp. goff. 


162 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


There was provision of 2} kdsu for burning lamps at night 
and for storing the medicines. The sick ration was 1 ndli of 
rice per head. 

The medicines stored in the hospital were—(1) Brah- 
mya-rasayana, (2) Vasa-haritaki, (3) Gomitra-haritaki, (4) 
Dasamila-haritaki, (5) Bhallataka-haritaki, (6) Gandira, (7) 
Balakeranda-taila, (8) Paficaka-taila, (9) Lasunadyeranda-taila, 
(10) Uttamakarnadi-taila, (11) Bilvadi-ghrta, (12) Mandi- 
kara-vatika, (13) Dravatti, (14) Vimala, (15) Sunetri, 
(16) Tamradi, (17) Vajrakalpa,. (18) Kalyanaka-lavana, 
(19) Purana-ghrta, etc. The medicines were prepared from 
herbs according to the prescription given in medical treatises 
like the Carakasamhita. 

The Srirangam inscription, dated Saka 1415 (1493 A.D.) 
registers the gift of 2 veli of land made by Srinivasa alias 
Srirangam Garudavahana-bhatta who repaired and removated 
the Arogya-salé or hospital. This hospital was constructed 
by one of Srinivasa’s ancestors also known as Garudavahana- 
pandita, who was a contemporary and disciple of Ramanuj- 
Acarya (llth century A.D.), during the reign of Pratapa- 
cakravartin, but had been damaged during the Muhammadan 
invasion (14th century A.D.). An image of Dhanvantari, 
the great physician of ancient India sometimes regarded as an 
incarnation of Visnu, is stated to have been installed in the 
hospital. 

The establishment of the same institution is mentioned 
in an inscription of the time of Hoysala Vira-Ramanatha (1255- 
95 A.D.).2 It is stated that Sitganna-dandanayaka, the 
Pradhana (minister) of the Hoysala king, constructed a hall 
for conducting a Sala (drogya-Sala) or hospital and placed it 
in the charge of Garudavahana-bhatta who was assisted by 
two physicians and two servants called vaidya-paricdraka. Medi- 
cines of the value of 100 kdsu were daily prepared for the 
hospital which supplied a kasaya as an offering to the god 
Ranganatha of Srirangam every night. It seems that the 
hospital was started by Garudavahana-bhatta who received 
munificent gifts for the institution from Singanna. 


1, Ibid., Vol. XXIV, p. gt. 


VAMADEVA AND VISVESVARA 163 


That provision of medical facilities was also made in the 
Brahmanical religious institutions of Northern India during 
the early medieval period has been recently proved by the 
Paschimbhag platet of king Sricandra (c. 925-75 A.D.) of 
South-East Bengal. A very big area in the present Sylhet 
District of East Pakistan was made a rent-free holding and was 
divided into three parts. The first consisting of 180 Pafakas 
of land was granted in favour of a temple of the god Brahman 
and was allotted to a number of people working for the temple. 
The second plot consisting of 280 Pajakas was likewise granted 
in favour of two groups of temples of the four divinities, viz., 
Agni-Vaisvanara, YogeSvara, Jaimani and Mahakala, one 
belonging to the Vangalas and the other built by outsiders. 
The third plot of the land was divided in equal shares among 
six thousand Brahmanas. As to the first plot, it is stated 
that a teacher of the Candra-vyakarana received 10 Pajakas while 
another plot of 10 Pafakas was allotted for the maintenance 
of his 10 students (i.e. for a hostel accommodating 10 pupils). 
But no provision was made for any hospital in this connection, 
though, out of the second plot of land, provision was made 
for two physicians, one each belonging to a group of four 
temples and receiving each 3 Péjakas of land. This allotment 
compares favourably with that made in favour of the Kayasthas 
(scribes) and Ganakas (accountants), the former receiving 
each 24 Péfakas and the latter only 1 Pataka each. There are 
no other details; but it appears that the people working in the 
temple of Brahman received their medical aid from these two 
physicians. 


1, See M. X. Bhattasali Com, Volume, Dacca, 1966, pp. 166ff. 


CuapTer XI 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 
I 


According to Sanskrit Lexicons, the word Hiranyagarbha 
has two principal meanings. First, it is a well-known epithet 
of the god Brahman; secondly, it is the name of one of the sodasa- 
mahddana, i.e., the sixteen Great Gifts which are enumerated 
and explained in books like the Matsya Purdna, Hemiadri’s 
Vratakhanda and Ballalasena’s Danasdgara. The sixteen Maha- 
danas are dana (offering) of the following things— 


1, Tulapurusa 9. Dhara 

2. Hiranyagarbha 10. Hiranyasvaratha 
3. Brahmanda 11. Hemahastiratha 
4, Kalpapadapa 12. Visnucakra 

5. Gosahasra 13. Kalpalata 

6. Hiranyakamadhenu 14. Saptasagara 

7, Hiranyasva 15. Ratnadhenu 

8. Paficalangala 16. Mahabhitaghata. 


These names are more or less of a technical character. 
They have been explained in full details in the Mahddandvarta 
section of the Ddnasagara, Chapter V of the Vratakhanda and 
Chapter 247ff. of the Matsya Puréna. 

The word Hiranyagarbha occurs several times in the ins- 
criptions of some South Indian kings. 1n the Gorantla inscrip- 
tion,’ king Attivarman is called aprameya-hiranyagarbha-prasava, 
which phrase was translated by Fleet, the editor of the Gorantla 
inscription, as ‘‘who is the posterity of the inscrutable [god] 
Hiranyagarbha_ (i.e., Brahman)”. In the Mahakita pillar 
inscription of the Calukya king Mangalesa,? we have the pas- 
sage hiranyagarbha-sambhita. Here also Fleet, who edited the 
inscription, translated the phrase as ‘‘who was descended from 
[the god] Hiranyagarbha”. It must be noticed that only 
particular kings have been connected with Hiranyagarbha in the 
inscriptions of their respective families. If Fleet’s interpreta- 


1. dnd. Ant., Vol. IX, pp. 102 f. 
2, Ibid., Vol. XIX, pp. off. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 165 


tion is correct, we should have found other kings of the family— 
wherein one has been called Hiranyagarbha-sambhiita—with titles 
of the same signification. Moreover, when we notice that in 
the Mahakita pillar inscription, this epithet is given only to 
PulakeSin 1, and not to Jayasirhha the first king mentioned, 
nor to MangaleSa the reigning monarch, there remains no doubt 
that Fleet’s theory is unjustifiable. We therefore agree with 
Hultzsh that the word Hiranyagarbha, in these inscriptions, 
signifies the second of the sixteen Mahdaddnas or Great Gifts. 
While editing the Mattepad plates of Damodarvarman,! 
Hultzsch remarked: ‘‘A similar feat is ascribed to king Atti- 
varman in another coper-plate grant from the Guntur District, 
where I translate the epithet aprameya-Hiranyagarbha-prasavena 
by ‘who is a producer of (i.e., who has performed ) innumerable 
Hiranyagarbhas.”* Hultzsch, here, evidently takes the passage 
hiranyagarbha-prasava as a case of the Sasfhi-tatpurusa compound 
to mean ‘‘prasava (origin, producer) of the Hiranyagarbha”. 
But he was in difficulty with the word Hiranyagarbha-prasiita 
which occurs in the Ipur grant (No. 1) of the Visnukundin 
king Madhavavarman I.? As prasiita is an adjective, it cannot 
make a case of the Sasthi-tatpurusa compound. Hultzsch, there- 
fore, had to correct the passage as Hiranyagarbha-prasilti, i.e., 
prasiti (origin, producer) of the Hiranyagarbha.* But when we 
notice that the epithet Hiranyagarbha-prasiita also occurs in the 
Polamuru plates of the same Visnukundir king,‘ and further 
that the Mahakita pillar inscription has Hiranyagarbha-sam- 
bhita, there can be no doubt that Hultzsch is wrong in taking 
the passage Hiranyagarbha-prasava as a case of the Sasthi-tatpurusa 
compound. The words AHiranyagarbha-prasiita and Hiranya- 
garbha-sambhiita are certainly examples of the Pavicami-tatpurusa 
compound and mean ‘‘born of the Hiranyagarbha”. The word 
Hiranyagarbha-prasava must also mean the same thing. We there- 
fore take it as a case of the Bahuvrihi compound to mean ‘‘one 
whose prasava (origin, producer, progenitor) is the Hiranyagarbha”’. 
But how can a king be born of the Hiranyagarbha which 
we have taken to signify the second of the sixteen Mahddanas ? 


1, Ep. Ind., Vol. XVII. pp. 328ff. 
2. Ibid., pp. 335f. 

3. Ibid., p. 336, note 7. 

4. Journ. Andhra Hist. Res. Soc., Vol. V1, pp. 176. 


166 RELIGIOUS Lire IN ANGIENT AND MEDinVAL INDIA 

In the performance of the Hiranyagarbha-mahadana cere- 
mony, the thing to be given away to the Brahmanas is a Hiranya- 
garbha, literally, ‘‘a golden womb”. Hiranyagarbha here signifies 
a golden kunda, three cubits in height. Cf. 

Brahmanair = Gnayet kundam tapaniya-mayarh Subham | 

dvasaptaty-angul-occhrayamn hema-pankaja-garbhavat || 

To discuss in details all the functions of the ceremony is 
not necessary for our purpose. The quotations, which are all 
from the 249th! Chapter of the Motsya Purana, will sufficiently 
clear the point. 

After due arcana, the performer of the Mahddana ceremony 
is to utter a mantra in adoration to Lord Hiranyagarbha (here, 
the god Visnu), two lines of which run : 

bhir-loka-pramukha lokds=tava garbhe vyavasthitah | 

Brohm-ddayas = tatha devd namas=te visva-dharine || 

Thereafter the performer enters into the hiranyagarbha, i.e., 
the golden kunda, and the priests perform the ceremonies of 

* garbhadhana, purtsavana and simantonnayana of the ‘‘golden womb”, 

_ as they would do in the case of an ordinary pregnant woman. Cf. 
evam = Gmantrya tan-madhyam = dvisy = a@mbha udan-mukhak | 
mus tibhydm parisamgrhya dharmardja-caturmukau |/ 

janu-madhye Sirah krtvd  tistheta Svasa-paiicakam | 

garbhddhdnarh purhsavanam simantonnayam tatha |/ 

kuryur =hiranya-garbhasya tatas=te dvija-pungavah || 

Then the performer is taken out of the ‘‘golden womb”, 
and the jata-karman and other necessary functions are performed 
by the priests, as if the performer is a newly born child. After 
that, the performer is to utter another mantra, wherein occur 
the following significant lines : 

métr= Gham janitah pirvuam martya-dharmé sur-ottama | 

twad-garbha-sambhavad =esa divya-deho bhavamy=aham || 

“© the best of gods, previously I was given birth to by my 
mother [and] was martya-dharman (one having the qualities of 
an earthly creature). [But] now owing to my rebirth from 
your womb, I become divya-deha(one having a celestial body).” 

That the performer of the Hiranyagarbha-mahddana was 
thought to be “‘born of the Hiranyagarbha, i.e., golden womb”, 
is also clear from the next mantra to be uttered by the priests: 


1. Qh. 275 of the Vaigavasi edition. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 167 


adya-jatasya te=‘rgani abhiseksyamahe vayam. 
After the ceremony is over, the priests receive the gift of 
that golden womb together with many other presents. 


II 


In a note appearing in the Indian Culture, Vol.1, pp. 
114-15, it was suggested that, since Madhavavarman I Visnu- 
kundin and Pravaraseria I Vakataka have been called simply 
Maharaja (not Maharajadhirdja) in the inscriptions, they are to 
be taken as petty feudatory chiefs even though they performed 
the As’vamedha. In support of this theory, D. R. Bhandarkar 
says that “‘even a feudatory chieftain can perform a horse-sacri- 
fice”? and that the ASvamedha “may or may not be preceded 
by a dig-vijaya.”? These theories, however, are not only against 
the evidence of the Sruti literature, but also go against the 
evidence of the inscriptions of these kings. 

In inscriptions, Pravarasena I has been described as a 
member of the dynasty of the Imperial Vakatakas.? That 
Madhavavarman I was not incapable of dig-vijaya is proved 
by a reference to his expedition for conquering the eastern 
countries in the Polamuru plates. Mahdrajadhiraja, based on 
Rajatiraja, etc., of the Scytho-Kusanas, was in early times not 
very often used in South India. The Kadamba king Krsna- 
varman 1, who performed the A‘vamedha sacrifice, ruled 
over the Kuntala country about the middle of 5th century 
A.D. In inscriptions, he is simply styled Dharma-Maharaja— 
not Dharma-Mahdrajadhirdja like Pallava Sivaskandavarman 
and others. The Devagiri plates,5 however, call him 
ek-Gtapatra, ‘‘possessor of the sole umbrella”, which, 





1. Ibid. p. 115. 

2. See op. cit., p. 116. 

3- CE, sama! (mrad)-Vakatakandrh nahdraja-sri-Pravarasenasya, etc., in the 
Balaghat plates (Ef. Ind., Vol. IX, p. 270, 1. 4); also the Chammak plates 
(Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol UII, p. 235). The Dudia plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. III, p. 
260 and note 7), it should be noted, read samratah which, according to 
Kielhorn, is apparently a mistake for samrdjah. Here Pravarasena has himself 
been called Samrd}, i.e. an emperor. 

4. Journ. Andhra Hist. Res. Soc., Vol. VI, p. 17; Sircar, Suc, Sat., 
P. 131. 

5. Ind, Ant, Vol. VIL, p. 34. 





168 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


as scholars have suggested,’ “‘is indicative of universal sovere- 
ignty”. A subordinate king can hardly be called ek-dtapatra. 
The Birur plates? moreover call him Daksindpatha-vasumati- 
vasu-pati, lord of the riches of the land of Daksinapatha”, which 
“clearly shows that Krsnavarman I claimed a sort of suzerainty 
over the whole of the Deccan”.* 

Keith has pointed out that the ASvamedha “‘is an old and 
famous rite, which kings alone can bring, to increase their 
realms”.4 The Baudhdyana Srautasiitra (XV. 1) says that a 
king victorious and of all the land should perform this sacrifice. 
According to the Toaittiriya Brahmana (III. 8.9.4), ‘he is 
poured aside who being weak offers the Asvamedha,” and 
again (V. 4.12.3), ‘‘it is essentially, like the fire offering, an 
utsanna-yajfia, a sacrifice of great extent and celaboration”.® 
According to the Apastambha Srautasiitra (XX. 1.1), a universal 
(sdrvabhauma) king can perform the Asvamedha, but not 
(n-=dpi)® an un-universal (a-sd@rvabhauma) king. It is clear 
from these statements that in ancient India, a subordinate 
ruler could never celebrate the ASvamedha. A performer of the 
Asvamedha may not have been a ruler of the earth from 
North Pole to South Pole or of India from the Himialaya to the 


1. Moraes, Kadambakula, p. 39, note. 

2. Ep. Cam., Vol. VI, p. 91. 

g. See Sircar, Suc. Sat., p. 222; Journ. Ind. Hist., Vol. XV, p. 905; also 
An, Bhand. Or. Res. Inst., Vol. XVI, pp. 160ff. Note also that the Malavalli 
inscription (Ep. Car, Vol. VII, Sk. 264) describes an Early Kadamba king 
as Kadambanam rajé, but also as Vaijayanti-dhamma-mahardjadhirdja. The Penu- 
konda plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. XIV, p. 331) mention the Ganga feudatory 
named MéAdhava-n.ahadhiraja and his Pallava overlord §Skandavarma- 
maharaja. For Mahérdja Varahasitnha, general of Rajan Aparajita, see the 
Nagda inscription (ibid., Vol. IV, p. 31). 

4. Rel. Phil. Ved. Upanis., p. 343. 

5. See Keith, Black Yajus, pp. cxxxii-iv. 

6. In place of n=4pi there is an alternative reading apiywhich is a later 
interpolation according to Keith (Black Yajus, p. cxxxii). The  interpola- 
tion seems to show that asdériabhauma (not master of all the land) kings could 
also perform the ASvamedha. The word asdrvabhauma, however, never means 
a feudatory. The alternative reading only shows that in later times kings 
who were powerful but who did not claim to be ruler of the earth (i.¢., wide 
areas of the country) did also perform the Aivamedha. It must, however, 
be noticed that the alternative reading goes against all the old texts quoted 
above. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 169 


Kumarika; but he must have been an independent ruler of a 
considerable portion of India. 

An essential feature of the ASvamedha, besides the actual 
slaying of the horse, is that, about the completion of the per- 
formance, at the bidding of the Adhvaryu ‘‘a lute-player, a 
Rajanya, sings to the lute three Gathds, verses, made by him- 
self which refer to victories in battle connected with the sacri- 
fice”.1 Further, ‘‘As revealed in the later texts, the sacri- 
fice is essentially one of the princely greatness. The steed for 
a year roams under the guardianship of a hundred princes, a 
hundred nobles with swords, a hundred sons of heralds and 
charioteers bearing quivers and arrows, and a hundred sons 
of attendants and charioteers bearing staves.”* To manage 
these requirements does not appear to be possible for a sub- 
ordinate chief. 

Moreover, that the progress of the ASvamedha was some- 
times impeded when other kings challenged one’s authority to 
perform the sacrifice, is not only proved from the early cases 
referred to in Sat. Br. (XIII. 5.3.21-22) and Mahdbha. (XIV. 
74-84), but is also proved by a tradition recorded in such 
works as Kalidasa’s Mdlavikagnimitra (Act V). It is stated that 
Pusyamitra Surga’s sacrificial horse was let loose to roam for a 
year at its own will under the guardianship of his grandson 
Vasumitra who was assisted by a hundred princes and brought 
the horse back after defeating the Yavanas as the horse per 
chance reached the right bank of the Sindhu (i.e., the Indus) and 
was captured by the Yavana horsemen. That the ASvamedha 
could not be performed without some sort of dig-vijaya is further 
conclusively proved by an eighth century inscription of the 
Pallavas. The Udayendiram grant(No. 2)* records that Udaya- 
candra, general of Nandivarma-Pallavamalla, defeated the 
Nisada king Prthivivyaghra who was accompanying an asva- 
medha-turangama, i.e., horse let loose in connection with a horse- 
sacrifice. This instance proves beyond doubt that the essential 
features of the ASvamedha hardly changed even as late as the 
8th century A.D. The famous poet Bhavabhiti, who flourish- 


1. Keith, Rel. Phil, Ved. Upanis., 

He 2. Sat. Br., XIII. 4.2.5; ‘Baudh. Pot >» XV. 1. See Black Yajus, 

+ Cite 
3+ Ind. Ant.. Vol. VIII, p. 273. 


170 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


ed in the same century, also recognises the above characteristic 
when he refers to the sacrifice as afvamedha iti visvajayinarm Ksatri- 
yandm=urjasvalak —-sarva-Ksatriya-paribhavi mahan=utkarsa-nis- 
karsat.' Al-Birini (first half of the eleventh century A.D.) 
also says, ‘“‘certain of them (i.e. sacrifices) can only be per- 
formed by the greatest of their kings. So, e.g., the ASvamedha.””? 

Bhandarkar thinks® that the number of performances of 
the Asvamedha could be increased by simply multiplying the 
amount of daksind payable to the Brahmanas. This view is, 
however, based on a wrong interpretation of the following verse 
of the Mahabharata (XIV. 88.14) : 

evam=atra mahdraja daksinam tri-gunam kuru | 

trituam vrajatu te rajan Brahmanaé hy=atra kéranam |j 

The verse obviously implies that, according toa Brahma- 
nical theory, the merit accruing from the celebration of the 
Aévamedha, and not the Asvamedha itself, could be tripled if 
the performer offered three-fold daksind to the Brahmanas.* 

In the Indian Culture, Vol. II, pp. 140-141, the Harivamsa 
has been quoted to show that feudatory rulers could also per- 
form the Agvamedha. Vasudeva, father of Krsna, lived at 
Gokula on Mount Govardhana in the vicinity of Mathura; he 
was engaged in cattle-rearing and was a karaddyaka to Karhsa, 
the king of Mathura.' After the fall of Karhsa, the family of 
Vasudeva removed to Dvarakéa. In Krgna’s conversation 
with Indra, there is an incidental reference which says that, while 


1. Uttarardmacarita, Act lV. That the ASvamedha did not lose its original 
and essential significance in later times is also proved by the Vaidyanatha 
temple inscription which refers to Adityasena as Sistd samudr-dnta-vasindha- 
raya —_yast=dsvamedh-ddya-mahdkrat inam, 

2. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, Vol. II, p. 139. 

3. Ind. Cult., Vol. I, p. 116. 

4. It has been said (Ind. Cult., Vol. I, p. 937 0), “The ASvamedha 
certainly had a great imperial significance in the old days. But in the period 
under review, it must have lost that importance. Otherwise it would not 
have been repeated so often.” It may, however, be pointed out that the 
Aévamedha is known to “have been repeated” many times even “in the old 
days”. Cf., ¢.g., Bharata Dausyanti’s 133 Asvamedhas in Sat. Br., XIII. 
3.5. 113 also Journ, Ind. Hist., Vol. XIII, p. 40, and Suc. Sét., p. 125. Many 
of the epic and Puranic heroes performed more than one A’vamedha. Parik,it, 
e.g., performed three after subduing the Bhadraéva, Ketumila, Bharata, 
Uttarkuru and Kimpurusa vavsas. See Bhdgavata Purdpa, I. 16.3.13. 

5+ Harivarnéa, LVI. 1162-61. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 71 


in Dvaraka, Vasudeva performed an Asvamedha.t The 
question at issue, however, is whether Vasudeva was a feudatory 
of the Mathura kings at the time of celebrating the sacrifice 
after he was established in Dvaraka. There is absolutely no 
proof to show that he was. The Dvaraka region is not known 
to have ever submitted to the kings of Mathura. It must also 
be noted that the evidence of traditions recorded in works like 
the Harivamsa should always be taken with a grain of salt. It 
was obviously written for the exaltation and glorification of the 
family (vamsa) of Hari (i.e., Krsna-Vasudeva) and like similar 
treatises in honour of other religious heroes is not free from 
extravaganzas incident to a pronounced theological bias. The 
probability here is that the parent of the hero of the tale has 
been given more than his due, just as in the New Testament the 
saviour of the Christians is described as the son not of a mortal 
man but of God, and in the Saundarananda (II. 32, 39, etc.), 
glories of the mightiest rulers are put on the head of a petty 
Sakya chief named Suddhodana. 

Moreover, while describing the Asvamedha that was 
attempted by Janamejaya, the Harivamsa itself* makes it clear 
that the horse-sacrifice could not be celebrated by a petty chief. 
When the Sarpa-yajfia was finished, Janamejaya collected 
materials for the celebration of an ASvamedha. Then he invited 
the ytviks, purohitas and dcdryas, and said, “‘I am desirous of 
celebrating a horse-sacrifice. Do ye dedicate the horse” (verses 
5and6).* Knowing, however, that the king’s sacrifice would 
not be successful, the omniscient Vyasa warned him not to 
begin the ASvamedha. The sage said, ‘The Sruti lays down 
that the Ksatriyas should celebrate the Agvamedha, the fore- 
most of sacrifices. On account of the greatness of it, Vasava 
will violate your sacrifice” (verse 28). ‘‘O slayer of enemies,” 


1. Vangavasi ed., Visnu-parvan, gt. 24. 

2. Vangavasi ed., Bhavisya-parvan, 2. 

3. Yaksye=‘harh Vajimedhena hayam=utsrjyatém= iti. . 

4- Afcamedhah kratu-sresthah Ksatriyanam farisrutapj tena bhévena te yajiarn Vasavo 
dharsayisyati || That the ASvamedha could be performed by great kings only 
is also proved by the fact that Vasava (Indra )is always represented as jealous 
of its performance. ‘Ihe Harivariéa describes how he endeavoured to spoil the 
Asvamedha of Janamejaya (Bhavisya-parvan, 5). Note also what Visva- 
vasu says to the king: ‘O king, thou hast celebrated three hundred sacri- 


172 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the sage added, ‘‘as long as the world will last, the Ksatriyas 
will not be able to collect materials for your horse-sacrifice” 
(v. 35).1_ The king became very sad and said, ‘Console me 
by saying that the Asvamedha will again be undertaken by 
kings” (v. 58). To this Vyasa replied, ‘‘As energy coun- 
teracted by another lives in it, so [the knowledge of] the 
Afvamedha, although stopped, will exist among the gods and 
Brahmanas. There will be one Senani,? an Audbhijja, a Dvija 
and a descendant of Kasyapa, who will revive the ASvamedha 
in the Kali age” (verses 39-40). Could this great sacrifice, 
of which the Harivamsa speaks in so high terms, be performed 
by a petty feudatory chief ? 

It has further been pointed out® that Sawai Jaysingh of 
Amber (1699-1744 A.D.), though he was a feudatory of the 
Mughul emperors Farrukhsiyar (1712-19) and Muhammad 
Shah (1719-48), performed a horse-sacrifice according to 
Tod,® and that therefore subordinate rulers could perform 


fices; Vasava therefore cannot forgive thee any longer”  (tri-yajfia-Sata- 
‘yajvinar Vasavas=tvdm na mrgyate, ibid., 5. 24). In this connection note 
what Bhandarkar himself says in another occasion (Ep. Ind., Vol. XIX, 
App., p.2, note 5), “As Indra is represented as being suspicious of Govinda 
Gupta’s power, the latter seems to have been a supreme ruler.” See the 
Vamana Puréna, Ch, 78, in which the significance of the ASvamedha and the 
cause of Indra’s unfavourable attitude are clearly described; also Raghu- 
raméa, TIT. 38-66; Bhagavata Purdpa, IV. 16. 24; etc. 

1. Tvayd vrttam kratuit=c=aiva Vajimedhar parantapa| Ksatryd n= dhari- 
syanti ydoad= bhiimir—=dharisyati |/ 

2. Yady=asti punar=dorltir=yajhasy=dtodsayasoa mam. 

3. The reference is generally thought to be to Pusyamitra Suaga. 
But that is doubtful, as the Sufgas were Bharadvajas aid not Kasyapas. On 
the strength of this verse and another in the Mdlavikdgnimitra, Raychaudhuri 
suggests (Ind. Cult., Vol. III, pp. 739ff.; Vol. IV, pp. 363 ff.) that Pusya- 
mitra was possibly not a Sufga, but a Baimbika. The unanimous evidence 
of the Puranas, however, may be set aside only on the evid-nce of a more 
positive character. Bimbaka or Bimbika appears to have been a predecessor 
of Pusyamitra. It has also been supposed that the Suigas were duydmusyd- 
yana, i.¢., both Bharadvaja and Kasyapa. 

4. Updtta-yajiio devesu Brahmanes= iipapatsyate | tejasd uyéhylarh tejas= 
tejasy=ev=dvatisthate || Audbhijjo bhavitd kai=cit senani Késyapo dvijah | afvame- 
dham Kali-yuge punah pratyaharisyati |/ 

5+ Ind. Cult., Vol. III, pp. 547f. 

6. Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, and ed., Madras, 1873, pp. 
328-32. 





HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 173 


the A’vamedha. It seems to us, however, that, if Sawai 
Jaysingh performed any horse-sacrifice, he must have regard- 
ed himself independent about the time.* 

It is admitted by all writers on Mughul history that, with- 
in less than twenty years after the death of Aurangzib in 1707, 
the actual possessions of the so-called emperors of Delhi became 
limited within the district round the walls of their capital, and 
that, after the invasion of Nadir Shah in 1739, no power of the 
emperors was left in Rajasthan. It will suffice to refer to 
Jadunath Sarkar who says, ‘The invasion of Nadir Shah dealt 
such a shattering blow to the empire of Delhi that, after it, 
the imperial authority was totally eliminated from Rajputana 
in all but the name. The Rajput princes were left entirely to 
themselves. ..... 2 ‘It is interesting in this connection to note 
that Tod himself takes the celebration of the sacrifice as a 
‘virtual assumption of universal supremacy’.* He also says, 
wanes amidst revolution, the destruction of the empire, 
and the meteoric rise of the Mahrattas, he (i.e., Jaysingh) 
not only steered through the dangers, but elevated Amber 
above all the principalities around..... 

That Sawai Jaysingh defied imperial ean even before 
1739 is proved by the following facts. In the war of succession 
that followed the death of Aurangzib, he attached himself to 
prince Bidar Bakht, son of Ajam Shah, and declared him suc- 
cessor of Aurangzib. For this opposition, Amber was seques- 
tered and an imperial governor sent to take its possession; but 
Jaysingh entered his state sword in hand, drove out the im- 
perial garrisons and formed a league with Ajitsingh of Marwar 
for their mutual preservation.’ That he had independent 
political relations with neighbouring states is also proved by 
the fact that he did ‘dispossess the Birgoojur of Deoti and Rajore 





1. Tod, op. cit., p. 3393 see also P.K, Gode (Journ. Ind. Hist., Vol. 
XV, pp. 364ff.; Poona Orientalist, Vol. I, pp. 166 ff.; Mimdnsé Prakash, 
Vol. II, pp. 43ff.) who points out that MSS. of Sadasiva-Dasaputra’s 
Acérasmrticandrikdé, Kygna-kavi's Hoaravildsa, Vrajanatha’s Padyataraigini, 
Visveivara’s Pratépdrka and Hariécandra’s Dharmasarigraha refer to the Asva- 
medha performed by Sawai Jaysingh. 

2. Fall W of the Mughal Empire, p. 279. 


174 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


which were added to his dominions; they embraced all the 
tract now called Macherri’.t 

The only proofof Sawai Jaysingh’s vassalage to the Dehli 
emperors is that, according to traditions, he was successively 
the governor of Agra and Malwa and was made governor of 
Malwa a second time in 1732 under Muhammad Shah. We 
must, however, note in this connection that the great Maratha 
leader, the Peshwa, snatched away the provinces of Gujarat 
and Malwa from Muhammad Shah who issued a farmdn best- 
owing the naib subahdari on the Peshwa.? The Maratha leader 
replied that ‘though the cauth of the whole of Hindusthan 
was his due, he would be satisfied with the above two subhds’.® 
Will any student of Maratha history believe that the great 
Peshwa, formally the naib subahdar of Muhammad Shah, was 
a feudatory of the rois faineants of Dehli? Again, the so-called 
Mughul emperors occupied the throne of Dehli as late as 1858 
when Bahadur Shah II (1837-58) was deposed, and the East 
India Company pretended to rule in the name of the Mughul 
emperors. Would it justify us to suppose that the Governors- 
General of the East India Company were feudatory to the pup- 
pet emperors of Dehli ? 

The suggestions that Sawai Jaysingh of Amber performed 
a horse-sacrifice as a feudatory of the Mughul emperors and 
that therefore the ASvamedha could be celebrated by a feuda- 
tory chief therefore appear to be inadmissible. 


Il 


Inscriptions describe a number of Indian monarchs as 
performers of the Aévamedha sacrifice; but, only in a few 
instances, they are known from any other source. In some 
cases, the celebration of the horse-sacrifice is mentioned in the 
records of the performer himself, while in others it is referred 
to in the inscriptions of his descendants. There is sometimes 
reference to the celebration of the ASvamedha by a king in the 


1. Ibid., pp. 337-38. 

2, It is interesting to note that the emperor of Dehli conferred (June 
12, 1723) the dignified title Rajadhirdja on Sawai Jaysingh (Poona Orientalist, 
Vol. II, p. 168). 

g. Sarkar, op. cit., p. 277. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 175 


legend on his coins, but not in any of the inscriptions of him- 
self or his descendants. The names of some of the performers 
of the horse-sacrifice as known from such sources are enumera- 
ted below. 

1, Pusyamitra Sunga (2nd century B.C.) of Pataliputra 
(Maghadha) is mentioned as celebrating an A‘vamedha in 
Kalidasa’s Méalavikdgnimitra ; but the epithet dvir-afvamedha- 
yajin (performer of two horse-sacrifices) is applied to him 
in the Ayodhya inscription of his descendant Dhanadeva, king 
of Kosala.? , 

2. Géajayana Sarvatata (Ist century B.C.) of the Chitod- 
gadh region of Rajasthan is mentioned as the performer of an 
ASvamedha in his Ghosundi and Hathibada inscriptions.* 

3. Satakarni I (Ist century B.C.) of the Satavahana 
dynasty of the Deccan performed two A‘vamedhas, the second 
of which is referred to in the fragmentary Nanaghat inscription 
probably incised after his death.* 

4. King Devimitra (Ist century B.C.) of the Kanpur- 
Allahabad region of U.P. is known from his Musanagar brick 
inscription to have celebrated a horse-sacrifice.* 

5. King Silavarman (3rd century A.D.) of the Varga- 
ganya dynasty holding sway over the Dehradun region of U.P. 
is known to have performed no less than four Avamedhas, 
the fourth of them being referred to in his Jagatpur brick ins- 
criptions.® 

6. Santamiila (Cantamiila) I (3rd century A.D.) of the 
Iksvaku dynasty of Vijayapuri (in the Nagarjunikonda valley, 
Guntur District, Andhra Pradesh) is credited with the perform- 
ance of an Agvamedha in the records of his son and grandson.® 

7. The Bharasiva Nagas (3rd and 4th centuries A.D.) 
of the Eastern Malwa region are credited with the celebration 
of ten horse-sacrifices in the records of their Vakataka relatives” 
although the names of the kings who performed the sacrifices 
are unknown. 


Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, p. 96. 
| Ep. ind., Wel. XVI, p. 27; Vol. XXII, pp. 203f. 


ee ae 
. Ind., Vol. Bax pp. 118ff. 


Indian Archaeology, Joss-ats Be 11. 
Select Inscriptions, pp. 222, 227, 229, ete. 
. Thid., p. 420. 


POPPE PS 


176 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANOIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


8. Vakataka Pravarasena I (3rd and 4th centuries 
A.D.), holding sway over parts of the Deccan and the central 
regions of India, is known from the inscriptions of his descen- 
dants to have performed four Aévamedhas.? 

9-11. There are three performers of the Asvamedha in 
the Pallava royal family of Kaficipura near Madras. The first 
of them is Sivaskandavarman (4th century A.D.) who claims 
to be an ASvamedha-yajin in his Hirahadagalli plates;* the 
second is Kumaravisnu (4th century) described similarly 
in his great-grandson’s Omgodu grant,? and the third is 
Sirhnhavarman, who has been tentatively identified with Nara- 
sithhavarman I (circa 630-68 A.D.), and also with the Pallava 
ruler who claims to have performed ten Asvamedhas in his 
Sivanvayal(Chingleput District, Tamil Nadu) pillar inscrip- 
tion.4 

12. Among the Salankayanas of Vengi (near Ellore in 
the W. Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh), king Devavarman 
(4th century A.D.) claims to have celebrated an Asvamedha 
in his Ellore plates.5 

13-14. Amongst the mighty Guptas of Pataliputra, king 
Samudragupta (4th century A.D.) and his grandson Kumara- 
gupta I (5th century A.D.) are known to have celebrated the 
horse-sacrifice. In the records of his descendants, Samudra- 
gupta is described as cir-otsann-dfvamedha-ahart,® ‘performer 
of the Aévamedha which was for a long time in abeyance’, while 
some of his own coins also support the claim.’ It has to be 
noticed that the reference to the horse-sacrifice having been 
in abeyance for a longtime is true only with reference to 
Magadha in South Bihar (where Pusyamitra Suga performed 
the Asvamedha in the 2nd century B.C.), as South Indian 
monarchs like Vakataka Pravarasena, Salankayana Deva- 
varman and Pallava Sivaskandavarman appear to have cele- 
brated their Aévamedhas shortly before the performance of 
Samudragupta’s horse-sacrifice. The A‘vamedha celebrated 


. Ibid., pp. 407, 419. 


ts 
5 
R 
3 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 177 


by Kuméaragupta I is only alluded to in the legends on his 
coins of the AS’vamedha type.? 

15. Traikitaka Dahrasena (5th century A. D.) of the 
Northern Konkan region claims in his Pardi plates of 455 A.D. 
to have performed the Asvamedha.* 

16. Among the Kadambas of the Kannada-speaking 
area, Krsnavarman I (5th century A.D.) performed an Afgva- 
medha according to the Birur and Devagiri plates of his sons.* 
A very late inscription from Talagunda wrongly assigns the 
celebration of eighteen horse-sacrifices to Mayiravarman, a 
name that was later fabricated for Mayiirafarman (4th century 
A.D.), founder of the Kadamba dynasty. 

17. The Visnukundin king Madhavavarman I (6th 
century A.D.) of the Guntur-Krishna-Godavari region is stated, 
in his own epigraphs as well as in those of his successors, to have 
performed no less than eleven ASvamedhas.5 

18. Calukya Pulakesin I (6th century A.D.) of Badami 

- celebrated an ASvamedha which is referred to in the records of 
himself and his descendants. See his own Badami inscription 
of 543 A.D.,® the Mahakita pillar inscription and Nerur grant 
of his son Mangaleéa’ and the Aihole inscription of his grand- 
son Pulakesin II.* 


Ibid., p. 297. 

JBRAS, Vol. XVI, p. 346. 

The Successors of the Sétavahanas in the L-wer Deccan, p. 280. 

Ibid., p. 240. 

Ibid., pp. 97ff. 

. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVII, pp. 4ff. 

. Bombay Gaz., Vol. Il, Part I, p. 344. 

Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, p. 4. A set of copper plates was discovered at 
Mudhol in the Bijapur District of the Mysore State. The charter was 
issued sometime about the middle of the 6th century A.D. by Pigavarman, 
described as the eldest son of Prthivivallabha-maharaja who is said to have 
performed the Agnistoma, Agnicayana, Vajapeya and A‘vamedha sacri- 
fices as well as the Hiranyagarbha-mahadana. See Progress of Kannada Re- 
search in Bombay Province from 1941 to 1946, pp. 69ff.; Ep. Ind., Vol. 
XXXII, pp. 293ff. The description of Prthivivallabha-mahraja in the said 
epigraph of about the middle of the 6th century A.D. reminds us of the cele- 
brated Galukya king of Badami (Bijapur District, Mysore), Pulakesin I 
(middle of the 6th century A.D.), who is often found to be mentioned as 
Sri-Pythivi-vallabha, Sri-vallabha or Vallabha and is credited with the 
performance of the Agnisjoma, Agnicayana, Vajapeya, Bahusuvarpa, Paun- 


Syor ters 


178 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


19-20. Among the kings of the Bhauma, Naraka or 
Varman dynasty of Assam, there are three Asvamedha-yajins. 
In the legend on the seals of Bhaskaravarman who flourished 
in the first half of the 7th century A.D., his grandfather 
Sthiravarman (c. 566-90 A. D.) is described as dvir-asnamedha- 
yayin (performer of two Asvamedhas) while the latter’s great- 
grard-father Narayanavarman (c. 496-518 A. D.) is called 
dvis-turagamedh-dharté (performer of two horse-sacrifices) ; but 
Bhitivarman, son of Narayanavarman, is not credited with the 





darika and ASvamedha sacrifices and the Hiranyagarbha-mahadina (Bomb. 
Gaz., Vol. I, Part II, pp. 343-44; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVII, p. 8.). There 
seems to be a prima facie case in favour of the identification of Prthivivallabha 
of the Mudhol inscription with Calukya Pulakesin I, although it is difficult 
to determine whether Pigavarman of the Mudhol record should have to 
be identified with Kirtivarman I (566-98 A.D.), son and successor of Pula- 
kegin I, It is difficult, in the absence of any corroborative evidence, to 
identify the bearers of the two distinct names, viz. Kirtivarman and Piga- 
varman. Moreover, Kirtivarman is nowhere called the eldest son of Pula- 
kedin I. Under the circumstances, it appears better to think that Piga- 
varman was the eldest amongst the sons of Pulakesin I including his succes- 
sor Kirtivarman I. But, if such was the case, we have no knowledge of the 
circumstances that prevented this eldest son of Pulakesin I from ascending 
his paternal throne after his father’s death. The most probable cause 
of this seems to be that Piigavarman predeceased his father. Of course in 
Indian history there is no dearth of instances of the supercession of the ‘eldest 
son’ in favour of the ‘dear son’, and Kirtivarman I really claims to have 
been the ‘dear son’ of Pulakesin I in the Godachi plates (Ep. Ind., Vol. 
XXVIII, p. 62). We cannot therefore rule out such a possibility totally, 
It is well known that Mangalesa speaks of Kirtivarman I as his jyestha 


bhraté (Ind. Ant., Vol. III, p. 305). But Kirtivarman may have been the 
eldest son of his mother who was also the mother of Marigaleéa, but not of 


Pigavarman. We may also think that, while Kirtivarman’s mother was 
the chief queen of Pulakesin I, Pagavarman’s mother was an ordinary queen 
of that monarch and that this fact led to Kirtivarman’s accession to the 
throne on his father’s death. It should, however, be remembered that, if 
Piigavarman predeceased Pulakesin I, Kirtivarman’s accession to the 
throne on his father’s death and mention as jyestha-bhrata in Mangaleéa’s 
record can be explained without conjectures like the above. 

‘The next question is whether the Mudhol plates were issued during the 
reign of his father Pulakesin I or during the chaotic condition in the Calukya 
empire resulting from the civil war between Mangalesa and his nephew 
Pulakesin II, -son of Kirtivarman, about the close of the 6th and in the first 
decade of the 7th century. The first alternative seems to be more probable 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 179 


celebration of any ASvamedha.! It is, however, interesting 
to note that, in the Barganga inscription® of his own reign, Bhuti- 
varman (c. 518-42 A.D.) is described as an Afvamedha-yajin. 
It has therefore been suggested that the second of the two Aéva- 
medhas, ascribed to Narayanavarman in the legend of Bhas- 
karavarman’s seals, was celebrated when the king was aged and 
the de facto king was his son Bhitivarman.® 

22. The Sailodbhava king Sainyabhita Madhavavarman 
II Srinivasa (7th century A.D.) of Kongoda (Ganjam District, 
Orissa) is credited with the performance of a horse-sacrifice 
in his own records as well as in those of his successors.4 But 
some inscriptions of his son Ayasobhita Madhyamaraja and 
grandson Manabhita Dharmaraja vaguely describe them as per- 
formers of the same sacrifice, although others indicate different 
meanings of the passages in question and suggest that they did 
not actually celebrate any A‘vamedha, but merely took part 
in the horse-sacrifice performed by Sainyabhita Madhava- 
varman II Srinivasa. 

23. The ‘Later Gupta’ king Adityasena (7th century 
A.D.) of Magadha is credited with the performance of three 
Aésvamedhas in an inscription on the right-hand side pier in 
the porch of the Vaidyanatha temple at Deoghar in the Santal 
Parganas District of Bihar.® 

24. The Udayendiram plates’ of the Pallava king Nandi- 
varman II Pallavamalla (8th century A.D.) refers to the victory 
of his general Udayacandra over a ruler named Prthivivyaghra 
who was engaged in guarding the horse let loose in connection 
with an Asvamedha sacrifice. Although some scholars have 
attributed the performance of this ASvademha to the Pallava 


under the aaciitatannes. although the other possibility cannot be altogether 
ruled out. It is not absolutely impossible that Pigavarman was the 
governor of the Mudhol area in the latter half of the sixth century and, 
during the civil war referred to above, had an opportunity of ruling inde- 
pendently or semi-independently for sometime. 

1. THQ, Vol. XXI, pp. 143 ff. 

2. Ep. Ind. Vol. XXVIUL, pp. 18ff. 
Cf. Section IV below. 
Ep. Ind. Vol. XXIX, pp. 32ff. 
Cf. ibid., p. 39, note 4. 
See Corp. Ins. Ind., Vol. III, p. 213, note. 
Ind. Ant,, Vol. VIII, p. 276, 


yegee 


180 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


king, the more reasonable interpretation of the epigraphic 
Passage is that it was celebrated either by Prthivivyaghra or 
by the monarch to whom he owed allegiance. This Prthivi- 
vyaghra is sometimes identified with the Nala king Prthivi- 
raja of the Rajim inscription.! 
25. The Cola king Rajadhiraja performed a_horse- 

sacrifice about 1044 A.D.? 

26. Sawai Jaysingh (1699-1744 A.D.) of Amber performed 
an Asvamedha as we have seen above. 


Iv 


There are some suggestions in N.K. Bhattasali’s paper 
entitled ‘New Light on the History of Assam’ in JHQ, March, 
1945, pp. 19-28, with which we find it difficult to agree. Here 
we shall offer a few comments on his views regarding the 
legend on Bhaskaravarman’s seal. 

The text of the legend runs as follows :— 

1. Sriman-Naraka-tanayo Bhagadatta-Vajradatt-dnvayo mahd- 

rajadhiraja-Sri-Pragjyotise- 

2. ndrak Pusyavarma(|/*) tat-putro mahardjadhirajak  sri- 

Samudravarmé (/*) tasya tanayo Dattavatyam samutpannah 

3. Mahdrajadhirdja-Sri-Balavarma(|*) tena (tasmat) jato 

devydm Sri- Ratnavatyém mahdrajadhira- 

4. ja-sri-Kalyanavarma (/*) Sri-Gandharvavatyam $ri-Ganapati- 

varma(|*) Sri-Yajavatyam fri-Mahe- 

5. endravarma(/*) dvis-turagamedh-Ghartté $ri-Suvratayam 

Sri-Narayanavarma(|*) sri-De- 

6. vavatyam $ri-Bhitivarma (|* ) sri-Vijftdnavatyam $ri-Candra- 

mukhavarma(|*) Sri-Bho- 

7. gavatyam dvir-asvamedha-yaji Sri-Sthiraverma(|*) tena $ri- 

Nayanasobhayam 
8. $ri-Susthiravarma(|*) tena §ri-Dhruvalaksmyarh(?) Sri- 
Supratis thita- 

9. varma (/*) tasy=dnujo mahardjadhirdja-Si-Bhaskaravarm 

=eti || 

The first point to note in the above text is the passage 
$riman-Naraka-tanayo Bhagadatta-Vajradatt-anvayo. . . . Pusyavarma. 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XVIII, p. 15, note 3. 
2. See The Struggle for Empire, ed. Majumdar, p. 241. 


HIRANYAGARBHA AND ASVAMEDHA 181 


The use of the word tanaya in the secondary sense of a ‘male 
descendant’ in preference to its pr.mary sense of a ‘son’, espe- 
cially in view of the word anvaya used in the adjoining expres- 
sion, is rather peculiar. In the second place, the relation of 
a king with his predecessor is indicated fully in the cases 
of Samudravarman, Balavarman and Kalyanavarman and 
imperfectly in those of Susthiravarman, Supratisthitavarman 
and also Bhaskaravarman; but the relation of Ganapati- 
varman, Mahendravarman, Narayanavarman, Bhitivarman, 
Candramukhavarman and Sthiravarman with their prede- 
cessors has not been indicated at all. The third point of inte- 
rest is that the title Mahdrajadhiraja is applied only to the names 
of the first four kings of the list and is absent in regard to those 
of the remaining rulers with the only exception of the latest 
of them. It may be suggested that the absence of the title and 
of words indicating the relationship of many of the kings with 
their predecessors is due to want of space. As, however, there 
could hardly have been any rigid rule about the size of the seal, 
it could have been made a little larger, or the size of the 
figure of elephant occupying the upper half of the seal’s surface 
could have been made smaller in order to accommodate the 
whole of the properly worded epigraph. 

Exceptionally strange seems to be the fact that while two 
of the kings mentioned have been referred to as performers of 
the Asvamedha sacrifice, Bhitivarman, who is known to have 
celebrated the horse-sacrifice according to his own Barganga 
inscription, is not called an afvamedha-yajin. It may be pointed 
out in this connection that the epithet dvir-afoamedha-yaji_ in 
line 7 admittedly refers to the following name of Sthiravarman, 
and, on the same analogy, the epithet dvis-turagamedh-aharta in 
line 5 should refer not to the preceding name of Mahendra- 
varman, but to the following name of Narayanavarman. The 
difference in the position of the queen-mothers’ names in the 
two expressions, Sri-Bhogavatyém dvir-afvamedha-yaji Sri -Sthira- 
varma and dvis-turagamedh-ahartta Sri-Suvratayam Sri-Nardyana- 
varmaé, does not make any difference in Sanskrit syntax. It 
therefore seems that not Mahendravarman, grandfather of 
Bhitivarman, but Narayanavarman, father of Bhitivarman, 
is mentioned in the epigraph on the seal as a performer of two 
Asvamedhas. Is it then possible to suggest that the second of 


182 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
the two horse-sacrifices assigned here to Narayanavarman was 
celebrated when that king was too old and his son Bhiitivarman 
was ruling the country on his father’s behalf and that this was 
the reason why Bhitivarman is said to be a performer of the 
Afvamedha in a record of his own reign ? Verse 12 of the 
Nidhanpur inscription comparing Mahendravarman with 
yajita-vidhindm = aspadam = analam and his mother Yajfiavati with 
yajftavati aranih need not be taken to point to Mahendravarman’s 
performance of the A‘vamedha, as the poet apparently played 
on the word yajfia in the name of the queen-mother and as 
Mahendravarman may have celebrated some of the numerous 
Vedic sacrifices other than the Asvamedha. 

Bhattasali thinks that Mahendravarman, a performer of 
two horse-sacrifices according to him, reigned in the period 450- 
90 A.D. as a contemporary of the Gupta emperors Kumfaragupta 
I. Skandagupta and Budhagupta. It is, however, more proba- 
ble that the earliest ASvamedha was celebrated in Kamaripa 
by Narayanavarman about the beginning of the sixth century 
when the suzerain power of the Guptas declined. Bhiitivarman 
may be assigned roughly to the second quarter of the sixth century 
and his father Narayanavarman (performer of the ASvamedha ) 
and grandfather Mahendravarman respectively to the beginning 
of that century and the end of the fifth. Pusyavarman who 
seems to have been a subordinate ally of Samudragupta and 
named his son after his overlord’ should better he assigned to 
the third quarter of the fourth century and not to 310-30 A.D. 
as suggested by Bhattasali. 


1. There are some cases of the naming of the son of a feudatory after 
his overlord (Sircar, Suc. Sdt., p. 176). In all these cases, however, the 
overlord may have been also the father-in-law of the feudatory so that the son 
was named after his maternal grandfather according to an established early 
Indian practice. It is thus possible to think that Samudragupta gave one 
of his daughters in marriage to Pusyavarman. 


CuapTer XII 
DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 
I 


The date of the first advent of Buddhism in Bengal cannot 

be clearly determined in the present state of our knowledge. 
The Buddhist canonical work Samyuttanikdya(about the 3rd-2nd 
century B.C.) as well as the introduction to the Telapatta Jataka 
speaks of the Buddha’s visit to a locality called Desaka or Setaka 
in the Sumbha or Sumha country in South-West Bengal.! The 
life story of the Buddha in early Buddhist literature, however, 
shows that the Buddha’s activities were limited to North and 
South Bihar as well as the eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh, 
although in later times stories of his visit to many distant lands 
(such as Ceylon and Khotan) were fabricated.? There is doubt 

whether the Buddha, who flourished in the 6th-5th century 

B.C., actually visited the Sumha or Radha country especially 
in view of the cultural backwardness attributed to the people 
of that country by the Jain canonical work Aydrarigasutta (I. 
8.3), a work of about the same age as the Saniyuttanikdya. The 
Ayararigasutta speaks of the wild nature of the people of Radha 
and the uncivil reception they offered to Mahavira, founder of 
Jainism and contemporary of the Buddha, who is said to have 
travelled in their country.* It is possible to suspect that Maha- 
vira himself never visited Radha, but that the treatment re- 
ceived from the people of that country by the Jain monks at a 
subsequent period was reflected in the above story regarding 
the founder of Jainism. | Whatever that may be, there is no 
doubt that Buddhism gained a firm hold in most parts of Bengal 
during the reign of the Maurya emperor Aégoka (269-232 
B.C.) who was a Buddhist and a great champion and pro- 
pagator of Buddhism.‘ If the traditions recorded in the 


1. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, s.v. Sumbha. 

2. Gf. Oldenberg, Buddha, Calcutta, p. 391. 

3. History of Bengal, Dacca University, Vol. I, pp. 9, 36- 

4. Sircar, Inscriptions of Aloka, and ed., pp. 18ff. PGi Sélect Inscriptions, 
Pp. 77 and also pp. 28, 30, 49, 51, 71, 73, 76. 


184 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDtEVAL INDIA 


seventh century by the celebrated Chinese pilgrim Hiuen-tsang 
are to be believed, Asoka built numerous Buddhist monasteries 
in different parts of Bengal.1_ The pilgrim is known to have 
seen some of these monasteries, the construction of which was 
attributed to the Maurya emperor of the third century B.C. 
While defining the limits of Aryavarta for the purpose of ordi- 
nation, the Vinayapifaka places the eastern frontier of that land 
at Kajangala near Rajmahal on the eastern fringe of Bihar, 
while, in the Sanskrit Vinaya, the eastern limit is given as the 
kingdom of Pundravardhana (North Bengal).* This has led 
some scholars to believe that ‘“‘Buddhism had probably ob- 
tained a footing in North Bengal even before Asoka’s time’’.® 
Although the tradition of the Sanskrit Vinaya may not refer to 
a pre-Agokan date, there is little doubt, in view of the Vinaya 
evidence, that in Bengal Buddhism first made considerable 
headway only in the northern part of the country. But, at a 
subsequent period, Vanga(Southern and South-Eastern Bengal ) 
became famous as one of the centres of Buddhism. _This is 
suggested by the mention of Vanga (and not of any other tract 
of Bengal ) in a list of Buddhist countries found in a Nagarjuni- 
konda inscription of the third century A.D.‘ 

Although there is some evidence regarding the existence 
of Buddhist monasteries in Bengal as early as the third century 
B.C., no undoubtedly Buddhist inscription of a pre-Christian 
date has so far been discovered in the country. Some scholars 
however believe that the Mahasthan (Bogra District, North 
Bengal) inscription of the third century B.C. refers to an esta- 
blishment of the Sadvargiya sect of the Buddhists at Pundra- 
nagara.® If this suggestion is to be accepted, we have another 
evidence in support of the early entry of Buddhism in North 
Bengal referred to above. The Chinese pilgrim I-tsing, who 
travelled in India in 671-95 A.D., saw .the ruins of the ‘Temple 
of China’ said to have been built near the Mrgasikhavana or 
Mrgasthapana monastery in Varendra (later name of Pundra 
or North Bengal) for some Chinese pilgrims by a Maharaja 


1. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, Vol. II, pp. 184ff. 
2. History of Bengal, op. cit., p. 411. 

3. Ibid., p. 412. 

4. Select Inscriptions, p. 225. 

5- Ibid. p. 83; History of Bengal, op. cit., p. 415. 


bictiNe oF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 185 


named Srigupta- about five hundred years before the pilgrim’s 
time, i.e., in the second century A.D.!_ This king is sometimes 
identified with Maharaja Gupta who was the progenitor of the 
celebrated Gupta emperors of Magadha and flourished about 
the end of the third century. The Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien, 
who visited Bengal about the beginning of the fifth century A.D., 
noticed the flourishing condition of Buddhism at TAmralipti 
in South Bengal, while the Ganaighar copper-plate inscription 
of 507 A.D. speaks of a number of Buddhist monasteries in the 
Tippera District of East Bengal.? There is archaeological, epi- 
graphic and literary evidence to prove the existence of, numerous 
Buddhist establishments as well as many Buddhist ruling families 
in different parts of Bengal in the post-Gupta period.* 
Inscriptions appear to show that the patrons of Jain and 
Buddhist religious establishments in Bengal were Brahmanical 
Hindus and that the lay followers of Jainism and Buddhism 
were not socially distinct quite markedly from the ordinary 
Hindus. The Paharpur inscription of 479 A.D. records the 
benefactions of a Brahmana named Nathasarman and his wife 
Rami in favour of a Jain monastery in North Bengal. The 
Gunaighar inscription, referred to above, records a grant in 
favour of a Buddhist monastery made by a king, who was a 
Saiva, for the increase of the merit of himself and his parents. 
It is not stated in the inscription whether the subordinate ruler, 
on whose representation the grant was made, was a Brahmanical 
Hindu or a lay follower of Buddhism. On this point, the 
Kailan inscription of the Vaisnava king Sridharanarata 
(second half of the seventh century) throws some additional 
light. According to this record, a minister of the Rata king, 
named Jayanatha, approached his master for the grant of a 
piece of land which he was inclined to dedicate to the Bhagavat 
Tathagata (Buddha) or the Ratna-traya (the Buddhist trinity 


1, Allan, Catalogue of the Coins of the Gupta Dynasties, p. xv; History of 
Bengal, op. cit., p. 69. A Bhaiksuki inscription in the Malda Museum, pub- 
lished in the £pigraphia Indica, Vol. XXVIII, pp. 224ff., scems to point to 
the existence of a community of foreign (possibly Mongoloid) monks in 
Varendra. 
2. History y al, op. cit. pp. 412-133 Select Inscriptions, pp. 331ff. 
3. History bea oP cn pe a 4 eae 
4. Select Inscriptions, pp. 3461 
5 


186 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANGIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


of the Buddha, Dharma and Safigha symbolised in a Buddhist 
monastery) for the worship of the Buddha, the reading and 
writing of Buddhist religious texts and the provision of food, 
clothing and other necessaries for the Aryasangha (Buddhist 
monks), as well as toa number of learned Brahmanas for the 
performance of their pavica-mahdyajia (the five daily sacrifices 
to be performed by a Brahmana, viz. adhyapana, tarpana, homa, 
bali and atithi-pijana). Whether Jayanatha was a Brahmanical 
Hindu or a Buddhist is not stated in the inscription; but, 
whatever may have been his religious belief, it is clear that, in 
seventh century Bengal, when the Brahmanical and Buddhist 
philosophers were busy in refuting one another’s views, the 
life of the ordinary man was marked by absolute toleration. 
Another interesting fact disclosed by inscriptions is the 
gradual merger of the lay Buddhists in the Hindu community. 
A Vajrayogini (now in the Dacca Museum) tortoise-shell ins- 
cription of about the eleventh century A.D., as we shall see 
below, contains the adoration: namo bhagavate Vasudevdya | 
namo Buddhaya || svasti-nifreyasdy=stu Fino jananam || ‘‘Ado- 
ration to the most worshipful Vasudeva. Adoration to the 
Buddha. May the Jina (Buddha) be for the prosperity and 
salvation of the people !” It has to be noticed that a shell 
seems to have been discarded by the engraver of the inscription 
because he was not inclined to incise namo bhagavate Vdsudevdya 
after svasti-nisreyasdy=dstu Fino jandnam. Another interesting 
fact is that, while Vasudeva has been adored before the Buddha, 
the former has been called a Bhagavat which epithet has not 
been used with the Buddha’s name. It is apparent that Vasu- 
deva is given more prominence than the Buddha or Jina. At 
least the former is not subordinated to the latter. It is well- 
known from works like the Sadhanamala and the Nispannayoga- 
vali Tantra that the Buddhists tried to incorporate Brahmanical 
deities in their own pantheon. But orthodox Buddhists always 
placed Brahmanical deities in a position subordinate to that 
of the Buddhist gods and goddesses often as carriers or atten- 
dants of the latter.2. Thus an orthodox Buddhist is not expected 
to have placed Vasudeva in a position superior to that of the 


1. JRASB, L Lene, Vol. XV, pp. 1o1ff. 
2 . B. Bhat fian Buddhist Iconography, pp. 81 , 143, 145: 
146; A. Getty, Gods of Northern Buddhism, and ed., p. '53- ? 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 187 


Buddha as is done in the inscription under discussion, although 
the reference to the Buddha shows that the person responsible 
for the inscription was a Buddhist. The inscription no doubt 
points to a rapprochement between the worship of Vasudeva 
and that of the Buddha. This is also indicated by the fact that 
the Buddha was regarded as an avatdara of Visnu before 
Ksemendra (llth century) and Jayadeva (12th century).! 
This further suggests that a number of Buddhists were gradually 
absorbed in the fold of the Vaisnavas. 

The Pala emperors, who ruled in Bengal and Bihar from 
the eighth to the twelfth century, claimed to have been staunch 
followers of the Buddhist faith (parama-saugata). It is, how- 
ever, interesting to note that, like typically zealous kings avow- 
ing the Brahmanical faith, the Palas were eager to suppress 
the social evil styled varna-sankara.2 The Manahali plate of the 
parama-saugata Madanapala (1144-61 A.D.) records the king’s 
grant of some land in favour of the Brahmana, Bhat{aputra 
Vatesvarasarman, as a fee for reading the Mahabharata to the 
patfa-mahadevi (chief queen) Citramatika.* The Bhagalpur 
plate of the parama-saugata Narayanapala (circa 854-908 A.D.) 
not only records the king’s gift of a village in favour of the 
temple of Siva-bhattaraka and the Péfupatdcdrya-parisad in a 
locality called Kalasapota, but also refers to his boasts of having 
built one thousand-roomed temple for the said god in the same 
locality.‘ This inscription seems to point to a rapprochement 
between Saivism and Buddhism. Although itis difficult to 
say definitely whether some Buddhists merged themselves in 
the religious group of the Saivas asin that of the Vaignavas, 
this seems to be quite probable.® 

The merger of the Buddhists in the Hindu community is 
also suggested by the Narayanpur inscription of the time of 


1, The Buddha is mentioned in the list of the ten Avatéras in an 
inscription of about the eighth century A.D. (MASI, No. 26, p. 5). The 
verse in question seems to be quoted from an earlier Puranic text. See above, 
P. 42; below, p. 194, note 7. 

2. Gaudalekhamédld, p. 36 (Monghyr plate of Devapaia, verse 36). 

3. Ibid., pp. 147-58. 

4. Ind. Ant., Vol. XV, pp. g04ff. 

5. It appears that sometimes the Buddha was also identified with Siva 
as with Vignu. 


183 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Mahipala I (circa 988-1038 A.D.).!_ This epigraph records 
the establishment of an image of Vinayaka bya merchant named 
Buddhamitra who was the son of Jambhalamitra and an inhabi- 
tant of Bilikandhaka in Samatata (modern Tippera-Noakhali 
region in South-East Bengal). The names of both Buddha- 
mitra and his father Jambhalamitra are Buddhistic and suggest 
that the said persons were Buddhists. But an interesting point 
to be noticed in this connection ic that the god Vinadyaka ins- 
talled by Buddhamitra, as is clearly indicated by the icono- 
graphy of the image cn which the inscription in question is 
engraved, is not the Mahayanist (Buddhist) deity of that name, 
but the Brahmanical god Vinayaka made according to the 
directions of the Brahmanical Silpasastras such as in the Visnu- 
dharmottara. This fact seems to show either that Buddhamitra 
and Jambhalamitra were Buddhists, but were Hinduised enough 
to pay homage to the Brahmanical deity or that their family 
had been Buddhist at an earlier date although they were them- 
selves followers of the Brahmanical faith. But, as suggested 
above, there was hardly any difference between the Brahmanist 
and Buddhist householders in the early medieval period. The 
distinction between Brahmanism and Buddhism seems in that 
period to have been exhibited mainly in the debates of the 
philosophers of the two schools. It may be pointed out in this 
connection that, from the view point of society, the lay Bud- 
dhists differed Jittle from the Brahmanist householders even in 
the early period,? although then the difference between the 
religions of the two sects was somewhat marked. In early- 
medieval Bengal, the religious distinction gradually died out 
so far as the ordinary people were concerned. In that age, the 
Buddhist mass had no growing popular literature and the atten- 
tion of the Buddhists was being gradually more attracted by the 
recitation and representation on the stage of the stories of the 
Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the growing Puranic literature, 
often translated into the local languages, rather than by the 
old Jatakas and Avadanas. The ordinary Buddhist house- 
holders do not appear to have had real touch with the Buddhist 


1. Ind. Cult., Vol. IX, pp. r2iff. The evidence of the Mandhuk 
inscription, Published in the’ Indian Historical Quarter, Vol. XXVUL, pp. 
5r57, su that ¢ Narayanpur it 

Ree Oldenberg, op. eis pp- 2824 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 189 


philosophers. These were apparently some of the causes that 
led to the absorption of the Buddhist masses into the Brahma- 
nical society. The Mahayana Buddhists worshipped deities 
quite similar to the Brahmanical gods and goddesses. This 
must have gradually done away with the marked barriers that 
chatacterised the two religions at the early period. In the early 
medieval age, the Buddhists appear to have been joining the 
worship of Brahmanical deities and the social and religious 
festivals of the Hindus and were enjoying recitations, on such 
occasions, of stories from Brahmanical literature along with 
their Hindu neighbours, who on their part, it should be remem- 
bered, adopted wholly or partially some of the Buddhist deities 
including the Buddha himself and certain Buddhist social and 
religious festivals. The old Mahayana form of Buddhism (in- 
cluding the Yogacara and Madhyamika schools) assumed 
such forms as are known by the names of Vajrayana, Sahaja- 
yana and Kalacakrayana. Much of the religious concepts of: 
these sects was adopted by the Tantrika school and various other 
religious communities of the Hindus. 

There are some traces of Buddhism in Bengal even in 
inscriptions later than the age of the Palas and there is a Bud- 
dhist population in the Chittagong area on the south-eastern 
fringe of Bengal even today. But Buddhism does not appear 
to have played any important part in the religious life of Bengal 
after the decline of the Buddhist royal family of the P4las in the 
twelfth century A.D. The antipathy of the Sena rulers of 
Bengal, who succeeded the Palas, may have supplied an addi- 
tional force to the elements that led to the withering of Buddhism 
in the country. 


II 


Two pieces of inscribed tortoise-shells were found in the 
course of reclamation of a tank at Vasupada in the village of 
Vajrayogini in Vikrampur within the jurisdiction of the Munshi- 
ganj Sub-Division of the Dacca District, East Pakistan. They 
‘were presented to the Dacca Museum and were published with 
facsimiles by N.K. Bhattasali in the Annual Report of the Dacca 
Museum for 1939-40, pp. 7-8. 


1, History of Bengal, op. cit., pp. 420ff. 


190 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The first of the two pieces of shells is blackish in colour 
and measures 53" x44", while the second is a greyish piece 
measuring 63” Aa Both the pieces are broken, the first 
into two and the second into four fragments. There are two 
lines of writing on the first shell and six (actually, five) 
lines on the second. The characters belong to that class 
of the Northern Alphabet which is commonly styled _ Proto- 
Bengali, although a better name is Gaudi. The inscriptions 
may be palaeographically assigned to the eleventh century. 
The single or double danda indicating stop is always preceded 
by a visarga-like sign in the second record. The language of 
the records is Sanskrit, although it is influenced by the local 
dialect. 

The text of the inscription on the first shell was deciphered 
by Bhattasali as follows :— 

1. [Symbol.] Svasti Sreyasaya | Sujino jandnam |/ 

2. [Symbol.] na 

His translation of the text runs as follows : ‘Peace. For 
the welfare of the good Buddhists.’ 

Bhattasali’s reading of the text of the inscription on the 
second shell runs as follows:— 

[Symbol.] Sri 

[Symbol.] namo bhagavate Vasudevaya | namo Buddhaya | 
svasti nisreyasdya | sujino jananam | 

ma namo bhagavate 

Manarasarmma kérévadhamma || Sri 

6. namo bhagavate Vasudevdya 

Bhattasali did not translate this record, but appended a 
note in which his views as regards its interpretation are made 
perfectly clear. He says,‘‘Leaving out an individual siddhir = astu 
figure and the Sri following, the inscription has five lines, the last 
three of which appear to be incomplete. The fourth line appears 
to pray for the death or incarceration of one Manaragarman 
(Manorathasarman ?) and helps us to understand the trend and 
nature of these curious inscriptions. They pray for the welfare 
of the good followers of Buddhism and invoke death or jail of 
Manarasarman, showing thereby that they are mantras or charms 
for Abhicdra or Marana (i.e. killing or injuring one’s foes), and 
the unclean nature of the material, on which the inscriptions 
are incised, also bespeaks of a sinister design. It would appear 


Suny Bi 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 191 


from these curious tablets that, sometime between 1000 and 
1100 A.D., the Buddhists were in a bad way in Vikrampur 
where these tablets were found, and the hands of one Manara- 
éarman lay specially heavily on them. This helps us to under- 
stand, to some extent, the religious history of the period follow- 
ing the fall of the Buddhist Candras of Vikrampur, who were 
supplanted by the Brahmanical Varmans, when Bhavadeva- 
bhatta, minister of: Harivarmadeva, is boastfully described 
as the Agastya of the Jaina and Buddhist seas in ‘his Bhubanes- 
war inscription.” The name of the village, Vajrayogini, may 
have lent colour to Bhattasali’s views as it shows that there was 
originally a temple of the Buddhist goddess Vajrayogini in 
the locality. Vajrayogini, sometimes said to be the consort 
of Heruka, was adopted by the Brahmanical Tantrikas as 
Chinnamasta.* 

These far-reaching conclusions in regard to the religious 
history of ancient Bengal arrived at by Bhattasali on the basis 
of the two inscriptions are, however, entirely unwarranted as 
his reading and interpretation of the records are both full of 
mistakes. 

Bhattasali’s reading of the first inscription (line 1) con- 
tains no less than three mistakes. The word read as <reyasdya 
is actually nisreyasdya, ni being written above the line. The 
engraver at first omitted ni, but corrected himself, when he 
noticed the mistake, by incising it above the line. This is of 
course a common practice followed even today. The fact is 
that while nifreyasa is a familiar Sanskrit word meaning the same 
thing as moksa, the word Sreyasa is not recognized by Sanskrit 
lexicons. It should be pointed out that the second inscription 
(line 3) uses the same word nifreyasa in the same context. After 
nifreyasdya, Bhattasali finds a danda which is, however, un- 
doubtedly a medial @ sign. Nowhere in these two records is 
a danda, double or single, joined above with the top métra of 
the preceding aksara; cf. the five cases of the use of the dandain 
the first (line 1) and the second (lines 2, 3 and 5) inscriptions. 
There is absolutely no doubt that the reading is nisreyasaya 
and not nifreyasaya | as deciphered by Bhattasali. The next 
aksara is read as su; but any one who would care to compare 


1. Bhattacharya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, pp. 155-56. 


192 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the aksara su in the expression Vasudevdya in the second inscrip- 
tion (lines 2 and 6) would certainly be convinced that this 
aksara is anything but su. Medial u in Vasudevdya as well as 
in Buddhdya in the second inscription (line 2) is a slanting 
stroke joined below a consonant; but in the aksara after nifre- 
yasdyd, the upper part of which is represented by s, there is 
besides the u sign a clear subscript which is either n or t; but 
that it is a subscript ¢ becomes absolutely certain when one 
compares this‘aksara_ with the subscript ¢ in the word svasti in 
both the inscriptions; cf. the first line of the first and the third 
(actually, second) line of the second inscription. The reading 
of the passage is therefore svasti nifreyasdy=dstu Fino jandnam 
and certainly not svasti-freyasdya | sujino janandmh as Bhattasali 
deciphered it. In the second line, the engraver began to in- 
cise namo bhagavate Vasudevaya, but gave up writing after engra- 
ving only the first aksara. 

Bhattasali’s translation of the above passage is also equally 
unfortunate. The interpretation of svasti as ‘peace’ and Sreya- 
saya as ‘for the welfare’ can hardly be regarded as ideal; but 
the climax is reached when sujino jandnam is translated as ‘of 
the good Buddhists’. Of course Jina was a name of the Buddha; 
but how can sujina mean ‘a good Buddhist’ ? And even if 
sujina can be taken in the sense of a good Buddhist, how can 
one account for the visarga changed into o after that word ? 
Even if therefore we ignore the mistakes in Bhattasali’s reading 
and accept his reading of the passage as correct, it has to be 
admitted that his translation is altogether absurd. There is 
absolutely no reference to good Buddhists in the first inscription. 
Tt simply says, ‘Let the Jina (Buddha) be for the prosperity 
and salvation of men.’ 

In the first line of the second inscription, what Bhattasali 
reads as the siddham symbol may actually be a figure for J in- 
dicating that the aksara fri that follows was omitted in line 1 and 
has to be inserted therein. The use of fri before namo bhagavate 
in two other cases below in this record may suggest that the 
engraver wanted to insert Sri before namo bhagavate also in 
line 2 which may actually be regarded as line 1 of the inscrip- 
tion. Otherwise, Bhattasali deciphered this line quite correct- 
ly. Line 3 (actually, line 2), however, reads : svasti-nifre- 
yasdy = dstu Fino jananam || sri. The main passage is exactly thé 


DEQLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 193 


same as we find in the first inscription. As already pointed 
out in connection with the first inscription, it is impossible to 
read it as svasti-nisreyasaya | sujino jandndm after Bhattasali. Line 
4 (actually, line 3) is also correctly deciphered by Bhattasali. 
The first aksara ma is redundant. Whether the engraver was 
thinking of the second aksara of namo or the first letter of the 
name at the beginning of the next line cannot be determined. 
Line 5 (actually, line 4) is read by Bhattasali as Manarasarmma 
kardvadhamma || sri. But there appear to be some inaccuracies. 
In the first place, _ there is a clear sign of anusvdra above between 
na and ra of Manarasarmma. it is also possible that we have 
to read nu instead of na. But even correcting sarmma to 
farmma, we have a rather peculiar name Manarrafarman or 
Manurmrasarman. Secondly, the third aksara of what has been 
read as kdrdva is certainly ta and not va, while the preceding 
aksara looks more like ri than ra. The reading thus appears 
to me to be férita (for Sanskrit kdrita). The next word 
dharma no doubt stands for Sanskrit dharmak. The last aksara 
reads i, the intended reading being no doubt Sri. There is 
no mistake in Bhattasali’s reading of the last line. 

Now we come to Bhattasali’s interpretation of tne second insc- 
ription. Bhattasali thinks that these lines ‘pray for the welfare 
of the good followers of Buddhism and invoke death or jail for 
Manarasarman, showing thereby that they are mantras or 
charms for Abhicdra or Marana’. But it hasalready been shown 
that the passage svasti-nifreyasdy= stu Fino jananam, which he 
wrongly deciphered, has absolutely nothing to do with a prayer 
typically ‘for the welfare of the good followers of Buddhism’. 
Attention of scholars may be drawn to another fact in this con- 
nection. One of the causes of abandoning the first shell seems 
to be that the engraver was not inclined to incise namo bhaga- 
vate Vasudevdya after svasti-nifreyasdy= Gstu Fino jandném. This 
is suggested by the second inscription in which the arrangement 
is altered. Another fact is that Vasudeva has been called a 
Bhagavat which epithet has not been used with the Buddha’s 
name. The text of the second inscription clearly shows that 
Vasudeva is given more prominence than the Buddha or Jina; 
at least the former is not subordinated to the latter. We know 
that attempts of the Buddhists to incorporate Brahmanical 
deities in their own pantheon can be traced in works like the 


194 RBLIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Sddhanamala and the Nispannayogavali Tantra.‘ The latter 
work describes twenty-seven magic circles of the Buddhist deities 
and mentions a host of Brahmanical gods and goddesses as 
companions of those deities. But orthodox Buddhists always 
placed Brahmanical deities in a position subordinate to that 
of the Buddhist gods and goddesses often as vdhanas. Their 
attitude is truly represented in the conception, e.g., of Vid- 
yujjvala Karali, a form of Ekajata (an emanation of Akso- 
bhya), who is said to have originated from the Buddha’s sweat, 
as having Indra, Brahman, Visnu and Siva together as her 
vahana.2 The vdhana of Vajrahunkara is Siva,* that of Vajra- 
jvalanalarka is Visnu and his wife,‘ that of Trailokyavijaya is 
Siva and Gauri. Mahacakra Vajrapani treads on Brahman 
and Siva.* It is therefore highly improbable that an orthodox 
Buddhist would have placed Vasudeva in a superior or equal 
position with the Buddha. This fact shows that the inscrip- 
tions under discussion have nothing exceptionally and typically 
Buddhist in them. But they no doubt point to a rapproche- 
ment between the worship of Vasudeva and that of the Buddha, 
which is also indicated by the fact that the Buddha was regarded 
as an Avatara of Visnu long before Ksemendra (eleventh cen- 
tury) and Jayadeva (twelfth century).”? This further suggests 
that a number of Buddhists were gradually absorbed in the 
fold of the Vaisnavas. And this is probably supported by the 
present records which point to the joint adoration of both 
Vasudeva and the Buddha. The reference to the Buddha 
shows beyond doubt that the person responsible for the inscrip- 
tions was a Buddhist. Had he been merely a Vaisnava, there 
is no meaning of the adoration to the Jina or Buddha. The 
fact that Buddha was regarded as Visnu’s Avatara is not material 
since no other incarnation is adored at the same time. But the 
same man also adored Vasudeva and could hardly have been 


1. Gf, Ariana Antiqua, 1947, 6 
2. Bhattacharya, op. pose | adage 
3. 
4 





Hid, p. 145. 


dies P. 
of Northern Buddhism, p. 53. 

She Hantpie vetoes ct ‘Avatéras including the Buddha 

is quoted in an inscription, from Mamallapuram, of about the eighth century 

while the Buddha is represented among the Avatdras in the Sirpur temple'of 

the same age, See Mem. ASI, No. 26, p. 53; No. 18, pp. 5-6; above, p. 187. 


hes 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 195 


an orthodox Buddhist. There is thus little possibility of these 
two being communal Buddhistic records as believed by Bhatta- 
sali. 

It is impossible to understand how, even if one accepts 
Bhattasali’s reading Manarasarmma-kard-vadha-mma, the passage 
can signify that a person’s incarceration or death was prayed 
for. Kard-vadha-mma of course cointains kdrdé and vadha; but 
the expression is no doubt as meaningless as sujino-jandném.1 
The actual reading of the passage is, as shown above, Manarhra- 
sarma-karita-Dharma, i.e. Manamraarma-karita-Dharmah. It 
appears to mean that a person named Manarrafarman caused 
a Dharma to be made in his behalf. Now the word 
Dharma may indicate anything, the making of which is related 
to the maker’s religious merit. The word Kirti, ‘fame’, is 
known likewise to be used in the sense of any construction (e.g. 
a temple for a deity) leading to the fame of the person respon- 
sible for it. But the material on which the inscriptions are 
incised appears to preclude the possibility of the above inter- 
pretation. What pious construction was possible by means of 
tortoise-shells ? It thus seems possible to suggest that the tor- 
toise-shells (or earthen images of tortoise covered by these 
shells) were worshipped as Dharma Thakur whose worship 
in the shape of a tortoise is prevalent in the Burdwan and 
Presidency Divisions of West Bengal even at the present time.” 
As regards the tortoise form of the deity, Sukumar Sen in a 
paper entitled ‘Is the Cult of Dharma a Living Relic of Bud- 
dhism in Bengal ?’ published in the B.C. Law Volume, Part I, 
says, ‘The emblem of Dharma—rather his pdda-pitha on which 


1, Bhattasali’s interpretation reminds ys of a Kannada story in which 
a person, who had been asked to purchase menasu (pepper) and jirige (cumin 
seed), bought mena (wax) and siji (needle) and explained ‘that rige was 
unknown in the market. The hopeless position of mma in Bhattasali’s trans- 
cript resembles that of rige in the story. 

2. Vide ‘Dharma Word’ by K.P. Chattopadhyay in JRASBI, Vol. 
VIII, 1942, pp. 99-135. Most ¢ images examine ry attopadhyay 
in the Distrite of Bebhum, Midnapur and ‘og-Parganss "were shaped Like 
tortoises measuring about 6” x4” (12”X12" in one case). ‘In one case, it 
had a tortoise back only.’ Cf. loc. cit., PP 104-05. Coomaraswamy (The 
‘Arts and Crafts of India and Ceylon, p. 185)-refers to. an Allahabad ‘jade 
tortoise’ in the British Museum, 17” long, as an ancient work. This ap- 
pears to point to the prevalence of the worship of the tortoise-shaped deity 
outside Bengal in ancient times, Cf. the Kiirma Avatdra of Vignu. 


196 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


was placed or engraved the paduka@ (boots or sandals) of 
Dharma—is a tortoise. In most cases, it is a natural bit of 
stone shaped like a tortoise; in other cases, it is a chiselled stone 
image of the same.’ In the introduction (p. xi) to the Rap- 
ramer Dharma-mangal, edited by Sen jointly with Panchanan 
Mandal, the following two verses, one in Sanskrit and the 
other in Bengali, have been quoted from the ritualistic 
literature of the Dharma cult : 

ulika-vahana Dharmadeva tejomay-dtmaka | 

idanith kiirma-prsthe tu divya-riipa namo-=stu te || 

hat patiy8 Dharma srjilen systi | 

paduka sthapiba lae kitrmer prsti || 

Sen and Mandal further point out that, although the 
worship of Dharma Thakur is now prevalent only about the 
Burdwan Division, it was in former times also current in other 
parts of Bengal. They trace it in the present day ceremony 
of Del or worship of Pat Thakur in East and North Bengal 
and point to the existence of ‘Dharma Thakur’s Gddi’ not far 
from the chief town of the Bogra District. They further con- 
nect the Dharma cult with the Chat Parav or Sasthi-parva 
prevalent in Bihar. The present records coming from the 
Dacca District support their contention. We have referred 
above to the ancient jade tortoise from Allahabad. 

Another important fact suggested by these records of a 
Vaisnavite Buddhist is that they associate the Dharma cult with 
Buddhism and Vaisnavism. Haraprasad Sastri* pointed out 
that Dharma Thakur’s dhyana represents the deity as finya- 
miirti_ and nirafijana, which connect the Dharma cult with the 
theory of the Void, so popular with the later Buddhists, and 
show the latter’s influence on the former. Chattopadhyay speaks 
of ‘the wheel of Dharma’ in connection with the Dharma 
Thakur cult.* But Sastri’s theory that the present-day Dharma 
cult of Bengal is a relic of Buddhism seems to be unwarranted 
in spite of the fact that the present records point to its popula- 
rity with the Buddhists. Sastri confused the tortoise shape of 
Dharma with the form of a Buddhist Caitya and ignored the 
fact that Buddhist literature does not represent Dharma (one 


1. Op. cit; p. i. 
2. Proc. ‘asd, 1894, p. 1353 FASB, 1894, pp. 55-61, 65-68, 
3. CF. op. cit., pp. 112, 115; figs. 2-3. 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 197 


of the celebrated Buddhist Tri-raina or ‘three jewels’, viz., the 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha) in the shape of a tortoise. It 
may be pointed out that the Kailan inscription of Sridharana- 
rata (seventh century) and the Sundarban inscription of 
Dommanapila (twelfth century) use the expression Ratna- 
traya to indicate a Buddhist establishment. This is probably 
because the images of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha came 
to be worshipped later in Buddhist monasteries. But the three 
Ratnas of the Buddhists are known to have been represented in 
human form. When represented in art, the four-armed Dharma 
usually shows afjali against the breast by one pair of hands 
and carries the rosary and double-lotus in the other.1 We 
know that the Mahayanists placed Dharma instead of the 
Buddha in the first place amongst the Ratnas.? It is also 
known that the Dhyani-Buddha is the first kaya or body of the 
Buddhist trinity called Trikéya and that he is the Dharma- 
kaya or the inner intelligence of the body of the Buddha. This 
Dharma-kdya is identified by some Buddhist sects with Dharma 
of the Buddhist Tri-ratna.? Buddhist scriptures represent Adi- 
Dharma as a goddess who revealed herself from the centre of 
a triangle and produced the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha from 
its three sides. Dharma that was produced from its second 
side is the wife of the Buddha, produced from the first side, 
and is the mother of the other Buddhas. But these concep- 
tions had apparently little to do with the tortoise form of 
Dharma Thakur whose name, however, connects him with the 
Buddhist Raina. In Brahmanical mythology, Dharma is some- 
times a separate deity (justice or virtue personified as a bull, 
dog or dove and identified with Visnu or Prajapati) and some- 
times another name of Yama and of Yudhisthira.’ No repre- 
sentation of the independent deity called Dharma is known. 
The figure of Yama (or Yudhisthita) as conceived by Brah- 


1. Gf, Bhattacharya, op. cit., Plate IIT. 
2. Ibid., p. xv. 

3. A, Getty, op. cit., p. 28. 

4. Ibid, p. 197. 


5+ Yudhisthira is worshipped in the Madras Presidency as Dharma- 
raja, This Dharmar4ja cult of South India may be related to the Dharma 
‘Thakur worship of Bengal; but it does not explain the tortoise form of 
Dharma. For the Dharmaraja cult of South India, see Chattopadhyay, 
op. Cite, Pp. 129-30. 


198 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL inDIA 


manical literature and represented in art has likewise nothing 
todo with a tortoise. The conception of the tortoise and other 
non-human incarnations of Visnu' was no doubt based partly 
on the ancient worship of the tortoise and other animals 
amongst the totemistic peoples of India and partly on local 
adoration of mysterious animals such as that of Daksinray, 
the tiger divinity of the Sundarbans, at the present time in 
Bengal. There are tales about the helpfulness of mysterious 
fishes (usually of the class known as Sol and Gajar in Central 
Bengal) living in the waters of particular Bils (lakes). The 
story is always the same. People used to get whatever they 
wanted from the strange inhabitant of the waters; but its favour 
was discontinued as a result of the dishonesty exhibited by one 
of the recipients of favours. It seems that an old tortoise wor- 
ship in ancient Bengal was later influenced by both Buddhism 
and Vaisnavism. Its association with Vaisnavism can easily 
be traced through the conception of the tortoise incarnation 
of Visnu. But its origin in Buddhism is rather difficult to 
trace excepting its association with one of the Buddhist Tri- 
ratna by name. Both Sen and Chattopadhyay think that the 
Buddhist conception of the Void ‘may indicate the influence 
of the Dharma cult on Tantric Buddhism’, and this view seems 
to be supported by the importance of the Void in the religious 
and philosophical beliefs of the Austric-speaking people of 
Polynesia. But even admitting the influence of Buddhism on 
the Dharma cult, there is no reason to believe that the worship 
of Dharma in the shape of a tortoise originated with the Bud- 
dhists.?. The name Dharma, applied to the deity, is regarded 
by Suniti Kumar Chatterji as derived from some Austric word 
meaning ‘tortoise’ and sounding like daram.* 

1, The tortoise incarnation was originally ascribed to Prajapati (cf. 
Satapatha Brékmana, VII. 5.1.5-6), Lut was later attributed to Visnu. 

2. Some writers have associated the Dharma-kim ceremony, preva- 
lent among the Chakmas who are a Buddhist tribal people of the Chitwgong 
region of East Bengal,with the eult of Dharma Thakur. Cf.Madhav Chandra 
Chakma Master, Cakma Jatir Itihds, p. 543 Satis Chandra Ghosh, Cakma Jati, 
p. 200. But Dharma-kam of the Chakma Buddhists is actually nothing” but 
a ceremonial worship of the Buddha, the name of Dharma being conspicuous 
by its absence from the mantras employed in the ceremony. The expression 
dharma-kém is a corruption of Sanskrit dharma-karman meaning ‘a religious 
rite’. The Chakma ceremony is so called because it is the religious rite par 
excellence amongst the Chakma Buddhists. 

3. Cf. Sen and Mandal, cp. cit. p. xv. 


DECLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 199 


Dharma Thakur is usually identified with Visnu, but 
in many cases also with Siva. It is interesting to note that 
the form of Pat Thakur, worshipped in the Faridpur region 
of Central Bengal as identical with Siva, has actually both 
Saiva and Vaisnava characteristics. It is made of Nimba or 
Bilva wood roughly in the shape of an alligator and has the 
emblems of the bull and the trident, associated with Siva,. as 
well as the conch, discus, club and lotus symbols of Visnu. 
The text of a work on the procedure of Pat Thakur’s worship, 
copied by us, also supports this. Cf. the section called Péf- 
srsfi. which runs : 

Gcambite jata nadilen Pafupati | 

bij padiyd Bel-vrksa Nimer utpatti // 

goda kafiyad aga katiya madhye dilen cheo | 

majhkhane bandilen Pa-ban bhao || 

Visvakarmé dilen Pat nirman kariya | 

Sankha cakra gadé padma cari mudra diya |/ 

gadilen tris al. gota kanta tin sari | 

Sukla-vastra diyaé mora Pat-ban ghiri |/ 

kahen a to satya-guru Maheseri var | 

Pat-bén Suddha karilen prabhu Bhola-Mahefvar || 

Sen and Mandal suggest that the cult of the Vedic and 
Iranian Sun-god, Vedic Varuna, the war-god of such peoples 
as the Doms and Candalas, and several other deities, mostly 
Nonaryan, contributed to the growth and development of 
the Dharma Thakur cult. As to the solar origin of Dharma 
Thakur, Sen observes, ‘Dharma is the Sun-god. The tortoise 
(Karma, Kasyapa) as the symbol or emblem of the (rising ?) 
sun is probably a Nonaryan concept. But the identitity of 
the tortoise with the sun appears early in Indo-Aryan religion, 
at least as early as the Satapatha Brahmana (VII.5.15). Asan 
Aryan god, the Sun moves in a chariot. So does Dharma. As 
a matter of fact, the ceremony of Rathayatra was originally 
concerned with Dharma.* Like the Sun-god, Dharma cures 


1, Ibid., p. xiv. 

2. Op. cit., pp. xiiiff. 

3. Ratha-yatra, popular in the religious life of South India, seems to 
have been brought to Eastern India by the South Indians. The Ganga 
kings appear to have popularised the Ratha-yatra at the Puri. temple and the 
Practice seems to have spread to other Vaisnava temples in these parts. 


200 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIRVAL INDIA 


incurable diseases like leucoderma. The Sun-god has a bird 
as his vdhana and the god of death (Yama) as his son. 
Dharma’s direct creation Uliika (owl) combines the two per- 
sonalities. The monkey cult was originally associated with 
Sun worship. In the cult of Dharma, Hanuman is his facto- 
tum.’ Chattopadhyay lays greater stress on Dharma’s relation 
with Vedic Varuna and the latter’s association with the Sun. 
He also points to Dharma Pennu, the creator god of the Khonds 
and to Dharma regarded as a great god by the Santals. 
In Brahmanical mythology, Dharma is the name of as on 
(Yama) and an attendant of the Sun-god. 

The antiquity of the cult of Dharma Thakur in Bengal 
is definitely established by the present inscriptions. The tortoise- 
shaped deity was no doubt called Dharma as early as the tenth 
or eleventh century. But when precisely this Sanskritic name 
came to be applied to the tortoise deity for the first time can- 
not be determined. 

There is thus absolutely no reason to believe that the 
Vajrayogini inscriptions are mantras or charms for Abhicdra or 
Marana, as suggested by Bhattasali. Had they been so, it may 
further be pointed out, they would have certainly contained 
certain mystic bij-aksaras, such as hrim, etc., which abound in 
such mantras noticed in Tantric works both Brahmanical and 
Byddhistic. 


Ill 


In a paper entitled ‘Aiduka’ in the Journal of the Oriental 
Institue, Vol. I, No. 3, pp. 278ff., it has been said that the 
Vedic origin of Aiduka, which has been suggested by the author, 
would justify its inclusion in the Visnudharmottara; because, if 
it were a Buddhist form, it could not have found a place in it. 
It is further pointed out that the word Aiduka is used in the 
Mahavastu to indicate a Buddhist Stipa. It is therefore concluded 
that, as it happens in the case of other words like Caitya, etc., 
“the word Aiduka also must have been used as a synonym of 
Stipa’’.! But in the eagerness to disprove the Buddhist asso- 
ciation of the eduka or aiguka, not only is the stamp of non- 


1. Op. cit., 282. 


DEGLINE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 201 


Brahmanical character put on the eduka in the verses quoted 
from the Vana-parvan of the Mahabharata been explained 
away, but a clear indication of the Visnudharmottara itself has 
also been ignored. 

In the analysis of the Visnudharmottara description of the 
eduka or aiduka, it has been said, ‘Below the bhimikds (floors) 
but above the liga should be placed in the four directions 
the Lokapalas carrying Silas in their hands. Their names are 
Viridha, Dhrtarastra, Viripaksa and Kubera. All of them 
should have the dress of the Sun and should wear armours. 
They should be adorned with ornaments. Viriidhaka represents 
Sakra the lord of the Devas; Dhrtarastra, Yama the leader 
of the nether-worlds; Viripaksa, Varuna the lord of waters; 
and Kubera is the lord of the Yaksas.”” 

It should be noticed that the association of the eduka in 
the above description with Viridhaka, Dhrtarastra, Viriipaksa 
and Kubera clearly demonstrates its original Buddhist character, 
as they are the famous Lokapalas of early Buddhist mythology.* 
The attempt of the Visnudharmottara to identify the Bud- 
dhist Loka-palas with the Brahmanical Loka-palas of the early 
period, viz. Indra, Yama, Varuna and Kubera,? no doubt 
Points to the assimilation of an essentially Buddhist institution 
in the fold of Brahmanism. 


Iv 


The donor of the Ratnagiri (Cuttack District, Orissa) 
copper-plate inscription* was Paramabhajféraka Mahdrajadhiraja 
Trikalingadhipati Karnadeva alias Mahasivagupta who was 
the younger brother of Purafijaya (feared by the Gauda, 
Dahala, Kalinga and Vanga kings), the son of Janamejaya 
and the grandson of Uddyotakesarin. Karna or Karnakesarin, 
grandson of Uddyotakesarin, seems to have ended his rule over 
Utkala before the conquest of that country by the Ganga king 
Anantavarman Codaganga probably before 1112 A.D.‘ The 
issue of the present charter from Yayatinagara® is thus inter- 
See Ep. Ind., Vol. III, pp. 263ff. 

IH, Vol. RXXIV, pp. 2738 
‘The city seems to be called Abhinava-Yayatinagara in the Maddala 


Che DE 


Patji. 


202 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


esting. The city of Yayatinagara (near Binkain the former 
Sonepur State in ancient Kosala), built by and named after 
Yayati I, was originally the capital of the Somavarhéis of 
Kosala. It appears that, after the expansion of Somavarnsi 
power over Utkala, their capital in Utkala was also given the 
name Yayatinagara or Yayatipura, probably after Yayati 
III who seems to have been the first Somavarnsi king of 
Utkala. This new ‘city of Yayati’ seems to be the modern 
Jajpur (possibly a corruption of Yayatipura) which was pre- 
viously the capital of the Bhauma-Karas, the predecessors of 
the Somavamsis in Utkala. 

An interesting fact is that the lady Karpiragri, the donee 
of the grant, is described as a Réni or queen and as the daughter 
of a woman and the granddaughter of another woman. The 
word pautri in this context seems to be used in the sense of 
‘the daughter’s daughter’. The absence of any reference to 
Karpirasri’s father and grandfather and her representation 
as the daughter and granddaughter of females appear to sug- 
gest that she was born ofaharlot. There are other instances of 
similar representation of a harlot in inscriptions. Thus the 
MahakiteSvara (Badami) temple inscription’ of the time of 
Galukya Vijayaditya records the donations of the harlot Vina- 
poti described as the daughter of Kuci-poti and granddaughter 
of Revamajical and the heart’s darling (prdpa-vallabhe) of king 
Vijayaditya Satyasraya. Similarly, an inscription* of the 
time of Rastrakita Dhruva in the Viripaksa temple at 
Pattadakal records the donation of Badi-poddi described as 
the daughter of Goyinda-poddi who was a harlot (i.e. Devaddst) 
of the temple of the queen Loka-mahadevi. These inscrip- 
tions are in the Kannada language, in which the word pofi, 
poddi or boddi means ‘a harlot’.* 

If Karpirasri, apparently one of the secondary queens 
or concubines of the Somavarhsi king Karna, was a harlot’s 
daughter, there are a few points to be explained. The first 
of these is that whether the word devi suffixed to her mother’s 


1. Ind., Ant., Vol. X, p. 103. 

2. Ibid., Vol. XI, p. 125. 

& A Telugu inscription from Velpuru in the Sattenapalli Taluk of 
the Guntur District, dated Saka 1131, mentions Kassadi Siramadevi, con- 
cubine (bhoga-stri) of the Kota chief Ketaraja, and her mother Amara-sini 
who was a harlot (SI, Vol. X, No. 249). 


DECLINE OF SuDDHisM tN BENGAL 203 


name should have to be taken to indicate the latter’s status as 
a queen.- We have, however, inscriptions mentioning harlots 
with names ending in devi. Even if Karpiragri’s mother 
was the secondary queen or concubine of some ruler, we may 
think that she was originally a harlot, but was later married 
to or associated with aking, while Karpiraéri had been born 
before her mother was associated with the ruler. The name of 
Karpiraéri’s mother is Mahéri Mahinadevi, the epithet 
mahdri being undoubtedly the same as Oriya mahdri (Prakrit 
mehari) meaning a songstress or dancing girl or a Devadasi 
or harlot. Secondly, Karpirasri is stated to have belonged 
to the Kagyapa-gotra. This appears to have been the gotra 
of one of her direct female ancestors, who first took to the pro- 
fession of a harlot.* 

The third point to be noticed in this connection is that 
Karpirasri is described as Salonapura-mahdvihara-vinirgata, i.e. 
hailing from Salonapura-mahavihara. Since the Devadasis are 
generally associated with Brahmanical temples, one may doubt 
that the harlots in question were residents of the monastery at 
Salonapura and may suggest that Salonapura-mahavihara has 
been used as the name of the locality where the harlots lived, 
the entire area under the possession of the Salonapura monas- 
tery or the village or township around it being known under 
that name as in the case of the town of Bihar (i.e. Bihar-sharif) 
and the Bihar State, both names essentially derived from the 
word vihéra meaning a Buddhist monastery originally standing 
at the site or in the vicinity of the modern town of Bihar called 
Bihar-sharif by the Muhammadans. 

But there is some proof to show that Devaddsis were main- 
tained in the early medieval period not only in the Brahmani- 
cal temples but also in the Buddhist shrines at least in Eastern 
India. There was therefore no difference in this respect bet- 
ween the Brahmanical and Buddhist temples in the area and 
age to which the Ranagiri plates belong. Thus Karpirasri and 
probably also her mother, if not her maternal grandmother 
as well, had really been Devadasis attached to the Buddhist 


1. See Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIIL, p. 244, text line 7. 
2. According to a Bengali saying, one having no gotra can claim the 
Katyapa-gotra, Cf. also Brough, Gotrapravaramaiijari, p. 171. 


204 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIZVAL INDIA 


temple in the mahdvihéra at Salonapura (modern Solampur 
near Jajpur) before she went to king Karna’s harem, She 
may have been purchased by the king from the authorities of 
the monastery. 

Bhagavanlal Indraji published an inscription embedded 
in the wall of a temple of the Sun-god on the western side of 
the tank called Daksina-manasa near the Visnupada at Gaya 
in the Indian Antiquary, Vol. X, 1881, pp. 341ff. Dated in 
the Buddha-parinirvana year 1883 (probably 1270 A.D.), this 
inscription records the construction of a Gandhakufi by Puru- 
sottamasimmha, the son of Kamadevasirhha and grandson of 
king Jayatungasirnha of the Kama country (probably Kumaun 
in the Himalayas or Kaman in the Bharatpur District, 
Rajasthan). The expression gandhakuti originally meant the 
Buddha’s private chamber in a Buddhist establishment and 
later a shrine where the Buddha’s image was worshipped in 
a Buddhist monastery. The Buddhist temple in question is 
said to have been built for the merit of Manikyasimha, the 
deceased son of Purusottamasimha’s daughter Ratna$ri, with 
the help of the local Chinda king and of king Asokavalla of the 
Sapadalaksa country (the Siwalik hills or the land around 
Sakambhari or Sambhar in the Jaipur District, Rajasthan), 
both Purusottamasimha and Asgokavalla probably being pil- 
grims to Gayé or leading retired lives at the holy place. 

Verse 12 of the said inscription has been read and trans- 
lated as follows : 


pijah pijyatamasya paricama-gatair = vddyais = trisandhyam sada 

Rambha-sannibha-bhavinibhir = abhitas = cetibhir = atyadbhutam| 

nytyantibhir = ananga-langima-gatair = ggit-adi-rangair = ima 

yasmat =santi hi Sdsane Bhagavatah satkdra-vispharitak |/ 
“Since, in the religion of the Bhagavat (Buddha), worship is 
here [offered] to the most worshipful, always three times a day, 
by means of instrumental music in the highest key (paficama- 
gata) together with Rambha-like Bhavinis and Cefis dancing 
round wonderfully with mirth in singing and so on, in a way 
appertaining to the unions of Ananga (Kama)—[worship] 
increased by hospitable entertainments.” 

On the words bhdvini and cefi, Indraji observes as follows: 
“Bhavinis are the dancing girls attached to temples. Cefis are 


DECLNE OF BUDDHISM IN BENGAL 205 


maid-servants belonging to temples, who perform certain 
menial services as well as join with the Bhavinis in singing....” 

The word bhdvini in the sense of ‘a wanton woman’ is 
interesting since this meaning may have developed from its 
use in expressions like Hari-bhavini, ‘devoted to Hari’ probably 
often applied to dancing girls attached to Vaisnava temples. 


Cuarter XIII 
RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 
I 


It is now admitted that the loose socio-religious organi- 
sation called Hinduism absorbed in it, in the course of its gradual 
development, contributions of various racial and cultural ele- 
ments, one of them being Aryan. A large number of concep- 
tions associated with Hindu religion and thought is believed 
to be Nonaryan in origin. A great deal of the Epic and 
Puranic myths and much of our cultural and social and other 
usages are supposed to be a legacy from our pre-Aryan ances- 
tors. The attitude towards suicide, as revealed in Indian litera- 
ture of the pre-British period, seems to suggest that the Aryans 
abhorred it while certain influential Nonaryan elements in 
the population approved of it, at least under special circums- 
tances, and that the Aryan approach to the problem was gra- 
dually evershadowed by Nonaryan ideas relating to suicide. 

According to the Yajurveda, ‘“Those who have killed them- 
selves repair after death to the worlds of the Asuras which are 
enveloped in blinding darkness.” There is another Vedic 
passage which says, ‘One who desires heaven should not seek 
to die before the appointed span of one’s life is at an end.”? 
The Satapatha Brahmana and lsavasyopanisad agree to this view 
when they say that suicide does not lead one to heaven.* The 
same view is expressed in the Adi-parvan of the Mahdbhdarata.* 
Certain other authorities’ including Gobhila compare an 
Ghitagni (i.c. one who maintains the sacred fire in his house) 
Brahmana committing suicide with one killed by the Candalas 
in a defiant fight with them and say that his corpse should be 


1. Vaj. Sark, 40.33 cf. Brhad. Up., 1V.4.115 Utararémacarita, Act 1V 
(after verse 3). i 

2. See Medhatithi on Manu, VI.32; Kane, Hist. Dharm., Vol. II, 
. 927. 
Pe 980 Sab. Bro, X. 2.67; Ma, 3. 

4 179.20. 

5. See Kane, op. e't., Vol. 11, pp. o24ff.; Vol. IIL, pp. 939, 949 
Vol. PV, pp. 6o3ff. 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 207 


cremated by Siidras without proper cermonies. According 
to the Dharmasitra of Vasistha,! ‘‘Whoever kills himself be- 
comes guilty of a mortal sin and his sapindas have to perform 
no death rites for him; a man becomes a self-killer by destroy- 
ing himself by entering wood-fire or water, by striking self with 
clubs or stones or weapons, by taking poison or being hanged 
on ropes.” The same authority quotes a verse saying that “‘a 
Brahmana who through affection performs the last rites of one 
that has committed suicide, must undergo the penance of 
Candrayana with Taptakrcchra.”* The Vasistha Dharmasitra 
also prescribes a Prayaschitta for merely resolving to commit 
suicide even when no attempt is actually made.* Parasara 
states that, if a man or woman commits suicide by hanging 
through extreme pride or rage or through affection or fear, he 
or she falls into hell for 60,000 years. Harita quoted by 
Apastamba® puts suicide on the same footing as homicide and 
condemns it even as a Prayascitta for a great sin committed 
although, as will be seen below, some authorities allow suicide 
in various ways as Prdyascitta for the Mahapatakas committed. 
Manu says that no water is to be offered and no rites, such 
as the sapindikarana, are to be performed for persons who have 
committed suicide. Gautama, YaAjiavalkya and Visnu are 
also of the same opinion.’ According to Yama, quoted in.the 
Mitaksar@,® for such persons there should be no afauca (cere- 
monial impurity) observed, no water offered, no tears shed, 
no cremation and last rites performed. Vrddha-Yajfiavalkya 
and Chagaleya, quoted by the same authority, however, 
concur that, in the case of persons guilty of suicide, a rite called 
Narayana-bali should be performed after a year and then their 
Sraddha maybe celebrated.® The Nagara-khanda section of the 
Skanda Purdna says that Srdddha may be performed for persons, 
who have committed suicide or met a violent death, on the 
fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of a month.!° 
1, 23.14-15. 
2. 1, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 924. 
3. 23.18, 
4. IV. 1-2. 
& Eres. 15-17. 
a SiIt: 6; Vise. Dh. S., 22.56. 
8, aj., I11.6. 
9g. Loc. cit. 
10. Ch, 219, verses 19-21; Kane, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 525: 


ae 
On 





208 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Although, suicide is thus generally condemned by many 
ancient Indian writers of great authority, there is another side 
of the picture. Manu and several other DharmaSastrakaras in- 
cluding Y4jfiavalkya, Gautama, Vasistha and Apastamba 
allow suicide in different forms as Prayascitta, involving death, 
to atone for the commission of Mahdpatakas or great sins, such 
asincest.1. In this connection, it is interesting to note that some 
of the ordeals, so popular with the medieval Indian courts, 
involved death of the litigant.* According to some Sastrakaras 
like Atri® and many of the Puranic writers, old men above 
70, very weak persons who cannot observe the rules of physical 
purification, those who have no longer any desire for worldly 
pleasures and those who have no more duties or tasks to perform, 
may be allowed tostart on the Mahdprasthdna (the last journey 
to meet their death) or to die at Prayaga (Allahabad). In 
such cases, proper afauca had to be observed and the usual water 
offering and Sréddha should have to be performed. 

There is evidence to show that suicide under particular 
circumstances was popular in India even in very early times; 
but such oppositions as noticed in the works on law and usage 
came to be more popular, as days passed by, till ultimately 
a section of writers regarded the Mahaprasthana and suicide on 
the part of old men by falling down from a precipice and in 
fire, as forbidden for the Kali age. But the great popularity 
enjoyed by various kinds of religious suicide in medieval India 
can be gauged by the Epic and Puranic injunction: ‘You 
should not pass over your wish about dying at Prayaga on 
account of the words of the Veda or the words of the people.”5 
‘The Adi-khanda of the Padma Purdna* even says, ‘“‘A man, who 
suffering from no diseases, having no deficiency as to his limbs 
and being in full possession of five senses, burns in cowdung 
fire, remains honoured in heaven for as many years as there are 
pores on the whole of his body.” Jainism, although it lays 


1. Manu,, XI. 73, 90-913 Yaj., 111.248, 253; Gaut., 23.1; Vas. Dh.S., 
20.22; cf. 13.4; Ap. Dh.S., 1.9.25.1-3 and 6. 

2. See Sircar, The Successors of the Sétavéhanas, 1939, pp. 354ff- 

3. Verses 218-19. 

4. Cf. Kane, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 926. 

5. Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 606. 

6. Adi-khanda, 44.3; cf. Matsa Purdna, 107. 9-10. 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 209 


particular emphasis on non-injury to living beings, encourages 
religious suicide called sallekhana.* 

The antiquity of the practice of religious suicide in India 
is suggested by an instance quoted by Alexander’s historians. 
An Indian gymnosophist from Taxila, named Kalanos, who 
accompanied Alexander (336-323 B.C.), is stated to have 
burnt himself to death on a funeral pyre at Sousa, when at the 
age of 70 he was afflicted with a malady that made his life a 
burden.? According to Strabo, another Indian gymnosophist 
of Broach, named Zarmanochegas, who accompanied an 
embassy to Augusts Caesar (27 B.C.-14 A.D.), at Athens 
consigned himself to flames.* The seventh century Chinese 
pilgrim Hiuen-tsang speaks of religious suicide committed by 
Indians at Prayaga or Allahabad.‘ About 1030 A.D., the 
celebrated Muslim savant Al-Biriini says that religious suicide 
“‘was resorted to by those who are tired of life, who are dis- 
tressed over some incurable disease, some irremovable bodily 
defect or old age or infirmity”. He further observes, ‘‘This, 
however, no man of distinction does, but only Vaisyas and 
Sidras. Burning oneself is forbidden to Brahmanas and 
Ksatriyas by a special law. Therefore, these, if they want to 
kill themselves, do so at the time of an eclipse in some other 
manner or they hire somebody to drown them in the Ganges.’’§ 
According to the ‘Ain-i-Akbari, the Hindus committed religious 
suicide in the following ways—(1) starving, (2) burning one- 
self in cowdung-fire, (3) burying oneself in snow, (4) 
drowning oneself at the Ganga-sagara-sangama, and (5) killing 
oneself at Allahabad.® 

An interesting fact can be deduced from what has been 
said above about the ancient Indians’ attitude towards suicide. 
The act of suicide seems to have been mainly governed by 
certain social regulations and the king’s court had probably 
little to do with it. It has to be noticed that no fines, etc., 
have been prescribed by the authorities quoted above for the 


Kane, op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 927-28. 
Majumdar, The Classical Accounts of India, pp. 187, 200-01. 
Ibid., pp. 282, 452. 

Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, Vol. I, pp. 232-34. 
Sachau, Alberuni’s India, Vol. II, p. 170. 

See Kane, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 605, note 1373. 


RE wees 


210 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


commission of suicide. But the fact cannot be ignored that 
India is a vast country. The customs relating to suicide and 
the degree of its popularity, especially of the particular methods 
of self-immolation, could not have been the same in all parts 
of the country. Moreover in ancient India, there was often 
little distinction between the functioning of law within the 
jurisdiction of the society and that of the court. That suicide 
of various kinds was usually not an offence recognisable by 
ancient Indian courts, seems to be suggested by the fact that, 
according to Kalhana’s Rdjatarangini, any Brahmana of ancient 
Kashmir was entitled to begin a fast to death at the gate of 
the royal residence in order to force the king to try his case 
speedily and that there was a class of royal officers called Prayo- 
pave§-ddhikrta, i.e. superintendent of suicide by fast [in the 
royal palace].1 At least one authority of antiquity, however, 
makes a distinction between the punishment a person, attemp- 
ting to commit suicide, should receive at the king’s court and 
that he should suffer socially. This is Yama? who prescribes 
that, when a person attempting to commit suicide, by such 
methods as hanging, dies, his body should be smeared with 
impure things, but that, if he lives, he should be fined 200 
Panas. According to this authority, that person’s friends and 
sons should each be fined one Pana and then they should 
undergo the penance prescribed by the Sastras. 

P. V. Kane, author of the History of Dharmasastra, has 
grouped the types of suicide, allowed by various authorities, 
under the following heads : 

(1) suicide in different ways as a Prdyascitta for those who 

are guilty of any of the Mahdpatakas, viz. murder of 
a Brahmana, drinking wine, theft and incest ; 

(2) setting out on the Mahdprasthana by a hermit suffering 
from incurable diseases and unable to perform the 
duties of his order; 

(3) suicide committed by old men or those who cannot 
observe the rules of physical purification or who are 
so ill that their recovery is not expected, by killing 
themselves by falling froma precipice or in fire or by 


i VIL 14. 
2. 20-21. 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 211 


drowning or fasting or starting on the Mahdprasthana 
in the Himalayas or by jumping from a branch of 
the Aksaya-vafa at Prayaga; 

(4) suicide committed by householders in the ways stated 
in No. 3 above if their lives’ work is done, if they 
have no desire for worldly pleasures and do not desire 
to live or if they are Veddntins and are convinced of 
the ephemeral nature of life; 

(5) religious suicide at the confluence of the Ganga and 
the Yamuna at Prayaga and under the Vafa there 
and also at various other holy places; and 

(6) Satt committed by wives by means of Sahamarana, 
Sahagamana or Anvdrohona (burning oneself with the 
husband’s dead body) and Anugamana (burning one- 
self on hearing the news of the husband’s death ).1 

Among the holy places (especially the waters of particular 

rivers) commended for religious suicide, Prayaga or Allahabad 
is often mentioned in ancient Indian works including the Vana- 
parvan of the Mahabharata. The great poet Kalidasa, who 
flourished in the 4th and 5th centuries A.D., believed that 
people, killing themselves at Prayaga or under the Vafa tree 
there, became free from the cycle of births and deaths.? The 
Kiirma Purana* prescribes suicide in the Ganges especially at 
the Ganga-Yamun4-sangama at Prayaga and at Varanasi. The 
Padma Puréna* similarly says, ‘‘One who dies in the Ganga, 
knowingly or unknowingly, wilfully or unintentionally, secures 
heaven and salvation on death.” The Salya-parvan® commends 
Prthiidaka (modern Pehoa or Pehava on the northern bank of 
the Sarasvati) and the Matsya Purdna® the holy tirtha of Amara- 
kantaka, the source of the Narmada and the Mahanadi. The 
Padma Purana similarly commends suicide in the waters of the 
Narmada and the Kaveri.?, The Brahma Purdna* calls upon 
Brahmanas to secure salvation by suicide at Purusottama- 


1, Vol. IV, pp. 604-05. 
2. st 
3. Lge. 22; 1.37.1! 
4. Srsti-khanda, 60.65. 
5- Ch. Cm Bk vores 33-34- 
6, é. VETOES 34°35 
i aide, 16, 14-153 
& 177-253 cf. 68.75, 8 nal 177-16-17, 


212 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


ksetra or Puri. The Liriga Purdpa' says that Srisaila is as effi- 
catious for religious suicide as Avimukta or Varanasi. As we 
shall see below, an interesting verse attributed to the Kiirma 
Purana says that salvation is attained on death in the waters of 
any part of the Ganges, that at Varanasi it is attained on death 
in the waters as well as on the banks of the river and that at 
Ganga-sagara-sangama it is attained on death in the waters, 
on the banks, and even in the air. It seems that originally 
religious suicide in the waters of the Ganges (at Prayaga, 
Varanasi and Gangasagara) was popular, but that the popu- 
larity of the custom was later extended to other rivers and holy 
places. 

There are many instances of religious suicide quoted in 
early literary and epigraphic records. The story of the Iksvaku 
king Rama drowning himself with his followers in the waters 
of the Sarayii is well-known. We shall see below how the later 
Gupta king Kumfragupta (sixth century A.D.) is stated to 
have died at Prayaga either in the waters or in cowdung-cake 
fire, how Candella Dhanga (circa 950-1002 A.D.) is known to 
have committed suicide in the waters of the Ganga-Yamuna- 
sangama and Kalacuri Gangeyadeva Vikramaditya (circa 
1015-41 A.D.) committed suicide under the Aksaya-vafa at the 
same place. We shall also see how, according to Bilhana’s 
Vikramankadevacarita, the Calukya king Somesvara I Ahava- 
malla (1943-68 A.D.) committed suicide in the waters of the 
Tungabhadra. 

There are similar instances of Sati in early literary and 
epigraphic records. Alexander’s historians refer to a case of 
Sati committed in North-West India in the 4th century B.C. 
The story of Madri burning herself on the funeral pyre of her 
husband Pandu as given in the Mahabharata is well known. 
The Nanduru (Guntur District, Andhra Pradesh) earthen pot 
inscription of the third century A.D. seems to record one of 
the earliest instances of Sati committed by an ordinary house- 
holder’s wife.6 The Eran (Saugor District, Madhya-Pradesh ) 

1. T, 92. 168-69. 
ca Se RV. 150 and 62) refers to the practice among the Kathacan 
pene See Majumdar, op. cits, p. 259. 


‘ Mabd., 1. 95.653 ef. I. 125.31. 
Sircar, Stud. Soc, Adm. Anc. Med. Ind., Vol. I, pp. aiofl 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 213 


inscription speaks of the Sati committed by the queen of a 
Central Indian ruler named Goparaja in 510 A.D.1 

In the late medieval period some sort of revulsion of feeling 
against religious suicide was gradually developing in some 
sections of writers in various parts of India. This is not only 
evident from the fact referred to above that Mahdprasthana and 
suicide, prescribed for old men, by falling into fire or from a 
precipice, were regarded by many authors as Kalivarjya,? but 
also by the attempt of authors like Nilakantha, commentator 
on the Mahabharata, to explain verses prescribing religious 
suicide, in a different way.* In his Tristhalisetu, Narayana- 
bhatta says that no one has authority to commit suicide at 
Prayaga after abandoning one’s old parents, young wife and 
children requiring support, nor should a woman, who is preg- 
nant or who has young children or who has no permission 
from her husband, commit suicide at that place. A section 
of the late Ndaradiya Purana similarly says that a woman should 
not burn herself on the funeral pyre of her husband, if she has 
young children or is pregnant or has not attained puberty or is 
in her monthly sickness at the time.’ Although some medieval 
digests allow religious suicide for people of all communities, the 
Tirthaprakéfa (part of Mitramisra’s Viramitrodaya, first quarter 
of the 17th century) confines it to non-Brahmanas only.* But 
in Eastern India, the customs of Sati and Garigdydtra (i.e. 
travel of old men to the banks of the Ganges to breathe their 
last in its waters) became even more popular in the late 
medieval period. Hook-swinging on the occasion of the 
Cadaka-paja became another form of self-torture popular in 
the eastern part of the country during the age in question. 

The British Government, established over wide regions 
of India about the last quarter of the 18th century, assumed 
in the beginning a policy of strict neutrality in the religious 
and social matters of the Indian people. Soon, however, this 
policy of benevolent neutrality came into conflict with the 


1. Sircar, Select Inscriptions, Vol. I, 1965 ed., pp. 345-46. 

2. Kane, op. cit., Vol. IL, p. 939; Vol IV, p. 608. 

3. On Vana-parvan, 85.83. 

4 CE, Kane, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 609. 

gz & 1. 7. 52-53. 
Cf. Kane, loc, cit. 


2i4 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANGIENT AND wepievai. inpiA 


humane and pregressive ideas which animated liberal English- 
men working in the administration of the country. Considera- 
tion of humanity impelled them to co-operate with a 
gradually developing school of Indian reformers to remove the 
evils including those discussed above, which prevailed in Hindu 
society under the sanction of religion and usage. The famous 
Regulation XIII declaring the Sati, one of the most horrible 
of such practices, illegal and punishable by courts, was passed 
on the 4th December, 1829. 


Il 


In the Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. X, June, 1934, pp. 
322-31, B.C. Sen edited the Sundarban (Rakshaskhali) copper- 
plate grant, dated Saka 1118, belonging to a ruler of Southern 
Bengal, whose name was read as sri-Madommanapila. In the 
Indian Culture, Vol. I, April, 1935, pp. 679-82, we made an 
attempt to improve upon the reading and interpretation of the 
record as published by Sen and suggested inter alia that the 
name of the ruler was very probably srimad-Dommanapila. 
This suggestion and some others were later supported by R.C. 
Majumdar in the History of Bengal, Dacca University, Vol. I, 
p. 222, note, The inscription was re-edited by R. K. Ghoshal 
in the Epigraphia Indica, Vol. XXVII, pp. 119ff., where some 
of our views were commented upon, while some of them were 
accepted. 

As regards the name of the ruler in question, Ghoshal 
seems to be inclined to prefer Madommanapaéla to Dommana- 
pala suggested by us. In this, he apparently ignores the im- 
portant fact that a mame like Madommana is not known to 
have been borne by any Indian in any period of history, while 
Domana (no doubt the same as Dommana) is a fairly popular 
name even now in Bengal and the neighbouring regions.t That 
the name was popular among the Vaidyas of Bengal also in 
early times is proved by the mention of Domanadasa in 
Bharatamallika’s Candraprabha (Saka 1597) and of Damanasena 
(the same as Domana°) in Kavikanthahara’s Sadvaidygkula- 
parjika (Saka 1575) as the ancestors réspectively of the Dasas 


1. Gf, Ind. Cult., Vol. Il, p. 152. 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 215 


and the Senas among the Vaidyas.1 Another interesting fact 
is that the name Dommana=Domana=Damana may be of 
South Indian origin as we have the name Dommana (probably 
a variant of Dommana) in the southern records; cf. the 
Mangallu grant? of the Eastern Calukya king Amma II 
(circa 945-70 A.D.) and the Dibbida plates* (Saka 1191) of 
the Matsya chief Arjuna. As regards the South Indian asso- 
ciation of the Bengal Vaidyas, among whom the name Domana 
=Damana is found to have been popular even during the 
medieval period, we have elsewhere‘ observed, ‘“The present 
day Ambasthas of the Tamil land and Malabar (their early 
distribution in South India may have been wider) appear to 
be referred to as Vaidya in inscriptions dating from the seventh 
century.5 Their entry into Bengal during the rule of the Senas, 
hailing from Karnata or the Kanarese country of the Deccan, 
is very probable, as the Senas of Bengal must have patronized 
South Indians in the same way as the Muslim rulers of India 
entertained Musalmans of other countries at their courts. It 
is thus very probable that the crystallization of the professional 
community of the Vaidyas or physicians of Bengal into a 
caste was a result of their amalgamation with the tribal 
Ambastha-Vaidyas of Southern India. This seems to have 
been the background on which the theory identifying the 
Vaidyas with the Ambasthas of early Indian literature (Manu 
calling them physicians) was fabricated in the late medieval 


1. Candraprabha, Calcutta, B. S. 1269, p. 19 : Domanah Palaxjdmata 
Vaidyah Palo na vidyate | vatiiyo Dommnadasasya Vamanah kulavdn katham |] 
iti cintd na kartayyd Vimane bahavah gunéh || This Domanadasa was one of the 
ancestors of the Kulina Disas in the Vaidya community of Bengal. Accord- 
ing to the Sadvaidyakulapaijikd, Jamanasena was the grandson's great-grandson 
of Vinayaka whom tradition assigns to the age of Ballalasena (circa 1158- 
79 A.D.). Pamanasena of the Sadvaidyakulapafijikd is called Domanasena 
in the Candraprabha (p. 69). For the great popularity of the name Domana 
among the Vaidyas, see Candraprabhd, pp. 27, 69, 129, 212, 218, 233, 319, 
334) 359- 

2, An, Rep. S. Ind. Ep., 1917, Part I, para. 24. 

3. Ep. ai Vol. cat nee meine 

4 JRASB, Letters, Vol. XIV, p. 106, note 2. 

5. Ep. Ind., Vols, IX, p. 101; VII, pp. 317-21; XVII, pp. 291 ff.5 
Ind. Ant., 1893, pp. 57f. 


216 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL tNDIA 


period.” It may be added that the Senas themselves came to 
be regarded as Vaidyas in the Vaidya Kula-pafijikas.* Since 
Dommanapila bore a name that may have been South Indian 
in origin, was a subordinate apparently of the South Indian 
Senas and used the Saka era which was popular in the South 
and seems to have been popularised in Bengal by the Senas, 
I suggested that his family may have originally belonged to 
South India; but this has been regarded by Ghoshal as ‘“‘the 
absurdity of Dr. Sircar’s persistent and curious Southern com- 
plexes”. 

King Dommanapila made the grant in question when he 
was ‘sviya-mukti-bhiimau Dvarahajdke, i.e., at Dvarahataka which 
was his mukti-bhimi.* Ghoshal interprets the expression mukti- 
bhiimi as ‘the place of initiation’, without any regard to Sanskrit 
lexicons, and says, ‘‘Dr. D. C. Sircar asked if this term indicated 
Madommanapila’s imminent death!” His use of the note 
of exclamation clearly indicates that he discovered here an- 
other of my ‘absurdities’. But mukti-bhimi is apparently the 
same as the well-known mukti-ksetra which is often used as 
an epithet of holy places and means ‘a place where salvation is 
attainable on death’. That the Indian kings regarded death 
at a tirtha as especially meritorious is definitely known from 
numerous sources including Varahamihira’s Brhatsamhita, Ch. 
68, verses 19 : 

bhuktod samyag =vasudharh Sauryen = opdjitam =aSity-abdah | 

tirthe prénarhs = tyaktvd bhadro dev-dlayarh yati |] 

In connection with the merits of religious suicide which 


1, See JRASB, Vol. XIV, 1948, p. 106, note 2; also JUPHS, Vol, 
XVIII, pp 148-615 Sircar, Stud. Soc. Adm. Anc, Med. Ind., Vol. I, pp. 
rogff, ‘The village Vaidyas in South India are barbers. 

2, Gf. Sadoaidyakulapaijikd, Dacca, B.S. 1292, pp. 1-2 : purd Vaidya 
kul-odbhita-Ballalena mah-aujasé, It is interesting to note that, like Domana, 
the typical Southern name Ballala was extremely popular among the Vaidyas 
of Bengal. Cf. Candraprabhd, pp. 48, 126, 141, 151, 175, 176, 184, 189, 212, 
225, 238, 264, 319, 331, 332, 335, 338, 362, 403, 420. 

3. Dvarahataka was not the capital of Dommanapil: in that case, 
the charter would have been probably issued from there, Sifnilar mention 
of the place from where a grant (recorded in a charter issued from the capital) 
was made by a king is also found in other records. The Nagari plates (Ep. Ind:, 
Vol. XXVIII, pp. 2g5ff.) of Anangabhima III, e.g., say that the 
king made certain grants ‘when he was at Abhinava-Vardpasydrh bhaganatah 


RELIGIOUS SUICIDE 217 


was popular with most classes of Indians in the medieval period, 
the importance of the holy waters of the Ganga and other rivers 
is often specially mentioned. The Sabdakalpadruma (s.v. ganga), 
€.g., quotes the following verses from the Karma Puraya : 

Garigayam jranato mytua muktim=apnoti manavak | 

a-jidndd = brahma-lokafi=ca yati n=dsty=atra samsayah |/ 

Gargayam ca jale mokso Varanasyam jale sthale | 

antarikse ca Gangdyam Gangd-sdgara-sangame |/ 

The practice of Garga-yatra (i.e. going to the bank of the 
Ganga with a view to die and to go to heavenas a result 
of such a meritorious death) is well known in Bengal even 
today.! The prevalence of the same custom also in other parts 
of India is indicated by P. Thomas who observes, “‘........ 
old people, on the point of death, make long journeys to 
Banaras or some other sacred city on the banks of the Ganges 
so that they may wash their sins away in the sacred stream or 
die in the waters. A dying man is often carried by his relatives 
to the Ganges and is held immersed knee-deep in the waters 
of the river. The banks of the Ganges at Banaras are as sacred 
as the Ganges itself and people of the neighbourhood who fall 
sick and are not expected to survive, are made to live in huts 
on the banks of the river till they die.”* The celebrated Abbé 
Dubois also points to the custom as well as similar others when 
he asks. “*...... how shamelessly they violate nature by placing 
the sick, whose recovery is despaired of, on the banks of the 
Ganges, or of some other so-called holy river, so that they may 
be drowned by the floods or devoured by crocodiles ? Have 
they ever attempted to restrain the frenzy of those fanatics who, 
in their mistaken devotion, foolishly allow themselves to be 
crushed under the wheels of the car of their idols, or throw 
themselves headlong into the stream at the junction of the 
Ganges and the Jumna ?”* Now Dommanapila’s plate was 
found on the small island of Rakshaskhali on the southern 
seaboard of West Bengal only about 12 miles due east of the 








1 t popularity of the practice as late as the nineteenth cen- 
su cay So iemonstrated by the newspapers of those days. Cf. B. N. 
Sarwadpatre Sckaler Kathé, Vol. 1 (B.S. 1344), p. 150; Vol. IE 


e ‘S = 48) PP. 535-36, 
Religion, Customs and Manners, p. 93. 
bof, Hindu Mamers, Customs and Ceremonies, trans, Beauchamp, rd ed., 


218 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


celebrated tirtha of Ganga-sagara-sangama at the mouth of the 
river Bhagirathi or Ganga popularly called Hooghly. We have 
seen how salvation was regarded as the result of death in the 
waters of the Ganga at any place, how the same was believed 
to be obtained from death at Varanasi either in the waters of 
the Gariga or on its banks and how death not only in the waters 
and on the banks of the Ganga but also in the air at Ganga- 
sagara-sangama was regarded as equally meritorious. That 
the locality of Dvarahataka lay probably in the vicinity of the 
Ganga as well as of Ganga-sagara-sangama seems to be indi- 
cated by the discovery of the plate in. the neighbourhood and 
by the fact that Dvarahataka is said to have been situated in 
the small district of Parva-Khatika or the Eastern Khadi which 
was bounded on the west by the lower course of the Ganga.! 
The second part of the name Dvarahataka is the same as Sanskrit 
hat{aka, modern °ha{a which is the common name-ending of 
many localities; but whether the first word in the name of our 
locality indicates one of the ‘doors’ or mouths through which 
the Ganga flows into the sea and actually refers to a locality 
within the Ganga-sagara-sangama area cannot be determined 
in the present state of our knowledge.*. There is, however, 
hardly any absurdity in the suggestion that Dommanapila 
went to Dvarahataka with a view to dying in the waters of 
the Ganga for attaining salvation and made the grant in 
question on that sacred occasion. In that case only is the 
epithet sviya-mukti-bhimi, applied to the locality, easily explan- 


1. History of Bengal, Dacca University, Vol. I, pp. 25-26. 

2. There is a place called Dwarahat in the Almora District, Uttar 
Pradesh. The Candraprabhd (pp. 145, 155, 185, 192, 309, ¢tc.) mentions 
Dvarahatta as a seat of the Bengal Vaidyas, J.N. Gupta identifies this place 
with Dwarhata near Haripal in the Hooghly District of West Bengal. It 
may be noted that, though the word dodra in the sense of the mouth of a 
river is not generally found in the Sanskrit lexicons and the name Gafga- 
dvara is applied to Hardwar where the Gafiga enters into the plains from the 
Himalayas, the Lunsadi copper-plate inscription (Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, 
pp. 74ff.) of 668-69 A.D. appears to use the word in the said sense, It 
records the gift of some land in a village situated at the Madhumati-dvara 
which has been interpreted as ‘the mouth of the river Madhumati (i.e, the 
moderri Nikol Creck)’, The localities mentioned in the enumeration of 
the boundary of the gift land support the said interpretation of the word 
dodra. In Tamil, the expression mukla-dodra means the mouth of a river 
especially where it falls into the sea (Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXV, pp. 98-99). 


RELIGIOUS suICIDE 219 


able. I do not see how it can be interpreted in any other equally 
satisfactory way. 

Of kings ending their lives in the waters of the holy rivers 
we have the well-known instances of Candella Dhanga (c. 950- 
1002 A.D.), who committed suicide in the Triveni at Prayaga 
(Allahabad),! and Calukya Someévara I Ahavamalla (1043- 
68 A.D.) who drowned himself in the waters of the Tunga- 
bhadra described as ‘the Ganga of Daksinapatha’.* Accord- 
ing to Bilhana’s Vikramdnkadevacarita, the Calukya king’s 
proposal to end his life in the Tungabhadra was hailed by his 
ministers as a right act, and the king made‘grants of a heap of 
gold before entering into the waters. On the authority of 
Hindu scriptures, Colebrooke speaks of the custom of making 
gifts by a dying man as he says, ‘‘When at the point of death, 
donation of cattle, land, gold, silver or other things, according 
to his ability, should be made by him, or, if he be too weak, 
by another person in his name.”* There is thus no absurdity 
in Dommanapila granting a village on a similar occasion. 

Verse 12 of the Jabalpur inscription‘ of Yasahkarna says 
that Kalacuri Gangeyadeva Vikramaditya (circa 1015-41 A.D.) 


1. Cf. Ep. Ind., Vol. I, p. 146 (Khajuraho inscription, verse 55) : Raksitod 
kgitim: = ambu-rafi-rasandm =elém=anany-dyatith jivitod Saradésh Satazh samadhikarh 
4ri-Dhanga-prthoipatift | Rudram mudrita-locanah sa hrdaye dhydyan japan Jahnavi- 
Kalindyoh salile kalevara-parityigdd=agén=nirytim. For religious suicide at 
Prayaga, see JUPHS, Vol. X, 1937, pp. 65ff. See also Kane, History of Dharma- 
Sastra, Vol. TV, pp. 604-13, on such suicides, and above, pp. 206ff. 

2. Vikramankadevacarita, Canto TV, verses 59-68: utsaige Tungabha- 
drayés=tads=ega Siva-cintayé | vdiichémy=aharmh nirdkartwh  deha-graha-vidam- 
banam |] ydto='yam=upakéraya kéyah Srikan;ha-sevayé | kytaghna-vratam=<lasya 
patra tatra visarjjanam || tath=eti vacanam réjfah pratyapadyanta mantrinah | 
ucit-dcarane kesém n=otsaha-caturart manaf |/ atah katipayair—eva praydnaib 
pronayicpriyah | téth ksonipatir—adraksid—=Daksindpatha-Jahnavim |] Tungabhadré 
narendrena ten=dmanyata manind | taranga-hastair=utksipya ksipant=iv=endra- 
mandire |/ uddanda tena dindire pinda-paiktir=adrSyata | vimdna-harhsa-mdl=eva 
prahité padma-sadmané || atidiirara samutplutya nipatadbhit sasikarai | ardjata 
dhard-candrah pratywigata iva grahaih || — tair=avatirya dhaureyo dhirdparh 
dharani-patit. | sndtod Candia-carana-dvandva-cinté-paro="bhavat || adatta cm 
Gparicchirnam=akhinnah kéftcan-otkaram | na kcchre="pi mahabhagas= tyaga- 
vrata-pardnmukhah || pravisya kaptha-daghne—tha sarit-toye jagama sah | 
kallola-tiirya-nirghosait=Candraciidémanel: prim || 

3. Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. I, p. 155-, 

4. Ep. Ind., Vol. Ul, p. 4 : prapte Prayaga-vata-mila-nivesa-bandhau 
sérdharh Satena grhipibhir=amutra muktim. 


220 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


attained mukti, i.e., committed religious suicide, at Prayaga 
together with his hundred wives. Prayaga was thus the mukti- 
bhimi of Gangeya and those of his queens who died with their 
husband. The Adbhutaségara’ states how king Ballalasena of 
Bengal gave numerous gifts at the time of committing religious 
suicide, together with his queens, in the waters of the Ganga. 
King Kalasa (1063-89 A.D.) of Kashmir, ‘knowing, in his 
helpless condition, that his life was about to escape, hurried to 
proceed to a firtha to die”, and there he dedicated a gold 
image of the god worshipped at the place.? 

Ghoshal’s explanation of the expression raina-traya, which 
not only occurs in the present record and the Manahali plate 
of Madanapila, as pointed out by him, but also in such other 
inscriptions as the Ashrafpur plate (B)® of the Khadgas, the 
Kailan (or Kailain) plate of Sridharanarata* and the Tipperah 
plate’ of Bhavadeva, is clearly wrong. It can neither be “‘right 
over the wealth [deposited underground]”, as suggested by 
Ghoshal, nor “‘a tax levied for the maintenance and upkeep 
of big Buddhist establishments”, as suggested by others and 
referred to by him. Ratna-traya means primarily a Buddhist reli- 
gious establishment symbolising the Buddhist trinity, viz., the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, worshipped there.* There are 
instances of kings granting land in favour of the ratna-traya. 
Thus the expression ratnatraya-bahih of Dommanapiala’s inscrip- 
tion means to say that the village in question was granted with 
the exclusion of the area around the Buddhist establishment in 
it or, better, the area in the possession of a Buddhist establish- 
ment. Similarly, ratnatraya-rajasambhoga-varjita of the Mana- 
hali plate means ‘‘excluding lands enjoyed by the Buddhist 
establishment and those belonging to the king’s Khas Mahal’. 


1. Cf. Ojha, Papacograply of India (Hindi), 1918, p. 184, note a: 
nénd-déna-cit-dmbu-sarncalanatah iirydtmaja-sai Gatigayars 

idare perah bhary-dnuyato gatak. Cf. N.G. Majumdar, Inscriptions of Bengal, 
Vol. III. Pe 147. ‘The expression nirjara-puram gatah means ‘gone to heaven 
(i.e. Cane it is speak 


Triveni’ * rhe area fe Envi, ed. Majumdar, p. 38). 
2. 


Part ti, PP. oy 15+ 


CuarTer XIV 


ARDHANARI-NARAYANA 

An interesting conception of Laksmi-Narayana is noticed 
in the Gaya Sitala temple inscription of the local ruler Yaksa- 
pala who flourished in the latter half of the eleventh century 
A.D.! Verse 12 of this epigraph runs as follows— 

Maundditya-Sahasralinga-Kamalardhaigina-Nardyana- 

-dva-Somesvara-Phalgunatha-Vijayadity-Ghvayanam —kyti | 

$a prasddam-=acikarad-=divisadém Kedaresvarasya ca 

khydtasy-=Ottaramanasasya khananam sattram Vate c-=aksaye || 
The stanza says that Yaksapala excavated (or re-excavated) 
the Uttaramanasa tank and established a sattra (free feeding 
centre) near the Aksaya-vata and also raised a temple for the 
following gods— (1) Maunaditya (Sun-god), (2) Sahasra- 
linga (Siva), (3) Kamalardhangina-Narayana, (4) the two 
gods called Someévara (Siva), (5) Phalgunatha (probably 
Visnu ), (6) Vijayaditya (Sun-god) and (7) Kedaresvara (Siva). 
It appears that the gods had been installed for worship by 
various persons, and Yaksapala built a temple for accommo- 
dating all of them. 

The third name in the list of deities for whom the temple 
was built by Yaksapala is interesting, because Kamalardhan- 
gina-Narayana means ‘Narayana, one half of whose body is 
Kamala (Laksmi)’.2 The conception of such a combined 
form of Laksmi and Narayana was doubtless imitated from the 
well-known Ardhanarigvara form of Siva, in which the right 
half represents Siva and the left his: consort Parvati. This 
combined form of Laksmi-Narayana has not been clearly traced 
in the Puranas, though Yaksap4la’s inscription proves its pre- 
valence in Eastern India in the eleventh century A.D. 

Recently P. Pal has drawn our attention to the come 
bined form of Laksmi and Narayana in a bronze sculpture and 
in a pafa, both from Nepal, as well as in a dhyana quoted in 


1B, had, Vo Vol. XXXVI, pp. 92 ff. 


3 ‘Ardhaniriovara first occurs on Kaniska’s coin and a Mathura 
miniature relief. Bardesanes (c. 154-222 A.D.) learnt about it from an 
Indian embassy visiting Syria. Sce Prdcyavidyd-tarangini, cd. Sircar, pp, 
218 ff.; JAS, Vol. IX, 1967, p. 181. 


222 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the Tantraséra.1 But the sculpture and painting have been 
assigned to the thirteenth century A.D. and the dhyana stanza 
may be ofa still later date. The image referred to in our ins- 
cription, which is earlier than the specimens alluded to by 
Pal, was under worship at Gaya in Bihar, so that the concep- 
tion does not appear to have originated in Nepal, but was 
imported from East India to that land. From this point of 
view, the reference to the combined deity in the Sitala temple 
inscription is of considerable importance. The prevalence of 
the worship of the said deity in Eastern India is also suggested 
by the dhyana in the Tantrasdra which was compiled by the 
Bengali Tantric named Krsnananda Agamavagiéa in the 
seventeenth century. In this connection, it may be mention- 
ed that the Brahmavaivarta Purdna seems to refer to a form of 
Visnu’s consort, the left half of which represented Mahalaksmi 
and the right half Radha, and also to one of Visnu having 
two arms on the right side and four arms on the left. The 
latter may be a combined image, the left half being the wife of 
the right half. No specimen of such images, however, seems 
to be known. 

The Nepalese bronze image is now preserved in the 
Museum fiir Volkerkunde at Basel in Switzerland while the 
Nepalese pafa is at present in the collection of the Ramakrishna 
Mission Institute of Culture, Calcutta. In the sculpture, the 
eight-armed composite deity, with its right half represented as 
male and left half as female exactly as in the Ardhanarisvara 
form of Siva and Parvati, stands in the sama-pada posture on 
a double-petalled lotus pedestal. While the plain diaphanous 
garment clings to the right leg, the left leg is draped in cloth 
with a floral design. The necklace, waist-band and anklets 
are common to both halves of the body; but the right ear is 
adorned with a kundala and the four right arms with argada, 
while the left ear has a large ring and the four left arms have 
ornaments of a type different from that of those on the right 


1. Jour, As. Soc., Vol. V, 1963, pp. 73 ff. 
2, See Sircar, The Sakta Pithas, pp. 74 ff. 

3. Prakrti-khanda, XXXV. 10-12— 

tad-vém-dinéo Mahdlaksmir=daksin-amsai=ca Réadhiké |... 
Kynass=tad=gauraven=aiva dvidhé-riipo babhiioa ha || 
daksin-dinsai=ca dvibkujo vém-dméas=ca caturbhujak | 


ARDHANARI-NARAYANA 223 


arms. As regards the attributes, the right hands bear respect- 
ively cakra (discus), gad@ (mace), gankha (conch-shell) and 
lotus-mark, and the left hands, likewise, the pusteka (manu- 
script), darpana (mirror) and kalasa (water-vessel), the fourth 
left arm being broken. 

In the pafa, the central eight-armed figure of the mandala 
is white and stands in the samapada-sthanaka pose on a double- 
petalled lotus in a shrine. The right half of the figure is male, 
the left half being female and having the feminine breast indi- 
cated by a large circle. The right leg is covered to the knee 
only; but the left leg is covered down to the ankle. Near the 
right foot of the figure is Garuda and near the left foot is what 
is described as karma (tortoise). The attributes in the four 
right hands are respectively—(1) cakra, (2) Sankha, (3) gada 
and (4) padma, while those respectively in the left hands are— 
(1) pustaka, (2) utpala, (3) darpana and (4) kalasa. 

An epigraph at the bottom of the pafa, dated in Nepala- 
varsa 383, Karttika-su-di 11 (4th November, 1261 A.D.), 
begins as follows— 

Om namo Bhagavate Vasudevdya || 

Hima-kund-endu-sadrfar padma-kaumodaki-punah(dharam) | 

Sarikha-cakra-dharam danda(bimbam) vdme ca kalasarh tatha | 

darpanam=ulpalam vidyd Vaisnavarh Kamal-dnvitam | 

patu daitya-nirakdra trahi narh(mam) Purusottamah(ma) || 
The dhyana quoted in the epigraph seems to represent the 
figure as a Vaisnava (Visnu) image united with Kamala and 
describes it as Purusottama, also called Bhagavat Vasudeva in 
the introductory margala. The figure is described as white and 
as bearing the attributes padma, kaumodaki (Visnu’s mace), 
Sankha and cakra (in the right hands) and in the left—kalasa, 
darpana, utpala and vidya (manuscript). 

The Tantraséra stanza runs as follows— 

Vidyuc-candra-nibharh vapuf Kamalaja-Vaikunthayor-=ekatam 

praptam sneha-rasena ratna-vilasad-bhisa-bhar-dlamkrtam | 

vidyd-pankaja-darpanan manimayam kumbham sarojam gadam 

Sankham cakram:=amini bibhrad-=amitam difydc-=chriyam 

vak sada |/ 
‘Let the body of Kamalaja and Vaikuntha, which resembles the 
lightening and the moon, bears a load of ornaments endowed 
with jewels, is united in love and holds vidya, pankaja, darpana, 


224 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


manimaya-kumbha (bejewlled jar), saroja, gada, faikha and cakra, 

bestow unlimited prosperity on you.” 

It appears, however, that the conception of the combined 
form of the god Visnu and his consort was not confined to the 
eastern part of India. In a paper entitled ‘Some Laksmi- 
Narayana Images from Western India’, published in the 
Journal of Oriental Institute, Vol. XIV, 1965, pp. 392-96, Sm. 
Kalpana §. Desai rightly points to the prevalence of the said 
conception on the strength of the following two stanzas in the 
Silparatna (XXIII. 23, and XXV. 75)— 

(1) haste bibkrat sarasija-gada-Sankha-cakrani vidyam 
padm-Gdarsau kanaka-kalasam megha-vidyud-vilasam | 
vdm-otturiga-stanam. = aviral-akalpom = aslesa-lobhad = 
ckibhittarh vapur=avatu vak Pundarikaksa-Laksmyoh || 

(2) cakram vidyd-dara-gha{a-gada-darpandn padma-yugmar 
dorbhir = bibhrat surucirataram megha-vidyun-nibh-dbham | 
gadh-otkantha-vivasam = anisar Pundarikaksa-Laksmyor = 
ekibhiitarh vapur=avatu vah pita-kauseya-kantom |/ 

Both the stanzas speak of the ekibhutam vapuk (the two 
bodies combined into one) of Pundarikaksa (Visnu) and 
Laksmi. The attributes in the eight hands of the two deities 
are given as—(1) lotus, mace, conch-shell and discus for the 
god, and (2) manuscript, lotus, looking glass and golden jar 
for the goddess. The second verse also mentions the same 
attributes for the combined form of the two deities. 

L. K. Tripathi of Varanasi drew my attention to 
S.B. Deo’s paper entitled ‘Some Ardhanari Forms of Visnu’ 
appearing in the Bharati, Varanasi, Vol. X-XI, 1966-68, 
pp. 125-33. Deo describes twelve late medieval icons repre- 
senting the Ardhandri forms of Visnu in the Narayana temple 
in the Svathe area adjacent to the Sundari Chowk at Lalit 
Patan (Nepal), which has been assigned to the beginning of 
the eighteenth century. The twelve images bear the following 
labels which do not appear to have any known textual support 
—(1) KeSava-Laksmi, (2) Narayana-Sarasvati, (3) Madhava- 
Danti, (4) Govinda-Kanti, (5) Visnu-Danti, (6) Madhu- 
sidana-Vidhrti, (7) Trivikarama-Aticcha, (8) Vamana- 
Atipati, (9) Sridhara-Dhrti, (10) HrsikeSa-Mchini, (11) 
Damodara-Matima (?), and (12) Padmanabha-Dharmada. 
The attributes in the hands of the god are the usual Sarikha, 


ARDHANARi-NARAYANA 225 


cakra, gada and padma, although differently arranged in the 
different cases. As regards the attributes in the hands of the 
goddess, besides the usual ones referred to above, sometimes 
aksamald, puspamala, kamandalu, camara, vyajana, etc., have been 
mentioned. Of the four hands of Sarasvati, two are broken, 
the other two holding manuscript and lotus bud. 

Deo’s contention that the Ardhanari conception of Visnu 
developed in Nepal during the medieval period, “for which 
no iconographical precedents can be had in India so far as the 
Visnu forms arc concerned” does not take into consideration 
all the evidence at our disposal and is wrong. His attempt to 
explain away the clear evidence of the Silparatna is no doubt 
unfortunate. 

In connection with the Nepalese pata discussed above, it 
may be pointed out that the tortoise as the vehicle or emblem 
of the goddess Laksmi in the fafa does not appear to be known 
from early sources which generally represent the deity as 
standing or seated on the lotus.'_ In the modern mythology 
of Bengal and some other areas, Laksmi is said to have the 
Owl (pecaka, ulika) as her vdhana.* In other respects also the 
figures do not quite conform to the prescription of old texts; 
cf. what Gopinatha Rao has said about the goddess : ‘‘The 
figure of Laksmi should have only two hands when she is by 
the side of Visnu. But when she is worshipped in a separate 
temple, she should have four hands, and be seated upon a 
lotus of eight petals placed upon a simhdsana. In one of the 
two right hands she should hold a Jotus with a long stalk and 
in the other a bilva fruit. The left hands should carry an 
amytaghafa (a pot containing ambrosia) and a Sarikha respec- 
tively.”’* Of course this is what is known as the Gaja-laksmi, 


1. Gf. aravinda-sthitd and padm-dsana-sthd in the following dhydnas quoted 
in the Sabdakalpadruma, s.v. Laksmi: kantya Kaficana-sannibharh Himagiri-pra- 
khyai$=caturbhir=gajair=hast-otksipta-hiranmay-imrta-gajair=dsicyaménam Sriyam | 
bibhranam varam=abja-yugmam=abhayar hastaih —kirif-ojjavalém ksaum-dbaddha- 
nitamba-bimba-lalitérs  vande="ravinda-sthitém || Pés-dksamdlik-ambhoja-Sraibhir= 
ydmya-saumyayoh | padm-dsanastham dhydyec=ca Sriyari trailokya-mdtaram |/ 

2. The figure of Laksmi is now painted or made with that of an owl 
near her feet. Cf. Forei,ners in Ancient India ani Lakgmi ant Sarasvati in Art 
and Literature, ed. Sircar, pp. 123, 192. 

3. Elements of Hindu Iconography , Vol. 1, Part II, p. 374, 








226 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


i.e. Laksmi being bathed by two elephants from two sides hold- 
ing water-jars in their trunks. 

The manuscript, which seems to be unknown from early 
sources as an attribute of Laksmi, has been recognised by 
Pal as referring to the jiiana aspect of the goddess. He 
draws our attention to an image of Laksmi in the Vangiya 
Sahitya Praigad, which is known to hold a manuscript in one 
of the left hands,} to the Visnu Purana representing Laksmi as 
intellect,* and to the Tantrasdra stating that the Laksmi-kavaca 
ensures a person proficiency in all the branches of knowledge.* 
As we have scen, the Silparatna (by Srikumara who flour- 
ished in the sixteenth century, the work being originally 
written in the Malayalam script) mentions. vidyé or manus- 
cript apparently as one of the attributes of the goddess Laksmi. 

This aspect of Laksmi takes her quite close to the goddess 
Sarasvati who is usually conceived as vind-pustaka-dharini, i.e. 
holding the lute and the manuscript. In East Indian mytho- 
logy, Laksmi and Sarasvati are the two wives of Visnu® and 


1, R.D, Banerji, Easter Indian School of Medieval Sculpture, p. 211, 
plate LXII-a. 

2. Wilson’s trans., 1849, p. 60. 

3. Cf. vidydrthind sada seuya visese Vignu-vallabha |/ asyéé—=catur-aksari- 
Vignu-vanitayah kavacasya Sri-Bhagavén Siva tsir=Anusfup chando Vagbhavi devata 
Vagbhavarh bijarh Lajja Saktih Ramd kilakarh kdmabij-dtmakam kavacarh mama 
sukavitva-supanditya-sarvasiddhi-samrddhaye viniyogah || (Pal, op. cit., p. 76). 

4+ Devibhdgavata, IX. 4. 46. 

5. Gf. The well-known stanza— 

Eka bharyé prakrti-mukharé caftcald ca doitiya 

putro="py=cko bhuvana-vijayt Manmatho durnivérab | 

Sesah Saya Sayanam=udad'ir=vahanam Pannagérii 

smérarh smararh soa-gtha-caritara dara-bhitto Murérifs || 
See also Ep. Ind., Vol. XII, p. 13, and note the combined Narayana-Saras- 
vati image referred to above. The Devibhdgatata (IX.6) and Brakmavaivarta 
Puréna (II.6), which are apparently East Indian products of medieval 
times, say how Laksmi, Sarasvati and Gaga were originally the wives of 
Hari (Visnu) and how later Laksmi remained Hari’s wife, but Ganga and 
Sarasvati became the wives respectively of Siva and Brahman. 

Cf. Lakgmii Sarasoati Ganga tisro bhérya Harer=api | 

premné samis=tds=tisthanti satatar Hari-sannidhau |] 

(Devibhagavata, 1X.6.17) 

Gaccha Gange Siva-sthanam Brakma-sthanam Sarasvati | 

atra tisthatu mad-gehe susila Kamal-dlaya |/ 

(ibid., 1X.6.65) 


ARDHANARI-NARAYANA 227 


they are now also regarded in the popular mythology of 
Bengal as sisters, both being the daughters of Siva and 
Parvati,! even though their rivalry and quarrels are also pro- 
verbial. That there was a raprochement between the con- 
ceptions of Laksmi and Sarasvati seems to be further indicated 
by the Sarwvatsarapradipa quoted in S. M. Bhattacharya’s 
Purohitdarpan (Bengali) :* 

Paitcamyam pijayel=Laksmim puspa-dhiip-dnna-varibhih | 

masy-Gdhérark lekhanitt=ca pijayen=na likhet=tatoh |/ 

Maghe masi site pakse paticami ya Sriyah priya | 

tasydr pitrv-thna ev=ca karyah Sérasvat-otsavah || 
According to this, pen, ink-pot, etc., should be worshipped 
on the occasion of the worship of both Laksmi and Sarasvati 
on Magha-sudi 5 which is called Sri-paficami, i.e. paitcamt 
sacred to the goddess Sri or Laksmi, though Sarasvati is wor- 
shipped on that day in many parts of the country. 

If thus Laksmi and Sarasvati were both sometimes cor- 
ceived as the goddess of learning, we have probably an expla- 
nation of the marigala at the beginning of the Nagpur prafasti 
(Vikrama 1161) of the Paramaras, which runs as follows— 

Om namo Bharatyai | 

Prasdd-audaryo-madhurya-samadhi-samat-ddayak | 

yuvayor = ye gundh santi Vagdevyau te="pi santu nak |/* 
Here the devotee salutes the goddess Bharati (Sarasvati) and 
prays that the qualities of the two goddesses of learning may 
be bestowed on him. The qualities enumerated are prasdda, 
audarya, madhurya, somadhi, samatd, etc., which are, in reality, 
some of the qualities of good compositions as indicated in 
Dandin’s Kavyddar‘a and other works.‘ The two goddesses 
of learning may be Sarasvati and Laksmi. 

It is also said that, in parts , Sarasvati still remained with Visnu. For Saras- 
vati and Gayatri as the wives of the god Brahman, see, e.g., Padma Puréna, 
‘Uttara-khanda, Ch. 111. 
sami ane" a pare, cvaortieet oe 
Sarasvati are represented as the daughters of Siva and Parvati ‘in the 
Néradiya, Dharma and Kiirma Purdnas’ (Candimangalabodhini, Vol. 1, pp. 47, 89). 

2. B.S. 1368 ed., p. 245. 

3. See Ep. Ind., Vol. Il, p. 182. 

* aporccgis is 41— 

sah prasddaf samaté madhuryarh sukumér 
arthaxyaktir = udaratoam=ojab-kanti- Somheyeh | I 


228 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


In connection with the Ardhan&ri form of Visnu, ref- 
rence may be made to a similar form of the Sun-god mention- 
ed in works like the Agni Purana’ and Saradatilaka.* This 
aspect of the deity is sometimes regarded as a combination of 
Siva (Ardhanariévara) and Sirya (Sun-god) and seems to 
be given the name Martanda-Bhairava.* The Ardhanari from 
of the god Ganapati (GaneSa) is likewise mentioned in the 
Haldyadhastotra inscribed in 1063 A.D. in the Amaresvara 
temple at Mandhata in the Nimar District of Madhya Pardesh.* 


Prasida=graciousness of disposition, clarity of style; audarya, udaratua=mag- 
nanimity, depth of meaning; madhurya=sweetness of behaviour or style; 
saméadhi=intentness, attribution of one’s characteristic to another; samaté= 
impartiality, having similar sounds throughout (bandhesv=avisamam). 

1. 301.g—sind ir-drunam=isdne vim-drdha-dayitarh Ravim. For isdne, some 
manuscripts have Ifénam. 

2. Cf. 

hem-imbhoja-pravala-pratima-nija-rucith céru khaftanga-padmau 

cakrarh Saktirh ca pitas Srnim=atiruciram=aksamélam kapalam | 

hast-dmbhojair=dadhénar trinayana-vilasad=veda=vaktr-dbhirémarh 

Martandarh vallabh-drdhart manimaya-muku‘am hara-diptarh bhojémah || 

3. See Agni Purdna, 301.8; cf. Liga Purdna, 11.19.73 Matya Purana, 
55- 5-6. 

4- See Journ, Anc. Ind. Hist, Vol. I, p. 112; Ep. Ind., Vol. XXV, 
p. 175, verse 1; cf. Vol. I, p. 104. Qf. also Sakti-Ginapati describ ed in 
the Silparatna (Journ. As. Soc., Vol. VIII, 1966, No. 4, rp. 265-66, and 
JAIH, Vol. IV, in the press). 





CuapTeR XV 
MAHISAMARDINI 


The ten-armed Durga is generally worshipped in modern 
Bengal in her Mahisamardini aspect. She is fashioned in clay 
as standing with her right foot on a lion and with different 
weapons in her ten hands. The Asura, whom she is shown as 
overpowering, is represented as emerging from the neck of a 
headless buffalo, lying at her feet, with a khadga (scimitar) in 
his right hand. The head of the Devi’s spear is shown as piercing 
the chest of the demon. The goddess has a benign smile on 
her face, which seems to be quite unsuitable in one engaged in 
fierce fighting with an enemy. She is flanked on either side 
by her sons (Ganapati and KArttikeya) and daughters (Laksmi 
and Sarasvati), Sarasvati and Ganapati on the right and 
Laksmi and Karttikeya on the left. There is nothing in the 
expression and attitude of these deities to show that they are in 
any way interested in the battle which their mother is fighting 
with the demon. This also appears to be rather strange. 

What appears to be even more strange is that, according 
to the late mediaeval Bengali tradition, Durga goes in this 
form, along with her sons and daughters, to the home of her 
father Himdlaya on the 6th day of the bright fortnight of the 
month of Agvina and returns to the abode of her husband Siva 
on Mount Kailasa on the tenth day of the same fortnight. It 
is difficult to reconcile this conception of the Devi with her 
militant Mahisamardini form, because a lady is hardly ex- 
pected to move towards her parents’ place while fighting fiercely 
with an enemy, in the company of her children who are, how- 
ever, indifferent to the struggle. The fact is that, in Bengal, 
Durga is predominantly conceived as a village housewife just 
as Siva is conceived as a poor villager, and these conceptions 
have greatly influenced the local mythology of the goddess. 
In any case, the first definite reference to the above strange 

1. For a Bengal story explaining why Durga’s son Karttikeya pre- 
ferred to remain a Kumdra or bachelor by suggesting that it was in order to 


allay the fear of his mother that she might be si by her daughter-in-law, 
see Journ. Anc. Ind. Hist., Vol. I, p. 266. 


230 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


form of Durga, as worshipped in Bengal at present, seems to be 
found in the well-known Candimangala-kavya! of Mukundarama 
who flourished in the sixteenth century. 

Durga is worshipped in Bengal both in spring and in 
autumn. Since, according to the Bengali tradition, Rama- 
candra in order to kill Ravana worshipped her in autumn, the 
autumnal worship of Durga is more popular. The worship 
of the goddess and the obscene Savar-otsava performed on the 
Vijaya-dagami day (Asvina-sudi 10) were prevalent in Bengal 
during the medieval period. In the Ramacarita* of Sandhya- 
karanandin (12th century A.D.), mention is made of the festi- 
vities associated with the worship of Uma, while the Kalika 
Purapa and the Kalaviveka of Jimitavahana refer to the obscene 
utsava.* It seems that, in the mediaeval period, Mahisamardini 
Durga was worshipped in Bengal singly and not along with her 
sons and daughters. 

We have, however, evidence to show that autumnal wor- 
ship of the goddess was .known much earlier. Hiuen-tsang’s 
Life by Shaman Hwui Li tells us that, in Ayodhya, robbers used 
to sacrifice, a handsome youngman before Durga in autumn 
every year.* But Hwui Li does not indicate the particular 
aspect of the goddess worshipped by them though it is possible 
that the Mahisamardini form was meant. 

The legend of the Durga-Mahisasura encounter cannot 
be later than thefirst century B. C. We have sculptural represen- 


1, See Kavikaikan-Candi, ed. D. C. Sen and others, Vol. I, p. 209-10: 
Mahisamardini rap dharen Candika i 
prét'e vdm pad dropan || vém kareMahisdsurer dhari cul] savya kare tar vuke dropila $4l// 
pat-drkus-ghanja-manta khe{ak Sardsan | vém pame kare Sobhe pame praharan || asi cakra 
Sill dr se sitasar | pame astre Sobhaye daksine pe kar |]......angad-kankan-yuté haila 
data-bhuj cdridige lambamén tobhe jatajut | bhage Karttik daksine 
Lambodar | otge érohan Si mastak upar || daksine Jaladhisuté vdme Sarasvati | 
2, Ill. 25. 


3. Hist. Beng., Vol. I, ed. Majumdar, p. 606; cf. Sircar, The Sakta 
Pithas, pp. 105-06. The Bengali jurist JimGtavahana is assigned by some 
to the fifteenth century and by others to the eleventh or twelfth century. 

4. See Life of Hiuen Tsiang, trans. Beal, p. 86, In the Kathdsaritségara, 
there are many references to such human sacrifices before the goddess, See 
Kathasaritsagara (pub. Munshiram Manoharlal, Delhi), Vol. I, pp. 133, 
176, 226, 521, 548; Vol. II, pp. 170, 191, 255, 263, 381. 








MAHIgSAMARDINi 231 


tations of Mahisamardini of that period.1_ The earliest repre- 
sentation of the said form of the Devi found so far is probably 
a terracotta plaque from Nagar near Uniyara, Tonk District, 
Rajasthan. It is now preserved in the Amber Museum and 
has been assigned by scholars to the first century B. C. or the 
beginning of the first century A. D.? Six statues of the Kusana 
age, preserved in the Mathura Museum, appear to contain some 
other early representations of the Mahisamardini form. The 
Devi is shown in these as holding a buffalo raised to her waist, 
the demon being represented in his animal form. With one 
hand, she presses the hind part of the buffalo or hits it with a 
club, throttling or breaking the animal’s neck with another. 
Five of the statuettes represent the goddess with six arms, and 
in one she is four-armed. The weapons in the Devi’s hands 
are the spear and trident; but the animal is killed more with 
her hands than with the weapons. The lion is absent in the 
sculptures. Several interesting Mahisamardini sculptures 
belonging to the Gupta age are known. Among them mention 
may be made of an image found in the Udayagiri cave near 
Vidisha (c. 400 A. D.) and that found in the Bhumara temple 
(c. 6th century A. D.).4 Some fine miniature stone reliefs of 
two-armed Mahisamardini belonging to the Gupta period were 
unearthed by Marshall at Bhita.6 The Ellora image* of the 
goddess should also be mentioned in this connexion for it is 
one of the most lively sculptures of the place. A very large 
number of post-Gupta Mahisamardini images are preserved 
in the different museums of India. The Mamallapuram image 
(7th century A.D.) and the image in the Vaital Deul at 


1, See V.S, Srivastava, Catalogue and Guide to the Ganga Golden Jubilee 
Museum, Bikaner, 1961, p. 53 cf. A. K. Chatterjee in the Indian Museum 
Bulletin, Vol. IV, No. 1, p. 61; also JHQ, Vol. XXII, pp. 154 f. 

2, See V. S, Srivastava, loc. cit.; also Lalit Kala, Nos. 1-2, pp. 72- 
743 Adar Library Bulletin (N.S.), Vol. XIX, pp. 37 

3+ JUPHS (O.S.), Vol. XXII, pp. 158-59; cf. Artibus Asiae, Vol. 
XXxXI, p. 180. 

4. See also K, Bharatha Iyer, ‘An Early Gupta Seal of the Mahisa- 
mardini’ in the Artibus Asiae, Vol. XXXI, pp. 179 ff., and Plates, Figs, 
1-56 

5. ASLAR, 1911-12, p. 86, Pl. XXXI, Figs. 13-14. 

6, See J.N. Banerjea, Development of Hindu Iconography (and ed.), 
p. 499 and Pl. XLI, Fig. 2. 


232 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Bhubaneswar are among the famous representations of the 
goddess belonging to the post-Gupta period. 

Among the early images of Mahisamardini found so far, 
some are two-armed, four-armed or six-armed, while the later 
images have often eight, ten, twelve, sixteen, eighteen, twenty 
or even thirty-two hands. In the early images, the demon is 
a buffalo or a buffalo-headed human being; but the demon 
emerging from the neck of a headless buffalo and fighting with 
the goddess is also found in the medieval sculptures of Bengal, 
Bihar and Orissa. As we have seen, often the lion is absent.? 

It is interesting to note that, in the Mahabharata, Karttikeya 
is represented as the destroyer of Mahisa. His fight with that 
demon is described in some details in the Vana-parvan.? Among 
the names of Karttikeya given in the Mahabharata, we have 
Mahisardana.‘ Of the two Durgdstotras preserved in the Mahd- 
bharata (IV. 6; VI. 23), only the first one endows the goddess 
with the epithet Mahisdsuranasini; but the said stotra is not 
found in the southern recension of the epic. It has been sug- 
gested therefore that the story of Durga’s killing of Mahisa was 
borrowed from the Karttikeya legend at a somewhat later 
period.’ We should, however, remember that the Mahabharata 
once speaks of Siva as the destroyer of Mahisa, and it therefore 
appears that the destruction of Mahisa was attributed by some 
to Siva, by others to Karttikeya and by a third group of 
people to Durga, probably in different areas of our vast country. 
Since Mahisamardini Durga is represented in art from about 
the first century B.C. or the beginning of the first century A.D., 
while the latest sections of the Mahabharata are believed to have 
been composed about the fourth century A.D., it is difficult to 
be sure that Durga’s Mahisamardini aspect is later than the 
conception of Karttikeya as the destroyer of Mahisa, even though 


1, J.N. Banerjea, Paicopasand, pp. 244-46. Durga worshipped in 
Bengal is ten-armed as noted above. Reference to the eighteen-handed Devi 
is often met with; see Devibhdgavata, V. 8. 44; also Kathdsaritsdgara., Vol. II, 
Be me Cf. above; also Banerjea, loc. cit. 

Ch. 231. 

III, 232. 3. 

Sce A. K. Chatterjee in the Indian Museum Bulletin, op. cit.. pp. 60 £. 
Soerensen, Index to the Mahabharata, p. 458. Siva is called Mahisa- 


Cd ad 


ghna. 


MAHITSAMARDINi 233 


the Mahabharata attributes the destruction of Mahisa more often 
to Karttikeya than to Siva and Durga. 

The struggle between Durga and Mahisdsura is one of the, 
principal subjects of the Devimahdtmya preserved in the Markan- 
deya Purana. The episode is also indirectly mentioned in the 
Matsya,1 Brahmanda* and other Puranas. It is generally sup- 
posed that the oldest parts of the Markandeya Purdna were com- 
piled during the third century A.D. or earlier while the Devi- 
mahatmya, which may rightly be called the testament of 
Sakta philosophy, is said to have been added to the text by the 
sixth century A.D.° The story of the Devi’s fight with Mahisa 
as found in the Devibhagavata, Skanda Purana, Vamana Purana 
and other texts appears to have been borrowed from the Mar- 
kandeya at a later date,‘ though there are minor differences. 

There are some interesting points on which the images of 
Mahisamardini discovered so far differ from the description 
of that goddess found in the Devimahdtmya. The story says that 
the goddess bound the demon by her noose and the latter then 
became a lion whose head the Devi cut off. Then the demon 
appeared in human form with scimitar and shield in hands and 
was pierced by the Devi’s arrows. Next he became an elephant 
and tugged the Devi’s lion with his trunk; but the goddess cut 
off the elephant’s trunk with her sword. Then the demon 
assumed the buffalo shape once again. The description goes 
on : “*....she leaped upwards and sat herself on that great 
Asura, and pressed him on the neck with her foot and struck 
him with her spear. And thereupon, he, being assailed by 
her foot, half issued forth from his own mouth, in sooth, being 
completely encompassed by the goddess’ valour. .. . The goddess 
struck off his head with her great sword and laid him low.”® 
I. 152. 17. 24. 

2. IV. 29. 75 and 78. 
3. See Winternitz, vi History of Indian Literature, Vol. U1, pp. 560, 
4 


The Mérkardea Purina (XI. 55) stanza— 

ittharn yadd yadé vddha danav-oltha bhavigyati / 

tadé tad=<dvatiry=dham karigyany=ari-samksayam |] 
imitated from the Bhagavadgita (IV. 8), is modified in. the Devibhdgavata 
(V. 18, 22) as— 

Jadé yada hi sadhiiném dubkhara bhavati dénava | 

tadé teséi=ca raks-drtham deham sandharayémy=aham |/ 

5. IIL. 38-40 : 
evam=ukwe 


365. 





samulpatya s=ériidhd tart mah-dsuram | 
paden=dkramya kapjhe ca Silen=ainam=atédayat |] 


234 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


We are told that the goddess killed Mahisasura with a 
sword -(asi). But the images usually show her as killing that 
demon with a Sila (spear).1_ The demon in human form is 
again said to have come out of the mouth of the buffalo and not 
out of its headless trunk. 

In the later adaptation of the episode as found in Book 
V of the Devibhagavata, the Devi is stated to have struck the 
chest of Mahis-asura by her sharp trident (trifala) so that the 
demon fell into a swoon;* but when he again attacked the 
goddess, she killed him neither by the spear nor by a sword, 
but by her thousand-poked discuss. Elsewhere in the same 
work, the demon is said to have been killed by the goddess 
with her khadga (scimitar.).4 

The Skanda Purana refers to the Durga-Mahisasura episode 
at several places. In one place, it is said that the Devi killed 
the demon by her spear and then cut off his head by her scimi- 
tar.4 At another place, the description of Mahisa’s slaughter 


tatah so=’pi pad-dkrdntas=tayd nija-mukhdt=tatah | 
ardha-niskranta ev=dsid=Devyd vlryena sarwttah ,/ 
ardha-nigkranta eo=dsau yudhyaméno mah-dsurah | 
tayd mah-dsind Devyé Siras=chittea nipdtitah |/ 

1, In the Chhoti Sidri inscription found in the Udaipur District of 
Rajasthan, dated in 491 A.D., Durga is described. as killing the Asura 
(Mahisasura) with a fila, This inscription represents the goddess not as 
riding a lion, but a chariot drawn by one or more lions. See Ef. Ind., Vol. 
XXX, pp. 120 ff. 

2. V. 20. 59 : 

Candik=4pi ca tar paparn trigiilena balad—hrdi | 
tadayémasa tikgnena krodhéd=aruna-locand | 
3. V. 20. 62 and 64 : 
tato Devi sahasr-dram su-nabhart cakram=uttamam | 
kare kttod jagdd—occaih samhsthitarh Mahis-dsuram ||... 
ity=uktod darunath cakramh munoca Jagadambika | 
Siraf=chinnarm rath-digena dénavasya tadé rape || 
4. X. 12. 33: 
pasena baddhvd sudydham chittod khadgena tac-chirah | 
pdtaydmasa Mahisarh Devi devagan-antakam || 
‘The Devi is called evar Laksmih samutpannd Mahisdsura-mardini (X. 12. 35). 
5. Prabhasa-khanda, Prabhasaksetra-mahatmya, Chap. 83, verses 


20-21 + iblyam=akranya $ilena nikato daitya-puiganab |] 
chine firasi khadgena tad-riipo nifsttah pumén | 
raudro="pi sa gatak svargarh daityo Dexy-dstra-patitah |] 


MAHTSAMARDINI 235 


in this Purana resembles the same in the Markandeya Purana 
which we have discussed above.! The story of Mahisa’s dis- 
comfiture as given in the Vamana Purana, not in the usual Anus- 
fubh but in the Indravajra or Upajati metre, is similar to that of 
the Markandeya Purdna.* 

The Agni Purana describes the ten-armed Candika as 
holding various weapons, riding a lion and having Mahisa, 
struck by her spear, in her front. Elsewhere the same Purana‘ 
speaks of Candi as having twenty, ten or eighteen arms while 
the nine Durgis are all sixteen-armed, have different complec- 
tions, are in the 4@lidha pose on the back of the lion and catch 
the hair of the armed male emerging from a buffalo.5 The 
twenty- or ten-armed Candi-Durga has a buffalo with his head 
cut off and lying near by and an angry male emerging out of 
his neck with raised hand bearing weapon. This demon is 
further described as bearing a spear, vomitting blood, having 
red garland, hair and eyes, being mauled by the lion and 
having the noose strongly pressing his neck. The Agni Purdna, 


See also ibid., Arbuda-khanda, Chap. 96, verses 152-53 : 
sittha-skandhati=ca sé Devi tatas=tam=adhyarohata | 
Khadgena tiksnena Sito Devi tasya nyaktntata |] 
Siilena bhedaydmasa prgtha-dese suresvari | etc. 
For another delineation of the episode, see further the Nagara-khanda section 
of the same Purana, Chapters 117-21. 
1, Jbid., Brahma-khanda, Setumahatmya-varnana, Chap.(6 or 7). 41: , 
kantham Sillena tiksnena pidayémasa kopita | 
tato Devyy=asim=ddaya cakart=dsya Siro mahat |] 
2, XX. 45-48. 
3. 52.16 : 
Candika dasa-hasta syat khadga-$iil-dri-Sakti-dhrk | 
dakse vame ndgapdtam carm-éikusa-kuthdrakam | 
dhanub simhe ca mahigah Silena prahato=’gratah |] 
See Chap. 50. 
5 10-12 : 
Rudracanda Pracanda ca Candogra Candandyika || 
Condé Candavati c—aiva Candarip= Aticardika | 
Ugracanda ca madhyasthd rocandbh=drm=asita |] 
nila Suklé dhitmriké ca pitd $..td ca sithhagah | . 
mahis-otthah puman Sastri tat-kaca-dhta-musfikah |] 
P alidha nava Durgal suk sthdpyal putr-ddi-vrddhaye |] 
+ 5043-6 
tad-adho mahisas=chinna-miirdhd patita-mastaka |/ 
Sastr-odyata-karah kruddhas=tad-griva-sambhavah fumdn | 


oP 


236 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


which is supposed to be an early medieval East Indian work 
in its present form, also mentions the Lalita form of Durga as 
having her left hand on Skanda’s head and holding a looking 
glass in the right hand.1_ Elsewhere in the same Purana, 
Lalita is described as standing on a lotus, having two of her 
four hands on Skanda and Gana (Ganesa) and holding a 
looking glass and a spear in the remaining two hands.* This 
second Lalita image representing the Devi with Karttikeya and 
Ganeéa seems to be close to the modern Durga image of Bengal 
representing the goddess with Karttikeya, Ganesa, Laksmi and 
Sarasvati. The modern Bengali conception of Durga may be 
an extention of a combination of Lalita of the Agni Purdpa and 
Mahisamardini. 
Recently we have found the following description of a 
sculpture discovered at Rajshahi in the Report on the Working 
of the Varendra Research Museum (Rajshahi, East Pakistan, 1969): 
“Museum No. 2650—Durga. Durga in sandstone, 32” x8". 
The goddess is standing on a plain pedestal in samabhariga pose 
with standing figures of Ganega on her right and Karttikeya 
on her left. Her vdhana, the lion, is seen crouching on the 
pedestal. The goddess wears a transparent petticoat-like 
garment which is held at her waist by a jewelled girdle. She 
has also put on a necklace, patrakundalas, armlets, bangles and 
anklets. Her hair is done up in a high bun which is encircled 
by a jewelled fillet. The lower right hand of the goddess is 
shown in varada-mudra. There is a sword in her upper right 
hand, a shield in the corresponding left, and an indistinct 
object (fruit ?) in her lower left hand. The upper part of 
the plain back slab is rounded. The sculpture, which is much 
corroded, is datable in the 10th century A.D.” The image 
seems to be four-armed. It is probably not Mahisamardini ; 
but, if Ganesa and K4rttikeya are correctly identified and the 
indication of the date is not incorrect, the Rajshahi sculpture 
$illa-hasto vamad-rakto rakto sravi-miisdhaj-eksanah |] 
sitthen=dsvddyamdnas=tu pdsa-baddho gale bhrfam | 
yamy-anghry -dkranta-sithhd ca savy-dnghris—=nicag-dsure |] 
Candik=eyam tri-netré ca sa-Sastra ripu-mardani | etc. 

1. 50,14—Skanda-mindha-karé véme dvitiye dhttadaprana. 

2. 52.15—abjasthd Lalita Skanda-Gop-ddarsa-tala(h*) kaya(rdh). 


MAHISAMARDINI 237 


is of considerable importance, because its conception approaches 
the idea underlying that of Lalita described in the Agni 
Purana and also the type of the Durga image that is worshipped 
in Bengal since the sixteenth century. 

The Matsya Purana also speaks of the image of Uma- 
MaheSvara flanked by Jaya, Vijaya, Karttikeya and Vinayaka, 
and it will be even. closer to the Durga image (which has 
Mahesvara in a small form above the head of the Devi) if Jaya 
and Vijaya are substituted by Laksmi and Sarasvati. 


1. Chapter 260, verses 11 ff.; cf. verses 19-20— 
Jaya ca Vijaya cmaiva Kanttikeya-Vindyakau |] 
barsvayor=darsayel=tatra torane ganc-guhyakén | 
The goddess Mahisamardini is described in this Purina (260. 55 ff.) as 
Katyayani who is called atasi-puspa-varn-dbhd (260.57), i.e. dark-complec- 
tioned, although the goddess as worshipped in Bengal is gauri, i.e. fair- 
complectioned. 


Cuarter XVI 
GUARDIANS OF THE QUARTERS 


Malalasekera quotes the Digha- and Avguttara-nikayas in 
giving an account of the lowest Deva-world of the Buddhists, 
which is known as Catummaharajika (Caturmaharajika), 
where the four Maharajas dwelt as guardians of the four 
quarters; ¢.g., Dhatarattha (Dhrtarastra), lord of the Gandha- 
bbas (Gandharvas), in the east; ViriJhaka (Viridhaka), 
lord of the Kumbhandas (Kusmandas), in the south; Viri- 
pakkha (Virapaksa), lord of the Nagas, in the west; and 
Vessavana (Vaisravana-Kubera), lord of the Yaksas, in the 
north. Childers’ Dictionary of the Pali Language refers to the 
Abhidhanappadipikd, etc., and assigns Dhatarattha to the north, 
Viriitha or Virilhaka to the south, Viripakkha to the west and 
Vessavana to the east. Thus Datarattha is assigned to the east 
or north and Vessavana to the north or east. Of the four 
MaharAjas or guardians of the quarters, Kubera alone is known 
from Brahmanical mythology and, as we shall see below, there 
also the quarter assigned to him is not the same in different 
accounts. The date of the evolution of the ‘six Deva-world’ 
conception and the idea of the lowest heaven called ‘the world 
of the four Maharajas’ in Buddhist mythology cannot be deter- 
mined with certainty, because the date of the Nikayas is un- 
certain.? It should, however, be noted that the Maharajas 


1. Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, s.v. Catummahdréjika, Dhatarattha, 
ete. 

2. The canons of the Buddhists are supposed to have been summarily 
compiled shortly after the Buddha’s death about 486 B.C., they were revised 
after a century in 386 B.C. and were more or less completed 236 years after 
the Buddha’s parinirdna (i.e. about the 19th year of  Asoka’s reign, 
probably about 250 B.C.). Cf. Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature, 
Vol. II, p. 6. The texts of the Buddhist canonical works, at first transmit- 
ted orally, are said to have been committed to writing in the first century 
B.C. (ibid., pp. 8, 13), though they are supposed to have suffered consi- 
derable change and modification even in later times, and in many cases 
‘commentaries penetrated into the texts and became mixed with them’ 
(ibid., p. 14). 


GUARDIANS OF THE QUARTERS 239 


are mentioned in the inscriptions! (really labels to the Maha- 
rajas’ images) from the Buddhist establishment at Barhut, 
belonging to the Sunga age (c. 187-75 B. C.), though they 
are called merely Yaksas and not MaharAjas, probably because 
the Maharaja concept was still on its way to development. 
Sanskrit Buddhist literature associates Kubera with Mani- 
bhadra, Dhrtarastra with Sirya, Viridhaka with Yama and 
Viraipaksa with Varuna,? probably due to the influence of 
Brahmanical mythology.* 

The earliest epigraphical reference to the Branmanical 
Dikpalas (guardians of the quarters) or Lokapalas (protectors 
of the worlds) is found in the Nanaghat inscription of queen 
Naganika of the Satavahana dynasty, who seems to have 
flourished about the close of the first century B.C.‘ Jt is inter- 
esting to note that salutations are offered in this record to 
the four Lokapdlas, viz. Yama, Varuna, Kubera and Vasava 
(Indra), separately from those to Dharma (Yama) and Indra 
(Vasava). It seems that a distinction was made between 
Yama and Indra as Lokapala and the well-known gods of 
the same names, so that the identification of Dharma and Yama 
and of Indra and Vasava may belong to a later date.’ 

The Brahmanical conception of the four Dikpdlas or 
Lokapalas is not as elaborate and definite as the Buddhist ideas 
about the four Maharajas. We have seen above how the Nana- 
ghat inscription refers to Yama, Varuna, Kubera and Vasava 
(Indra) as the four Lokapalas, while the Mahdvastu and 


t, Barua and Sinha, Barkut Tncrition, pp. 67 fl. Besides the Digha- 


nikdya, the authors quote the Divydvadéna, "Makiast and Lalitavistara in this 
connection. 


2. Loc. cit. For a conflicting account in the Vignudharmottara, see above, 
201. 
= 3. Hopkins (Epic Mythology, p. 152, note) says that ‘the four Maha- 
rijas of the Buddhists combine the Lokapala gods and the elephants of the 
directions (Vessavana and Dhatarattha) with other un-Brahmanic features’. 
But Vessavana and Dhataraftha are not mentioned in the Disagaja list 
which is borrowed from the Brahmanical list of the Diggajas. 

4. Sircar, Select Inscrif tions, Vol. 1, 1965 ed., p. 193. For the number 
‘four’, note also that the Mahabharata (III. 112.1, and 161.8; XII. 327.7)com- 
ares four mighty brothers as the Lokapilas. Here as well as in IX. 61.64, 
the Lokapalas are indirectly represented as great herocs. I. 225.3 represents 
Varuna as the fourth Lokapila. 

5. Sircar, loc, cit., note 3. 


240 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Lalitavistara of the early centuries of the Christian era mention, 
as we have seen, the Brahmanical counterparts of Kubera, 
Dhrtarastra, Viridhaka and Viripaksa as Manibhadra, Sarya, 
Yama and Varuna who are respectively located in the north, 
east, south and west. The quarters assigned to the different 
Brahmanical Dikpalas or Lokapalas are not specifically men- 
tioned along with the names of the divinities in many cases. 
The Mahabharata mentions Vaivasvata (Yama), Varuna, 
Satakratu (Indra) and Dhanega (Kubera) as welcoming a 
dead hero. In the epics, the position of Yama and Varuna 
respectively in the south and west is more or less fixed, 
though the names of the deities are not always the same. 
At one place, the Vana-parvan? mentions Varuna, Kubera, 
Yama [of the southJand Sakra (Indra) as Lokapalas offering © 
some gifts to Arjuna, while elsewhere® the group of four gods 
are enumerated as Indra, Agni, Varuna and Yama without 
using the designation Lokapala. Thus Agni takes here the 
place of Kubera, and Hopkins thinks that ‘the grouping Agni, 
Yama, Varuna and Indra seems older than when Kubera_ is 
substituted for Agni’. But the Karna-parvan® represents 
Jatavedas (Agni), Yama, Varuna and Bhagavat Soma as 
leaders respectively of the gods in the east, the Pitrs in the 
south, the gods in the west and the ruling priests in the north. 
Here Agni and Soma take the places of Indra and Kubera as 
guardians respectively of the east and north, so that Soma 
was another early claimant for the guardianship of the northern 
quarter. Mahendra (Indra) is also clearly separated from 
the four Lokapalas Kubera, Yama, Soma and Varuna in the 
Udyoga-parvan.® 

The reference in the Mahabharata’ to the four Lokapalas 
living on the Himavat like the Disampilas of the north seems to 
make a distinction between Lokapala (world-protector) and 


1. VII. 70.45. Yama, Kubera, Varuna and Indra or Mahendra are 
also mentioned in Ch. gt, verse :3 ard in I, 74.85. For the epic evi- 
dence, see Hopkins, Epic Mythology, pp. 149 ff. 

2. Ch. 41. verses 6 ff. 

3. Ch. 55, verse 6. 

4 Op. cit., p. 149. 

5. VIL. 45. 31-32. 

6. V. 16. 27 ff. 

7. See Santi-parvan, Ch. 327; Hopkins, op. cit., p. 150. 


GUARDIANS OF THE QUARTERS 241 


Disampala (quarter-protector). This may be related to the 
reference in the AnuSdsana-parvant to the three lokas 
(worlds) and the three Lokapalas. In the same way, the 
Ramdyana* recognises Vajradhara (Indra), Yama, Varuna 
and DhaneSa (Kubera) as the guardians of the east, south, 
west and north; but in one place,? it speaks of the three Loka- 
palas headed by Sakra (Indra). This exhibits a confusion 
between the conception of the guardians of the four quarters 
and that of the protectors of the three worlds (the earth, the 
heaven and the nether world). 

In the Udyoga-parvan,‘ Mahendra (Indra) requests 
the Lokapalas Varuna, Yama, Soma and Kubera for helping 
him against Nahusa, makes Varuna the lord of waters, gives 
Yama and Kubera lordship (mentioned later as respectively 
of the Pitrs and of the Yaksas and wealth) like his own and 
offers Agni a share (meant for Indra and Agni) in the sacri- 
fice. Hopkins notices the confused nature of the story and 
points out that ‘here Soma comes in first, and is then displaced 
by Agni’.® Indra is sometimes excluded and Agni included 
in the list of Lokapilas,* while in some cases both Sakra 
(Indra) and Agni are included in the list along with Varuna 
and Yama.’ 

Hopkins refers to ‘the explicit correlation of three protec- 
tors of worlds with three worlds to point to an earlier group 
of guardians of the three’, and goes on to say, ‘‘Soma still 
lingers in the epic as one of these; later he rules ‘above’. Yama 
and Varuna may have been the other two. What remains 
also, however, is the later addition of Kubera who was not a 
world-protector or even a god at first, so that when the four 
were established as guardians of directions rather than of 
worlds, the first grouping was probably Agni, Yama, Varuna 
and Soma, the first and last then yielding to Indra and Kubera. 


1. Qh. 158, verse gr. 

2. II. 16.24. They imparted greatness, restraint,beauty and weatlh 
(Hopkins, of. P. 150). 

3. IL gt.13. 

4. Ch. 16, verses 27 ff. Indra gave the sword to the Lokapalas (XII. 
166.67). 

& Hopkins, loc. cit. 

»  Mbh., TIT. 54.24. 

7. Ibid, 55.6. 











242 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Finally, the ejected ones (Soma and Agni, cf. Mbh., IV. 
30.25) came back as guards of the intermediate points, north- 
east and south-east respectively, Indra setting into the east 
(Mbh., VII. 184.47) after Kubera had got the north.”! It 
is, however, difficult to prove the antiquity of the three Loka- 
pala conception which was never popular. 

Chapter 37 of the HarivarhSa-parvan of the Harivamsa 
says how Indra was the lord of the three worlds and how he 
made Viratha (a son of KaSyapa), Yama, Amburaja (Varuna) 
and Pulasya’s son who is the one-eyed Pingala (Kubera), 
lords (rdjan, adhipa) respectively of the east, south, west and 
north. It will be seen from the above accounts that, while 
the position of Yama in the south and Varuna in the west is 
constant, Agni, Kubera, Indra and Viratha are assigned to 
the east, and Indra, Kubera and Soma to the north. 

We have seen above how the Nanaghat inscription of the 
first century B. C. gives the number of the Lokapalas speci- 
fically as four and how the said number is also often specified 
by the epics. The same number is often indicated by the 
representation of the king as the fifth Lokapala. Thus Ravana 
makes the said claim in the Ramdyana story incorporated in 
the Mahdbhérata.* Likewise, the Pallava kings Skandavarman 
II [of copper-plate grants like the Uruvupalli, Omgodu No. 
2 and Pikira records] and Kuméfravisnu I [of the Cendalira 
grant], who flourished in the 6th and 5th centuries respective- 
ly, are called Pavicama-Lokapdla, ‘the fifth Lokapala’.* The 
idea is that, while the four Lokapala’s guarded the four direc- 
tions, the king was the protector of the central region of the 


1. Op. cit., p. 151. He further says, “As a matter of fact, Indra 
belongs to the north-east, at least according to epic ideas, and epic tradition 
still recognises that Kubera was raised to the position of world-protector and 
added to the group of Yama, Indra and Varuna (Rém. , VII. 3.17 f.).” In 
Mbh., 163. 3f., Dhaumya ‘takes Yudhisthira by the right hand, looks at the 
cast’, and says, “Here is to be seen Mt. Mandara which covers the earth to 
the ocean. It is the district which Indra and Vaisravana (Kubera) together 
guard, and the seers call it the seat of Mahendra and Vaiéravana; it is 
where the sun rises.’” Hopkins tries to show that Kubera and Indra are really 
guardians of the north and east together, meeting in the north-east. 

2. IIL. 280.14. > 

g. Sircar, The Successors of the Sdtavahanas in the Lower Deccan, p. 196. 


GUARDIANS OF THE QUARTERS 243 


earth. The same idea is also sometimes expressed by the 
epithet Madhyyama-Lokapdla, ‘protector of the middle region’. 
Kalidasa’s Raghuvamfa' (the 4th or 5th century A. D.) 
applies the said epithet to a king. 

The number of the Dikp4las, identified with the Loka- 
plas, was later raised to eight because, besides the protectors 
of the east, west, north and south, those of the south-east, 
south-west, north-east and north-west were also conceived. The 
Manusmrti* (early centuries of the Christian era) says that 
the king is made out of parts taken from, and is equal to, the 
eight gods—Indra, Anila (Vayu), Yama, Arka (Sirya), Agni, 
Varuna, Candra (Soma) and Vittefa (Kubera), while the 
Amarakofa* (about the sixth century A.D.) recognises Indra, 
Vahni (Agni), Pitrpati (Yama), Nairrta, Varuna, Marut 
(Vayu), Kubera and Iga (Isana) as the lords of the quarters 
beginning with the east, i.e. east, south-east, south, south- 
‘west, west, north-west, north and north-east. It will be seen 
that Sirya (Arka) and Soma of the Manusmyti are replaced 
by Nairrta (south-east) and Isa or Isana (north-east) in the 
Amarakofa. Even, however, after the introduction of the con- 
ception of the eight Dikpalas or Lokapalas, we have references 
to the older idea of the four quardians of the quarters as men- 
tioned in the Raghuvama and the Pallava inscriptions referred 
to above and also in many other epigraphic and literary 
records. The Allahabad pillar inscription‘ of Samudragupta 
(c. 335-76 A.D.) regards the king as equal to Dhanada 
(Kubera), Varuna, Indra and Antaka (Yama). Dandin’s 
Kavyddarfa,5 which may be assigned to the seventh century 
A.D., also has a stanza speaking of Yama, Varuna, Kubera 
and Sahasrakga (Indra) as the four Lokapdlas with the king 
as the fifth. 

We have seen above that the Buddhists regarded the 
guardians of the quarters as the four Maharajas, although the 
Buddhist inscriptions of about the second century B.C. call 


2. VII. 4-7. 

. I. ii.6. The pahdakalbedrama (s. . Lokapdla) quotes a stanza 

ihe Vahni estes ole poe se ith Nii (for No > 
anne ir Kubera) and Sankara “(on 7 é Tia). ome) 

4. Sircar, i . cit., p. 267, text line 26. 


244 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


them Yaksas and not Maharajas. The Lokapalas are not 
generally called Maharaja in the Brahmanical works, even 
though, as we have seen, the Harivamfa (III. 37. 22) says 
that Indra made Viratha Rajan and Adhipa of the eastern 
quarter. Of course, if they were conceived as lords of the 
quarters, they could have been mentioned as Rajan or Maharaja; 
but that is not usually done in Brahmanical mythology. Very 
rarely, Kubera has been called Maharaja in Brahmanical 
works like the late Taittiriya Aranyaka and the Mahabharata’ 
probably under Buddhist influence. We have seen, however, 
that Kubera’s position in the list of Lokapalas was not at all 
fixed since the Mahdbharata* mentions Agni and Soma as 
guardians of the east and north respectively in the place of 
Indra and Kubera while elsewhere* Agni is mentioned in the 
place of Kubera. The Kitrma Purana‘ also substitutes Soma 
for Kubera. 

Panini’s — siltra—Mahérajat-=than® speaks of bhakti 
(attachment or devotion) to Maharaja. Another sitra® is 
sometimes supposed to refer to Maharaja as a devata or divi- 
nity, though it is doubtful. Jayaswal took bhakti directed to 
Mahfaraja in a political sense; but the conception of divine 
kingship is much later than the age of Panini who flourished 
in the fifth century B. C., its earliest mention probably 
being in the Manusmyti? of the early centuries of the Christian 
era. However, bhakti to the Maharaja may mean here 
attachment to the king. Bhusari, Coomaraswamy and others 
take Maharaja in the sense of the Lokapalas called Maharaja 
by the Buddhists. It should be admitted, however, that the 
said Buddhist conception is also considerably later than Panini’s 
days and that it was not popular with the Brahmanical writers. 

The sixth century Buddhist lexicographer Amara does 


got MORE Bm 
" 
gS 


Based in ABORI, Vol. VIII, 1926, p. 199; Coomaraswamy, 
Onigin of the Buddha Image, Calcutta reprint, p. 18, note 21; A. C. Chakra- 
varti in The Bhakti Cult and Ancient Indian Geography, ed. Sircar, p. 49. 


GUARDIANS OF THE QUARTERS 245 


not recognise Maharaja as a name of Kubera though he speaks 
of the names Kubera, Tryambakasakha, Yaksarat, Guhya- 
keSvara, Manusyadharman, Dhanada, Rajaraja, Dhana- 
dhipa, Kinnarega, Vaigravana, Paulastya, Naravahana, 
Yaksa, Ekapinga, Ailavila, Srida and Punyajanesvara as 
synonymous.1 Amara, however, recognises Maharajika as a 
class of divinities, and Ksirasvamin’s commentary says 
saftrimsad=dve Sate Maharajikak, Maharaja-Sabdo=’sty =esam= 
iti, ie. the Maharajikas, 236 in number, were so called be- 
cause they enjoyed the designation Mahdraja. Ksirasvamin 
further says, s=dsya devata (Panini, IV.2.24) iti Mahérdjika 
ity-=eke, Mahérdja-Prosthapadat = thai (Panini, IV. 2.35) which 
indicates that, according to some, the word is Maharajika 
meaning one who worships the devatd called Maharaja. The 
alternative interpretation, however, seems to be unsatisfactory 
because in Panini’s sitra for the formation of the two words 
Méahdrajika and Prausthapadika, the latter apparently means 
related to the Prosthapada-naksatras, i.e. Pirva-Bhadrapada 
and Uttara-Bhadrapada, which do not look like objects of spe- 
cial worship. In any case, Panini seems to have lived much 
earlier than the development of the Buddhist conception of the 
divinities called Maharaja, so that the word Mahdraja used by 
Panini probably means ‘a king’ rather than ‘a deity’. It may 
be noted here that Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya ignores the siltra— 
Mahérajat:= thai as unnecessary because the formation of the 
word Mahdérajika has already been suggested by the earlier 
siitra, Mahéraja-Prosthapadé{= than, the word as formed by the 
two siitras having the same sense. Modern lexicographers have 
taken the word Mahdrdjika in the sense of ‘fit for a great king, 
imperial, royal’, and ‘attached or devoted to the ruling prince’. 

A medieval Puranic conception of the Dikpalas regards 
them as ten in number, viz. Indra in the east, Vahni in the 
south-east, Yama in the south, Nirrta in the south-west, Varuna 
in the west, Marut in the north-west, Kubera in the north, 
Iga in the north-east, Brahman in the zenith and Ananta 
in the nadir.? 





1. Amarakosa, 1. 1.98-39. 
2. Sabdakalpadruma, s. v. Dikpala. 


Cuaprer XVII 
SUN TEMPLE AT MUNDIRA 


The Skanda Purana in its present form is a medieval work.! 
The name of the Nagara-khanda section of this Purana is asso- 
ciated with the Nagara Brahmanas of Gujarat, and the section 
deals mainly with the holy spots in HatakeSvara which is loca- 
ted in the present Ahmedabad District of Gujarat and contained 
the city of Camatk4rapura identified with Anandapura (modern 
Vadnagar ), also called Nagara whence the Nagara Brahmanas 
are supposed to have received their name.? 

Chapter 67 of the Nagara-khanda mentions three famous 
images of the Sun-god, the first in Eastern India, the second 
in Mid-India and the third in Western India, though all the 
three were supposed to combine into one image worshipped 
in a temple in HatakeSvara. This is indicated in the following 
stanzas (verses 1-6) : 

tath=dnyad=api tatr=4dsti Bhaskara-tritayam Subham | 

pais = tusfais = trisu lokesu manavo muktim = dpnuyat |/ 

Mundiram prathamam tatra Kalapriyam tath=dparam | 

Millasthanam trtiyai=ca sarva-vyadhi-vindfanam |/ 

tatra sankramate Sitryo Mundire rajani-ksaye | 

Kalapriye ca madhy-ahne Millasthane ksap-agame |/ 

tasmin kale naro bhaktyd pasyed = apy =ekam=eva ca | 

kyta-ksano naro moksam satyam yati na samSayal |/ 

Mundirah pirva-dig-bhage dharityah Sriyate kila | 

madhye Kalapriyo devo Milasthanam tad-antare |/ 

tat katharh te trayas-=tatra saijatah sitta Bhaskarah |/ 

HatakeSvaraje ksetre sarvam no brihi vistarat |/ 

Of the three places sanctified by the presence of images of 
the Sun-god, Milasthana is well known and the location of 
Kalapriya is also satisfactorily established; but the location of 
Mundira seems to be otherwise unknown. Méilasthana is 
modern Miltan, headquarters of the District of the same name 


1, Of. Sircar, The Sakta Pithas, p. 25, note 2. It mentions Ramanuja 
(11th and 12th centuries A.D.) in the Visnu-khanda, Chap. 21. 
2. See Dey, Geog. Dict., 8. v. Hajaka and Camatkérapura. 


SUN TEMPLE AT MUNDIRA 247 


in the Punjab region of West Pakistan. It is situated near the 
left bank of the Chenab in lat. 30° 12’, long. 71° 30° 45”. 
Milasthana is famous in the Puranas as the place of the Sun- 
god.1. The Yadava prince Samba is said to have worshipped 
the god at this place and was cured of leprosy. The great Sun 
temple at Miiltan was seen by Hiuen-tsang in the seventh 
century and is referred to by Al-Birani in the eleventh cen- 
tury.* 

The identification of Kalapriya with KAlpi in the Jalaun 
District of U. P., lying on the southern bank of the Jamuna, 
lat. 22° 4’, long. 88° 18°, is also certain.* It is at this place that 
the Rastrakija emperor Indra III (915-28 A.D.) crossed 
the Jamuna in the course of his expedition against Kanauj, 
then the capital of the Gurjara-Pratiharas. The Vardha Puréna 
speaks of a temple of the Sun-god at Kalapriya or KAlpi, 
which is located to the south of the Jamuna.‘ 

The location of Mundira, where the Sun-god was wor- 
shipped under the name Mundirasvamin, is not clear from the 
passage quoted above from the Nagara-khanda, which, how- 
ever, places it in Eastern India (pfrva-dig-bhage dharitryah). 
This is possibly also suggested by the fact that the Sun-god 
was worshipped at Mundira at sunrise in the morning, at 
Kalapriya at noon and at Milasthana at sunset in the evening. 
Mundira was thus situated in Eastern India, considerably 
to the east of Kalpi. The expression Srayate kila, ‘as we have 
heard it reported’, seems to suggest that the author of the 


1, See Bhavisya Purdpa, Brahma, Chap. 74; Brahma Purdna, I. 140; 
cf. Dey, Geog. Dict., s. v. Milasthdnapura. Dey says that the old city of 
Multan was situated on both banks of the Ravi, This is doubtful though 
the frequent changes in the courses of the rivers are well known. 

2. Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, Vol. Il, p. 2543 
Sachau, Alberuni’s India, Vol. 1, pp. 116-17, etc. The mistakes in the 
Chinese pilgrim’s account led Watters to doubt the identification of Mou-lo- 
san-pu-lu with Miltan ; but the mention of the great Sun temple makes 
it absolutely certain. Hiuen-tsang speaks of the image at Multan as made 
of gold while Al-Birini mentions it as made of wood. The priests must have 
made the wooden image (of little value as a loot) after the golden one had 
been taken away by the iconoclasts. But even this could not save the image 
and his temple. 

3. Sircar, Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. Ind., 2nd ed., pp. 303 ff. 

4. See below; also V.V. Mirashi, Stud. Indol., Vol. I, p. 38. 


248 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


stanzas heard an old tradition about the existence of Mundira 
in Eastern India, but had no personal knowledge about it. 

The most important Sun temple in Eastern India, which 
is regarded as ‘the most exquisite memorial of Sun worship in 
India’, stands at Konrak (lat.19° 54’, long. 86° 10’), on the 
shore of the Bay of Bengal, nineteen miles north-west of Puri 
in Orissa! There is no definite evidence that any other 
temple of the Sun-god, of all-India celebrity, existed in Eastern 
India. The latitudes and longitudes of the three places show 
that they stand on the same line drawn from the south-east 
to the north-west, Kalpi standing almost exactly in the middle 
of the distance between Konarak and Miltan. It is there- 
fore possible that, by Mundira, the Nagara-khanda section 
of the Skanda Purdpa refers to Konarak.* Kalinga (compri- 
sing parts of Coastal Orissa and Andhra Pradesh )is mentioned 
as the country of Aditya or the Sun in a list relating to the 
nine grahas in the medieval Afvaldyana Grhyasitra Parisista, 
probably with reference to Konarak.? 

In the copper-plate grants® of the successors of the Ganga 
king Narasirhha I (1239-65 A.D.) of Orissa, we have a 
stanza referring to the construction of the temple of Usmaraémi 
(Sun-god) by the said king at Konakona, i.e. modern Konarak, 


1, Cf. Hunter, A Statistical Account of Bengal, Vol. XIX, pp. 84 ff. 
The name is sometimes written ‘Kanarak’, 

2. R.C. Hazra (Studies in the Upapurdnas, Vol. 3, pp. 105 ff.) 
identifies Mundira with Konarak. 

3. See T. P. Bhattacharya, The Canons of Indian Art, 1963, p. 489. 
For the late date of such lists found even in the Afvalayana Grhya- 
silira (not to speak of its Parisista), see Winternitz, A History of Indian Lite 
rature, Vol. 1, 1927, p. 471, note 2—“The date of the Afcaldyana Grhya- 
siitra is, however, entirely unknown, and lists of this nature could easily 
have been enlarged at any time in Avaldyanc’s school. For this reason, we 
are not justified in drawing in chronological conclusion from this passage.” 
The passage in question relates to the mention of Bhdrata and Mahabharata 
in a list of teachers and sacred books (III. 4.4.). 

4. See, e.g., the Kendupatna plates (first set) of Narasiraha II, edited 
by N. N. Vasu in Journ, As. Soc. Beng. , Vol. LXV, Part I, 1896, pp. 229 
ff,; the Asankhali plates of the same king in Ep. Jnd., Vol. XXXI, p. 123 
(text lines ees) iio di 

Eaves foalaien oe mt =ca 
print patie saha mahat belagecaie Bi. 
kone kujirakam=acikarad=Usmarasmeh |/ 


SUN TEMPLE AT MUNDIRA 249 


which name is probably a modification of Konakon-arka, 
‘Arka (Sun-god) of Konakona’. The worship of the Sun at 
Konarak is mentioned in some other Puranas. Thus the 
Brahma Purana,» another medieval work in its present form, 
speaks of the great importance of the Sun-god named Kon-Aarka 
ot Kon-dditya worshipped on the sea-shore in the Odra or 
Utkala country. The mention of the locality as Konakona 
in the thirteenth century epigraph seems to suggest that 
Konarak is not so called because of its position ‘in the north- 
east corner (kona) with respect to Puri’.* 

Since king Narasirhha I was a devotee of the god Visnu 
with some inclination to the original Saivism of his ancestors,? 
it may be that the king was not a special devotee of the Sun 
so that he could have installed the Sun-god at Konakona 
after being cured of a desease like leprosy through the god’s 
grace; otherwise, he only constructed the temple or made 
arrangements or paid money for its construction at the en- 
treaty of the devotees of the god already in worship at the place; 
but, in any case, it is difficult to be sure that Mundira was the 
older name of the place because, in that case, this celebrated 
name would probably have been used in the inscriptions. In 
case Narasirnha I installed the god in the middle of the thir- 
teenth century, Mundira may have been different from 
Konarak, because all the Puranic references to Mungira may 
not be later than the said date. It may be noticed that the 
epigraphic verse speaks of the construction of the temple and 
not of the installation of the god. 

The Bhavisya Purdna* says that the three famous places 
of Sun worship in Jambu-dvipa are Mundira, Kalapriya and 
Mitravana [in the Punjab] and that the god resides perma- 
nently at Sambapura [in Mitravana, i.e. at Miltan]. Else- 


1. See Chapter 28. 

2. Of. R. CG. Hazra, Studies in the Upapurdnas, Vol. I, p. 105, note 
164; M. M. Ganguly, Orissa and her Remains , p. 437. 

3. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXII, p. 43. The king’s father Anafigabhima 
III dedicated the Ganga kingdom to the god Purusottama-Jagannatha 
of Puri and thenceforth the Gariga kings and their successors ruled the kingdom 
theoretically as vassals of the god. See Sircar, in Indian Studies : Past & 
Present, Vol. VIII, No. 3, “April-June, 1967, pp. 269 ff.; also above, pp. 


59 ff. 4 
4. I. 72. 4-63 see Hazra, op. cit. p. 101, note 151. 


250 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


where in the same Purana,’ the name Mundira is given as 
Sutira, literally, ‘the beautiful [sea]-shore’. In the place 
of Sutira, Kalapriya and Mitravana, the Bhavisya Purana else- 
where mentions Pundirasvamin (sic—Mundirasvamin), Kala- 
priya and Milasthana* and also Sundirasvamin (sic—Mundi- 
rasvamin), Ka4lapriya and Mitravana.* This would suggest 
the identification of Mitravana and Millasthdna or the location 
of Milasthana in Mitravana. The Vardha Purdna‘ refers to 
three images of the Sun-god installed by Samba, the first on 
the Uday-dcala, the second called K4lapriya to the south of 
the Yamuna and the third called Milasthana on the Astaman- 
acala. This would equate Uday-acala and Mundira. 
According to another section of the Skanda Purdaya,5 the 
sun resides in the morning as Mundirasvamin at Gangasagara- 
sangama, [at mid-day] as Kalapriya [on the bank of the 
Yamuna] and in the evening [at Milasthana] on the bank 
of the Candrabhaga. The Samba Purdpa* says that Mundira 
was the name of the Sun-god installed in the Sun’s penance 
forest [in Orissa] on the sea-shore. This would suggest the 
identification of Mundira with Konarak. It has, however, to 
be noted that the said section of the Samba Purdya is an inter- 
polation in the original work according to Hazra? who thinks 
that it was inserted in the Purana for the special purpose of 
glorifying the sanctity of the Orissan holy places. Even the 
name Mitravana, situated on the bank of the Candrabhaga 
in the Punjab, has been applied to the Orissan holy place.® 


1, I, 129. 16b-17a. The stanza speaks of the Sun’s proximity at 
Sutira in the forenoon, at Kalapriya at mid-day and ‘here’ (Mitravana) 
in the afternoon. 

2, I, 189. 23-26. 

3. I. 55+ 27+ 

4, Chap. 177. 

5. Prabhasa-khanda, i. 139. 11-12 : 

Mundirasvdminam pratar=Gangdsdgara-sangame | 
Kalopriyara c= dstamane Candrabhaga-taje sthitam |/ 

‘The second half of the stanza seems to be an awkward combination of 
two halves. 

6. Chaps. 42-43. 

cit. 
Shab‘ Pinay 42.2. 


SUN TEMPLE AT MUNDIRA 251 


The name Candrabhaga was also applied to an Orissan stream, 
a branch of the Prdci river.? 

The Skanda Purana reference to the worship of Mundira- 
svamin at Gangasagarasangama may suggest that originally 
the god was associated with the holy confluence of the Ganga 
and the sea, even though, like the name Candrabhaga applied 
to an Orissan stream, some locality in the Puri coast may 
have later been called Gangasagarasangama.* This seems to 
be supported by the Varaha Purana reference to Mundirasvamin’s 
worship on the Uday-acala which was the mythical Sun-rise 
mountain on the eastern fringe of India. The name Udayagiri, 
however, was also later applied to a spur of the Assia range in 
Orissa. It may, however, be noticed that both the Sun-rise 
mountain associated with the Eastern Sea and the confluence 
of the Ganga and the said Sea are sometimes placed on the 
eastern boundary of the Indian Cakravarti-ksetra;? but neither 
Puri nor any other place in Orissa enjoys that distinction. On 
the other hand, Puri is often associated with the Southern 
Sea. 

We had occasion to discuss the ancient glory of the 
Gangasagarasangama, which was originally the greatest tirtha 
in Eastern India situated near the eastern border of India, and 
to show how, on the decline of the importance of Gangasagara- 
sangama, its glory was gradually appropriated by the medieval 
Puri-tirtha.5 The transport of the names Gangasagarasan- 
gama, Udayagiri and Mundira to Orissa may be ascribed to 
the above period. 

It may be noted that the Bhavisya Purdna* mentions Ganga- 


1. Hazra, op. cit., p. 106. 

2. See ibid., p. 107. : 

3. Gf. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India, 2nd 
ed., pp. 9 ff. (for the Sun-rise mountain) and p. 11 (Gafigasamet-ambudhi 
in the Gaudalekhaméld, p. 36, verse 7). 

4. See Journ, As. Soc., Letters , Vol. XVII, p. 25  (4i-Purusottama- 

* katake Daksina-mahodadhi-tire); Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, p. 257. (ri-Purusot- 
tama-kgetre Daksina-tirthardja-tafe); ibid., Vol. XXX, p. 322 (veléyém Daksine 
abdher= Musaladhara-Gadapéni-samcdsa-vedsém). 

5+ Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India, and ed., pp. 
220 fl. 

6. 1. 55+ 24-30. 








252 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 
dvara, Gangasagara, Kalapriya, Mitravana and Sundirasva- 
min (sic—Mundirasvamin) in a list of tirthas to be named at 
the bathing ceremony of the Sun’s image during its annual 
worship. This may also refer to an age after the grafting of 
Mundirasvamin to Orissa. What is interesting here is that 
Gangasagara is associated with the worship of the Sun-god. 
This is an aspect of the tirtha which seems to have been later 
forgotten. 


APPENDIX I 
Repudiation of Buddhism by the Candras 


The royal family of the Candras of South-East Bengal 
adopted Buddhism as well as the Buddhist symbol of the 
Dharmacakra as the emblem on their seal. The kings of the 
dynasty were called Paramasaugata, i.e. devout follower of the 
Sugata or Buddha. Of the published copper-plate records of 
the family, the grants of Sricandra (c. 925-75 A.D.) were 
made in the name of the Buddha-bhattaraka.1_ The recently 
published Mainamati plates* of Ladahacandra (c. 1000-20 
A.D.) and Govindacandra (c. 1020-55 A.D.), however, show 
that the latest members of the Candra family repudiated the 
Buddhist faith of their predecessors and that they made grants 
of land in favour of a Vaisnavite or Saivite deity in the name 
of Vasudeva-bhattaraka or Siva-bhattaraka. Although _ these 
two kings were also conventionally called Paramasaugata, their 
documents make it clear that they adopted Pauranic Hinduism, 
Ladahacandra being specially devoted to the god Visnu, and 
Govindacandra to Siva.! Ladahacandra’s gifts were made 
in favour of the Vaisnavite god Ladahamadhava-bhattaraka, 
installed by and named after himself. ‘Ladahamadhava’ 
really means ‘Madhava installed by or named after Ladaha’, 
and Madhava is a well-known name of the god Visnu-Krsna. 
Govindacandra made his grant in favour of the dancing form 
of Siva called Natteévara (or Narteévara)* whose worship may 
have been popularised in Bengal by South Indian settlers. 
The records of both the kings abound in references to Hindu 
mythology; but there is not a single reference to any Buddhist 
legend in them. Ladahacandra visited Varanasi and Prayaga 
on pilgrimage, though, significantly enough, Varanasi is 
associated in the Mainamati inscriptions with Siva and 

See, e.g., the Rampal plate of Sricandra in Majumdar’s Ins. 
Beng., "Vol. Til, pp. tf 
'2. Pakistan Archacology, No. 3, 1966, Karachi, pp. 22-55. 
3. ue possible to think that Ladahacandra received initiation in the 


Virow-mag and Govindacandra in the Siva-mantra. 
Oh ep Ind., Vol. XVII, p. 951. 


254 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Parvati, and the god Brahman, and not with the Buddha’s 
turning of the Wheel of Law at the Mrgadava (Sarnath). 

An analysis of the Mainamati records in order to show 
the Hindu leanings of the two monarchs is made below. 

The two grants of Ladahacandra begin with the Vaisnavite 
mangala—Om namo bhagavate Vasudevaya and introduce in verse 
1 the Moon-god, the progenitor of the Candra dynasty, as spring- 
ing from the eye of the sage Arti. Candra’s rise from Atri’s 
eye is not only noticed in the Puranas! and numerous epigra- 
phical and literary works, but is even supported by such names 
of the Moon-god as Atrijata, Atridrgja, Atrinetraja, Atri- 
netrabhi, etc., recognised in the lexicons. In verse 2, the 
Hindu Trinity is introduced in the description of the dynasty 
as deva-tray-Gtman by using the words vidhdté (Brahman), 
acyuta (Kysna-Visnu) and mahefoara (Siva) each in two 
different senses. Verse 7 describes king Kalyanacandra as 
pure or purifying (pdvana) like the waters of the Trisrotas 
(Ganges). Verse 9 says how Kalyanacandra’s queen 
Kalyanadevi gave birth to Ladahacandra just as Kunti gave 
birth to Satyavac (Yudhisthira) and Rudrani to the god 
Mahasena (Skanda Karttikeya). The same stanza represents 
king Kalyanacandra as Purugottama (Visnu) and Kalyana- 
devi not only as Laksmi, but also as worshipping the said goddess. 
Verse 11 states how at Ladahacandra’s birth, the divine drum 
sounded, the Vidyddharas danced, flowers dropped from 
heaven, pleasant winds blew and the goddess of earth, together 
with the ocean, became highly gladdened. Ladahacandra is 
described in verse 12 as having the goddesses Gir (Sarasvati), 
Sri (Laksmi) and Vasundhara (Earth) under his control. 
This verse also mentions the king’s mastery of all the sciences 
while verse 9 of Govindacandra’s grant speaks of his kavitoa 
and panditya as we shall see below, so that the king may be 
identified, as we have elsewhere suggested, with the poet 
named Ladahacandra known from Sanskrit anthologies.? Verse 
14 indirectly represents the king, through a series of puns, as 
the gods Purusottama (Visnu) and ‘the Victor of Kama’ 
(Siva). 

According to verse 16, Ladahacandra visited Varanasi, 


1. Bhagavata Purépa, 1X. 14.3. 
2. Ep. Ind, Vol. XXVIII, p. 339, note 7. 


APPENDIX I 255 


the abode of Sambhu and Girisuta (Parvati), took bath in the 
waters of the Ganges and offered tarpana to his ancestors and 
granted gold to numerous Brahmanas. Verse 17 also speaks 
of the king’s pilgrimage to Varanasi, purified by the waters 
of the Ganges where the god Svabhi (Brahman) performed 
ten ASvamedhas [at the Dasasvamedha Ghat] and the god 
Srikantha (Siva) and the goddess Durga resided happily. 
Verse 18 describes similar pious activities of the king at the 
junction of the Ganga and the Yamuna (Prayaga near 
Allahabad). The next stanza refers to the gifts made by the 
king at the said tirtha which is sanctified by the Ganga and 
the Yamuna and is the place where the eternal banyan tree 
(aksaya-vafa) stands. It is well known that there is one aksaya- 
vata at Prayaga and another at Gaya.’ 

The two charters of king Ladahacandra record the 
grant of several villages and plots of land in the name of Lord 
Vasudeva in favour of the deity Ladahamadhava-bhattaraka 
installed at Pattikeraka by the king himself for the increase of 
the religious merit and fame of his own self and his parents. 

Verse 2 in Govindacandra’s plate introduces the Moon- 
god who sprang from Atri’s eye and was progenitor of the royal 
family to which the donor belonged. Verse 4 describes Sri- 
candra, the donor’s great-grandfather, as more intelligent 
than Vagisa (the god Brahman) and as the master of the 
sciences (vidya). Verse 6 introduces Sricandra’s son and 
successor Kalyanacandra as equal to Bali in liberality, Rama 
in prowess causing fear to the enemies, Yudhisthira in truth- 
fulness and Arjuna in great prowess, though it is difficult to 
be sure as to which one of the three Ramas (viz. Rama 
Daéarathi, Rama Jamadagnya and Rama Haladhara) is 
meant. Verse 8 says that, just as the Golden Mountain 
(Sumeru) is accessible to the celestial beings known as Vidya- 
dhara, Ladahacandra could be easily approached by the 
learned men (vidyddhara). Verse 9 refers to Ladahacandra’s 
pilgrimage to Varanasi and his bath in the waters of the 
Ganges as well as to this kavitvua and pdnditya.2 Verse 10 in- 


1. See Kane, Hist, Dharm., Vol. IV, pp. 603-53; also Ep. Jnd., 
Vol. IL, p. 4; Vol. XXXVI, p. 92; ete. 
2, Cf. our remarks on verse 12 of his own grants, above, p. 254. 


256 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


troduces his queen Saubhagyadevi who is stated to have been 
like Siva’s wife Siva and Hari’s wife Sri. Verse 13 represents 
young Govindacandra as equal to Saktiman Mahasena (Maha- 
sena, holder of the fakti, i.c., Skanda-Karttikeya) and his 
parents to Siva and Siva who were the latter’s parents. Verse 
15 states that he was equal to Akhandala (Indra) the king of 
the godsin splendour, the Sun in terrible vigour and Mrkanda’s 
son (Markanda or Markandeya) in the matter of long life. 
Verse 16 of the inscription contains a prayer to the gods 
Svayambhi, Hari and Hara, i.e., the Hindu Trinity. 

The grant recorded in the document was made perma- 
nently in favour of the god Nattesvara-bhattaraka in the name 
of Lord Siva for the religious merit and fame of the donor 
and his parents. 

As against the above points, the epithet Paramasaugata 
applied to the names of the kings and the Dharmacakra-mudra 
affixed to their grants appear to be a mere legacy of the past. 
The Buddhist marigala in verse 1 in Govindacandra’s grant 
which is a prayer to the Buddhist Triad, the Jina (Buddha), 
Dharma and Sangha, may also be explained in the same way. 
It is, however, interesting to note that the author who com- 
posed this Buddhistic stanza was also the author of the various 
other verses of the record, discussed above, which allude to 
Hindu mythology. He appears to be a Hinduised Buddhist 
like the author of the tortoise shell inscriptions in the Dacca 
Museum, in which the first foot of the Buddhist margala 
stanza (nifreyasdy=dstu Fino jandndm) occurs together with an 
adoration to the god Vasudeva.* There is no other trace of 
Buddhism in the Mainamati records of Ladahachandra and 
Govindacandra. It may be noted that the Vaisnava king 
Ladahacandra named his son Govindacandra after the god 
Govinda, i.e., Krsna-Visnu. 

In the early medieval period, the Buddhists of Eastern 
India appear to have been attracted more and more by some 
of the Hindu gods and goddesses, the epico-Puranic literature, 
the religious festivals and the mythological shows and drama- 
tical performances of the Hindus especially because they had 

1. The story of the long-lived sage is told in the Puranas, e.g., Padma, 
Srsti-khanda, Ch. XXXIII, and Skanae, Nagara-khanda, Ch. XXI, and 


Prabbdsa-khanda, Ch. XLI 
2. See above, pp. 189 ff. 


APPENDIX I 257 


themselves not enough that was as attractive. On the other 
hand, some of the popular deities and festivals of the Buddhists 
were gradually appropriated by the Hindus or were popular 
among the Hinduised Buddhists. These points! appear to be 
emphasised by the evidence of the Mainamati plates of Ladaha- 
candra and Govindacandra discussed above. Of course in 
this age, the Buddha was already accepted by the Brahmanical 
Hindus as an incarnation of Vignu, and there is indirect allu- 
sion to this aspect of the problem in the tortoise-shell inscrip- 
tions referred to above, but not in the Mainamati records. 


1, They have already been referred to above, pp. 185 ff. 


APPENDIX II 
Gems for the Propitiation of Planets 


We know that the Indian students of astronomy, mathe- 
matics and some other subjects generally composed their works 
in verse and that the work on some of the subjects necessitated 
the repeated mention of numbers, ¢.g., in the setting and solv- 
tion of the problems of arithmetical sums. There was, how- 
ever, usually one numerical word in Sanskrit to indicate a 
particular number (e.g., eka for ‘one’), and since the repeated 
use of the same word in the same sense was a bad style of com- 
position and such a word would often not easily suit the metre 
of a stanza, the authors required a large number of words to 
indicate the same number. Therefore a conception gradually 
developed, according to which non-numerical words which 
can somehow be associated with particular numbers were used 
to imply those numbers. Thus all the Sanskrit words mean- 
ing ‘the hand’ came to be used to indicate ‘two’ because man 
has only two hands. Likewise, all the words meaning ‘arrow’ 
were employed in the sense of ‘five’ since the Indian god of 
love is represented in mythology as armed with five arrcws of 
flowers. When there were more than one tradition regarding 
the number associated with a particular object, only one of 
them was adopted because precision was the very basis of scien- 
tific treatises. Thus, although the Vedas are traditionally 
three or four and the oceans (samudra, etc.) four or seven, the 
early astronomers, mathematicians and others used the said 
words in the sense respectively of ‘four’ and ‘seven’ only. But 
uncritical writers of the medieval age are often found to have 
violated the old convention and introduced a good deal of con- 
fusion by using often one word in several numerical senses.! 

G. H. Ojha points out that the fashion of expressing a 
number by an ordinary word is old, though it became popular 
from the sixth and seventh centuries A. D.* He has traced the 


1. On this subject, see Sircar, Indian Epigraphy, pp. 228 ff. 
2. Bhiratiya Pracin Lipimala, p. 121. 


APPENDIX II 259 


use of the word kyta in the sense of ‘four’ in the Satapatha 
(XIIL.3.2.1) and Taittiriye (1.5.11.1) Brahmanas, and that 
of gayatri=24 and jagati=48 in the Katyayana (Weber’s ed., 
p. 1015) and Latyayana (IX. 4.31) Srautas@tras. Such expres- 
sions have been often used in the Vedériga-jyotisa and Pingala’s 
Chandafsitra and more frequertly by Varahamihira (sixth 
century), Brahmagupta (seventh century) and other later 
writers. 

How the numerical sense of the word ratna has suffered 
in the hands of medieval writers is illustrated by the fact 
that it is found to indicate no less than three numbers —five, 
nine and fourteen. It may be noticed that these conceptions 
have not been influenced by the early Buddhist ideas about 
the number of ratnas. In Pali literature, the jewels are pri- 
marily three, viz., Buddha, Dharma and Sangha; but mention 
is often made of the seven rainas as (1) gold, (2) silver, (3) 
pearl, (4) ruby (mani, ie. médnikya), (5) cat’s-eye, (6) 
diamond and (7) coral, while the seven ratnas of the Cakra- 
vartin are (1) wheel (i.e. chariot or state), (2) elephant, 
(3) horse, (4) gem or ruby (mani), (5) queen, (6) the 
house-holder subjects and (7) crown-prince.* 

The pafica-ratna are enumerated variously in Brahma- 
nical literature, one of the stanzas running as follows:— 

nilakam vajrakarh c=eti padmaragas=ca mauktikam | 

prabdlam c= eti vijneyar pafica-ratnam manisibhib |/ 
They are here given as the sapphire, diamond, ruby, pearl 
and coral. Another stanza enumerating the pajica-ratna runs 
as follows: — 

suvarnarh rajatam muktd rdjavartam prabalakam | 

ratna-paficakam = dkhydtam..........0.024+ I 
This list mentions the five ratnas as gold, silver, pearl, diamond 
and coral. The third list of the paftca-ratna is the following:— 

kanakarn hirakam nilam padmaragati=ca mauktikam | 

patica-ratnam=idarh proktam=rsibhift pirva-darsibhif || 
Mention is here of gold, diamond, sapphire, ruby and pearl. 


1, See Sircar, op. cit., pp. 231-32; also Apte’s Sans.-Eng. Dict., s.v. 
pasixan, navan and catur for the passages quoted below. 

2, See Childers’ Pali-English Dictionary, s. v. ratana. Parindyaka, the 
seventh of the Cakravartin’s ratnas, may also mean ‘an adviser’, 


260 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


The last of the three verses has been quoted in the Sabda- 
kalpadruma, under pajica-ratnam, from Hemiadri. It also says 
that, according to the Gauda people, the list enumerates 
kanaka, rajata, prabéla, mauktika, and rdajapatta, i.e. gold, silver, 
coral, pearl and diamond. From this well-known conception 
of the five ratnas, the five most admired episodes of the Mahd- 
bharata are sometimes called pafica-raina.* 

Likewise. the nava-ratna are enumerated as :— 

mukta-manikya-vaidfrya-gomeda vajra-vidrumau | 

padma(puspa)rago marakatarh nilaf= c= eti_yatha-kramam || 
Mention is made in this list of—pearl, ruby, cat’s eye, Jacinth, 
diamond, coral, topaz, emerald and sapphire. 

The Sabdakalpadruma quotes the above stanza from the 
Tantrasdra under nava-ratnam, but cites some other verses from 
the Dipika indicating the following list of jewels required for 
the propitiation of the nine grahas —(1) vaidirya (cat’s eye) 
for the Sun, (2) nila (sapphire) for the Moon, (3) ménikya 
(ruby) for Mars, (4) padma(puspa)raga (topaz) for Mer- 
cury, (5) mukta (pearl) for Jupiter, (6) vajra (diamond) for 
Venus, (7) nila (sapphire) for Saturn, (8) jacinth (gomeda) 
for Rahu, and (9) marakata (emerald) for Ketu. It seems that 
the two lists are the same and that nila has been twice men- 
tioned in the second list through mistake in place of vidruma 
or prabéla meaning coral.* 

In the same way, the Caturdafa-ratna are enumerated in 
the following stanza :— 


1. Apte, op. cit., 8.v. farncan; see also Monier-William’s Sans.-Eng. 
Dict., s.v.fafica. According to Bandyopadhyay’s Vargiya Sabdakosa, 8. v., 
fafica-ratna, also means a group of five didactic stanzas. 

2. In the Mrcchakafika, Act IV, there is a Prakrit passage enumerat- 
ing the following jewels—vaidirya (cat’s eye), mauktika (pearl), frabdla 
(coral), ¢uspardea (topaz), indranila (nila, sapphire), fadm 1aa (ruby), 
marakata (emerald) and what is called kakketaraa (karketaraka)) or kakkeraa 
(karkerake). The Nog name is found in Reni lexicons as karketana for 
which see also the Garuda Purdna, Part I, Chapter 75. Monier-Williams 
recognises the forms karkenata (from Caraka) karketila (from the lexi- 
cons) and explains it as a kind of quartz. In the Mrcchakafika, the word may 
mean sphatika or crystal, though the Garuda Purépa has a separate chapter 
on sphafika (chap. 79).. The said Furdaa (Part I, J, Chapters 60-8 ) des- 
cribes (1) vajra, (oJ “uk, (3) padmardga, (4) marakata, gy (6) 
vaidirya, (7) fusparaga, (8) ark, ay ee: (10), Ries nGoe racers, 
(12) sphafika, and (13) vidruma. 

Ghap. 68, verses 9-10. 


APPENDIX It 261 


Laksmi: kaustubha-parijataka-suré Dhanvantarif = Candrama 
gavak kamadughaf suresvara-gajo Rambh-adi-dev-anganak | 
afvak sapta-mukho visam Hari-dhanuk Sankho=’mytam c= 
Gmbudhe 
ratnan=iha ... pratidinam kuryuh sada mangalam |/ 
The fourteen ratnas that came out of the ocean after it had been 
churned are—the goddess Laksmi, the jewel kaustubha, the 
parijata plant, wine, Dhanvantari, the Moon, the wish-fulfilling 
cow, Indra’s elephant (Airavata), the celestial damsels in- 
cluding Rambha, the ‘seven-faced’ horse (Uccaihéravas),’ 
poison which Siva drank, Hari’s bow (rainbow), the conch- 
shell, and nectar. 

The above conception of the nine gems was utilised by 
Ganaka Kalidasa who wrote the astronomical work Jyotirvida- 
bharana in the thirteenth or sixteenth century? in enumerat- 
ing, for the first time, the gems of courtiers at the court of 
king Vikramaditya whom tradition represents as the founder of 
the Vikrama ‘era of 58 B.C. The stanza in the Jyotirvidabharana 
runs as follows :— : 

Dhanvantari. Ksaponak-Amarasimha-Sa tku- 

Vetalabhat{a-Ghajakarpara-Kalidasah | 

khyadto Vardhamihiro nypateh sabhayamh 

retndni vai Vararucir = nava Vikramasya |/* 

The list includes the following nine names—Dhanvantari, 
Ksapanaka, Amarasirnha, Sanku, Vetalabhatta, Ghatakarpara, 
Kalidasa, Varahmihira and Vararuci. Of these nine, Varaha- 
mihira is known to have flourished in the sixth century A.D. 
and not in the‘middle of the first century B.C. whence the 
so-called Vikrama era started. According to Prthusvamin, 
a commentator on Brahmagupta’s works, Varahamihira died 
in Saka 509=587 A.D. Varahamihira’s own Pajicasidhan- 
tiké, however, quotes the year of the Saka-kdla counted by 
sapt-dsvi-veda, ie. 7, 2 and 4 or Saka 427 (505 A.D.) accord- 
ing to the principle aikaném vamato gatih.t Thus the idea of 


1. Sapta-mukha is not a usual epithet of the Uccaihéravas. 

2. Keith, A History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 534; Winternitz, A 
History of Indian Literature, Vol. 111, Part Il, p. 659; Sircar, Ancient Malwa 
and the Virkamdditya Tradition, pp. 120 ff. 

3. Apte, op. cié., 8.v. navan. 

4. See Sircar, ‘Ancient Malwa and the Vikramaditya Tradition, p. 126, 





note 42. 


262 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


the nava-raina at Vikramaditya’s court is a late concoction. This 
view is supported by other evidences discussed in our Ancient 
Malwa and the Vikramaditya Tradition, pp. 106 ff.(cf. pp. 120 ff.) 
to which we may now add the fact that the conception of the 
nava-raina or nine precious objects from which the idea of 
Vikrama’s nine courtiers was borrowed is itself a late one. Its 
lateness is indicated by the fact that the word raina_ is not found 
in the sense of ‘nine’ in any early work. 

It will also be seen from the above discussion that the 
number of different lists is the largest in the case of the paitca- 
ratna, the conception of which was therefore more popular than 
that of the nava-ratna and caturdafa-ratna. Probably the idea 
of the nava-ratna developed out of the requirement of nine gems 
for the propitiation of the nine planets. This seems also to 
suggest that the pafica-ratna conception is older than nava-ratna 
and caturdafa-ratna, so that the idea of the nine learned men 
at Vikramaditya’s court was formulated not much earlier than 
the medieval age. 

That the idca of the propitiation of the unfavourable 
planets by wearing gems passed through several stages of 
development can be easily proved. Early works prescribing 
the worship and appeasement of the planets do not speak of 
the gems at all, while the wearing of jewels is prescribed for 
kings for prosperity, etc., even in some early medieval texts 
without any reference to the planets. On the other hand, 
works assignable to the age before the late medieval period 
prescribe the appeasement of the various planets by wearing 
certain objects including mostly metals (both cheap and costly) 
and rarely a gem and some other object. In later works, nine 
gems are prescribed for the propitiation of nine planets, while 
very late works offer separate lists of gems, metals and other 
objects for the appeasement of each one of the planets. 

Thus the Yajnavalkyasmyti' (c. 4th century A.D.), which 


295: -308 (or 309). The Agni Purdna (Ch. 164) copies 

stanzas, while the Brhadyogayatrd (Ch. 18, verses 1-24) — of 
a (6th century; cf. also the Yogayatré, Ch. 6) adds a few details 
hess and there. Yajfiavalkya’s short and simple graha-yajfa has become 
an elaborate affair in later works like the Bhavigyottara Purépa(141. 6-85). See 
Kane, Hist., Dharm. Vol. V, pp. 749 ff. For the development of the 
conception of the planets, see Sircar, Cosmography and Geography in Early 
Indian Literature, p. 13. 





APPENDIX It 263 


is one of the earliest works prescribing graha-pijé or graha-yajita, 
does not speak of any gem or any other object which one could 
wear for appeasing the planets. It is interesting to note that 
the Garuda Purdna, which is a medieval work in its present 
form,' offers valuable evidence on the subject. In one place, 
it enumerates thirteen varieties of jewels and prescribes the 
wearing of all of them for prosperity, etc., though no mention 
is made of the planets in this connection. Elsewhere the same 
Purana prescribes the following objects (which cannot all: be 
called gems) for the said purpose (1) Sun—copper, (2) 
Moon—bell-metal, (3) Mars—crystal, (4) | Mercury—red- 
sandal, (5) Jupiter—gold, (6) Venus—silver, (7) Saturn— 
iron, (8) Rahu—lead, and (9) Ketu—bell-metal.* A simliar 
list is found in the medieval Afvalayana Grhyasitra Parisista; ¢.g., 
(1) Sun—copper, (2) Moon—crystal, (3) Mars—red-sandal, 
(4) Mercury—gold, (5) Jupiter—gold, (6) Venus—silver, 
(7) Saturn—iron, (8 Rahu—lead, and (9) Ketu—bronze.? 
A later work cited by U. N. Mukhopadhyay in his Jyotisaratna- 
kara,‘ gives the list as follows: (1) Sun—copper, (2) Moon— 
conch-shell, (3) Mars—coral (vidruma), (4) Mercury—gold, 
(5) Jupiter—silver, (6) Venus—..., (7) Saturn—lead 
(trapu), (8) Rahu—diamond (rdjapatta) and (9) Ketu— 
iron. It has to be noticed that the lists do not tally with one 
another and that they contain the names not only of jewels, 
but also of metals and other objects. But Mukhopadhyay also 
quotes the Dipikd stanzas referred to above which prescribe 
nine real gems for the nine planets.5 In his Bhdrate Fyotis- 


1. See Sircar, Stud. Geog. Anc. Med. Ind., 2nd ed., p. 29; above, 
Pp. 250, note 2. 
2. Vangavasi ed., Part I, Chap. ror, verses 2-3. Cf. 
témra-késnsya-sphatikde=ca raktacandana-svarnakat / 
rajatéd=ayasah sisat kamsyad=drstih prasamyati |/ 
3. See T. P. Bhattacharya, The Canons of Indian Art, 1963, pp. 489-90. 
For the late date of such lists found even in the Afvaldsana Grlyasiitra (not 
to speak of its Parifisfa), see Winternitz, A History of Indian Literature, Vol. 
I, 1927, p. 471, note 2. See also above, p. 248, note 3. 
4. Vasumati Sahitya Mandir, Calcutta, p. 391. 
5. Ibid., p. 390 + 
vaiditryar dhérayet Stiye nilai=ca Mrgalaiichane | 
Avaneye="pi manikyams padmardgam Sasankaje |/ 
Gurau muktém Bhrgau vajram=indranilam Sanaiscare | 
Rahau gomedakarh dharyarh Ketau marakatam tathé |/ 


264 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


carcad O Kosthi-vicdrer Sitravali,) N.N. Bagal offers separate 
lists of (a) objects pleasing to the planets, (b) gems for wear- 
ing with a view to pleasing them and (c) to removing their 
disfavour and (d) metals to be worn for pleasing them, on 
the authority of several late works, as follows: (1) Sun 
—(a) copper, (b) ruby (mdnikya), (c) cat's-eye (vaidarya) 
and (d) gold, copper; (2) Moon—(a) _ silver, conch-shell, 
(b) pearl (mukia), (c) sapphire (nila) and (d) silver, conch- 
shell; (3) Mars —(a) gold, copper, vermillion, red arsenic 
(manafsila), red chalk (gairika) ; (b) coral, (c) ruby 
(mdnikya) and (d) copper, iron; (4) Mercury—(a) mer- 
cury, gold, bell-metal, (b) emerald (marakata), (c) topaz 
(pusparéga) and (d) mercury; (5) Jupiter—(a) gold, zinc 
(dasté), myrobalan, (b) topaz (pusparaga), (c) pearl (mukia) 
and (d) zinc; (6) Venus—(a) silver, (b) diamond,  (c) 
diamond and (d) lead, silver; (7) Saturn—(a) lead, iron, 
(b) sapphire (nila), (c) sapphire (nil@) and (d) lead; (8) 
R&hu—(a) duro grass, sandal, (b) jacinth (gomeda), (c)jacinth 
and (d) iron; and (9) Ketu—(a) kufa grass, camphor 
(karpira), (b) cat’s-eye (vaidirya) , (c) emerald (marakata) 
and (d) iron, diamond. Such lists are not found in early works. 


Indeed the divergence among the lists proves the worth- 
less character of astrological prescriptions. Another point to 
be remembered in this connection is that, even if it is believed 
that planets may have some influence on the destiny of man, 
R4ahu and Ketu are not planets at all. They are merely the 
ascending and descending nodes of the moon. 


1. Indian Associated Publishing Co., Calcutta, B.S. 1372, pp. 254-55. 


APPENDIX III 
Narasimha Cult 


The theory of the Avatéra (Descent or Incarnation) of a 
god, as we have seen, is based essentially on his identification 
with men and animals endowed, in old tales, with mysterious 
powers of assistance and molestation, an animal of the type 
being the modern figer-god Daksinaraya of the Sundarbans 
in Lower Bengal. Many such divinities were identified with 
the god Visnu at a later date.? 

The worship of the Avatdras of Visnu is an important 
feature of Bhagavatism in the Gupta age, the germ of the 
Avatéra conception having been traced in the later Vedic lite- 
rature. While, however, the conception of the Vamana (Dwarf) 
form, associated with Visnu, and of the Varaha (Boar), Matsya 
(Fish) and Karma (Tortoise) forms, not yet connected with 
the said god, have been traced in the Satapatha and other Brah- 
manas, it is only in the late Taittiriya Aranyaka that we have 
an allusion to the Narasirnha (Man-lion) incarnation © of 
Vignu together with the Varaha. Of these two, Varaha has 
been the most popular Avatéra of Vignu in all parts of India 
since the early centuries of the Christian era. But the Mahd- 
bhérata also points to the growing popularity of the Narasirhha 
(Man-lion) form of the god? from about the same age. 

The Narayaniya section of the Mahabharata includes Nara- 
sirhha in several lists of the Avatéras of Visnu e.g., (1) 4 
Avatéras—Boar, Dwarf, Man-lion and Man (Vasudeva-Krsna) ; 
(2) 6 Avatdras—the said 4 together with Rama-Bhargava and 
Rama-Dasarathi; and (3) 10 Avatdéras—the above 6 together 
with Harhsa, Karma, Matsya and Kalki or Kalkin. It is 
well known that the number 10 for the Avatéras of Vigsnu was 
gradually stereotyped in the Puranas, the popular list of 
the 10 Avataras consisting of (1) Matsya, (2) Karma, 
(3) Varaha, (4) Narasirhha, (5) Vamana, (6) Rama- 
Bhargava, (7) Rama-Dagarathi, (8) Rama-Sarnkarsana, 


1. Gf. above, p. 42; also The Classical Age, ed. Majumdar, p. 415. 
2. Above, pp. 42-43. 


266 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


(9) Buddha and (10) Kalkin.1 We have seen that the 
Puranic stanza giving these 10 names is quoted in a South 
Indian inscription of the 8th century A.D.,‘ while the Dasa- 
vatara panel in the Sirpur Laksmana temple of the same age 
also represents the said 10 forms of the god Visnu.? 

The evidence indicated above would suggest that the 
Man-lion incarnation of Visnu became popular in the early 
centuries of the Christian era. It is thus rather curious that 
writers on the history of Vaignavism have succeeded in tracing 
the mention of the Narasirhha Avatéra in no inscription earlier 
than the Alina copper-plate record of the Maitraka dynasty 
of Valabhi in Kathiawar (Gujarat State), which was issued 
in the year 766 A.D.‘ It is, however, not generally noticed 
that the popularity of the cult of Narasirhha is clearly indicated 
by a large number of personal names occurring in much earlier 
epigraphic records. 

Just as we have in early inscriptions names like Varaha- 
dasa (‘slave of the Boar form of Visnu’),5 or Varahadinna= 
Varahadatta (‘given by the Boar’, or ‘dedicated to the Boar’) 
and Matsyagupta (‘protected by the fish incarnation of 
Visnu’),6 the names Sihadatta=Sirhhadatta (‘dedicated to 
the Lion or Man-Lion form of Visnu’) and Siharakhita= 
Simharaksita (‘protected by the Sirmha or Narasimha incar- 
nation’) in the Prakrit inscriptions of the first and second cen- 
turies A. D. from Sanchi, Mathura and other places.” A few 


1. Ibid., pp. 43-44. It has been shown that the Purdnic lists of the 10 
Avatéras do not always contain the same names; e.g. the Matsya Purdna 
speaks of 3 divine Avatéras (viz. Narayana, Narasirnha and Vamana) and 
7 human Avatdras (viz. Dattatreya, Mandhatr, Rama-Jamadagnya- 
Bhargava, Radma-Daéarathi, Vedavyasa, the Buddha and Kalkin), while 
the Harivarhéa omits Matsya, Karma, one Rama and the Buddha, but in- 
cludes in their places Padma, Datta (Dattatreya), Keéava and Vyasa. 

2. Cf. above, pp. 42, 187, 194; MASI, No. 26, p. 5. 

3. See MASI, No. 18, pp. 5-6. 

4. CII, Vol. Il, p. 188 and note 1; cf. above, p. 46; The Classical 
Age, p. 417. 

5. CI, Vol. Ill, pp. 124, 129, 134, 139, 156- 

6. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXVIII, p. xi. 

7. Liiders’ List of Inscriptions, Nos. 48, 186, 228, 1cyo, etc. 


APPENDIX IIT 267 


of these records may probably be assigned even to carlier 
dates. 

Names like Sirnhavarman (‘one. whose protector is the 
Lion or Man-lion’), Sirnhavisnu (‘Visnu in the form of the 
Lion or Man-lion’) and Narasirnhavarman (‘one whose pro- 
tector is the Man-lion’) were popular in the Pallava dynasty 
of South India. The earliest such name in the family of the 
Pallava kings is that of Sihavamma= Sirhhavarman of the 
Manchikallu (Guntur District, Andhra Pradesh) inscription 
assigned to the fourth century A.D.1_ The founder of the 
greatness of the Imperial Pallava dynasty was Sirhhavisnu, son 
of Sirnhavarman, both of whom flourished about the last 
quarter of the sixth century. Narasirhhavarman I, also called 
Narasirhhavisnu, was the greatest of the Pallava kings, who 
flourished in c. 630-68 A.D., while his great-grandson, Nara- 
sirnhavarman II (c. 700-25 A.D.), was famous for his building 
activities. The Narasirnha form of Visnu thus seems to have 
been a favourite deity with the Pallava dynasty, many of its 
rulers being Vaisnavas in faith.* 

Sewell’s Historical Inscriptions of Southern India® enumerates 
no less than 40 kings of the early and medieval periods, who 
bore the name Narasirhha. Most of these rulers flourished in 
South India, one distinguished king from the North in the 
said list being Narasithhagupta Baladitya of the Vaisnavite 
Gupta dynasty of Magadha, who reigned in the latter half 
of the fifth or the first quarter of the sixth century A.D. 
Epigraphic evidence thus points to the popularity of the Nara- 
sirnha cult in éarly times, especially in South India. 

Among the medieval kings of other parts of the country, 
who were devoted to the Man-lion form of Visnu, king Laks- 
manasena of Eastern India is described in the epigraphic re- 
cords of the Sena dynasty generally as Paramavaisnava and 
particularly as Paramandrasimha.4 He therefore appears to 
have been especially devoted to the Narasirhnha Avatara. It 


1. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXII, p. 86. 

2. Cf. The Classical Age, pp. 255 ff., 275 ff. 

3. See op. cit., pp. 233-34. 

4. Of. N. G. Majumdar, Ins. Beng., Vol. III, pp. 85, 101 (for 
Paramavaisnava), and pp. 95 , 111 (for Paramandrasitnha). 


268 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


is of course difficult to say whether this has anything to do with 
the South Indian origin of the Sena dynasty. 

Early images of Narasimha together with the Boar and 
Dwarf forms of Visnu are found in the rock-cut temples at 
Udayagiri, Badami and Mamallapuram belonging respectively 
to the Gupta, Early Calukya and Pallava periods.’ 


1. The Classical Age, pp. 425-26; T.A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of 
Hindu Iconography, Vol. 1, pp. 128 ff., Plates XXXVI ff. The fact that the 
Avatdra is often mentioned in early records as Sinha instead of Narasirnha may 
suggest that the deity was once conceived by some as having the form of a 
lion (not a combined form of man and lion). 


INDEX 


Abbé Dubois 217 
‘Abbottabad 105 
abhicdra 190, 193, 200 
‘Abhidhdnappadipil 


Lb) 235 
‘Abhinava-Varanasi 72: kajaka 62 
‘Abhinava-Yayatinagara 201n 
Abhira 29, 38, 40 
Abhona plates 155 
‘Abja 1330 
Abu 1 


Adityasena 49, 84n, 170n, 179 
Afghanistan 109 


agnicayana 1770. 
Agni Purdna 43, 228 and n, 23-37; 


Agnivarman 137 
Agra go and n, 174 
agrahdra 119 


‘Ahicchatra 92 

ahimsd 27 and n, 36-37 
‘Ahirbudhnya-samhitd 33n, 44 and n, 48 
‘Ahmedabad District 246 

‘aiduka 200-01 

Aihole inscription 177 

Ailavila 245 

Aindri 


” ‘Ain-i-Akbari 99, 209 
Airavata 133, 261 


aisvarya RB 

Aitareya Brahmana 4-5, 16 
Aja 51 

Ajam_ Shah 173 

Ajit Singh 173 
Ajivika_19 
Ajmer-Khandwa line 94 


209, 247 and n 
Alauddin 117 
Alexander 209, 212 


Glidha 114 
Alina 46 and n, 50, 266 
147, 175» 195m, a, 208- 
09, 211, 219, 243, 255; pillar ins- 
cription 39 


18; 

Almora District 137, 2180 

Alvar 7m, 54-55 

Amara-kantaka 211 

Amara (author of the Amarakola) 


Amataksta 7, 8: 

}, Bt, 9 
rang ia 
Amarasithha 261 
Amareévara le 228 
‘Ambastha 215; Vaidya 215 


Amber 17274 180, 231; Museum 93 
faruna) 242 


Anasgabhiha III 62-63, 64 and n, 
65, 69 70-72 216n, 249n 


270 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Ahangadevi 113 Artadinast 13190, 18; 25 
Ananta 36n, 44 51, 133, 137, 245  Astamén-dcala 2: 
Anantamirti 137 Astasahasrika Projhdparamité 98 
Ananta-Nag 36, 51 Asura 4, 6, 19, 23 206, 229, 233, 234n. 
Anantavarman Abealay edie Parifisfa 248 
Anantavarman 60-62, 67, n, 263 and 
69, 72 74-75, 201 Afvamedha 20, 164, 167, 168 and n, 
Anargharaghava 76 169, 170 and n, 171-72, 173m, 174- 
Andal 56-5 76, 177m, 178 and n, 181-82, 255 
Andhaka 16-17 Afvasena 139 
Andhra-bhasa 158 Aévatara 1350 
21, 60, 84n, 100, Atak-Bandras jon 
139n, 160, 175-76, 212, 248, 267 atasi-kusuma-! 17 
arga-bhoga 73 Atharvaveda g, 14n, 138 
ariga-ranga-bhoga 73 Athens 209 
Abgirasa 26-27 Atmabhi 51 
Aniguttaranikdya 19, 238 diman 12 
Anila (Vayu) 243 and n Atri 254-55, 
anihata 20 Atridrgja 254 
Aniruddha 173,88 1-36, 40, 47, 81 Atrijata 254 
afjali_ 22 a Atrinetrabhi 254 
Annaiya 12 Attivarman 164 
Annam 5; Attock 112 
‘Annamala 128 Audumbara 86-87, 91 
Anniga 12 et Caesar 209 
‘Ani fama) 243 : a inscription 97 
Aparajita 168n Aupapatikasitra 35 
Aparnd-Uma 102 Aurangzib 173 
Apastamba 5, 207-08; Srautasiitra 168 Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva 98 
Aphsad inscription 49 avama 5 
gremos 3 Avanti 100 
pri ir Avaruddhaka 19 
Apte 259n, 261 Avatara 36-37, “0-49, i 51, 55°56, 
Aravalli range 134 81; nineteen in number 44 
Arbuda 136, 143, 151 avatdra-vida 37, 48 
Ardhaniri 224-25, 228; Narayana 221 dveéa 45 
Ardhandrigvara 52, 94, 221 andn, Avimukta 212 
222, 228 Aviruddhaka 19 
Arigtanemi, Tirthatkara 22 Ayérangasutta 183 
Grjava 27 é Ayatobhita 179 
juna 12,18, 24, 27, 40, 44, 1393 dyatana 11 
aria t 153: Matsya chief 215, Ayodhya 49, 175 
240, 255 Azilises 49 
Grogya-Sala 159 
Arka (Siirya) 243, 249 Badami 47, 51, 53, 177 and n, 202, 
Arthasastra 16, 49 267 
Aurpavabha 3 ‘i Badari 23 
Aryad iya-mahsparred 128, 132 Badauni 117 
Aryasangha 186 Badi-poddi 202 
Arya-sitvata-yog-lcirya 8 Bagal, N. N. 264 
Arya-téré-mandala-vidhi 95 Bagla 99 
Aryavarta 132, aoe Bahadurpur 152 
Asankhali plates 248n Bahadur Shah II 174 
Ashrafpur plate 220 Bahudravyapura 152 
Abika 146-47 Babusuvarna 1770 
Asita 103 Bailey, H. W. 108 
Afoka 13, 37, isa 238n aoe ‘99: Candradvipa 99 
‘Aolakes i farici 3 
Afokavalla Balabhadra 81, 82 and n; Sankarsana 


‘Astam 4m, 6% 81-82, 178, 180 81 


INDEX 


Balacarita 29n, 520 
Baladeva 19, 34-36, 47, 55. 81, 135m: 
Sankarsana, 40 + * 


Balakeranda-taila 162 
Balarama 21, Se5s, 48, 55, 81, 1353 
Sankarsana 4: 


Banerji, 
Banc, R. D. gm 65, 226n 
for > ars 


Bargaon 136 
ga Snscripton: 79-80, 179, 181 
ut 134, 2393 inscription 48; 
tures 


sculp' 
Barnett, L. & 8gn 
Basel 222 
Batha 152 
Baudhdyana - Dharmasitra 23; 
siitra 168 
Beal, S. 112n, 209, 230n 


percha 287 


343 Peta ption 3, 12, 205 


Srauta- 


Bhagalpur 

Bhagavadgita 17, 27 

Bhagavat 34, 59» 64, Gon; Balabhadra- 
svamin 79-81; Bhiminaga 134; 
Dadhikarna 134; Narayana 25; 
Ramagirisvamin 45; Visnu 5 

Bhagavata 18, 33 

Bhagavata Purdga 18, 28, 43, 55-36, 
124n, 135, 170M, 172M, 254n 

Bhagavati 128; Dagami 126; Tara 


Bhagirathi 59, 156, 218 
Bhailasvamin 121 
Bhiilla 121 


Bhiillasvami-mahadvadasaka-mandala 
116 


271 


Bhiillasvamin 115-16, 118, 121 
Bhairava 95 
m 6 


BAAS 7, 14,0905 17, S68EST; 
Bhaktisara 36 3! 7s 33-34 37) 54 
Bhaktiyoga 32 
Bhallatuka-haritaki 162 
Bhandarkar, D.R. 56, 105, 106n, 167, 
7p 7a 

, RG. 60, 17a 

Bhandeo 70 aaa 


Bhangala ror 

Bhanu, Bhanudeva II 65-66, 151n 
Bhanudeva III 70 

Bhanu Jena 65n 


Bhasvat 116 
Bhasvati 67 
BigneenT®, B. 140, 186, 191, 194n, 


Bhatiacarya, S. M. 2: 
Bhattacharya, T. P. 2460, 26gn 
Bhattaputra 187 
Bhattasali, N’ K. 13: 
182, 189-93, 1 5 an 

Bhauma 79, 18, 
Bhauma-Kara dynasty 62 
Bhauma-Naraka dynasty 80-81 


n, 163n, 180, 
B, 200 


Bhavadeva-bhatta 191 
Bhavani 70 
Bhavissattakahé 136 
Bhavigya Purdna 2470, 249-51 
Bhavipotara Purdue ‘26an 
Bhiyi 

Bhyilavmin 115 1205 


17 

Bhelsa 115 

Bhilasan 117 

Bhillamaladeva 128-130 1320 

Bhilsa 115 and n, 116-18, 1203 ins- 
cription 97, 116 

Bhimadeva 73 

Bhimanagara 63n 

Bhinmal 128, 1320 


temple 97, 


272 
Bhramarasi 152 
Bhrantayogin 56 
Bhrngarika-catubsasti-pathaka 116 
Bhi 49 


Bhitayogin 56 
Bhitivarman’ 79-80, 178-179, 181-82 
Bidar Bakht 173 
» Bihar 82, 135 179, 183-84 203, 222, 
232 


io in 
Bijapur District 

Bikaner agin 
Bilaspur District arn, 84, 86 


Bilhana 139, 212, 219 
Bilikandhaka 188 


Brakmagupta 34, 124n, 259, 261 
Brahman 19, 23, 30, 52, 57, 77M, 164, 
» 2260, 227M, 245, 254-55 

18-19, 170, 172, 185-87, 
206-07, 210 
Brakménda Purdna 233 
i 96 and n 


Brahmi 77n, 96 
Brahmi i 


it 34, 400, 45, 47, 95, 96n, 
103, 115, 124M, 131, 135, 147, 216 


District 99, 100n 

Buddha 30, 37, 42, 43 andn, a4 
183, 185-87, 189, 192-93, 197, 198n, 
204’ and n,’220, aga ssgets 256. 
57, 266 and n 


Buddha-parinirvana 204 
Buddharaja 115, 156 
Buddhardhi-Tara 98n 


Buddhi 33 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


rer 
Cakroarti-kgetra 251 


4 

Calukya 47, 51, 100, 164, 177 and 
n, 178, 202, 215,219, 268; emper- 
ors 


46 and n 
Cambodia 57-58 
Gamundd 96 
Candaka brothers 134 
Candala 199, 206 


Candella 62n, 212, 219 
Candi 235; Durga 235 


Gaturbbujt Bhagavan 21n, 8% 
Caturmabérajika 238 
catur-vy ii 


Ceylon 131, 183 
th ae 


INDEX 


Chinchani 126 
Ghingleput District 176 

21; inscription 53 
Ghitodgadh, Chi orgarh 

» Chitorgarh 20, 175 

Chittagong ‘g8n, 99, 189, 198n 
Ghitape {poet} 25.26" 
rock inscription 57 


61, 

He 127, 131, 1 
febrook 219 
Coomaraswam) 


Curtius 17 
Cuttack 62, 70, 201 


Dacca 186 189, 196, 216n, 2; 

Dadhticttta niga e id 

Dahala 149, 154, 138, 201; :nandala 
1 


Daksina-Radha 160 
Daksinaraya 4an, 198, 265 
dama 2' 


72. 
Damana 214-15 
Damanasena 214, 2150 
Dimodara 6, 28-29, 49, 773 Matima 


pe et 125 


273 


Dandin 227, 243 
Dantidurga 126-27 

Darada gi, 113 Rak 
Dargah Pir Ratan 10 
Dasa 214 


Dasamila-haritaki 162 
Dasgarathi. 


itya- 


Devi 47, 50, 52, 229, 291-34, 236 
Devibhagavata 226n, 232n, 233n, 234 
33 


Dhanvantari 43-44, 102, 261 
Dhara 164 
Dharaghosa 88, 89 
Dharma 91, 196, 198, 239 
Dharmacakra 101, 2533 mudn 100 
Dharma-kim ceremony 198n, 200 
Dharmakéya 197 
196 
oon, 101 


274 


harmaraja 179, 1 
Dharmasambhu ie ee 
Dharnasamgraha 1730 


Dharma-Thakur 195-96, 197 and 
n, 1981, 1 
Dhatarattha (Dhrtarastra) 238, 


Disdaya 24 

ya 242n 
Dhrtardstra 133, 201, 2: 
Dhruva 202 8 ee 
Dhulev plate of Bhetti 111 


aja 

Dhyani- 1 

Dibbida plates 273°” 

Digambari 104 

diggaja 239n 

Dighanikdya 238, 2ggn 

Dikpata: 290-40, 245, 245 

Diksapala 5 

Dilshit, K. N. 89n 

Dinajpur District 47 

Dipdvali 129 

Dip-otsava 129 

Disigaja 2gon 

Disampala 240-41 
iupdvadina 2390 

Dola-parvata 50 


199 
manadisa 214, 2150 
215, 216n 


Dommanapila 197, 214, 216 and n, 
217-20 

drackma 119 

dramma 119, 129 

Dravatti 162 

Dravida an, 76, 91, 127 


draryamaya-yajta 27 
Dubi plates of Bhaskaravarman 111 
Dudia plates 167n 
Dudyala 160 
Durga 52, 64, 770, 94n, 102-0: 
N, 230, 232-33, 234 
235-37) 255 


Durga-putra 
Durgd-vara-putra 640 





> 229 
n, 


99 
Dvaipayana 18 
Dvarahataka 216 and n, 218 
Dvarahatta 218n 
Dvaraka 170, 173 


Dvarapa 5 
Dwarhata 2180 
Dyuti, Dyutivarman 137 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


East—l 


seer ae ee 0 


131; Punjab 89, 


443 


138 
Eci 83 
Ejavati 147 


Ekajata 98, 1 
Elaings 60, 8F, 150, 154 
Ekanaméa 47, 81 

mans = 
Elapatra 193-34 


Ellora 43n, 51, 176, 2315 plates 176 
Eran #:, 545 inscription 50 
Etah District 114 


Fa-hien 185 
Faridpur 199 

F yar 172 

Fe » J. 1930 
Firdz Shah 70, 72, 117 
Fleet, J. F. 164-65 
Fu-nan 57 


gad 21, 56, 85 
wa inscription 50 


uvaka 129 
Gana (Ganeéa) 236 
Ganaka 163 

Ganapati 156, 160, 


104, 
Gandhara 20, 107m, 112 
Gandharva 19, 23 
Gandira 162 
Ganeéa 110, 114, 228, 236 ba, 6 
Gahga—dynasty 53, 59n, 66n, 67, 
168n, 199n, 201, 216n, 248, 249n} 
inscrij jon 
Ganga 96, 135m, 211-12, 217, 218 
and n, 219-20, 226n, 251, 255 
Gangadvara 251-52 
Gangambika 73 
59, 62, 212, 2525 sargama 
209, 212, 218, 250-51 
Gangdhar inscription 50, 52 
Gangeyadeva Vikramaditya 60, 212, 
219 
Ganguly, M. M. 249n 


INDEX 


Ganjam District 61, 67, 70, 179 
Gardez 110, 112 


Garudadhvaja’20 
Garuda Puréna 44, 260n, 263 
Garudavahana-bhatta 161-62 


Garutmad-anka 39 
Gagira Saphara 108 
Gauda 76, 157, 160, 201, 260 
Gauda-cik 157 
Gauhati 61, 69, 79-80 
Geupetrates 146 

jauri 70, 194 
Gaufira clan 108 


9 
Gautamiputra 25; Satakarni 21 
Gay& 204, 221-22, 255 
Gayakarna 154 
Gayasiras gn 
Gayatri 77m, 227 
Gazar 


1ogn 

Getty, A. 114n, 186, 194, 197 
Ghata Jataka 18, 21, 25-26 
Ghatal 261 

Ghora 26; 
Ghosh, Sat 
Ghoshal, R. K. 2t4, 216, 220 
Ghosundi 


led 





275 


Govinda 6, 28 

Govinda III 100-01 

Govinda IV 127 

Govindacandra 253 and n, 254-57 


Gonndaenpta 172n 


‘ogn 
car 131.3%) 174), 246, 266 
a cdi 185 
geste 33 
Guntur Ditic 252 53, 165, 175, 177 
202n, 212, 
Gupta, J. ae 2v6n 
106n, 1a), a 1g2n 247 
g pra-szatihiea’ 187 
yur] aré 131, 1g2n 
Gurala 1930, 
fuseum 116m, 117 


He 228 
inscription 20, 25, 35, 175 
Ghusar, Gh Hall, F. E. 115 
Gi 13 une aes 43, 265 
ir (Sarasvati 

Gira vag ) 954 Hare 206 ag 
Giri (Parva) 255 Hara Narayana 53 
Girnar ro8n Hardwar 218n 


Gitd 12, 18, 20-21, 28, 30, 39, 42n 
Gi ty ue 30, 39, 421 


go-brahmana-hita 54 

Godachi plates Shen 
Godavari D eiicad 176-77 
Gode, P. K. 17g 

B01 a 


Hari Fan “tees, 171, 205, 226n, 261 
Frdbaboadevs! 150 


Hari-Hara 51-53 
Hari-Hara-] ‘Hara-Fliresyagarbha 53 
Haripal 218n 8 


Haruna 28, 43, 52n, 102, 103, 124n, 
195, 16m, 170 and and n, 171 and n, 
172, a 

Hadetomelers gt 


276 


Hayungthal plate r124n 
Hazara District 105, 108-10 
Hazra, R. C. 248n, 249n, 250, 
Heliodoros 20 


25in 


Herakles 17-18, 26, 54 

Heruka 191 

Hilsa 98 

Himalayas 23 47, 91, 102-03, 168, 
204, 211, 218n, 229 

Himavac-chikhara 47 

Himavat 102, 240 

Hindusthan 174 

Hi li plates 176 

Hiranyakesin 5 


Hiranyagarbha’ 164-66, 177, 178n; 
sambhiita 164-65 

Hiran: mu 164 

Hiranyasva 164 

Hiranyasvaratha 1 

Hissar District 18, 

ae 98-99, en 113, 192m, 
136, 184, 209, 230, 2470 

Papo 218 and n 

28-29, gb, 239 and n, 240 

and n, 241 n, 242n 

Hrsikesa-Mohini 224 

Hududul Alam 112 

Hultzsch 165 

Hina 99, 127, 133 

Hunter 247n 

Huviska 22, 35, 53, 107; monastery 


1 

Hi ferabad State 

Tksvaku 14n, 16, 

Titutmish 117 
Indird 49 and n 

Ineosse 11gn 

Indore State 139 

Indra 6, 19, 21, 39, 53, 81, 170 172m, 
194, 239, 240m, 241 and n, 242 
and n, 243, 256, 261 

Indra III 247 

Indraji, Bhagwanlal 204 andn 

Indrani 

Indr-dnuja 46 

Indraprastha 26 

Indraraja 126-27 

Ta 1695, valley 93; civilization 11, 


28, 45, 175, 212 


1h eis 3 243 and n, 245 
2 

Tastroporige? 206 

Tévara 110; Siva 102 

earn 1730, 

-tsing 1 

Iyer, K. Bharatha 231n 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIBNT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


pur region 60, 149, 156, 219 


154 


faiminiya Cpanigad Brakmana 16, 29 
Jain—mythology 37; Tirthabkara 37 
Jang 157 


ajpur 62, 63n, 70, 202, 204 
pur 62, 6gn, 70, 202, 


jamuna 247 
fjanamejaya 134, 138, 171 and n, 201 
Jota ardana 25, 50 


tare A) 240 
# a he ni) 4 
siaper Seatcean 51 

java 57 

favli 70 

aya 237 

aealere 44, 84n, 187, 194 
jayanagaragrama 71 
ern Gon, 153 


jam| 
= 249 


fayanatha 185-86 

ayasitaha 165 

jayaswal 244 

jayatungasithha 204 

jayavarman II 157 

end 6: 

Jhang District 10, 106 
hansi District 51, 95, 119-20 
imitavahana 230 and n 
fina (Buddha) 186, 192-94, 256 
Hastatesatel 152 


Svante! Srenthin 74 


Jana 31, 33 
jatrka 14. 
Jabares (river) 18 
fodhpur 128. 1320 
jodhpur-Alwar-Bharatpur reigon 131 
loggapaiya 131 
jonaraja 153 


INDEX 


Junagadh inscription 46, 
potirsiddbharana 26x 48, 49 


Kabul 110; Ganeéaimage 111 
Kachuwa-Madhavpasa 99 
Kadamba—dynasty 167, 168n, 177; 

inscription 47, 50; tree 110 
Kadambeivai 110 
Kailan (Kailain) plate 185, 197, 220 
Kailasa 76, 229 
Kailisanatha temple 51 
Kajangala 184 

tiya dynasty 157 

Kalacakrayana 189 
Kalacuri family 148-49, 212, 219 
Kalamukha 20 
Kalafijara 155-56 
Kalanos 


209 
Kalapriya 246-47, 249, 250 and n, 


Kalaviveka 230 
A 95, 112-13, 133N, 139, 210 

Kalieuri 133 anda SS 
Kalidasa 29n, 46n, 102, 169, 175, 

211, 243, 261 
Kalika’ Purdna 103, 230 
Kalinga 201, 248 
Kali fa 60, 70 
Kaliivara 160 
Kalivarjya 213 
Kaliya-naga 36, 135 
Kalki-avatara 42-44, 265 
Kalkin 266 a 
Kalla family 56 
Kalpa-lata 164 
Kalpa-padapa 164 
Kalpi 247-48 
eae 108n ? 

lyanacandra 254-55 
Kalyanadevi 254 
Kalyinak lavona 162 
Kalyanavarman 80, 181 
Kama country 204 and n, 254 
Kamadeva 143 
Kamadevasiraha 204 
Kamakhya 61, 69, 79 
Kamala 77n, 221, 223 
Kamalaja 223 
Kamalardhangina-Nardyana 221 
Kamaripa 79-80, 182 
Kamathesvara 44 
Kambala 135n 
Kamboja 91 
Karhsa 20, 29n, 30, 36, 170 
Karhsabhakta 13, 20 
Karhsavadha 29n, 38 





277 


Kanarak 248n 

Kanarese count 215 
Kanauj 92, 247 

Kaiici a8 

Kaficipura 176 
Kanchipuram inscription 64 


Kandrakota 160 

Kane 206n, 207n, 208n, 209n, 2130 
Kaniska 109, 221n » 
Kannada 177, 195n, 202; inscription 


73 
Kanpur 175 
Kanvayana 24 
ila 43-44 
Kapilas inscription 64 
Kapileévara 64n 
Kapiéa 112-13 


Karhad plates 1271 
ikannan 


istrict 160 
Karkota 133 and n 
Karkotaka 193 


karma-yoga 30-31 
Karna, Kammadeva 201-02, 204 


Karnakesarin 201 
Karnata 116n, 215 
Karpiradevi 153 
Karpiraéri 202-03 
Karra 117 
Karsnayana-gotra 25 
Kartavirya 153, 
Karttikeya 52, 89, 96, 229 and n, 

232-33, 236-37, 254, 25 

mir 44, 47, 112M, 113, 131, 
133-34, 159, 210, 220 
a % 

Kassadi Siramadevi 202n 
Kasyapa 172, 199, 242 
Kataccuri 15; 
Katak 7on; jon. 
Kathdsaritségara 230n, 232n 
Katha Upanisad 5 
Kathiawar 53, 266 
Kathmandu inscription 84n 
Katya clan 11 
Katyayana 24, 27n, 54; Srautasiitra 259 


Kausiki (river) 11, 47 
ha 


kaustubha 50 
Kautiliya ArthaSastra 18, 35 
Kaut 128 


278 


Kauveri g6n 

Kaveri air 

Kaveripattinam 55 

Kavtkantonw-cand?: ro 

XK Kavikanthahara 214 
‘avindravacanasamuccaya 125 

phan! 227 and n, 243 


Keéava 21, 25, 43, 266n; Laksmi 224 
Kelavd va 83 52 439 3 


Khadiravani-Tara 97, 100 
ence 120 

Khajuraho inscription 21: 
Khalari stone inscri ion 350 
Khandava forest 13} 

Kharosthi inscriptions 106 and n 


pay 113 
Kleisobora 18, 26 


179 
Kontan 17 
Korni plates 68 and n 
Kosala 100, 175, 202 


Kosam 144, 147 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Kraufica 102 
Krorayina 108 
Kya 17, 21, 28-29, 34, 36, 38, 43 


and n, 4° 48, relat O56 71, 170-71 
saat ti al 
putra a oes 8 6, 5I 


gsnaraja 126 
Krmasvamin 245 
Kysnavarman I 167-68, 177 
Krsnaveni 158 

Kyttika 


Kegapan: 261 

Keatriya 14 and n, 171-72, 209 

Keemendra 44, 187, 194 

Kuan-yin 98 

Kubera 21, 39, 201, 238-39, 240 
and n, 241, 242 ‘n, 243 andn, 

Kutara 6 

Ku-che-lo 132n 

Kuci-poti 202 

erent 72 

Kula-devata 


Kulaéekhara {raint) 46, 56 

Kulika 1330 

Kuta Bo, 107-08, 110, 229n} sthéna 
Kumdragupta 150, 176-77, 182 
Kumaran: 52 

Kumiarapila 153 
Kumdrasambhava 102 
Fuunlires ios aie 242 
ie 


ethan (bel 238 
ieee 


Kuninds fee 

Kuntala (country) 167 

Kunti 254 

Karma-avatira 41-44, 193, 265, 266n 

Karma Puréna 211-12, 217, 2270. 

Kurnool District 1ggn, 160 

Kuru (country) 16,26 

Kuruigetra 92, 198-39 
Kuru-Pandava war 22 

Kusala 142 

Kusana 22, 29n, 108, 231; age 353 

seal-matrix 22 


‘Ladahacandra 253 and n 254-57 


INDEX 
Ladahamadhava-bhattaraka 253, 255 


45n 
Lakymana temple 266 
yan Rao, N. 148n 


225 2, 2: n, 229, 236-37, 
254, 2615 kavaca 226; Narayana 221, 


224 
Lalitd 296-37 
Lalitavistara 239n, 240 
Lalit Patan 224 


Lampaka 112 
Lasunddyeranda-taila 162 
Lal Srautasittra 259 


wi 14 

Linga 20 

Linga Purdna 212, 228n 
ple 


Lokapila 19, 21, 39, 239 ant n, 240, 
241 and n, 242, 243 and n, 244 
Li Museum 34-35, 139 
Liders, H. 108n, 2660 
Lunsadi plates 218n 


Macdonell 1 n,3 0, 53 
Macherla 133n 
Machersi 174 


Macnicol 3 
‘Madalapaijt 62, 63 and n, 69, 1510, 


Madhavapasa 99 
Madhavavarman I 165, 167, 177 
Madhavavarman II Srinivasa 179 


Madhu (demon) $6 
Madhumati 218n; dodra 218n 
Madhurakavi 56 
Madhusadana 7, 128; Vidhrti 224 
Madhyamaraja 179 
Madhyammiki > 
yamika 90 

Madhya Pradesh 21, 46, 62n, 76, 84, 

86, 114-15, 139, 150, 228 
Madommanapila a4, 216 
Madras 51, 172n, 176,197 
Madri 212 
Madurai 18, 27, 54, 61, 69 
Madurai-Ramanathapuram. 


\-Tirune- 
Jeli region 131 


279 


Maga 108n; Brahmana 
Bane 98, 135)" i 175-76, 
179, 185, 267 
ndika 19 


Me data 17-20, 22-23, 25, 26n, 
27-28, 30, 355% fee oh 9 io 
124n, 134, 136, 139, 145~ 
187-88, 201, 206, 211-12, Geen 
n, 23372 239N, 240, 242, 244, 248n, 
260, 265; sitradhdra 

Mahabhagya 10, 17, 20-21, 26, 30, 32, 
38, 107, 245 

Mahabhi 


(Brahmana) 75 


Mahambuja 1330 
Mahanadi 63, 71, 211 
Mahan Deva 9. 
Mahaniddesa ae 145 
mahépargad 128-29, 132 
eh Ce yo an 245 


S Maharastra 76, 126, 


131 
Maitisena 96, 254 
Mahasivagupta 201 
Mahasthana 19, 184 
Mahévastu 200, 239 and n 
Mahavinayaka 111, 114 
Mahavira 22, 36 183 
Mahiyana 98, 189 


Mahendra 81 
Maheoise (Indra) 204 and n, 241, 


Mahendragiri 61 61, 6: 

Mahendravarman 80, 181-82 

Mahendri 96 

Maheévara 10, 57, 64, 237, 254 

‘Mahesvara-putra 640 

Maheivari 96 

Mahi 133 

Mahipaia I 188 

Mahisa 232-35 

Mahisaghna 232n 

Mahisamardini 93, 95, 229, 231-33) 
236, 2370 

Mahisardana 232 

Mahigasura 230, 233, 234 and n 


280 


Mahisasuranaéini 232 

Mahismati 76 

Mahiyar 76 

Mahmid-i-Subuktigin 70 

Mahratta 173 

Mahinadevi 203 

ar Gan, 76-77 

Mainaka 102 

Mainamati plates 253-54, 256-57 

Maitraka—dynasty 266 ;records 14gn 

Maitri Upanisad 5 

Majhamika 90 

Majumdar, N. G. 220, 267n 

Majumdar, R. G. 2gon, 214 

Maks 108 and n 

Makara 34 

Makaraditvaja 44 

Makar-amavasya 72 and n 

Malabar coast & 25 

Malalasekera, G. P, 145n, 183n, 238 

Malava 132, 157; nadi 116 

Malavalli inscription 168n 

‘Malavikagnimitra 169, 172, 

Malaviya 127, 132 

Malayalam 226 

Malhar 21n, 84 

Malkapuram inscription 60n, 149- 
50, 154, 156, 158, 161 

Malkhed 126 

Mallinatha nA 

Malwa 117, 118 and n, 174-75 

Mamallapuram 43n, 51, 1940, 231, 
268; inscription 42 

Ménabhita 179 

Manahali plate 187, 220 

Manarasarman, Manarhrasaman 
190-91, 193, 195 

manas 33 

Manasa 137 

Manchikailu 267 

Mandal, Panchanan 196, 198n, 199 

mandapa 67 

Mandara 158, 242n 

Mandasor inscription 51 

Mandhata 228 

MAndhiatr-avatara 43, 266n 

Mandhuk inscription 188n 

Mandlik, V. N. 133n 

Mandrakita 160 

mandiikara-vatika 162 

Mane 160 

Mangalesa 165, 177, 178n 

Mangallu grant 215 

Manibhadda 145-46 

Manibhaddavattika 145 

Manibhadra 19, 136n, 144-45, 146n, 
147, 239-40 

Manikyasirnha 204 

Manimat 143 

Maninaga 136 and n; matha 136 








175 


RELIGIOUS IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Maniyar Math 136 

Manorathasarman’ 190 

Manschra 1»8n 

Mantrakita 16 

Manu 28, 42, 770, 91, 206n, 207-08, 
215 

Manusmrti 39, 243-44 

Manusyadharman 245 

Mainyakheta 126 

mérana 190, 193, 

Markanda 256 

Markandesvara 72-74 

Markandeya Purana 131n, 233, 2 

Marshall, J. 231 ® a 

Mairtanda-Bhairava 228 

Marut (Vayu) 243 and n, 245 

Marwar 173 

Maskariputra-Gosala 36 

Masharfa 144, 147 

mathikd 128-30 

Mathur 12, 16, 18-19, 21-22, 26, 
34) 49» 54, 92, 134-35, 190-91, 
221n, 231, 266; inscription 19, 
144; sculpture 2gn 

mbi-eakra 95 
fatr-gana 

Matrka mee 

Matr-mandala-vidah 95 

Matsya-avatara 41-44, 92, 265, 266n 

Matsyagupta 21 

Matsya Purdpa 43, 103, 136n, 164, 
166, 208n, 211, 228n, 233, 237, 
266n 

Mat plates 165 

Mauakes 108n 


200 


Maurya—dynasty 14n, 100; court 18 

Maya 3t 

Mayarasarman 177 

Medhitithi 206n 

Megasthenes 12, 18, 26, 54 

Meghadiita 45n, 46n 

Men, Menaka 102-03 

Menander 13 

Methora 18 

Mewar 60 

Midnapur 195n 

Milindapaitha 145 

Minaksi 61, 69 

Mina-sankranti 71 

Minhajuddin 117 

Mirashi, V. V. 148 and n, 149-51, 
155 and n, 247n 

Mirzapur 69 

Mitaksara 207 

Mithila 83 

Mitra 53 

Mitramisra 213 


INDEX 


Mitravana 250 and n, 252 

Mlechha 

Moa, Moga 108 

Mohenjo-daro 11 

Mohini 43 

Mokala 151 

p’o 132 

Monghyr—District 82; plater87n 

Mongolian, Mongoloid 14n, 185 

Monier-Williams gn, 260n 

Mookerji, Satkari 46n 

Mora inscription 17 

Moraes 168n 

Mrcchakafika 260n 

Mrgadeva 254 

Mrgasikhavana, Mrgasthapana 184 

Mudhol plates ‘177m, 178n, 179n 

Mudiratha 75 

‘Mudrahasta 75 

Muhammad fy 

Muhammad Shah 172, 174 

Mukhalingam 60, P 

Muthepas yay A N. 263 
‘uktapida litaditya 1 

Mukund mali 56 ves 

Mukundaraéma 230 

Milasthana 246, 247 andn, 250 

Multan 246, 247 and n, 248-49 

Mundaka Upanigad 14 

Mundaéravaka 19 

Mundira 246, 248 and n, 249-513 
svdmin 247, 250-52 

Munshiganj’ 189 

Muntakhab-ul-Tawarikh jon, 

Mura (demon) 50 

Murarimiéra 76 

mirti 44 

Musanagar inscription 175 

My-son inscription 57 

Mysore 177n 





117 


Nadagam plates 68n 

Nadir Shah 173 

Naga 19, 36, 133, 135-36, 139, 143, 
238; Ananta 135; images 134; 
Karkotaka 134; Sega 135, 

Naga-kastha 134 

Nagalddmaka 83 

Naga-mata 146; Kadru 146 

Naganika 239 

Nagara 93, 112, 231, 246 

Nagara Brahmana 246 

Nagarahara 112 

Nagaraja 143 

Nagari plates 63, 216n 

Nagarjuni hills 52 

Nagarjunikonda 175; inscriptions 


184 
Nagda inscription 168n 


281 


Nageivara temple 1390 

Nagini 136-373 cult 137 

Nagna-Sabara 104 

Nagpur 45, 227; inscription 67 

Nahusa 241 

Nairrta 243 and n 

Nala 134; dynasty 180 

Nalanda 136, 161 

Nalayira Divya Prabandham 56-57 

ndma-japa 9 

néma-sankirtana 9 

Namma]var 56 

Nana 73-74 

Nanaghat inscription 20, 35, 85, 
175, 239) 242 

Nanak gt 

Nanda 144 

Nanda-gopa 29n, 47, 52 

Nanda-gopt 29n 

Nandaka 50 

Nandapada 160 

Nandivarman II Pallavamalla 169, 


79 
Nanduru 212 

Naoli 139 

Nara (sage) 23-24, 43 

Nara 24 

Narada 43-44 

Naradiya Puranay213 

Naraka 80, 178 

Narasimha I 64 and n, 248-49 


. Narasirha II 65n, 248n 


Narasirhha III 73 

Narasirhha-avatara 42, 43 and n, 
44, 265, 266 and n, 267-68 

Narasirhhagupta Baladitya 267 

Narasithavarman I 57, 176, 267 

Narasirhhavarman IT 267 

Narasimhavignu 267 

Narasimhhi 96 

Naravahana 245 

Narayana 15, 17, 23, 40 43- 
8, 53, 221, 224, 266n; cul 
hai 1207; dérita 36 

Narayana-bhatia 213 

Narayanapala 187 

Narayana-Sarasvati 224, 226 n 

Narayanavarman 80, 178-79, 181- 
82 

Narayana-vataka 20 

Narayana| ur inscription 187, 188n 

Narendraditya 113 

Narmada 156, 211 

Narteévara 253 

natamandira 67 

Nathamuni 56 

Nathaéarman 185 

Natteivara 253, 256 

natya-sala 67 


Navali 139 


fas 


282 


Navalakha, Navasi 2 

Neak T: a i 
Neemuch R. S. 93 

Revel 47s 50 53, 131, 221-22, 224-25 


Nether world 135 and n 
New Banaras 


Nis 133 

Nilicala 61 
Nilachal hill 79 
Nilakantha 10, 21 
Nimar District 2: 
Ricalc-grame. 73, 75 


Nirjarapura 220n 
Nerd 243n, 245 


Nigadha 134 
porerron iets i-tantra 
bare mt 120 


Noixaba Pallava 152 ; 
North—Bengal 47, 51, 125n; Punjab 


16 
North-West Frontier Province 105- 


186, 194 


Oded 
Odra county) 62, o Ql, 127, 131, 


249 
Ojha, G. H. 106, 15gn, a20n, 258 


Orissa 47, 50-60, 66, 78, 87, 91, 131, 
146, 179, 201, 232, 248, 250-52 
Osmanabad 70 


Otyata Sahi Te 


Pabhosa inscription 29n 


Padmanabhasvamin 60, 87, 150 
Padma Puréna 136n, 208, 211, 2270 
Pédma Tantra 7, 22, 18n, 44n 
Padmavati 145 
Padya:arangini 1730 

51; inscription 
Pablava gi 


185, 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Pakistan 10, 105 and n, 106, 114, 
189, 236, 247 
‘Athene 50 

Pallava—dynasty 53, 131, 1672, 168n, 

165 17 179, 242-43, 267-68; 


Pallindda-vigaya 160 
Pal, P. 221-22, 226 and n 
Palyutlu 160 
Pamir Cinema 110 
pana 210 
Pafica-Gauda 132; mahdparsad 128, 
132 
Pate ke-taila 162 
Paficdla 21, 92 
i 
jfia 186 
tra 23, 32, 36, 44 and n, 48, 


irdhmana 5 
119 and n, 120 
Pande 128 
Pandaia 26, 27n, 54 
Pandava, Pindu (clan) 27, 30, 54 
Pandu 27n, 212 
Pandya—country 18, 54; people 27n, 
127, 131 
mi 12, 1 » 107, 2 
Fasict 28, Be 54M, 107, 244-45 


freeman 92 


Parana bhdbonata 99,41, 51 
Paramabhajfaraka 111 
Paramabrahmanya 54 
Paramadaivata 41 
Paramamahesvara 64n, 68 and -n, 69 
Paramdra (dynasty) 116, 227 


nee nee 


Parijataharana 50 
Pariksit 138, 170n 


Parvati 96, 129, 221-22, 
and n, 254-55 

Pasapélaka 75 

Pasayita 75 


227 


INDEX 


Paschimbhag plate 163 
Péfupatdcarya-parisad 187 
Pasupati-Yogin 11 

Patalesvara 64 

Pataliputra 175-76 

Patafijali_ 10, ee 21-22, 107, 245 
Peak oe 


Pat ts 1 iat 

Patiakella plate of Sambhuyaéas 111 

Patna District 98, 133, 135-36 

Patoladeva- ‘ajraditya-Nandin 11g 

Patola-sahi-éri-Navasurendraditya- 
Nandideva 113 





Paulastya 245 
ee 43 

awa 
Pehoa 2 ehava) au 
Penukonda plates 168n 
Persia 131 


Hazara region 106, 112 
Peshwa 108, 174 
Phalgunitha 221 


Pitrpati (Yama) 243 
Polamuru plates 165, 167 
Polynesia 14n, 198 
Ponnagrama 160 

Por 118n 

Poravada 118 

Porwal, Porwar 1181 


Prabodhacandvodaya 6an, 78 
Praci river 251 " <f 
Pradyumna 17, 33-36, 49, 47-81 
Pragjyotisa 79-80 
Pragvaja-vaihéa 1180 

Prajapati 23, 41, 197, 1980 
Prajapati Brahman 42 

Prajavati 85 


Pratihara dynasty 131, 247 


283 
Pratima-ndjake 


a 
fa 167 and n, 176 


Pravara-giri 
Prayarasena 


Praydga 76, 208-09, 211-13, 219 and 
pate 258 
thapada-1 caine 245 
a heeetsd asa 
P; thiviraja (Nala king) 180 
Prthivivallablia-mahéraja 1770, 1780 
Brthivivyaghra 169, 179-80 





Pundirasvamin 250 

Pundranagara 184 

Pundravardhana 184 

Punjab 109, 131, 247, 249-50 

Paniru 160 

Punyajana, demon 50 

Punyajanesvara 245 

Punyaratna-siri 152 

Puraiijaya 201 

Puri 59°61, 62n, 63-64, 66, 69, 72-73, 
151, 1998, 212, 248, 249 and 

lates 65 





Paranagrama 71-72 
Parnavarman 57 
pueaeiite 
tra Subga 190, 169, 1720, 
175; rea 
puyeveraan, 182-83, 
Puru 16 
Purusa 23, 50; Narayana 23, 24n 
Purusottama (Vignu) 59, 61, Gan, 
65, 66 andn, 7 rie 68-73, 76, 


151, 223, 2. 

Purajottas featna Yagil tha 59-61, 162 and 

rin £9.70, 72-73» 75 785 15% 
Purusottama-ksetra 59, 67 and n, n, 

72, QI-1D 


Purusottama-puri 59, 64n, 67, 7on, 


gon 
Purusottama-samrajya 64 
Purusottamasirnha at 
Parvagrama 157, 
Parva-Khatika 218 


Radha (country) 157, 183 


284 


Radha 51, 222 
Raghu 16 
Raghudeva 64n 
Raghupati 45n 
Raghuwarhéa 124, and n, 142, 172n, 
Rabu 1h 260, 263-64 
ipur District 43n, 1 
Rijathirdja 80" “4° 
Réjaputra, Rautta 63, 65 
Riajaraja IIT 
Rajaraj 
Raj 115 
*Rajasthan 20, 93, 111, 128, 131, 151, 
173, 175,204, 231, 234n 
Réjatarangini 95, 112, 131n, 133n, 139, 
jjendra TIT 157 
jens 
Riendraccla 101 
Rajgir 135-37, 143 
Rajagrha 135-36, 143 
Rajim inscription 180 
Rajmahal 1 
Rajore 173 
Rajput 30 
Rajputana 173 
Rajshahi 236 
Ral li 214, 217 
Raktamukha 20 
Rama (Iksvaku king) 212 
Rama-Bhargava 43, 265 
Ramacandra 230 
Rémacarita 230 
Ramadasa 60, 87n, 8g, 151 
Rama Dasarathi 43-44, 45 and n, 46, 
255, 265, 266n 
Ramadeva 150 


Rama Dhanurdhara 44 
Ramagiri 45 and n 
Rama Haladhara 21, 35, 43-44, 255 
Rama Jamadagnya 43-44, 255, 266n 
RimAnujacarya 162, 246n 

ee cenbaetae 265 

Ramayana 139, 188, 241-42 
Rambha 204n, 261 

Rampal pla 

Rampal plate 253n 

Ramtek 45 and n 

raiga-bhoga 73, 

Ranganatha 162 

Rasatala 135n 

Rastrakita 115, 202, 247 

Rata 185 

Ratanpur 149n 

Rathayatra 59, 199 and n 
Ratnadhenu 164 

Ratnagiri 201; plate 203 

Ratnasri 204 

ratna-traya 185 

Réuta, Réutta 63-64 

Ravana 139, 230, 242 


243 


245 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Ravi (river) 115, 247n 
Ravuta a ee 
Rawalpindi District 107, 112n 
Raychaudhuri 172n 
Revamajical 202 
Revana 128 
Rgveda 1, 4, 7, 9, 11, 16, 26, 28-29, 
41) 53, 15 
uni 17, 2 
Sesttia (Tirthatikara ) 37, 43 
4 


158 


Rudra-putra 64n 
Rudra-Siva 10 
Rukmini 17, 51 
Rummindei pillar inscription 13 
Raparima 196 


Sabara 61, 103 
Sachau 170n, 209n, 247n 
§adanana 96 
Sadasiva-Dasay 
Sadbhavasaml 
rarer aa 186, 


Sadhu 73 
Saduktikarndmrta 126 
Sadvaidyakulapafijikd 214, 215n, 2160 
Sadvargiya sect 184 

Sahajayana 189 

Sahasanka 60 

Sahasika 60, 153, 154n 

Sahasraksa (Indra) 243 
Sahasraliaga 221 

Sahanusahi 113 

Sabi 113-14 

Sahni, Daya Ram 105, 144 


147 
Sailodbhava dynasty 179 
Sailo-visaya 71 
Sainyabhita 179 


gr 
Sakambhari 204 
Sakapiini 3 . 
Sakra (Indra) 201, 240-41; festival 51 
wapin 136 

jakti 33, 52 
Sakti-Ganapati 228n 
Saktiman Mahasena 256 
Saktinaga 52 
Saktiéambhu 157 
Sakya clan 14 and n, 171 
Sakyamuni (Buddha) 13 
Salihundam 84n 


tra 173n 
M149, 156-57 
194 


INDEX 


Salonapura 203-04; mahdvihara 20 
Salagrama 20 


Senbert 17, 34s 40, 52, 82, 247, 250 


te 
aS dna ago and n 
Sambhar 204 

Sambhu 255 
Sambhudeva 131 
Sambhu-Visnu 58 
Samidevi-Trailokyadevi 
Sarhkarsana (Saikarsana) 
Sarhmavaji 75 
Samudravarman 80, 181 
Samudragupta 39-40, 54,176, 182- 


83, 243 
Saneatserpradipa 227 
Sarhyina 128, 131 


1g 
26 


Sarhyuttanikdya 183 

Sanchi 266 

jandhyakaranandin 230 

Andilya 12 

Sangha 16 

Saighamukhya 17 

ae 27, 131 

Satkaragana. 148, 156 
na 148, 15 

Sankara-Narayana 58 


Sankarsan: 
133 
Sankha 21 
Sankhadhara 1330 
Santhdyana Grhyasitra 138 


geomiur ae 
anmatura 


Santamila’ (Ganemaua i 175 
Sanyeliévarapuri 160 


285 


Sarnath 254; inscription 49, 155 
Sarpa-yajfia 171 ~ 


Pea (eda) 240 


Satapatha Baliage 2-5, 9, 16, 23, 25n, 
41, 169 and n, 170n, 198n, 199, 
206, me 

Satarudriya 

Sitavahana dynasty 21, 175, 239 


Satna Dutrct Gan, 76, 114 
satra 138 
Sattenapalli 202n 
Peart 36318, 25, 28, 36 
tyabham: 
Satyavac Cedhinira 254 
Saubhagyadevi 256 
Bangor District vo 212; inscription 
sats 149, 156 
jaundarananda 171 
an mata 29n 
javar-otsava 230 
Savitri 77n - 
Savity-man dala-madhyavartin 2 
Sawai Jaysingh 172. 173 and n, 174 
and n, 1 
Sayana 6n, 8 
hrader 33n, 47 
Seliya 147 


Senart 3° 

Sen, BG. 214 

Sen, D. GC. 2g0n 

Sen, Sukumar 195-96, 198 and n, 199 
ga, Sega-naga 36 and n, 44, 124, 


Shahbavgarhi 108n 
a 





Sarada 76 

Saradatilaka-tantra 228 

Saranya 51 

Sarasvati 11, 49, 77 and n, 225, 226 
and n, 227 and n, 299, 236-37, 254 

Sarasvati (river) 211 

Sarasvatikanthabharana 125 

Sarayd 212 

Sarda, H. B. 1 

Sarkar, Jodensth 0n,-173, 174m 


Sibae 10 


Sirhhavisnu 267 
Sindhu (Indus) 169 


Siiganna 162 
Sinha zo1n, 239n 
Sipivista 1 


Sircar, D. GC. 167n, 168n, 182n, 283n, 
208n, 212n, 213n, 216 and n, 221n, 
222n, 230, 239n, 242n, 244n, 246n, 
247n 24gn, 251n, 258n, 259n, 261n, 

sn 


Siro-mdtrd 122 


Sita g5n 

Sitala temple 221-22 

Siva 6, 9-10, 13n, 24, 29, 50, 52, 58, 
69, 72, 770, 88, 94n, 103, 107, 187n, 
194, 199, 221-22, 226n, 227 and n, 
228-29, 232 and n, 233, 253-56, 
261; bhat{draka 187, 253 

iva 


1 60, 70, 151 
ga 84n, 110, 140n, 160 


Sivapura 10 

Sivaskandavarman 167, 176 

Svs hills 204 

Sin i inscription 119-20 

Skanda 94n, 107 andn, 236, 254, 
256; Karttikeya 96 

Skandagupta 49, 99, 182 

Skanda Purdna 61, 207, 233-34, 246, 
249-51 

Skatdavarma-mabiraja 168n 

Skanday carmen 242 


Somagambhu 15; 
Somadambhupaddhati 157 
Somavarnéi 68n, 202 

Someivara I Ahavamalla 212, 219 
Somesvara (Siva) 221 


Sourasenoi 18 
Sousa 20: 
South Pole 168 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


SrimA Devata 48 
Srimala-sangha 152 
Srimati 48n 
Srinivasa 162 
Sri-Prthivi-vallabha 49 
Srirangam—temple 55; inscription 
161-62 
Srigaila 160, 212 
Srivaignava philosophy 33 
Srivastava, V. S. 231n 
Srivatsa-gotra 160 
Sri-Visvesvara-golaki 158 
Stein, A. 131 
Sthiravarman: 78,181 


Sumha 183 
Sundarban r1oon, 198, 265; plate 197, 


andari 

Sundari Chowk 224 
Sundirasvamin 250, 252 
Sunetri (medicine) 162 
Suga 48, 239 

Suparna 19 
Supratisthitavarman 181 
Sarasena, people 18, 26, 92 
Surendra 81 
Surendravarman 79-81 
siti 1, 7 

Sarya 19, 26n, 228, 239-40, 243 


INDEX 


Stiryasiddhanta 67, 1 
Saninyease ae 
Sutira 250 and n 
Svarbhanu 124 

Svabhi (Brahman) 255 


Svastika-naga 136 

Svathe 224 

Svayambhi 256 

Svetadvipa 24 

Svetdsvatara Upanigad 10-11, 13 
Svetavarahasvamin 46 

Swat valley 111-12 
Switzerland 222 


Syama-Tara 98-993 
Sylhet District 163 
Syria gain 


Tabagat-i-Nasiri 117 andn 
tdbuva 140 


Tagare 47 
Taittiriya—Aranayaka 5, 23, 41, 2445 
265; Brahmana 41n, 1 Beer ine 
itd 16, 29, 41n 
ika, Tajika 126-27, 131 
T. khajt_139 
Takgaka-ndga 133, 138-39; cult 139; 
Vaisaleya 138 
TaksakeSvara 139; bha/dra 140n 
Takaila 20, 112m, 134 
‘alagunda 177 
Talesvar charters 137 
Témradi (medicine) 162 








1 
‘Tadjavur-Tiruchirappalli region 123 


Tanmaya 7n 

Tantrasdra 222-23, 226, 260 
‘Tantrika school 189 

Taptakrcchra 207 

Tar 97-100, 102; temple g8n, 1oon 
‘Tarikh-i-Firaz i 70 

Tathagata (Buddha) 185 
Tatrabhavat 22 


tejas 33 

‘Tejasimha 151-52 

a lapatta Fataka 183 

Te }» 202n 

Thana District 126, 131 
Therigathd 13 

Thomas, F. W. 125 
Thomas, P. 217 

Thup Muoi inscription 58 


287 


Tiger divinity 42n 
Tiladhaka 


Tippera—District 185, 188; plate 220 


Tirthaprakdsa 213 
Tirujiana Sambandar 57 
Tirumalai inscription 101 
Tirumalitai Alvar 56 
Tirumangai Alvar 56-57 
‘Tirumukkudal"insetiption 161 
Tirupati 55, 69 
Tirupan Alvar 56-57 
Tiruvaymofi 56 
Tod 172, 173 and n 
To-lo Bodhisattva 98 
Tondamandalam 1 gt 
Tondaradippodi 5 
Tonk District 93, 231 

‘0! 6 






9 
Traikitaka dynasty 1 
Trailokyacanira 1o1 7 
Trailokyavijaya 194 
Travancore 56, 60, 87 

Treang 57 

Trikaya 197 

Trimarti 52-5; 

Tripathi, L. R. 224 

Tripuri 148-49; purandara 153-54 
tri-ratna 197- 

Trisrotas (Ganga) 254 
Tristhalisetu 213 

Triveni 219, 220n 


Tri 

cchA 224 
‘Tryambakasakha 245 
Tucci, G. 110-11 
Tuldpuruga 164 
Tuljapur 70 





‘ummina-Kalacuri 150 
Tuagabhadra 212, 219 
Turvasa 16 

Turvasu 17 

Tusam inscription 18, 
Uccaihéravas 261 and n 


Udayagiri (Jhansi District) 95 
Udayagiri (mythical bill) 221 
Udayagiri (Nellore District) 
Udayagiri (Orissa) 251 
Udayagiri cave 231 
Udayapura (Vidisha District) 116 
Uddiyana 111 

Udicya 10gn 

Udayana in: 


268 


288 


udyat-kofi-divdkar-dbha 2 
Udayendiram grant 169 
Uddyotakesarin 201 
jjayini 49, 76, 156 
Uae 


Umi 57, 102-03, 230, 237 
Umachal hill 79; inscription 47n, 
8c-81 
Und 112 
iniyara 93, 231 
Upanands 144 
Upatakgaka 138 
Upendra 46 
Uravupalli +2 wi an 
ymarasmi (Sun- 2 
Utkala 68n, 201-02, 249 
Utkala-khanda 61 
Utpala 36, 95, 96n 
Utan karnddi-taila 162 
Uttaradhyayana-siitra 220 
Uttarakuru 170n 
Uttaraminasa tank 221 
Uttarardmacarita 170n, 206n 
Uttarapatha 109 and n, 114 


Vadnagar 246 

Vadner plates 115, 156 

Vagharaj: = Bn 
Vaghelk 155°56 
Vagisa 258, 4 

Vahni (Agni) 243, 245 

Vahni Purépa 2430 

Vaidisa 115, 156 

Vaidya 115, 214 and n, 216, 218n 

Vaidyanatha temple 179; inscription 
170n 

Vaidya-pariciraka 162 

Vaikuntha 223 

Vaisnava 40 

Vaisnavi 49, 96 andn 

Vaiéravana (Kubera) 238, 242n, 
2. 








Vaivasvata (Yama) 240 
Vajapeya 177 
Vajradhara (Indra) 241 
Vajrahasia NT Anantavarman 68 
Vajrahunkara 194 
Vajrajvalanalarka 
Vajrakalpa 162 
Vajrapani 194 
Vajrayana 1 
Vajrayogini (g & oddess) 191 
Vajrayogini (village) abs 189, 191, 





194 


Vakataka dynasty 25, 167, 
Valabhi 161, 266 


175-76 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Valitunai-nayanar 146n 

Vamadeva 60 and n, 87n, 150, 153- 
54, 155 and n 

Vamana-Atipati 224 

Vamana-avatéra 2, 25n, 41-42, 43 
and n, 44, oti 55, 265, 266n 

‘Vamanadeha 


Vamana Purana * 172N, 233, 235 
Vamaraja 148 and n, 149, 154 
Vamasambhu 60 and n, 87 n, 149- 
50, 154, 158 
Varhkina’ 127 
Varida-vira 34 
Vanarasi 835 kr'aka 63 
Vandau 7 
Yates an 184, 201 
angila 100-02 
Vatkina 131 
PA) 152 
in, 154 
Veeeanes 42-44, 46 
Varahachatra 
Varahadisa 
Varahadatta 266 
Varahadinna 266 
Varahaksetra 47 
Varahamihira 34, 36, 45, 47, 81: 95, 
115 1240, 131, 135, 147, 216, 259, 
. 261, 96 an 
‘ardha Purdna 43n, 247, 250-51 
Varihasiziha 168 


Varahi 96 

Varanasi 76, 161, 211-12, 218, 224, 
253+: 553 kat ka 62, 70 and n 
fararuci 261 

Varavati6g andn 
Vardhi 





Vargna 29 

Varttika 270. 

Varuna 4-5, 12, 21, 39, 53) 124, 199° 
my aggandn, 240 andn, 241, 

N, 243, 245 

Vartnaiva-bhattira 152 

Varuni 96n 

Varvara 127, 131 

Vasa-haritaki 162 

Vasava (Indra) 21, 171 and n, 172n, 


239 
Vasitha 207-08 
Vasistha Dharmasiitra 207 
Vastu-sarpa 137 
Vasu 


12, 14°15, 17-21, 23, 25, 
33-37, 40, 46, 49, 51, 53, 81, 170- 


INDEX 


71, 186-87, 193-94, 223, 255-56, 265 
Vasudeva-bhattaraka 253 
Vasudevaka 12, 19 
Vasudeva-Krgna 9, 17-18, 20, 22, 24 

and n, 25, 43, 54 
Vasudeva-vargin, 7 
Vasudeva-Visnu 18, 48, 55 
Vasuki 133 and n, 135n, 139 
Vasumati 49 
Vasumitra 169 
Vasundhara 254 
Vasupada 189 
Vatesvarasarman 
Vatsadevi 84n 
Vayu 243 
Vayu-Purdna 17, 33, 43 
Vedavyasa, Vyasa 43, 266n 
Velarhgapidi 158 
Velivada-visaya 158 
Vellala 56 
Velpuru 202n 
Vengi 131, 176 
Venkatesvara-Balaji 69 
Venkatesa Purumal temple 161 
Vessavana (Vaisravana) 238, 239n 
Vetila-bhatta 261 
Vetha in 
Vetravati 115, 

Vibhava 44 

Vibhu 51 

vid an 

Vidhi 48 

vidhi-yajfia 27 

Vidisha District 20, 115 and n, 156, 


187 


44 
Vidyujjvala Karali 194 
Vihatgama 44 

Vijaya 237 
Vijaya-dasami 230 
Vajayaditya (Cilukya king) 202 
Vijayaditya (Sun-god) 221 
Vijayapuri 175, 

Vikramaditya 261-62 


Vikramankadevacarita 139, 


212, 219 
ra, Vikrampur rot, 184, 191 
ila (Vikramadila) 161 


Vinapoti 202 

Vinayaka (Ganeéa) 114, 188, 237 
Vinayaka (Vaidya) 215n 
Vinayapifaka 184 

Vindhya 124 


Vindhyavasini 69 

Viprosere 159 
raja z9 

Viramitrodaya 213 

Viranefvarasvamin 137-38 

Virarajendra-cola 161 

Vira-Ramanatha 162 

Viratha 242, 244 

Virgin Mary 38 

Viradhaka, Viralhaka 201, 238-40 

Virdpakkha (Virapaksa) 238 

Virapaksa 202, 239-403 temple 202 

Visakha 107 

Visakhapattanam plates 68 

Visnu 1-9, 12, 33, 29 35137» 39-42» 
46-53, 57-59, 61, 66n, 76. 770, 121, 
124, 135n, 162, 166, 187 and n, 
194, 195m, 197, 198 and n, 199, 
221-25, 226 and n, 227n, 228, 249, 
253-54, 256-57, 265-68 

Visnu (Smrtikira) 207 

Visnu-cakra 164 

Vignucitta 56 

Visnu-Danti 224 

Visnudharmottara 35, 188, 200-01 

Virougopa (Pallava king) 28, 46, 53 

Visnu-Krsna 9, 253 

Visnukundin dynasty 165, 167, 177 

Visnumitra 21 

Visnu-Narayana-Vasudeva 53 








Visnupada hill 3 and n, 204 
Visnu Purdna 28, 226 

Visnusmrti 138 

Visnuvarman 137 

Visnu-Vasudeva 21 

Vipoakena Sart 

Visvaksena ita 44 and n, 48 
Visvaripa 51 

Visvavasu 1710 

Véveivara 158, 1603 temple 71 
Visveivara (author of the Pratdparka) 





1730 
Visvesvara-desika 157 
Visvesvara-golaki 159 
Visvesvarasambhu, °siva 157 
Vitasta 133 
Vitha Vika m 

thi 118-1 
Vittesa (Kubera) 243 
Vivasvat 26n 


Vizagapatam plates 68 
Vokkana 131 


6: 
Veddha-Vajiavalkya 207 
Vrsni 14, 16-18, 21, 29 and n, 33, 355 
405 54 
Vrsala 14n 
Vrtra 4 


290 


Vuvaka 119 

Vyiha 32-33, 35-36, 47, 81 
Vyitha-vdda 47-48 

‘Vyasa 18, 43-44, 171-72 


Wakhan 131 

Warangal inscription 64n 

Watters 184n, 2470 

Weber 259 

Wei-lio 169 

Whitehead, R. B. 4gn, 107n 

Wilson 226n 

Winternitz 233n, 238n, 248n, 621, 
263n 


Yadava 15n, 16-17, 25,125, 247 

Yadava-Satvata-Vrgni 17-19, 21-22, 
26, 29, 34, 48, 81 

Yadni-méta 290 

Yajfiabhavana 4 

Yajitabhoktr 5 

Yajfiakratu 5 

Yajhakrt 5 

Yavtapurig 4 
Yajfia-Satakarni 21 

Yajatratr 5 

Yajiiavahana 5 

Yajniavalkya 207-08, 262n 

Yajiavalkyasmrti 262 

Yaji 

Yajiiavati 182 


RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Yajurveda g-10, 2c6 
Yaksa 19, 133, 145, 201, 238-39, 241, 


244-45 

Yaksapala aes 

Yaksarat 24: 

Yama (Lokspala) 21, 26n, 39, 197, 
Seay, 1, 239, 240 and MB, 241, 242 
and n, 243, 245 

Yama (Smytikara) 207, 210 

Yami 

Yamun 18, 26 and n, 29n, 135 and 
N, 211-12, 250, 255 

Yami 36 





Yayati IIT 202 
Yayatinagara 6gn, 70, 201-02 


Yogeivara 16: 

Yogivahana 5 

Yudhisthira Es and n, 242n, 254-55 
Yue-chi 109 

Yu-houan 109 


Zarmanochegas 209 


» 


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA 


2, line 28. —Read—fantastic 

4, line 32. —Read—-Yajiiabhavana 

8, line 25. —Read—vayunani 

17, line 7. —Add note—See Brhatsamhita, 58.32 ; 
cf. Ep. Ind., Vol. X, p. 80. Early 
Western Ganga inscriptions describe 
Padmanabha (Visnu) as gata-ghana- 
gagan-abha, i.e. having the colour of 
the clear (free from clouds) sky. See 
Sel. Ins., 1965, p. 480. For Visnu’s 
complexion like the colour of the thun- 
der clouds, see below, p. 135, note 3. 

20, line 16. | —Read—Vidisha District 

41, note 5. —Add—The Kirma-avatéra reminds 
us of the tortoise Akipara of boundless 
dimension, in whom is found the cosmic 
tortoise that finds the earth in the 
ocean (Keith, Rel. Phil. V. Up., p. 242). 

45, note 5, line 2.—Read—Ramagiri 

82, line 4. —Add note—For a bronze image of 
Balabhadra bearing an inscription of 
Devapila’s reign (c. 810-50 A.D.), see 
Mem. ASI, No. 66, pp. 88-89. 


»» 124, line 18. | —Read—salilamaye 
» 161, line 8. —Read— Vikramasila (Vikramasila) 
»168, note 3. —Add—The Kadamba king Ravivarman 


(c. 490-538 A.D.) was also merely a 
Maharaja; but the Davangere plates 
(Ep. Ind., Vol. XXXIII, pp. 90ff.) 
refer to his sémrdjya and to his claim 
of lordship over the southern cakravarti- 
ksetra, ice. the whole of South India as 
far as the Narmada in the north. 


292 RELIGIOUS LIFE IN ANOIENT AND MEDIEVAL INDIA 


Page 175, line 20. 


—Add—4a. King Damamitra (Ist cen- 
tury A. D.) probably belonging to 
Devimitra’s line, is known to have pet- 
formed an ASvamedha, from his Lucknow 
Museum brick inscription (Ep. Ind., Vol. 
XXXIII, pp. 99-100). 


