# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1973-lingat-classical-law-of-india.pdf
# Total Pages: 326 | Direct: 321 | OCR: 1 | Blank/Sparse: 4
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 17:54:33
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [DIRECT] ---

The Center for South and Southeast Asia Studies of the University of California is the
unifying organization for faculty members and students interested in South and Southeast
Asia Studies, bringing together scholars from numerous disciplines. The Center's major
aims are the development and support of research and language study. As part of this
program the Center sponsors a publication series of books concerned with South and
Southeast Asia. Manuscripts are considered from all campuses of the University of Cali-
fornia as well as from any other individuals and institutions doing research in these areas.
RECENT PUBLICATIONS OF THE CENTER FOR SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA STUDIES :
Jyotirindra Das Gupta
Language Conflict and National Development : Group Politics and National Language
Policy in India (1970)
Gerald D. Berreman
Hindus of the Himalayas (Second Revised Edition, 1971)
Richard G. Fox
Kin, Clan, Raja, and Rule : State-Hinterland Relations in Preindustrial India (1971)
Robert N. Kearney
Trade Unions and Poiitics in Ceylon (1971)
David G. Marr
Vietnamese Anticolonialism, 1885-1925 (1971)
Leo E. Rose
Nepal—Strategy for Survival (1971)
Richard Sisson
The Congress Party in Rajasthan : Political Integration and Institution-Building in an Indian
State (1971)
Prakash Tandon
Beyond Punjab : A Sequel to Punjabi Century (1971)
David N. Lorenzen
The Käpälikas and Kälämukhas : Two Lost Saivite Sects (1972)
Elizabeth Whitcombe
Agrarian Conditions in Northern India. Volume One : The United Provinces under British
Rule, 1860-1900(1972)

--- PAGE 2 [DIRECT] ---

THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA

--- PAGE 3 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
This volume is sponsored by the
Center for South and Southeast Asia Studies,
University of California, Berkeley

--- PAGE 5 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Rosert Lincat, 1892-1972

--- PAGE 6 [DIRECT] ---

THE CLASSICAL LAW
OF INDIA
ROBERT LINGAT
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH
with additions
BY J. DUNCAN M. DERRETT
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
BERKELEY, LOS ANGELES, LONDON

--- PAGE 7 [DIRECT] ---

University of California Press
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California
University of California Press, Ltd.
London, England
Copyright © 1973, by
The Regents of the University of California
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number : 76-81798
ISBN 0-520-01898-2
Printed in the United States of America
The original edition of this work, Les sources du droit dans le Systeme traditionnel de I'lnde.
was published in 1967 by Mouton & Co., Paris and the Hague, as a volume in both the
series Le Monde d'Outre-mer Passe et Present (Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne)
and the series Les Systemes de Droit Contemporain (Institut de droit compare', University
of Paris).

--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE
AT THE end of the Second World War the Indian subcontinent found
itself equipped (or perhaps, better, encumbered) with three main types
of Hindu law. In matters of family law and some other topics of which
the most prominent was the law governing religious endowments and
chanties, almost all Hindus amounting to a population of about four
hundred millions were governed by a system professedly derived from
the dharma-sästra, the "science of righteousness", the ancient indigenous
holy law of India. (There were a few exceptions among the Hindus—
chiefly those who, in British India, had married under the Special Marriage
Act, and those who, in French India, had "renounced" their religious
law in favour of the civil law of France.) In the forms in which it was
administered it was called "Hindu law". In the area known as British
India, which was ruled by Britain through the Viceroy, this "Hindu law"
had developed under the aegis of Common Law and Equity, modified
occasionally by statutes, not all of which were clearly understood or
put into practice by the public at large, into a system known since the
1920's by the pejorative but accurate name of "Anglo-Hindu law".
The courts constantly referred themselves to the dharma-sästra texts,
but subject to a method which had been gradually devised during British
rule. They also referred to previous decisions of the High Courts and the
Privy Council. The result often coincided with what indigenous Hindu
jurists of a century before might have recommended, and often did not.
In the French possessions another system was in force, which can
be called "Franco-Hindu law". Characteristically, the French took
considerable interest in the systfem, intellectually as well as practically,
and there is a respectable bibliography, in which the name of L. Sorg
figures prominently and honourably. In the Portuguese territories the
legislation of Portugal made a substantial but uneven impact upon the
indigenous laws. The tangled web of law (not unmarked by Goans who
had adjusted themselves to the resulting chaos) awaited the skilled and
authoritative treatment of the celebrated Portuguese jurist, Luis da
Cunha Goncalves. himself born in Goa. To this day Franco-Hindu law
and Luso-Hindu law. as we must call the personal law in force in the
former Portuguese possessions, must be taken into account by any
scholar and by any would-be reformer.
In the parts of India not subject to direct foreign rule, the so-called
vii

--- PAGE 9 [DIRECT] ---

viii 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE
Native or Princely States governed by Indian rulers under British para-
mountcy. other versions of Hindu law were in vogue. In some States
little codes of their own devising obtained and to some limited extent
still obtain as law.
Throughout India scholars and informed members of the public
deplored features of the traditional system, particularly the absence of
a divorce law and the right of Hindu males to have more than one wife
concurrently, and sought for a method whereby these defects might be
cured. They were met at every turn by the comment that the dharma-
sästra did not contemplate massive reforms, and that if an attempt were
made to reform the system comprehensively, religion, as well as popular
custom, would be outraged. The coming of Independence in 1947 gave
Hindus the opportunity to effect dramatic reforms by legislation, and
in 1955 and 1956 the four statutes forming the so-called Hindu Code
were enacted by the Parliament at New Delhi.
These new laws have not satisfied all sections of opinion. There remain,
moreover, large areas of the Hindu law which are only marginally affected
by the reforms. Whether intellectually or practically, it is desirable to
understand the scene in which these dramatic happenings took place;
and it is high time that a concise and faithful picture be made available,
wherefrom anyone may obtain a grasp of the nature of the legal system
with which the foreign rulers worked and which the native population
inherited.
During the long period of foreign rule Indian jurists and public men,
some of them trained wholly or in part in Europe, gave voice to ideas
about the dharma-sästra which were gratifying to their fellow-country-
men. In a country which had become used to western jurisprudence and
which fully accepted the rule of law as imported into India from England,
it seemed natural to treat the re-discovered wealth of dharma-sästra
material as if it were a corpus of law similar in purpose and effect to the
law to be found in Anglo-Indian legal publications. Many scholars,
amongst whom K.P. Jayaswäl comes readily to mind, conceived the
idea that the excellencies of the dharma-sästra proved that Indians were
fully capable of administering law to themselves long before foreign
rule became inevitable.
This gratifying notion tended to lead imperceptibly to an assumption
that the dharma-sästra was not only law, in the modern sense, but also
(at least for practical purposes) all the law which India had before the
intrusion of the Muslims. The great difficulties of mastering the corpus
of dharma-sästra material, and the enormous heap of discordant and
unreconciled decisions which emerged during British rule and which
formed the pabulum of the writers of textbooks for legal practitioners,
tended to dissuade people from undertaking an objective study of the

--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
ix
subject in its true cultural setting. Practitioners did not want to know
what the "true" Hindu law was. when the Privy Council had said autho-
ritatively what the law for India (or for a part of India) must thence-
forward be. Historians were, as is usually the case, impatient of the task
of sorting through legal decisions, which are couched in a peculiar lan-
guage and set in contexts of unexampled complexity and obliquity.
The only man who set himself to explain what the dhanna-sästra taught
and. at the same time, to sketch in the developments during the British
period was P.V. Käne, whose gigantic and solid encyclopaedia still
daunts even the best-intentioned enquirer. Kane's objectivity and accu-
racy were phenomenal; but he too had a motive, namely to show that
India's own jurisprudence should be seen in its historical setting, and
that when judged by the appropriate criteria it could stand comparison
with any system likely to be compared with it. I do not think that anyone
will blame Käne or castigate his results for the motive which he had.
Some will blame Parliament for not taking seriously the suggestions which,
from time to time, he made for the guidance of the reformers.
After 1956, Hindu law suffered from a double disadvantage, in that
the difficulty of the materials did not yield at once to a determined
researcher, because there was no short and attractive guide to the subject;
and in that the reforms gave a superficial impression of having rendered
the learning of the past quite superfluous and obsolete. Many realised
that the Hindu law was the oldest continuous system of law. and that
its materials were, in their richness and diversity, superior to Roman
law. while the longevity of its institutions altogether exceeded anything
which any other system could proffer. Many were prepared to enquire —
until they discovered that a knowledge of Sanskrit was required, if only
to test the reliability of the many translations done by English and
German scholars. True, this difficulty did not absolutely restrain those
whose education had been of a classical type and whose minds had been
broadened by contact with many and ancient cultures prior to their
involvement with the dry and* practical business of the law. But an
uncertainty as to the value of what they read confined them to narrow
and limited paths, in which an ultimate practical object was seldom out
of view. Such was the work of J. Köhler. The speculative, if deep, studies
of the dharma-sästra and its companion sciences by J.J. Meyer only
served to weaken the confidence with which students of a Bühler and
a Jolly had been going to work. The only man who knew how to evaluate
the material comprehensively was G. Mazzarella. whose enormous, but
not prolix, publications defy all those who are not fluent in Italian and
those who. possessing that language, are sceptical about the scientific
content of the "social sciences". The recent work of W. Ruben illuminates
the very early stages of the development of the sästra, but avoids the

--- PAGE 11 [DIRECT] ---

X 
TRANSLATOR S PREFACE
jurisprudential questions raised in this present book. It stops at A.D.
500, when our commentaries begin.
Meanwhile the world has awakened to the intellectual value of non-
western thought. Non-Christian is no longer anti-Christian. The world
of ideas, as well as the world of space, has become perceptibly smaller.
Asians, whether in Asia or in Europe and Africa and America, make
their contributions to life and to intellectual endeavour. They need to
understand their own culture; and we need to understand them. Pre-
viously we had the advantage of possessing fluent (I may also say, glib)
accounts of Indian culture from Indians; but they were couched in
language which borrowed far too much from our own environment.
In order to communicate with us, they borrowed more than our language.
Now we have Europeans who know the East well, not as exploiters,
nor as sentimental wanderers, nor as lost souls trying to find their spiritual
home, but as learners, sufferers, men and women who have not learnt
about Asia from books alone, but have lived and perspired, imbibed
the spirit of the lands in which they served, and struggled along with
their inhabitants in a spirit of common enterprise and equality. Books
by such authors come into quite a different category from the apologetic
work of Asians or the fusty academic meanderings of the old-fashioned
"philologist".
Robert Lingat worked for long in South East Asia, mastering languages
and culture. He discovered that the core of society retained an historical
tradition which was still alive and explained much that was otherwise
inexplicable. That tradition went back directly to India. Much research
into the history of the social institutions and even the political institutions
of, for example, Cambodia has shown that culturally these regions were
colonies of India. The traces of the dharma-sästra which we can find
there prove that India exported her concept of society and law, and
probably she exported practitioners in it also. Lingat proceeded to trace
back to India the concepts which were living realities in the regions
where he served for so many years. Further study of India herself, and
not merely from the classical literature, produced a view of that subject
which had not been open to Indians or Europeans involved with India's
own political, emotional, and intellectual problems.
This is why Lingat's book, translated here, is the best work ever
written on this tantalising and difficult subject. No one who masters it
can fail to tread securely in the maze of Indian legal history (if for the
moment we neglect Muslim law, so ably served by others); and students
of the comparative history of law will realise that they are handling
here not merely a system of great age, but also one which is an important
component of the modern world.

--- PAGE 12 [DIRECT] ---

TRANSLATOR S PREFACE 
XI
The original edition of this book appeared in 1967 and was intended
for readers in those parts of the world in which French culture and the
heritage of the Roman law are treasured. To make it fit for readers
subject to the Anglo-American consortium of legal systems, in which of
course India herself is included, numerous small adjustments were called
for. These have no effect on the author's meaning. Because "loi", "droit",
"droit positif", and similar expressions have no exact equivalent in
English the author's beautiful, concise style has occasionally had to be
abandoned for more cumbersome expressions which, I trust, will prevent
unnecessary confusion.
Since 1967 several new publications have thrown light on matters
falling within the scope of the book. The footnotes have been enriched
with some additional, recent references, but the author's meaning has
not been affected. There were a few places where, with the author's
consent. I have thought fit to insert a "perhaps" or some similar caveat
where an expression which was forcefully put can no longer be regarded
as literally sound. But I believe it would take a minute comparison of
the original and this translation to detect them, their contribution being
minimal. The bibliography has been slightly amended in places, and the
opportunity has been taken to remove misprints and incorrect references
which so complex and detailed a work would be likely to incur even
when undertaken by a meticulous publisher.
Since a work of outstanding merit, deserving that often abused epithet
"seminal", depends fundamentally on the intention, and thus on the out-
look, education, and qualifications of the author, I thought it proper
to include Robert Lingat's Curriculum Vitae and his illuminating list of
publications. These, together with an excellent portrait, he gladly pro-
vided at my earnest request; and thus what the reader has before him is
Lingat's chef-d'oeuvre in English. His death in May 1972 deprived
international scholarship of a combination of experience, intuition, in-
sight, and sympathy which can hardly be looked for again. The question
whether his work will be taken up and furthered, and by whom, now
lies open for the English-speaking as well as the French-speaking world
to answer.

--- PAGE 13 [DIRECT] ---

AUTHOR'S PREFACE
IN THE following pages I propose to clarify the Hindus' understanding
of Law before they encountered western notions on that subject. I am
concerned essentially with aspects of private law, in other words those
which obtain between individuals. Institutions of public law are the subject
of a quite distinct science devoted to the art of government. It is true enough,
as I shall demonstrate in due course, that one comes across not merely
coexistence but even interpenetration between the two systems, political
and juridical—the traces are evident in works appertaining to either
discipline. But their points of view are nonetheless different; and the
dichotomy between them is such that writers in each profess to be unaware
of their counterparts in the other.
A feature of the originality of Hindu law, and at the same time of the
difficulty which we experience in understanding the legal system of
India, is that the law does not derive from written sources properly so-
called. Its development owes nothing either to positive law in the sense
of a legislative act, or to judicial decisions. Significantly, the rich voca-
bulary of Sanskrit does not contain a term corresponding to our word
law, as we understand the term "law" (in English) or "droit" (in French)
when we wish to refer to "English law" or "French law", signifying a
group of rules which govern men actually and imperatively in a given
locality and period of time. In building up their law the Hindus have
not taken as their starting-point that element which has served in the
West as a foundation for a specific discipline, namely the coercive element,
which characterises a legal rule and distinguishes it from other
rules which also control human activity. They have derived it from a
more general notion which exceeds the domain of law in many respects
without actually comprehending it entirely: duty. They did not attempt
specially to define rules which people may be constrained by an external
or physical sanction to observe1 and which amount to specifically juridical
duties. They relied on religious concepts peculiar to the Hindu world,
and they taught people the rules of conduct which they ought to observe
by reason of their condition in society—and amongst these rules the
rules of law are to be found. The word dharma which is translated here
*Cf. the definition of Aubry and Rau : 'Law is the totality of precepts or rules of conduct
to the observance of which it is permitted to constrain a person by exterior or physical
coercion'.
XÜ

--- PAGE 14 [DIRECT] ---

AUTHOR'S PREFACE 
xiii
"duty" in effect expresses conformity with what Hindus regard as the
natural order of things, and this explains its association with law. But
the rule of dharma can only become a rule of law by a process beyond the
expression of it, a process which enables it to enter society armed with
a power of constraint which is not inherent in it. Moreover, the jurist's
task is not simply to discern amongst the enormous literature devoted
to dharma whatever is particularly amenable to law. He must, indeed,
concern himself with a great many of the duties which could not be the
object of an external constraint (or, more simply, a legal action).2 But,
the jurist must go further and ask to what extent and under what form
they could have been taken as rules of law by society. I say "could have
been" and not "were" so taken, because we are in a position to grasp
the machinery, but not its end-product. The latter, viz. the law in action,
escapes us, precisely because we have no legal instruments such as legis-
lative documents and reports of judicial decisions at our disposal.3
In short, we must study the role played in the evolution of law by the
notion of dharma and by the precepts in and through which it is expressed :
that is my task. I have chosen the period of the commentaries and the
original treatises deliberately. In that period alone can we watch dharma
and law face to face. In that period for the first time we can disentangle
the broad features of a genuine juridical system. One might object that
this amounts to a somewhat tardy attack on the subject: India had a long,
rich story before the first commentators came upon the scene. But it
struck me as a good method not to try to elucidate the sense and bearing
of texts relating to dharma at any stage prior to their first being used for
the construction of law. The theories and the means which the inter-
preters utilised to adapt them to social realities go to make up what I
call the "traditional system of India", the classical system, by contrast
with the system applied under British rule, in which western concepts
predominate. It is "traditional", or classical, in two senses: not only
does it rest upon concepts which are exclusively Indian; it possesses,
also, the character of being an undisputed tradition.
2One must not forget, however, that this distinction is essential only for the western
jurist. The commentators and authors of digests treat quite indifferently precepts which
(it seems to us) derive from religion, ritual, morals, or even good manners, and those which
have a juridical significance. They employ the same arguments relative to one and all of
these and apply the same method of interpretation to them. It would be gravely misleading
for us to attribute less value to the former group than to the latter, especially as they differ
only in respect of the nature of the problems posed.
?This need is very scantily supplied by epigraphy and by the rare documents drawn by
practitioners which have survived and been published. But we must make special mention
of the Lekhapaddhati (Gaekwad's Oriental Series, Baroda, 1925), a manual of forms from
Gujarat, bearing dates in the fifteenth century (and occasionally even earlier), which does
provide numerous examples of forms of contract.

--- PAGE 15 [DIRECT] ---

xiv 
AUTHOR'S PREFACE
The interpreters are not mere theoreticians. They are exegetes. They
absorbed from the very texts which they were interpreting the principles
which allowed them to recognise a rule of dharma and to determine its
import. These principles became apparent and indeed imperative, not
as scholastic opinions but as fundamental data, the product of the
ancient Sages' speculation. Consequently they were never questioned,
except by certain heterodox circles which had no effect on the Hindu world,
and it is only in our own days that they have been vigorously attacked
at the heart of the Hindu world itself. Throughout the millennium in
which their writings range, the interpreters or commentators started
from the same premisses and employed the same methods of argument.
Their intelligence was employed simply to apply the means at their
disposal, with the result that the difference between the authors has no
other significance for us than to inform us how varied were the solutions
which practical problems could command. For our purpose it is not so
tragic as it might otherwise be that a part of this literature is still buried
in manuscript form, and that a part has disappeared altogether: even
though there would have been found amongst the latter some works
which would have been authorities at a given period and in a given region,
the loss is serious only for the history of institutions. The lack of such
works will not impede knowledge of the system which we are undertaking
to investigate.
One may well ask if this system really proceeded from the texts upon
which the interpreters believed it to be based, or if it became established
only progressively, enveloped in a doctrine which emerged at the dawn
of the interpretation itself. The question must remain open. No indepen-
dent source has transmitted to us the texts under consideration. The
state in which they have reached us, and the chronological difficulties
which they raise, confine us to the paths which the commentators them-
selves have trodden. We are bound to limit our research and, at least
provisionally, its result, to the period I have chosen.
These observations indicate the outline of my work. An early portion
is devoted to dharma, to its sources, and to a rapid analysis of the literature
which has risen from it. This is a purely descriptive section, intended
above all to underline the size of the literature and the importance of
the place it occupies in Indian thought. The dharma-sutras which are the
earliest expression of it have afforded me a starting-off point for a demons-
tration of the great sociological themes which provide the material of
dharma with its framework and schematic arrangement, and for an
apercu of the vast domain open to the writers concerned and of the
way in which they approached their task. It was, I felt, no duty of mine to
linger long over questions of chronology which (as we shall see) held no
interest whatever for the commentators and, as a consequence, had no

--- PAGE 16 [DIRECT] ---

AUTHOR S PREFACE 
XV
bearing on the construction of the law. In any case, a few observations
placed in an appendix serve to throw doubt on the very possibility of
setting up a chronological classification of the texts which might be
sufficiently advanced and sufficiently certain to satisfy the demands of
critical scholarship.
In the second part, which is more systematic than the first. I endeavoured
to discover how law-in-action (le droh positif) was born. i.e. by what
means and in what measure the rule of dharma, which possesses authority
for society, could receive from it that constraining force which turned
it into a rule of law. This brought me to contrast the rule of dharma
first with rules of customary origin and then with injunctions emanating
from the king, viz. the two powers which are coercive in a society which
has no legislation in the modern sense. Problems of this kind are not new :
often propounded, they have been variously solved. I did not even have
to alter the terms of them. I simply applied myself to the task of keeping
to the orthodox position, which is that of the commentators, and to
understanding it.
The classical Indian system was altered somewhat under Muslim rule,
and more directly affected under British administration. As is generally
known, it has given place to a system inspired from the West. But before
it vanished as a whole from India it was propagated, not without under-
going changes which left its essential principles untouched, in the company
of Buddhism in the Hinduised lands of Indo-China. It has finished, curi-
ously, by uniting with our western system. I thought it would be interesting
to present in conclusion a rapid survey of the outlines of that evolution,
seeking out its seeds in the Hindu system.
It is hardly necessary to say that this work could not have been under-
taken if I had not had at my disposal the five volumes of P.V. Kane's
History of Dharmasästra, that remarkable synthesis of the texts. The
greater part of my references were obtained from that quarter, and my
research grew out of reflections suggested to me as I read them. I must
also express here my gratitude*to the late M. Louis Renou. whose en-
couragement meant so much to me; and my thanks to M. Louis Dumont
who was kind enough to read a part of my manuscript and to draw my
attention to vistas which one who was too strictly educated in the law
might well have overlooked.1
July 1965
•M. Lingat would have wished to draw attention to M. Dumont's Homo hierarchicus
(Paris, 1967; Eng. trans., London, 1969) and D.G. Mandelbaum, Society in India (Berkeley,
1970) which in a sense complements it. [trs.]

--- PAGE 17 [DIRECT] ---

ABBREVIATIONS
Äp. 
Äpastamba-dharmasütra.
Baudh. 
Baudhäyana-dharmasütra.
ßrh. 
Brhaspati-smrti, ed. J. Jolly.
Brh. Aiy. 
Brhaspati-smrti, ed. K.V. Rangaswämi Aiyahgär.
Däy. 
Däyabhäga of Jimütavähana, trans. Colebrooke (cited
from W. Stokes's collection).
Dh.k. 
Dharmakosa, the Vyavahärakända.
B.E.F.E.O. 
Bulletin de l'Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient.
B.S.O.A.S. 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies.
Gaut. 
Gautama-dharmasütra.
l.H.Q. 
Indian Historical Quarterly.
J.A. 
Journal Asiatique.
J.A.O.S. 
Journal of the American Oriental Society.
J.A.S.B. 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
J.B.R.S. 
Journal of the Bihar Research Society.
J.O.R. 
Journal of Oriental Research, Madras.
J.R.A.S. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain.
P.V. Käne 
History of Dharmasästra, by P.V. Käne.
Kät. 
Kätyäyana-smrti^d. 
P.V. Käne.
Kaut. 
Arthasästra of Kautilya, ed. and trans. R.P. Kängle.
M. 
Manu-smrti, ed. V.N. Mandlik, and Jhä.
Mit. 
Mitäksarä of Vijnänesvara, ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
När. 
Närada-smrti, ed. J. Jolly.
När.Sämb. 
Närada-smrti, ed. K. Sämbasiva Sästri.
Par. 
Paräsara-smrti. ed. V.S. Islämpurkar.
Räj. rat. 
Räjanlti-ratnäkara.
S.B.E. 
Sacred Books of the East.
Sm.cand. 
Smrti-candrikä, ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
[trs.] 
The sentence or note is owed in part or wholly to the
translator.
Vas. 
Vasistha-dharmasütra.
Vir.par. 
Viramitrodaya, paribhäsä-prakäsa.
Vir.vyav. 
Viramitrodaya, vyavahära-prakäsa.
Vis. 
Visnu-dharmasütra.
Vyav.cint. 
Vyavahära-cintämani, ed. L. Rocher.
Vyav.may. 
Vyavahära-mayükha, ed. V.N. Mandlik.
Yäj. 
Yäjhavalkya-smrti, ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
xvi

--- PAGE 18 [DIRECT] ---

CONTENTS
Translator's Preface 
.. 
vii
Author's Preface 
.. 
xii
Abbreviations 
.. 
xvi
Part One
DHARMA
Chapter One—The Sources of Dharma 
.. 
3
1. The Concept of Dharma 
.. 
3
2. The Veda 
.. 
7
3. Tradition 
.. 
9
4. "Good Custom" 
.. 
14
Chapter Two—The Dharma-Sütras 
.. 
18
1. The Dharma-sütra of Gautama 
.. 
19
2. The Dharma-sütras of Baudhäyana, Äpastamba,
and Hiranyakesin 
.. 
20
3. The Dharma-sütra of Vasistha and Other Ancient
Dharma-sütras 
.. 
23
4. The Visnu-smrti 
.. 
25
Chapter Three—Indian Society and the Rules of Law in
the Dharma-sütras 
.. 
28
1. The Theory of the Four Varnas 
.. 
29
2. The Theory of the Four Stages of Life 
.. 
45
3. The Rules of Law in the Dharma-sutras 
.. 
52
Chapter Four—The Dharma-Sästras : The Manu-smrti 
. . 
73
1. Analysis of the Manu-Smrti 
.. 
78
2. The Origin of the Manu-Smrti 
.. 
87
3. The Date of the Manu-Smrti 
92
Chapter Five—The Other Dharma-Sästras 
. . 
97
1. The Yäjnavalkya-Smrti 
. . 
97
2. The Närada-Smrti 
' 
. . 1 0 0
3. Other Smrtis 
. . 
103

--- PAGE 19 [DIRECT] ---

XVlll 
CONTENTS
Chapter Six—The Commentaries and the Digests 
.. 
107
1. The Commentaries 
.. 
Ill
2. The Digests 
115
Appendix : Some Reflections on the Chronology of the
Dharma-Sästras 
.. 
123
Part Two
FROM DHARMA TO LAW
The Problem 
.. 
135
Chapter One—Interpretation 
.. 
143
1. The Scope of Interpretation 
.. 
143
2. The Method of Interpretation 
.. 
148
3. Conflicts between Texts 
.. 
157
Chapter Two—Dharma and Custom 
.. 
176
1. The Contrast between Law and Custom 
.. 
176
2. The Doctrine of Consensus 
.. 
180
3. Prohibitions proper to the Kali Age 
.. 
189
4. Conflicts between Dharma and Custom 
.. 
195
Chapter Three—Dharma and Royal Ordinance 
.. 
207
1. The Function of the King 
.. 
207
(a) Ksatra and Dharma 
.. 
207
(b) Ksatra and Brahman 
.. 
215
(c) Analysis of the function of the king 
.. 
222
2. The King's Legislative Power 
.. 
224
3. The King's Role Relative to Penance 
.. 
232
4. Criminal Justice 
.. 
237
5. Private Litigation 
.. 
243
Conclusion 
.. 
257
Appendix by the Translator 
.. 
273
Bibliography 
.. 
275
Glossary 
.. 
283
An aid to the Pronunciation of Sanskrit Words 
.. 
286
Robert Lingat
Curriculum Vitae, Opera 
.. 
287
Index 
.. 
290

--- PAGE 20 [DIRECT] ---

PART ONE
DHARMA

--- PAGE 21 [DIRECT] ---

ABBREVIATIONS
Ap. 
Apastamba-dhavmasittra.
Baudh. 
Baudhäyana-dharmasütra.
Brh. 
Brhaspati-smrti, ed. J. Jolly.
Brh. Aiy. 
Brhaspati-smrti, ed. K.V. Rahgaswäml Aiyangär.
Däy. 
Däyabhäga of Jimütavähana. trans. Colebrooke (cited
from W. Stokes's collection).
Dh.k. 
Dharmakosa, the Vyavahärakända.
B.E.F.E.O. 
Bulletin de VEcole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient.
B.S.O.A.S. 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies.
Gaut. 
Gautama-dharmasütra.
I.H.Q. 
Indian Historical Quarterly.
J.A. 
Journal Asiatique.
J.A .OS. 
Journal of the American Oriental Society.
J.A.S.B. 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
J.B.R.S. 
Journal of the Bihar Research Society.
J.O.R. 
Journal of Oriental Research, Madras.
J.R.A.S. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain.
P.V. Käne 
History of Dharmasästra, by P.V. Kane.
Kät. 
Kätyäyana-smrti,Qd. P.V. Käne.
Kaut. 
Arthasästra of Kautilya, ed. and trans. R.P. Kängle.
M. 
Manu-smrti, ed. V.N. Mandlik, and Jhä.
Mit. 
Mitäksarä of Vijnänesvara, ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
När. 
Närada-smrti, ed. J. Jolly.
När.Sämb. 
Närada-smrti, ed. K. Sämbasiva Sästri.
Par. 
Paräsara-smrti. ed. V.S. Islämpurkar.
Räj. rat. 
RäjanJti-ratnäkara.
S.B.E. 
Sacred Books of the East.
Sm.cand. 
Smrti-candrikä,ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
[trs.] 
The sentence or note is owed in part or wholly to the
translator.
Vas. 
Vasistha-dharmasütra.
Vir.par. 
Viramitrodaya, paribhäsä-prakäsa.
Vir. vya v. 
Viram itrodaya, vya vahära-prak äsa.
Vis. 
Visnu-dharmasütra.
Vyawcint. 
Vyavahära-cintämani, ed. L. Rocher.
Vyav.may. 
Vyavahära-mayükha, ed. V.N. Mandlik.
Yäj. 
Yäjnavalkya-smrti, ed. J.R. Ghärpure.
xvi

--- PAGE 22 [DIRECT] ---

CONTENTS
Translator's Preface 
.. 
vii
Author's Preface 
.. 
xii
Abbreviations 
.. 
xvi
Part One
DHARMA
Chapter One—The Sources of Dharma 
.. 
3
1. The Concept of Dharma 
.. 
3
2. The Veda 
.. 
7
3. Tradition 
.. 
9
4. "Good Custom" 
.. 
14
Chapter Two—The Dharma-Sütras 
.. 
18
1. The Dharma-sütra of Gautama 
.. 
19
2. The Dharma-sütras of Baudhäyana, Äpastamba,
and Hiranyakesin 
.. 
20
3. The Dharma-sütra of Vasistha and Other Ancient
Dharma-sütras 
.. 
23
4. The Visnu-smrti 
.. 
25
Chapter Three—Indian Society and the Rules of Law in
the Dharma-sütras 
.. 
28
1. The Theory of the Four Varnas 
.. 
29
2. The Theory of the Four Stages of Life 
.. 
45
3. The Rules of Law in the Dharma-sutras 
.. 
52
Chapter Four—The Dharma-Sästras : The Manu-smrti 
.. 
73
1. Analysis of the Manu-Smrti 
.. 
78
2. The Origin of the Manu-Smrti 
.
.
8
7
3. The Date of the Manu-Smrti 
.. 
92
Chapter Five—The Other Dharma-Sästras 
.. 
97
1. The Yäjnavalkya-Smrti 
.. 
97
2. The Närada-Smrti 
.. 
100
3. Other Smrtis 
.. 
103

--- PAGE 23 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 24 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER I
THE SOURCES OF DHARMA
1. The Concept of Dharma
DHARMA IS a concept difficult to define because it disowns—or
transcends—distinctions that seem essential to us, and because it is
based upon beliefs that are as strange to us as they are familiar to the
Hindus. The word itself is used in several widely different senses, even
in a work with one consistent style like the code of Manu. The most
general sense is provided by its root, dhr, which signifies the action
of maintaining, sustaining, or supporting and which has produced fre
in Latin (fretus, depending upon, daring to) and fir (firmus, strong in
the physical and moral senses, whence solid, hard, durable).1 Dharma
is what is firm and durable, what sustains and maintains, what hinders
fainting and falling.
Applied to the universe, dharma signifies the eternal laws which
maintain the world.2 This sense is related to a very ancient conception
which the Hindus shared with the Iranians, according to which the
world is not the product of a fortuitous concourse of elements, but is
ruled by certain norms and sustained by an order necessary to its pre-
servation. This order is an objective one, inherent in the very nature of
things; and the gods are only its guardians.3
During the Vedic period the fundamental laws of the universe were
identified with the laws of the sacrifice. Consequently dharma was par
excellence the sacrificial act which maintains and even conditions the
cosmic order. As we shall see below, it is in this sense that the Mimämsä
school use the word. Later on, that more or less magical act of sacrifice
remains constantly present before the minds of the authors,4 but the
concept of dharma is widened : it^ envelops the moral world as much as
the physical; and the norm of ritual becomes a norm of conduct. In
!A. Ernout and A. Meillet. Dictionnaire etymologique de la langue la tine (Paris. 1932),
s.v. firmus and fretus.
2'Dharma is so called because it protects (dhäranät) everything; Dharma maintains
everything that has been created. Dharma is thus that very principle which can maintain
the universe' {Mahäbh., Säntip., 109, 59).
3P. Masson-Oursel. Esquisse d'une histoire de la philosophie indienne (Paris. 1923). 35-6.
Cf L. Renou, L'Inde classique. ss. 1152-3.
4Cf A/., III.75-6: \ . . he who is diligent in making sacrifices upholds all this [world],
animate and inanimate. The offering correctly thrown into the fire goes to the Sun; from
the Sun comes rain; from the rain food; and from this all creatures [subsist]1. Cf XII.99.

--- PAGE 25 [DIRECT] ---

4 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
external terms, dharma is the action which, provided it is conformable
to the order of things, permits man to realise his destiny to the full,
sustains him in this life, and assures his well-being after death. By its
own virtue that act produces a spiritual benefit for him who has per-
formed it, which will necessarily bear fruit in the other world.5 Conversely,
an act contrary to dharma, called adharma, necessarily involves a sanction,
a "fall" for the one who does it, which will strike him in his future exis-
tence if not actually in his present life. "Destroyed, Dharma destroys;
protected, he protects": so says Manu (VIII. 15). In internal terms,
dharma signifies the obligation, binding upon every man who desires
that his actions should bear fruit, to submit himself to the laws which
govern the universe and to direct his life in consequence. That obligation
constitutes his duty : and that is a further sense of the word.
From there it is an easy step to the sense which dharma most
frequently bears in our texts. This is the totality of duties which bears
upon the individual according to his status (varna) and the stage of
life (äsrama) at which he stands, the totality of rules to which he must
confirm if he does not want to "fall", if he is anxious about the hereafter
(cf A/., 1.2; Yä/'.y I.I). This is the sense which the word has in the epics,
notably in the celebrated passage in the BhagavadgJtä where Krsna,
speaking to Arjuna who is hesitating to give the order to commence
battle, tells him what is his duty (sva-dharma) as a Ksatriya.6
This morality is addressed to man in society. It is based on a belief
in retribution for one's acts and on the operation of transmigration.7
Its foundation and its sanction are religious, but it is essentially social
in the sense that, in a social order visualised as one with the natural
order, the individual who obeys its precepts performs a duty which is as
much social as religious. So far as this life is concerned, it provides him
with reasons for acting and for fulfilling as his function, his role in society.
It sees man's welfare in his works. And, in effect, this is the morality of
action postulated by the literature which we must survey and the concep-
tion of law which emerges from it.
However, we must note that this is not the only morality which India
has. Mystics extol disciplines of salvation whose object, by contrast,
5Cf the definition of dharma which Haradatta gives in his commentary on the Äpastamba-
sütra : karma-janyo 'bhyudaya-nihsreyasa-hetur apürväkhya ätma-guno dharmah : 'Produced
by the act, cause of [final] beatitude, a property of the soul having the name apürva [devoid
of cause], [that is] dharma' (Ujjvalä, on Äp.. I.1.1-2).
6But we are bound to note that even our sources illustrate the use of the word dharma
simply in the sense of imperative rule or customary usage, without any religious conno-
tation. Manu (IX.66) describes niyoga (see below) as fca dharma of animals' (pasu-dharma),
i.e. a bestial usage.
7On its doctrines see L. Renou. L'Inde classique, ss. 1142-9, and P.V. Käne, Hist. Dharm.
V, ch.xxxv, pp. 1530-1612.

--- PAGE 26 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
5
is to enable man to escape from the chain of rebirth by abstaining from
and renouncing works of any kind. That is the life of the samnyäsin,
practised in India at very early times and, some would say, not yet
extinct. The writers on dharma-sästra are perfectly aware of it, and
they even go so far as to quarter it within the last stage of life. But this
salvation-morality goes beyond their domain. The samnyäsin has renounc-
ed the world, he has freed himself from the relationships which are the
web of mundane life; society's morality offers him no object or goal.8
As is said in the Mitäksarä (on Yäj.t 1.8), "ascetics have no need of
rules".
It follows as a matter of course that, for authors committed to the
religious significance of actions, society's essential end is the realisation
of dharma, when each individual can put his duties into effect. So their
structure of law has dharma as its axis. But even in India religious aspi-
rations do not monopolise all human activity. Manu himself remarks
(II.2-4) that men seldom act without being prompted by interest, and
that even the rule prescribed by dharma is sought out not for itself but
for the spiritual advantages which it proffers. The pious intention is
seldom pure. It is mixed with other motives of a less elevated complexion.
Hindus contrast with dharma (which is the good) both artha (the useful)
and käma (the pleasurable), which also motivate human behaviour.
Under the heading of artha the rule is assessed by the measure of profit,
the advantage one draws from it; under that of käma the measure is that
of the pleasure which is experienced. Human activity may be summed
up in that triad : dharma, artha, and käma. A rule founded on dharma
has an authority superior to that founded on artha, just as the latter
has an authority superior to one motivated by käma. But all three points
of view are equally legitimate, and man is made in such a way that he
is bound to consider all three of them as he functions in life. Side by
side with the science of dharma (dharma-sästra) there is, therefore,
a science of artha (artha-sästra), set out in treatises on politics as the
practice of princes, just as there is a science of pleasure codified in the
Kämasütra. For Manu (II.224), wisdom is to be found in a harmonious
combination of the three prim© motives of human nature. "There are
those who declare", says he, "that the highest good, here below, consists
in virtue (dharma) and in wealth (artha); [others say it consists in]
pleasure (käma) and wealth, or in virtue alone, or in wealth alone;
but the true opinion [is that it consists in] the conjunction of all three".9
However, the man who is anxious about his future destiny must
search for the rules of behaviour in the science of dharma. It is true that
8Cf L. Dumont, Le renoncement dans les religions de rinde'. Archives de sociologie
des religions, 1959, pp. 45-69.
9On the trivarga see P.V. Käne. II, 8 9 and L. Renou. op. cit.. s. 1150.

--- PAGE 27 [DIRECT] ---

6 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the criteria of interest and even (albeit rarely) of pleasure may play
some part in the working out of law-in-action, but the rule of dharma
will remain fixed at the very foundation of the concept of law.
To understand this concept we must first apply ourselves to dharma
and examine the various sources from which it proceeds and in which
it is expressed. After that, our task will be to understand how the passage
was made from dharma to law, and at that point we shall find artha
personified in the king.
The dharma-sutras (Gaut., 1.1-2; Vas., 1.4-6) enumerate three sources
(müla) of dharma: the Veda, Tradition, and "Good Custom". The
codes of Manu (11.12) and of Yäjnavalkya (1.7) add one more: inner
contentment (svasya priyam ätmanah, ätma-tusti). 'The Veda, Tradition,
and "Good Custom", and inner contentment, these are said manifestly
to be the fourfold foundation of dharma" (M., 11.12). But if "inner
contentment"—we should prefer to say the approval of one's conscience—
really is a source of dharma, it does not strike us as quite properly placed
here, following upon sources which possess an authority exterior to man.
To understand why our authors set some store by it, it is sufficient to
note that the list given by Manu and Yäjnavalkya, like most lists of this
type, amounts to a climax of esteem : the first of the sources of dharma
is superior to the second, the second to the third, and so on. Consequently
one should not have recourse to Tradition unless the Vedic texts are
silent; only when the texts furnished by Tradition fail us may we refer
to "Good Custom"; and lastly it is only when all the other sources are
silent that the rule of dharma may be sought out in the approval of one's
conscience. The commentators on Manu add the hypothesis that where
one has a choice between two ways of acting conscience will show which
is to be preferred. They believe, moreover, that the approval of cons-
cience, as a rule of life, is not to be admitted except in the cases of indivi-
duals of great virtue. At that rate this source is in danger of being confused
with "Good Custom".
It is evident, on the other hand, that in speaking of what is agreeable
to the conscience, our authors do not intend that whatever suits someone
can be considered as a rule of behaviour. Before referring to conscience
it is fitting to look into the question whether it is not possible by analogy
or by way of a natural consequence to deduce the required rule from
those which have in fact been expressly formulated, or whether it is not
possible to resolve the conflict between two rules which are only appa-
rently contradictory. In other words recourse to reason and to logic
should not be overlooked. In fact Gautama (II.2.23-24) recognises the
usefulness of reasoning. Manu (II.11) is less hostile to reasoning than
to sophistry which is aimed simply at undermining the authority of the
written rule. Later authors, Yäjnavalkya, Närada, and Brhaspati, allow

--- PAGE 28 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
7
substantial scope for logic and exegesis as means of deciding upon the
rule to be followed. When the Mimämsä method came to be applied
to the texts of smrti it left very little room for ätma-tusti.
Only the Veda, Tradition, and "Good Custom" are sources in the
sense in which we understand that word in juridical discussion. These
we shall define one after the other. The two first are written sources,
the last is an unwritten source.
2. The Veda
For every author dharma rests primarily and essentially upon the Veda
or rather upon Revelation (sruti). The Vedic texts are really revealed
texts, divine words gathered directly by the inspired bards, the rsis.
They consist of three collections of liturgical texts particularly named
"Vedas": the Rg-veda, the Säma-veda, and the Yajur-veda, to which
a fourth collection, the Atharva-veda, was added at some later date.
For each Veda there existed several recensions, each belonging to
a particular school of interpreters. Each school (säkhä or carana) posse-
ssed its own collection of liturgical and sacramental texts called by the
name samhitä. In addition, each Vedic school possessed, alongside
its samhitä, treatises on ceremonial practices called brähmana, "guides",
intended to explain to the Brahmins authorised to officiate what the
relation was between the hymns or the formulae which they recited
and the ritual actions which they were bound to carry out. A propos
of these prescriptions, the brähmanas have preserved for us numerous
legends and some traditions of great age. The samhitäs and the bräh-
manas together make up sruti \ but one must also bring within that expres-
sion the äranvakas and the upanisads, which were philosophical specula-
tions.
It is very difficult to establish the age of the Vedas. The Rgveda is
generally regarded as the most ancient. Max Müller places the majority
of the hymns which comprise that collection in the eleventh century
before our era. As for the brähmanas, the same authority would place
them at intervals between 800 and 600 B.C. Actually, there are some
of them which could well be contemporary with the redaction of the
Vedas, whereas others seem no older than the fifth century.10
For the Hindu all knowledge proceeds from the Veda, which is Know-
ledge.11 All belief takes its source and its justification there. Consequently
every rule of dharma must find its foundation in the Veda.
In actual fact the Vedic texts contain little enough in the way of rules
10For further detail on the Vedas and Vedic literature see L. Renou, op. cit., ss. 513-618.
11 Veda has the same root as video, which implies vision as a means of cognition. The perfect,
which expresses a result gained, has the sense of knowledge (A. Ernout and A. Meillet,
op. cit., s.v. uiso).

--- PAGE 29 [DIRECT] ---

8 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of dharma. Strictly speaking, the Vedas (samhitäs) do not even include
a single positive precept which could be used directly as a rule of conduct.
One can find there only references to usage which falls within the scope
of dharma. By contrast the brähmanas, the äranyakas, and the upanisads
contain, apart from descriptions of certain practices fit to be invoked
as precedents to support some rule, numerous precepts which propound
rules governing behaviour.
But in reality, it seems that when a Hindu affirms that dharma rests
entirely upon the Veda, the word Veda does not mean in that connection
the Vedic texts, but rather the totality of Knowledge, the sum of all
understanding, of all religious and moral truths, whether revealed or
not. These truths are not human entities; they are imposed upon man
who must simply submit to them; they exist by themselves and have
always existed. They form a kind of code with infinite prescriptions
of which only the Supreme Being can have perfect knowledge. This
eternal code was revealed by Him to certain chosen ones, and that is
what is called sruti. But only a part of that Revelation could be com-
municated to mankind; a good deal of it has been lost, moreover, due
to the weakness of human memory. Therefore the Vedic texts are far
from representing all the Veda. When a rule of dharma has no source,
we must conclude that it rests upon a part of the Veda which is lost or
somehow hidden from view.
We recognise in this theory the ancient belief in a cosmic and moral
order which is at the foundations of the concept of dharma. To affirm
that all dharma is to be found in Revelation amounts to an affirmation
that the rule of dharma has a transcendent character. Primitive peoples
often experience the need to materialise their concepts, and in this case
the cosmic and moral order is represented in the form of a code capable
of being consigned to writing.
It is this hypothetical or symbolic code, rather than the surviving
Vedic texts, which the most ancient authors, the writers of the dharma-
sutras, have in mind when they proclaim that the Veda is the primary
source of dharma. They hardly do more thereby than express their adher-
ence to common belief, without attaching any particular practical value
to that source.
But in Brahminical circles the interpretation of Vedic formulae soon
aroused some interest, and it was not long before also our writers had
developed a tendency to define more accurately the authority which
should be accorded to the Veda. In effect the dharma which is expressed
in that part of Revelation which has reached us has, by reason of its
origin, an absolute and unquestionable authority. But it was necessary
that any passage in the Vedic texts which was actually invoked should
really amount to a rule of conduct, that is to say, it should be an injunc-

--- PAGE 30 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
9
tion (vidhi). If it merely reported a fact, no rule of an imperative character
could be derived from it; it was a simple arthaväda. For example, it is
said in the Yajurveda (Taittinya-samhitd III. 1.9.4) that Manu divided
his goods amongst his ten children. Is this only a story, suggesting no
obligation upon fathers of families to follow Manu's example? Or is
it a practice inspired in Manu by a consideration of the spiritual benefits
which it might procure and which ought, thereafter, to be converted
into a rule by any person concerned for his salvation? Upon the answer
to this question depends the value of any Vedic text which is invoked
as a source of dharma. In the same way the story of Rjräsva in the Rgveda,
the story of Sunahsepa (who was sold by his father) in the Aitareya-
brähmana, and that of Naciketas (who was offered by his father to Yama)
in the Katha-upanisad, raise the problem of the limits of paternal authority.
A special school was formed to ensure the correct interpretation of
the sacred texts, viz. the Mimämsä school, the foundation of which is
attributed to a sage of the Vedic period, Jaimini. Although the domain
of Mimämsä extends well beyond the search for dharma, its influence
upon the development of the literature on dharma was considerable.
The method of interpretation which it extols was adopted by the authors
who belong to the epoch of the sütras, and was thereafter constantly
followed by the commentators. One could say that it became the Indian
mode of juridical reasoning par excellence. Since its character is purely
exegetical, its effect has been to reduce the scope of interpretation to
a mere study of the texts, to distract writers and commentators at an
early period from other sources of dharma than written sources, and,
in that way, to bestow upon Indian jurisprudence a scholastic character
which could not but be aggravated with the process of time.
In spite of the intervention of Mimämsä, even though it has become
a true and not simply a theoretical source of dharma, the Veda remains
poor enough, as we have seen, in injunctions capable of being utilised
to construct a science of dharma. It is from another written source,
Tradition (smrti), to which however the same method of interpretation
comes to be applied, that the aythors and commentators must borrow
in order to disentangle the rules of dharma and to make a specific disci-
pline out of them.
3. Tradition
Tradition (smrti) differs from Revelation (sruti) inasmuch as it is not
a direct "heard" perception of the divine precepts, but an indirect
perception founded on memory {smrti: to remember, Lat. memor).
A Sage remembers and transmits to men the traditions which he has
gathered and which are the authorised means of acquiring wisdom.
In its largest sense smrti signifies a complete portion of the sacred

--- PAGE 31 [DIRECT] ---

10 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
literature: the six Vedängas, the epics (the Mahäbhärata and the Rämä-
yana) and the Puränas.
All these works contain the rules of dharma. But those whose special
object it is to expound them belong to the class of the Vedängas. These
(literally the "members" of the Veda) are considered as auxiliary sciences
required for the interpretation of the Veda (envisaged as the "body").
They are subdivided into six kinds of treatises bearing (1) on phonetics
and more especially on the euphonic rules peculiar to the Vedas; (2)
on metres; (3) on linguistic analysis and grammar; (4) on astronomy,
especially for the Vedic calendar which fixes days propitious for sacri-
fices; (5) on the explanation of the difficult terms of the Veda, i.e. etymo-
logy; and lastly (6) on the ritual to observe in the sacrifices: kalpa (rite,
literally "form", "fashion").
All these works are written in the form of the sütra ("thread", leading
thread, whence rule), that is to say in aphorisms or highly condensed
and abstract sentences, intended, no doubt, to be learnt by heart and
unintelligible until they are explained and commented upon by the
master.
The sütras appertaining to ritual, or kalpa-sütras, are the most impor-
tant, which is easily understood when one realises the essentially ritua-
listic character of the Vedic religion.
The kalpa-sütras are subdivided in turn into three categories of work.
One deals with the great sacrifices: these are the srauta-sütras; the next
with domestic cults : these are the grhya-sütras, the last are particularly
devoted to the duties and the privileges which are attached to the status
of membership in the Aryan community: these are the dharma-sütras.
The srauta-sütras set out in detail the rituals of the sacrifices which
belong directly to the sruti or great sacrifices, the only ones dealt with
in the brähmanas. The grhya-sütras are concerned with domestic rites
which those scriptures mention only incidentally, and which are known
to us only by tradition (whence the name smärta-sütra also is given to
them).^
It would be incorrect to see in those last rites a domestic cult opposed
to a public cult. Brahminism does not know a public cult. As a general
rule, all the acts known to it are individual, and are done for the advan-
tage of an individual who pays the expenses involved (he is the yajamäna,
the one for whom sacrifice is performed). There is no question of two
cults, but only of different rituals. A certain number of acts are common
to both rituals, for example the laying and maintaining of a sacred fire,
and the daily offering made in this fire. But in their domestic form they
are more simple, and they can be done with less preparation and with
a smaller band of priests. Notably they can be performed by means
the ritual, cf L. Renou, op. cit,. ss. 697-744; Käne, op. cit., II, pt. 2.

--- PAGE 32 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
11
of a single fire, whereas rituals celebrated according to the evolved cere-
monial require at least three.
The ceremonies of the srauta ritual are obligatory in theory but are
not widely observed in practice. They are performed daily, or return
at fixed intervals, or take place at the occurrence of exceptional events.
They consist above all of offerings, of which the offering of soma (the
agnistoma ceremony) is the most important. All such ceremonies are
costly. Some last for a day, but usually they last for many. There are
some that last for several months, for more than a year, or even for
several years. Some are reserved for kings, like the royal consecration
(räjasüya) or the horse-sacrifice (asvamedha).
The domestic rituals constitute the least of the duties incumbent on
the respectable and pious head of a family, particularly if he is a Brahmin.
They are also the only rituals still observed to some extent up to our
own time by Brahmins who pride themselves on their fidelity to the
ancient ways.
In the first rank come the samskäras (literally, "preparation", "arrange-
ment", whence consecration, sacrament), which mark the characteristic
phases of life. Generally twelve of them are counted, from the garbhä-
dhäna, a ritual intended to ensure conception, to upanayana, or initiation,
and to viväha, namely marriage.
At the time of initiation (upanayana) the adolescent boy, dressed
in an antelope-skin, receives from his master or guru, the words of the
celebrated verse of the Sävitri, along with the sacred thread and the
staff. From that moment, which is considered as if it were his spiritual
birth, he is 'twice-born" (dvija) and responsible for his acts. Initiation
is obligatory for all males of the free castes. He who abstains from it
falls, he and his descendants, into the status of the "fallen", the excom-
municate. In principle initiation should be followed by a more or less
long noviciate, devoted to the acquisition of the Veda by the initiate.
That is the status of the brahmacärin. At the end of the noviciate a special
ceremony takes place which gives the Hindu the right and the duty to
found a hearth and to become the head of a household.
Marriage has a great importance in the context of domestic ritual
because as a general rule the cult of the sacrificial domestic fire commences
with marriage. The fire employed for the marriage ceremony follows
the young couple to their home and there forms the centre of their domes-
tic cult. For women who (except perhaps in ancient times) do not undergo
the sacrament of initiation, the marriage ceremony takes its place (A/.,
V.150; Yäj., I.83; Vis., XXV.5-6).
The domestic ritual includes also a whole series of minor sacrifices
to be performed by the head of the household, or by his wife or a Brahmin.
Essentially they consist of oblations of clarified butter or of offerings

--- PAGE 33 [DIRECT] ---

12 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of flowers or fruits: for example, the five "great sacrifices" (mahäyajna)
are offered every day to the gods, to "beings" (the offering of bah), to
the spirits of the dead, to the Veda itself (a recitation of sacred texts),
and to guests. Some ceremonies recur at a fixed date or at a particular
season, such as the new-year rituals or the spring festival. From their
very nature some cannot have their date fixed in advance, such as rituals
for the choice of a house-site, rituals required by agriculture and cattle-
breeding, rituals appropriate to the reception of guests of particular
status. Finally there are funeral ceremonies, purificatory rites and other
ceremonies connected with death, and there is the worship offered to
the dead, i.e. the different kinds ofsräddha, a prominent feature of which
is the offering of pindas or "balls" compounded of rice boiled with milk.
The grhya-sutras consist essentially of rituals. They confine themselves
to a description of the rites incumbent on the dvija. Only exceptionally
do they touch upon dharma, upon rules of conduct, moral duties, or
rights and obligations. It could not be long before that sort of speculation
occurred to authors of sütras, independently. The post-Vedic epoch
saw an affirmation of the supremacy of the Brahmin caste. The role
of preceptor had devolved upon the Brahmins, and they were bound
to compose manuals in which the teachings which they must inculcate
in their pupils were condensed, in the form of formulae. Quite apart
from this, appeals were commonly made to Brahmins to arbitrate between
parties to a dispute or to give advice as to which rule should be followed
in a particular difficulty (and this role is played by Brahmins, here and
there, to this day). At royal courts Brahmins played the role of confessor
or keeper of the royal conscience (purohita), of councillor, or of judge.
As a result there developed, alongside the sütras devoted to domestic
ritual, yet in close relationship with them, a literature which was equally
sutra in form but specially devoted to dharma : these are the dharma-
sütras.
Each school of the Veda should have, in addition to its samhitä and
its brähmana, its threefold series (at least in theory) of the kalpa-sütra:
sraütaf grhya, and dharma.
Later, but still, it seems, at a relatively ancient period, dharma was
subjected to specialised study. It began to be studied in special schools
no longer attached to any one carana, to any particular Vedic school.
A science of dharma grew up (dharma-sästra), a discipline belonging
exclusively to dharma, in which the rule of conduct was taught more
systematically than in the dharma-sütras. The new treatises were called
dharma-sästras. It is to this class of work that the celebrated Code of
Manu belongs.
It is in the dharma-sästras and the dharma-sütras that Tradition,
smrti, came principally to be located, if one thinks of it in its capacity

--- PAGE 34 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
13
as a source of dharnui. In fact the word can be used in a very wide sense
to embrace both those classes of works. The Code of Manu is the Manu-
smrti. Such rules as were capable of being furnished by the Vedas were
incorporated therein. The usages of the Sages played (as we shall see)
an ever fainter role, and consequently it is the dharma-sütras and the
dharma-sästras which, along with the enormous mass of commentaries
and digests derived directly from them, constitute the actual corpus of
the Hindu law, in so far as thatünds its source in dharma.
Smrti therefore has two senses: in the original, etymological sense
it signifies remembered tradition or the knowledge one may derive
from memory of the rules of dharma, in opposition to the sruti which
is knowledge directly acquired through Revelation. In a second sense
it signifies the whole of the literature constituted by the dharma-sütras
and dharma-sästras, a literature regarded as having been inspired by
the smrti. The first sense is more prevalent amongst the old authors.
Gautama (1.2) speaks of the smrti "of those who know the Veda". Plainly
he has in mind a source which was still alive. Similarly when Äpastamba
speaks of "the consensus (samaya) of those who know dharma", he
seems really to be referring to the same source. Manu still uses the word
smrti in the same sense (11.6,12), but he employs it equally in the second
(11.9,10), and for later authors smrti almost always means the inspired
literature, dharma-sästra (and -sütra). Thus what had been a living source
is fixed, congealed in the writings to which Tradition had been committed.
If one takes smrti in its etymological sense of human tradition founded
upon memory, its authority cannot but be inferior to that of sruti, which
is direct revelation of the rule. But in course of time its authority grew
to the point of equalling that of sruti. At a time when smrti was consi-
dered to be conveyed entirely in a special literature—namely during
the age of the commentators—two opinions on the subject were in
vogue. For some (the followers of Sabara, the chief exegete of the sütras
of Jaimini) the works included in smrti lay down rules of conduct which
have been respected from time immemorial by Sages fully versed in know-
ledge of the Vedic texts. There is room, therefore, for presuming that
the rules rest upon Vedic precept. Consequently, if sruti is silent, their
authority is equal to that of the Veda. If, on the other hand a rule exists
in sruti which contradicts what is conveyed by the smrti, the former
must, naturally, prevail. Smrti thus has a secondary authority, dependent
upon the non-existence of a corresponding rule in the sruti. On the other
hand, for other commentators such as those who follow Kumärila (a later
commentator upon Jaimini), the precepts of smrti are invariably founded
upon the Veda. If we cannot find the Vedic text which confirms them
it is either because that text has disappeared, or is lost, or that—a pre-
ferable hypothesis—the weakness of our understanding or even our

--- PAGE 35 [DIRECT] ---

14 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
negligence impedes our having that profound knowledge of the
Veda which the authors of the smrtis must have had. Consequently
those precepts have an authority equal to those of sruti, and, should
a conflict occur between the two categories, it is permissible to infer
a choice between them.13 Common opinion favours the second theory.
But, as we shall see, writers have, thanks to various arguments, managed
often to remove completely any rule of sruti which embarrasses them,
and to cause that of smrti to prevail.
Another difficulty, hardly as serious as the other, arises from the
development of the .sw/Miterature itself. How is one to choose between
different rules laid down in the texts when they disagree with each other?
In such cases it is permitted to have recourse to an objective criterion,
namely "Good Custom", and to a subjective criterion namely the appro-
val of one's conscience guided by reason. Both of these tend to be blended
in the act of interpretation, the role of which is precisely to resolve conflicts
between different smrtis. All writers agree in saying that one must apply
to the smrti texts the same rules of interpretation as are used for the
text of the sruti, that is to say they must be interpreted according to the
techniques of Mimämsä. Later we shall investigate in some detail the
way in which the authors of commentaries and digests have applied this
method of exegesis.
4. 'Good Custom"
The last source of dharma mentioned by all the authors is "Good Cus-
tom", the way good people live: sad-äcära, the custom of the good,
or sista-ücüra, the custom of those who have undergone instruction.
We find also the term sila, conduct, which some commentators make
into a special source (Kullüka on A/., II.6). But the ancient writers make
no such distinction and refer to äcära as frequently as sila. In effect,
the practice of those who know the Veda blends with "Good Custom",
for there is room to suppose that he who knows the law is guided by it
in his conduct.
One must take care to avoid confusing this ideal "custom" with what
we call custom, that is to say practices confirmed by immemorial usage,
custom followed by everyone, habitual practices of a group, perhaps
arising from convention. Custom pure and simple is indeed a source
of law, but it is not a source of dharma.
Sadäcära is a religious life, exclusively orientated towards the acquisi-
tion of spiritual merit. It amounts to the practices observed from genera-
tion to generation by sis fas, or those who are at once instructed and vir-
tuous. They have not only plumbed the depth ; of the Veda and its related
texts, but they can deduce from them all the consequences which are
13P.V. Kane. III. 828-835.

--- PAGE 36 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
15
implied, and. what is more, they conform to these teachings in their
conduct (cf. Baudh. 1.1.5-6; Vas.y VI.43).
For Manu (I1.18) this custom is pure Aryan custom, that which the
Aryans brought to India and which continues to be observed (in his view)
by the pious inhabitants of Brahmävarta, the sacred territory. In a con-
ception which is the reverse of our notion of progress,14 Hindus place
the golden age at the dawn of creation. Consequently their custom is
pure, in perfect conformity with dharma.
In course of time the sense of the expression sadäcära was modified
until it signified every usage practised from time immemorial by virtuous
and instructed people, without any special localisation, subject to the
condition that no such usage should be motivated by any visible mundane
purpose. This condition, to which we shall return later, is already for-
mulated by the authors of the dharmasütras (notably Vas., 1.6-7).
The task of telling whether a particular practice conforms to sadäcära
falls particularly on an assembly (parisad) to which the Upanisads
often allude, sometimes under the name samiti or "gathering" (Chdnd.,
V.3.1; Brhad., VI.2.1). The make-up of this assembly varies according
to different authors. In the dharmasütras 
it comprises, in principle,
ten persons (Gaut., XXVIII.49-51; Vas., 111.20; Baudh., 1.1.7-9). The
same number appears in Manu (XII. 111), according to whom the assembly
contains three men versed each in one of the three Vedas, one logician,
one mmwmsaka (exegete following the techniques of Mimämsä), one
scholar in etymology (nirukta), one who knows the treatises on dharma
(dharma-sästrin) and finally three individuals, each of them representing
the first three stages of life, namely one brahmacärin, one householder,
and one hermit or ascetic. But Manu also provides (XII.112) that the
assembly may be composed of three members only, each versed in one
of the three Vedas: Rg, Yajur, and Säma. Yäjnavalkya (1.9) reduces
the number of men competent to form a parisad to four, or to three.
But it matters little, basically, what the numerical composition of the
assembly is. What really matters is the quality of the members. "They
can be five, they can be three", says Baudhäyana (I.1.9), "one man
[provided he is] without sin is sufficient to decide on the rule. But a
thousand fools would be incompetent to do it". And he adds, "As an
elephant made of wood, as an antelope made of leather, so is an ignorant
Brahmin. Like them, he has nothing more than the name of his species"
(1.1.10). Similarly Manu states (XII. 113-114), "That which even a single
Brahmin, instructed in the Veda, declares to be dharma must be consi-
dered as the highest rule, and not whatever may be proclaimed by myriads
of ignorant men. Even thousands of Brahmins, if they have not fulfilled
14L. Dumont. La civilisation indienne et nous. Cahiers des Annales 23 (Paris. 1964). 33.
Käne. III. 885fiT; V. 686ff.

--- PAGE 37 [DIRECT] ---

16 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
their religious duties (vrata), if they are not versed in the Veda, and
if they subsist merely upon the name of the caste, are incompetent to
constitute a parisad by assembling together".
The Brahmins do indeed form a class, and a powerful one at that, but
they have never been organised as a college. They are entirely independent
of each other, their class possesses no hierarchy, they have no sovereign
pontiff. Provided they accept the letter of the Vedas and the sacred texts,
and provided they perform the prescribed rituals, they retain a complete
freedom of opinion. The Brahminical religion is a tolerant religion whose
dogmas are very wide and capable of encompassing the most diverse meta-
physics. It follows that no interpretation could derive authority from the
number of those who assent to it. Its authority derives solely from the logi-
cal as well as moral value of the teaching involved. It was the same at Rome.
The authority of the prudentes, who also were exegetes of a "good custom"
laicised into boni mores (good practices) or jus naturae (the law of nature),
was founded in the esteem which they earned as well as in their inborn
aptitude to grasp the rule of law and to deduce its logical consequences
from it.
During the post-Vedic epoch sadäcära, expressed in parisads, was
obliged to play an important role in the elaboration of the rules of
dharma. To arrive at these Äpastamba (I.1.1.2) refers principally to "the
agreement of those who know dharma" (dharma-jna-samaya), and he
mentions the Vedas only in the second place. But the development of a
literature founded on the smrti must, little by little, have deprived that
source of all practical relevance. It is likely that the dharma-sütras and
the older sästras did little more than collect the traditional rules pro-
pounded by parisads. Haradatta, a commentator on Äpastamba, explains
parisad in terms similar to what Manu and the other smrtis imply. The
smrtis were in fact called pärsada works (works emanating in some way
from parisads). On the other hand the authority attached to "Good
Custom" is founded upon a presumption that it relies ultimately on
the Veda. It follows that authority vanishes before a contrary Vedic
text, for "the revealed texts have a greater force than any custom from
which one might deduce (änumänika) [the existence of a sruti passage
prescribing the action]" {Äp., I.1.4.8).15 But its authority vanishes also
before a rule of smrti, that is to say, of the dharma-sästr as \ for the authors
of the latter are unquestionably sistas, and if they condemn a custom
that naturally destroys the presumption that it is founded on the Veda.
Finally the adoption of Mimämsä techniques, which are exclusively
exegetical in object, must have contributed towards the evaporation
of this source, since it tended to confine commentators to a mere inter-
pretation of the written rules.
15On änumänika. see Biihler's note to his translation ofthat sütra (S.B.E.. II. 15).

--- PAGE 38 [DIRECT] ---

THE SOURCES OF DHARMA 
17
Parisad "colleges" disappeared in relatively early times, probably
prior to the development of the literature comprised in the sästras.
Manu preserves the institution, but the fact that he allows a single qualified
Brahmin the function of proclaiming äcära ("custom") is significant.
As his commentators Medhätithi and Kullüka see it, that source is
involved only where the rules are of secondary interest. All essential
rules from then onwards appear in the smrtis themselves. The proper
functions of parisads, which are above all to give decisions in particular
cases and notably in questions of penance, have been fulfilled at later
periods by Brahmins attached to the courts of Indian princes, such as
ihepandita who bears the title vinaya-sthiti-sthäpaka ("he who established
the lines of good discipline") in Gupta inscriptions.16 In our own days
they are fulfilled by caste meetings or by the heads of religious orders
(matha).11 Interpretation in the proper sense of that word, namely
that which enables principles or general rules to be singled out, finally
passed to commentators and to the authors of independent treatises.
16A.S. Altekar, State and Government in Ancient India (Benares. 1955), 164.
17According to Käne, II, 966-75. it was only after the British conquest that heads of
mathas took over from Brahmins in general the privilege of deciding doubtful questions
of a religious nature. For an instance of this jurisdiction actually being used, to the embar-
rassment of the regular courts, see Madhavrao Raghavendra v. Raghavendrarao Indian
Law Reports 1946 Bombay, 375. And the svämiji's de facto power to settle complaints is
well illustrated at H.M. Sadasivaiah. A Comparative Study of Two Virasaiva Monasteries
(Mysore, 1967), 158fT. [trs.]

--- PAGE 39 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER II
THE DHARMA-SÜTRAS
THE DHARMA-SUTRAS are works on dharma written in the sütra form,
that is to say in the form of aphorisms which condense the teaching impart-
ed by a master, and were probably intended to be learned by heart by
his disciples.
A score of such works have reached us, some of them in a fragmentary
state. Half a dozen have been published, but the remainder exist only
in manuscript.
Only the most important have been translated : Äpastamba, Gautama,
Vasistha and Baudhäyana by Georg Bühler (S.B.E., II and XIV), Visnu
by Juiius Jolly (S.B.E., VIII).
Originally, it seems, most of these dharma-sutras, if not all of them,
belonged to a collection of kalpa-sütras and were attached to a particular
Vedic school. But of all those which have come down to us there are only
three (Äpastamba, Hiranyakesin and Baudhäyana) for which we possess
the srauta- and grhya-sütras which complete the triple series of the
kalpa-sütra.
In all respects the dharma-sütras bear a close relation to the grhya-
sütras : the connection is not only linguistic but also in point of subject
matter. There are sütras which are common to both works, and these
latter often refer to each other. Like the grhya-sütras, the dharma-sütras
contain rules about the samskäras, including marriage; on the äsramas,
including the duties of the brahmacärin and the householder; on funeral
oblations, etc. But they seldom describe the ritual of domestic life;
they touch upon it only in passing. Their domain is vaster and more
ambitious. They intend above all to propound the rules to govern men's
conduct, an intention which leads to the appearance of precepts of a
character that can only be called juridical. Their principal interest for
us lies precisely in their demonstration of how the study of ritual has
led the writers to a study of religious obligation, which has itself led
them to propound rules of law.
The period in which the dharma-sütras were compiled, like that of the
sütra literature in general, follows that of the brähmanas. A start was
made about the sixth century B.C., one or two centuries before the rise
of Buddhism, and theoretically the period ends with the birth of the
sästra literature, didactic treatises written in epic Sanskrit, several
centuries before the Christian era. But composition in the archaic style
18

--- PAGE 40 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÜTRAS 
19
of the sütra went on long after the sästras began to appear. Moreover,
to arrive at a date for the principal dharma-sütras involves considerable
difficulty. Indologists are agreed in placing the dharma-sütras of Gautama,
Baudhyäyana and Äpastamba amongst the most ancient, also Hiranya-
kesin and Vasistha. A special place must be made for the dharma-sütra
of Visnu.
This chapter will be devoted above all to the problem of our texts'
origins, and the next chapter will deal with their contents!
1. The Dharma-sütra of Gautama
It is generally acknowledged that the dharma-sütra attributed to Gautama
is the most ancient of those which have come down to us.
Gautama is the name of a very ancient Brahmin family, many of
whose members founded various Vedic schools which were all attached
to the Säma-veda. Though the text which has reached us is unattached
we may well suppose that it once formed part of the kalpa-sütra of one
of those schools. Apart from that some internal evidence indicates that
it had relations with a school of the Säma-veda, of the Ränäyaniya
branch localised in the Maratha country in Western India. The twenty-
sixth chapter reproduces practically word for word a passage from a
brähmana belonging to that Veda, the Sämavidhäna. Further, the author
betrays a preference for the mantras of the Säma-veda in his choice of
formulae to be used for purification.
The priority he gives to the dharma-sütras of Baudhäyana and of
Vasistha is supported by the fact that both these works refer to him,
and they have actually borrowed a chapter from him. The dharma-sütra
of Gautama, on the other hand, names no other master but Manu
(who may well not be the author of our Manu-smrtx). However, he often
cites the opinion of the äcäryas (teachers), implying no doubt that the
opinion on the point in question was accredited amongst those who had
taught dharma before him. He alludes in many places to opinions pro-
fessed by various writers. That» shows that Gautama's dharma-sütra
is far from being the first treatise on dharma.
It is a fact hostile to the relative antiquity of this dharma-sütra that
the language in which it is written is less archaic and more conformable
to the grammatical rules of Pänini than the dharma-sütras of Äpastamba
and Baudhäyana. But Bühler resolves this difficulty by noticing that
Gautama's sütra was detached from the kalpa-sütra collection which it
belonged to; it became a work of general authority instead of being a
work of special application in a particular school. Its original language
could easily have been revised and corrected by commentators. Bühler
goes so far as to believe that the text itself may well have been altered,
and he marks two or three passages which could have been interpolated.

--- PAGE 41 [DIRECT] ---

20 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
But he adds that the general character of the work has not been affected
greatly. The topics were arranged with too much method and with too
much care to allow substantial modifications.
The use of the word bhiksu to indicate ascetics instead of the more
usual term samnyäsin (or yati), and also the rule according to which the
bhiksu should not change his abode during the rainy season (III. 13)
leads Bühler to think that the compilation of this dharma-sütra must
have been long anterior to the development of Buddhism, which appro-
priated the term. It is true also that one finds there the word yavana,
which signifies the Greeks, and that many authors suppose that the
Yavanas became known to Hindus only after the expedition of Alexander
the Great, with the result that no work that contains the word yavana
could have been written earlier than the fourth century B.C. A possible
reply is that Hindus could very well have known of the Greeks long
before Alexander's invasion, through Achaemenid Persia as an inter-
mediary. Yet the sütra which causes the difficulty cites these Yavanas
as one of the mixed castes, which suggests that the Greco-Bactrian
kingdoms were already in existence. However, the mention of an isolated
name in a work subject to interpolation can hardly be a powerful argument
in the face of characteristics consistent with a much greater antiquity.
Thus the composition of the dharma-sütra of Gautama could be placed,
at the latest, four centuries before our era. Käne places it between 600
and 400 B.C.
It is written entirely in prose. This distinguishes it from other dharma-
siltras all of which contain some verses, whether composed by their own
authors or borrowed from elsewhere. It is divided into twenty-eight
adhyäyas (literally "readings") of unequal length.
2. The Dluunuisütras of Baudhäyana, Äpastamba and Hiranyakesin
These three dharma-sutras have a characteristic in common. They
belong to branches of the same Vedic school, the school of the Taittiriya,
specialising in the study of the Black Yajurveda }o{ which we have the
complete series of sacred texts, samhitä, brähmana, upanisad and äranyaka.
We have, furthermore, the srauta- and grhya-sütras appertaining to
each of these three texts.
According to the Brahminical tradition Baudhäyana was the first
to compose a kalpa-sütra collection in the Taittiriya school. His successor,
so it is said, was Äpastamba, who founded a school of his own. Hiran-
yakesin. disciple of Äpastamba, set up in his turn yet a third school.
This is how three kalpa-sütras came into existence, all attached to the
Black Yajurveda.
recension is so called because prose portions are intermixed with the formulas
and prayers, while the so-called White Yajurveda is free from such admixture.

--- PAGE 42 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SUTRAS 
21
It is generally agreed that the dharma-sütra of Baudhäyana is earlier
than the other two. The tradition we have just mentioned provides
one reason. Another derives from a comparison of the rules expressed
there with the corresponding rules of Äpastamba, who propounds
generally stricter, more puritanical rules than does Baudhäyana. Further,
the style of Baudhäyana is more archaic, ruder than that of Äpastamba.
His plan is also much less systematic, which would be understandable
if Baudhäyana were indeed the first sütra-kära of the school.
However, we have already seen that Baudhäyana's dharma-sütra
cannot be anterior to that of Gautama, for he expressly cites Gautama's
opinion in two places and copies him virtually word for word.
Though the sütras of Äpastamba and Hiranyakesin have reached us
in collections which have been systematically arranged, with a place
assigned to every portion of the kalpa, the sütras of Baudhäyana's school
have come down to us in an incomplete fashion and as a distinct work.
It is probable that the dharma-sütra of this school was treated as an
independent work, standing as an authority in questions of dharma.
In consequence its text was bound to undergo certain changes. In Bühler's
view only the first two portions (prasnas, "questions") out of the four
which make up the surviving version actually belonged to the original
composition, and he is not able to declare even those free from revision
and interpolation.
The Äpastamba-dharma-sütraf by contrast, has reached us in a much
more satisfactory condition. It is contained in a kalpa-sutra of thirty
portions (prasnas) which have survived intact, of which it forms the
twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth portions. The first twenty-four portions
are devoted to srauta rituals, the twenty-fifth to various ancillary matters,
the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh to grhya rituals, while, after we have
done with dharma, the thirtieth section contains rules regarding the
construction of altars. This huge work is certainly a whole and seems to
have been composed by a single author. The subjects are systematically
arranged. Further, the grhya-sutra gives only the outlines of the domestic
rituals, since the duties which are linked to the performance of them are
explained in the sections set aside for the dharma-sütra. Moreover,
there are frequent cross-references from one part of the kalpa-sutra to
another. A few sütras in identical terms are found in parts devoted to
domestic ritual and parts devoted to dharma. Consequently the different
parts of the work are really a unity.
Äpastamba. like Gautama, Baudhäyana and Hiranyakesin, is actually
a patronymic name. It belongs to a family of Brahmins dedicated to the
study of the Black Yajurveda, one of whose members founded a school
after Baudhäyana which was ritually specialised, a branch of the Tait-
tiriya school. According to Brahminical tradition the Äpastamblyas

--- PAGE 43 [DIRECT] ---

22 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
originated in the South East of India, and their founder came from the
Ändhra country (between the Godävari and the Krsnä rivers). This
tradition is to some extent corroborated by a passage in the dharma-
siltra where the author refers disapprovingly to a custom of inhabitants
of the North. Further, he cites the äranyaka of the Taittiriya according
to a version current amongst Ändhra Brahmins. Right up* to our own
times Äpastambiya Brahmins have settled primarily in the territories
belonging to the former Bombay Presidency, the Nizam's State, and the
former Presidency of Madras (that is to say a large part of the present
Andhra Pradesh and parts of Madras, with Maharashtra), whereas
Brahmins of this school are rare in Northern India and those who are to
be found in Central India have plainly immigrated into those regions.
Pallava inscriptions, likewise in the Ändhra area, confirm that Äpastam-
biya Brahmins were settled in South India at an ancient period.
If the founder of the school came from the South we are led to suspect
that it must have been relatively late in appearing. The South of India
doubtless received the Brahminical civilization long after Hindusthan.
The regions of the South are not mentioned in the Vedic texts and the
Ändhras are actually indicated as barbarians in a brähmana of the Rgveda.
The name of Apastamba does not figure in the Vedic texts. The author
of the dhanna-sutra represents himself as belonging to a late period
(avara), that is to say at some distance of time from the Vedic period.
On the other hand the dharma-sütra of Apastamba suggests that a
rich literature on dharma already existed. He cites ten authors by name.
He certainly knows Gautama, with whom he shows some striking resem-
blances, and Baudhäyana, several of whose opinions he discusses.
He refers to many authors without naming them. He cites one or perhaps
more than one puräna.
Yet his style and grammar (which is far from the standards of Pänini)
evince a great antiquity. There is no distinct reference to Buddhism,
nor to any schism. Bühler himself was not able to place the date of
composition later than the third century B.C. and he admits that that date
could be too late by a century or a century and a half. Käne places the
work between 600 and 300 B.C.
But we are bound to notice that Hopkins places the composition
of this work in the second century B.C. at the earliest. In his view the
archaic character of the style is to be explained by the likelihood that
the Ändhras will have retained such linguistic peculiarities long after
the siitras of Pänini had fixed the usage of the regions of the North.2
His opinion remains an isolated one. Other scholars, on the contrary,
regard the work as much more ancient and even consider it anterior
to Gautama.3
2Cambridge History of India, I, 269.
3J.J. Meyer, Über das Wesen der altindischen Rechtsschriften (Leipzig, 1927) and B.K.

--- PAGE 44 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SUTRAS 
23
The dharma-sütra of Hiranyakesin, like that of Apastamba, has
come down to us with the complete series of siltras of the school to which
it belongs, the school of Hiranyakesin Brahmins, which became detached
at some undeterminable period from that of Apastamba so as to form
an independent school, though it maintained a certain relationship
with it. It originated in the Koiikan (on the West coast). Hiranyakesin's
dharma-sütra has thirty-six sections (prasnas), and it is the twenty-sixth
and twenty-seventh which contain the dharma-sütra. This work can
hardly be regarded as an independent work, for many of the sütras
are borrowed word for word from Apastamba. Its principal interest,
therefore, is that it serves as the most ancient evidence of the authenticity
of Äpastamba's text, and its value is considerable as a means of establish-
ing it.
Bühler was content, when he drew up his edition of Äpastamba's
dharma-sütra to indicate the variants which appeared in that of Hiranya-
kesin. The latter has some additions and some omissions. The style is
revised; and the arrangement of the sütras is different in places.
3. The Dharma-sütra of Vasistha and other ancient Dharma-sütras
Govindasvämin. a commentator on the dharma-sütra of Baudhäyana,
cites a tradition that before the dharma-sütra of Vasistha enjoyed a
general authority it was studied and received as authoritative in a parti-
cular school of the Rgveda. Vasistha is the name of one of the most
famous of the Rsis of the Rgveda, a redoutable champion of Brahminism,
a demigod born of the gods Mitra and Varuna and the apsara Urvasi.
The dharma-sütra calls him "Vasistha the Rsi" and thrice appeals to his
authority. No doubt because of the tradition which relates it to the
famous Rsi, this dharma-sütra has been held in great veneration and
has been preserved up to our own time. Perhaps there was a family of
Rgvedin Brahmins who claimed the Rsi Vasistha as its mythical ancestor,
and a member of that family was the author of a kalpa-sütra of which
only the dharma-sütra has surviyed. Another possibility is that here we
have an independent work adopted by a school of the Rgveda which
happened to possess only srauta- and grhya-sütras.
In any case, the established relationship between this work and a
school of the Rgveda presumes a considerable antiquity. In fact the
dharma-sütra of Vasistha greatly resembles the sütras we have already
examined, especially Gautama and Baudhäyana, to which it appears
to be junior. Unfortunately, as in the case of Baudhäyana, the text
has reached us in a retouched and interpolated condition. Nevertheless.
Ghose, 'Apastamba and Gautama'. I.H.Q., 3 (1927). 607-11. For a critique of the arguments
in favour of the priority of Apastamba see S.C. Banerji. Dharma Sütras. A Study of their
Origin and Development (Calcutta. 1962). 44 49

--- PAGE 45 [DIRECT] ---

24 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
our existing version is that known to the ancient commentators, especially
Visvarüpa.
One of the interesting features of this dharma-sütra is that in many
places it cites the opinions of Manu, from which it follows that there
existed at that time a work attributed to Manu. Primarily from this
factor Bühler and other Indologists conclude that there must have
been a dharnw-sütra of Manu behind the dharma-sästra which has
reached us: a hypothesis which we must consider later on.
Several of Vasistha's opinions are archaic. In many respects they
differ from those of ancient authors like Gautama and Baudhäyana.
Vasistha propounds rules on adoption which are not to be found in
Äpastamba or Baudhäyana. He speaks of written documents as one
of the three modes of proof, but the other authors are silent on the point.
Jolly admits that the composition of Vasistha's dharma-sütra must
go back several centuries before our era. Kane places it between 300
and 100 B.C.
Most of the dharma-sütras we have just reviewed imply that an earlier
literature on dharma was already abundant. Of these ancient dharma-
sutras a few survive in manuscript form, but others are known to us only
from citations either in the smrti works or in the commentaries and
digests.4
For example, Baudhäyana, Äpastamba and Vasistha refer to a dharma-
sütra of Härita which is often cited by the commentators, from the
oldest to the most recent. Only one manuscript was known, and that
was useless for purposes of publication. Jolly, who gives a resume of
its contents, considers it the most ancient of all dharma-sütras. Like
Äpastamba, the author belonged to a school of the Black Yajurveda.
By the same way, the oldest commentators, like Visvarüpa, prove
the existence of a dharma-sütra of Sankha-Likhita in prose. The frag-
ments which they quote have been gathered by Käne. The text is close
to Gautama and Baudhäyana, and its date must be relatively old.
We may also mention the sütras of Usanas, of Käsyapa, and of Atri.
These three works bear the names of sages or famous Rsis who were
themselves reputed to be masters of dharma. They have reached us in
two forms : in one we have incomplete versions in sütra style, and in
the other the versions are mostly versified. The same is the case with
the dharma-sütra of Sarikha-Likhita. A verse version has reached us
which, however, is called a smrti. It contains none of the numerous
prose citations which appear in the commentaries. On the other hand
a comparison between the two texts does reveal a tendency towards
a more strict, rigorous approach to the subject. The very form of those
4S.C. Banerji {op. cit., 244-344) has gathered citations from twenty-three of these dharma-
sütras.

--- PAGE 46 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SUTRAS 
25
last works foreshadows the literature of the dharma-sästras, even if it
does not already presuppose its existence.
We must mention, lastly, the Vaikhänasa-dharma-prasna9 which
includes a detailed account of the status of hermit (vaikhänasa, which
is synonymous with vänaprasthä) and that of the samnyäsin. The work
appears to be comparatively recent, because it provides evidence of
the cult of Näräyana (Visnu), but it may well be founded upon an ancient
manual. Käne (I, 2d. ed., 260) dates the sütra 300-400 A.D.
4. The Visnu-smrti
This work, known under the names Visnu-smrti, Visnu-sütra and Vaisnava-
dharma-sästra, is very different from the dharma-sütras which we have
just studied. To start with, the dharma-sütras represent themselves as
human products, while the rules to be found in this work are attributed
to the god Visnu. He addresses them to the goddess Earth when, under
the avatära of the Boar, he raises the earth above the waters.
Further, the work is more extensive than the old dharma-sütras (by
about double). It is divided into a hundred chapters (adhyäyas), as
many as there are epithets for the name of Visnu. However, some of these
chapters are quite short.
Finally, while the old dharma-sütras are written almost entirely in
prose (mixed with verse in the ancient tristubh metre), all the chapters
possess a portion in prose, generally at the beginning, and a portion in
verse, sometimes in tristubh but often in the sloka metre, with the excep-
tion of the first chapter and the two last which are entirely in verse.5
As it stands at present, the work shows evidence of fairly recent
redaction. Notably it mentions the seven days of the week, a Greek
usage which does not appear in Indian epigraphy until the end of the
fifth century A.D. and is not attested in literature until the next century.
It enumerates the places of pilgrimage, many of which are situated in
the Deccan (the south central„portion of the peninsula). It describes
numerous ceremonies and practices unknown to other smrtis, omens
of good and bad augury at the moment of leaving on a journey (amongst
which appears the act of meeting an ascetic in a yellow robe—probably
a Buddhist monk). Certain of its practices have a distinctly marked
Vaisnavite character. Many passages have no parallel in the old dharma-
sütras. Jolly therefore finds himself unable to date this edition before
the third or even the fourth century A.D., and Käne is of the same opinion.
Nevertheless certain portions unquestionably go back to an older
period. If the style in general is classical and conforms to the rules laid
down by Pänini. the prose passages are written in the laconic form of
5 S e e L. R e n o u . *Sur la f o r m e d e q u e l q u e s textes Sanskrits. I. L a V i s n u s m r t i ' . J . A . . 1961.
1 6 3 - 7 2 .

--- PAGE 47 [DIRECT] ---

26 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the oldest sütras and could not have been understood without the aid
of a commentary. Even in the versified passages certain chapters, notably
those which contain rules of a juridical character, contain a nucleus
of great age, at least as old as the dharma-sütras of Gautama and
Äpastamba.
Jolly, following Bühler, conjectures that we have there the traces or
the remains of a very old dharma-sütra which has been retouched at
some recent period by a member of a Vaisnavite sect. Hindu commen-
tators have already pointed out the close connections which exist between
this work and the katha school of the Veda, one of the oldest schools
of the Black Yajurveda, of which a grhya-sutra has survived. Many
of the passages in Visnu which relate to domestic rituals are in perfect
agreement with the katha grhya-sutra, just as many of the mantras
quoted throughout the work derive from collections belonging to the
same school. Bühler and Jolly conclude from this that the Visnu-smrti
was, in its original form, nothing but the dharma-sütra of the katha
school of the Black Yajurveda. That school, which was born in the
Punjab and Kashmir, is one of the oldest schools of the Veda. This means
that the sütras, composed so near to the first home of Aryan civilization
in India, testify to an antiquity greater than those which have proceeded
from other schools of the Black Yajurveda, such as that of Äpastamba,
founded in South India. Bühler and Jolly believe in consequence that
Visnu is. in substance, much more ancient than Äpastamba, even earlier
than the fourth or fifth century B.C. Yet because of the considerable
retouching which the original work has undergone we must employ a
good deal of caution in utilising the text which has come down to us.
The Visnu-smrti has another interesting feature, to which Jolly devotes
some space. This is its relationship with later literature, especially the
smrtis of Manu and Yajfiavalkya. Visnu has 160 slokas which are found
in Manu, and several hundreds of sütras only reproduce in prose rules
expressed by Manu in verse. Jolly believes that the author of the Visnu-
smrti could draw upon the same source as the author of the Manu-smrti,
and in these similarities he sees an argument in favour of the existence
of a dharma-sutra of the Mänava school (that is to say, the school of
Manu or his followers), which was another school attached to the study
of the Black Yajurveda.
Kane disputes this conclusion and, it seems, rightly. Far too many
verses are common to the two works. One must have borrowed from
the other. Granted, indeed, that the surviving edition must be late, the
most likely borrower is the author of our Visnu-smrti. Quite apart from
Manu we find in that work very frequent agreements with the smrti
of Yajfiavalkya and even with the Bhagavadgltä. We may join Kane
in the comment that it is highly unlikely that works of this order of

--- PAGE 48 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SUTRAS 
27
celebrity could have borrowed from a work of relative unimportance
such as the Visnu-smrti. If Visnu does not actually cite Manu by name,
and if that name is missing in certain verses which, in the Manu-smrti
itself, contain the name of Manu, this is not because both authors have
drawn upon a common source, but simply because, since the Visnu-smrti
represents itself as a direct revelation from the god, no human author
could have been named! The retoucher who made a Vaisnavite work
out of the original composition has intentionally suppressed the name
of Manu from the verses where he found it.
It is interesting to note that the Mitäksarä, a commentary on the
smrti of Yäjnavalkya of the early twelfth century, quotes Visnu about
thirty times but does not quote any verse from the Visnu-smrti. The
authenticity of these versified portions can be open to doubt. They
may not have formed a part of the work at the period when the Mitäksarä
was written : at any rate it is beyond doubt that they form the latest
stratum of it.

--- PAGE 49 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 111
INDIAN SOCIETY AND THE RULES OF
LAW IN THE DHARMA-SUTRAS
THE IMPORTANCE of the dharma-sutras appears not least from the fact
that they show us what part was allotted, in the Vedic schools, to the
teaching of dharma. They taught dharma after they had taught ritual;
it was taken for granted that ritual had been studied completely, and
dharma made its appearance as a complement to that. If we are to judge
from the number of siitras devoted to dharma in a complete kalpa-sutra,
such as that of Äpastamba, the student's attention seems to have been
directed, above all. towards a very thorough knowledge of the ritual
performances. Unquestionably what was undertaken was to put him in
a position correctly to fulfil the task of priest in the various cult activities
in which he would be expected to officiate. This same spirit, ritualistic
and even formalistic, prevails equally in the dhamui-sütras, which, to
a certain extent, stop at rituals. Nevertheless there is a new element, an
appreciation of dharma, of "duty" underlying all that formality. The
teaching of dharma still occupied a very meagre place in the brahmacärin 's
education. Perhaps this was in response to a movement which manifested
itself during the post-Vedic period which put the authority of the Veda
itself and even that of Tradition in question. The movement denied the
utility and efficacy of the religious practices and the rules of conduct
which the Sages had prescribed. Possibly it was such criticisms which
led the äcäryas of the Brahminical schools to complete their teaching
of the rituals by speculations which brought out the moral and religious
aspects of the rite, and explained its significance and the obligations
which flowed from it. But there is another element in the dharma-sütras
which is entirely novel. Side by side with precepts which are still in
strict relation to the rituals one comes across numerous rules tending
to define social relationships and to regulate men's activities within
their group —and from this time onwards there is the appearance of
something resembling legislation. The study of the dharma-sütras is
essential if we are to do justice to the atmosphere which surrounded
the birth of law in India and which impregnated it for ever afterwards.
Above all it permits us to grasp how rules of this kind managed to find a
place in their author's concerns, and how law came to be tightly bound
up with dharma.1 Moreover it helps us to understand these authors'
1 "Comment le droit s'est trouve incorpore au dharma".
28

--- PAGE 50 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
29
point of view, for their particular vision gave them a rule of law which
they saw not with the eye of a jurist but with that of a religious preceptor.
The interest of such a study is every bit as great when one considers
that the dharma-sütras represent the first phase of the written expression
of smrti. No doubt we are unable to attach much importance to dates,
even the very approximate dates which are attributed to their composition.
In course of time they underwent so many alterations that no one can
predicate the definite authenticity of any of their rules. But that does
not prevent our drawing at least from the form, to a considerable degree
from the substance also, a reliable notion of what the first treatises on
dharma were really like. Their material was already substantial by that
stage. They contain in embryo all the later development of the smrti
literature. Topics are arranged there according to a plan which reappears
in the Code of Manu. His and later dharma-sästras' original contributions
stand out the more clearly for that.2
In my present chapter the first two sections will be devoted to expound-
ing two theories which appear to have been established at least in outline
by the epoch of our sütras. They are the theory of the four varnas, and
that of the four äsramas or stages of life. We are bound to tackle them
first, for they are the very framework of the dharma-sütras. The former
of the two introduces the caste system, which is one of the most character-
istic aspects of traditional Indian society. It raises most interesting pro-
blems, especially of its historical value and its practical importance.
The latter theory, namely that of the stages of life, must not be neglected
for all its frankly religious character, because it completes the picture
of Indian society as our authors have drawn it. While the theory of the
four varnas seeks to define the positions of individuals in space (their
relations with different social groups parallel to their own), the theory
of the four äsramas follows them throughout their existence and leads
them progressively to their final goal. Thus the two theories in combina-
tion provide a two-dimensional view of society, the former along the
horizontal or static plane, the latter vertically or diachronically. Life
itself is organised, in its individual and its social aspects, through the
coordination of the two.3
1. The Theory of the Four Varnas
The theory of the varnas provides the authors of the dharma-sütras with
a framework within which they may lay down the duties of individuals
according to their caste. The word used for caste is varna (literally.
2With rare exceptions 1 have not taken account of developments later than the rules
found in the Visnu-smrti. For a more detailed and more comprehensive statement of the
content of the sutras see the work of S.C. Banerji. cited above at p. 22, n.3.
3P.N. Prabhu. Hindu Social Organization (Bombay. 1954). 74-5.

--- PAGE 51 [DIRECT] ---

30 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
"colour"). We shall see that it does not signify any real castes, but rather
the concept of caste to which our authors subscribed.
We cannot possibly set out here the scheme of castes as it has been
described and studied by innumerable writers, nor even summarise
the various methods proposed to explain its origin. We must presuppose
that that scheme is already known to the reader in general terms. It
remains for us to find out what may have been the relation between
the theory of the varnas and the reality. That theory belongs to smrti
and is found throughout Indian literature. It is fully formulated in the
dharma-sütras, to which alone we need resort for our information.
There are four varnas, of the Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and
áüdras respectively. "Amongst these varnas, each preceding one is sup-
erior by birth to that which follows it" (Äp.ß I.1.1.4-5).
This hierarchy is founded on a celebrated myth to be found in a hymn
of the tenth book of the Rgveda, to which Gautama (IV.2) expressly
refers. The four varnas issued from Purusa, the first male: the Brahmins
from his mouth, the Ksatriyas from his arms, the Vaisyas from his thighs,
and the Südras from his feet. A hierarchy of functions and duties corres-
ponds to this hierarchy of social groups.
'Brahma", says Baudhäyana (1.18.2-5), "has placed brahman (sacred
learning, mystic power) in the Brahmins, with the duty and the right
to devote themselves to study and teaching, to perform sacrifices for
themselves and for others, to make and to receive donations, in order
to secure the protection of the Vedas.
"In the Ksatriyas he has placed ksatra (force, Imperium), with the
duty and the right to devote themselves to study, to make sacrifices and
donations, to exercise force of arms, and to protect the wealth and lives
of created beings, in order to secure the good government of the country.
i n the Vaisyas he has placed vis, the power of work, with the duty
and the right to devote themselves to study, to make sacrifices, to make/
donations, to cultivate the soil, to do business, to take care of cattle,
in order to secure the development of productive labour.
"Upon the Südras he imposed the duty of serving the three higher
varnas."
Certain duties are common to the three higher varnas: studying the
sacred learning, sacrificing (that is to say, performing religious rites),
making donations (that is to say, charity and pious offerings). These
duties are not laid^pon the Südras. In short the latter, though an integral
part of Aryan society, do not participate in the cult. They can perform
only the lesser sacrifices (päka-yaßä), very simple domestic rituals such
as funeral oblations, which do not require the recitation of mantras
(Gaut., X.53; XI.65). Only the first three varnas can and should receive
the initiation which makes a dvija, a "twice-born", out of a young neo-
phyte.

--- PAGE 52 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
31
On the other hand certain duties are peculiar to each varna. The most
noble occupations are reserved for the members of the superior varnas.
To the Brahmins belong the sacerdotal function and a monopoly
of religious teaching. Their name differs only in point of accent from
the word brahman (neut.) which means the sacred word, the liturgical
and cosmological power. Naturally, such functions secure for them a
pre-eminent position. No one is above them. "Know that as between
a Brahmin often years of age and a Ksatriya of a hundred the relation-
ship is that of father and son, but of those two it is the Brahmin who is
the father", says Apastamba (1.1.14,25), and Manu repeats this (11.135).
The Brahmin is superior even to the king, who has only temporal autho-
rity. If a Brahmin meets the king on the road it is the latter who must
give way (Äp. II.5.11.5-6; Gaut., VI.25; Vas.t XIII.59; A/., 11.139), for
the Vedas affirm that Brahmins have no king but Soma, the god of the
sacrifice (Vas., I.45). The Brahmins are the depositaries and guardians
of the sacred learning. Their families (gotras) have eponymous ancestors
who were rsis that actually received the revelation personally. Consequen-
tly the duty to preserve the sacred word falls upon them, as does the
duty to teach the Veda and its ancillary sciences, to teach other varnas
their dharmas; and. as a result, the functions of spiritual preceptor
belong to none but them.4
The Ksatriyas come after the Brahmins. In them resides Ksatra, that
is to say virtue, force, and right such as appertain to military men. Their
special mission is to protect the people and to secure the safety of the
country, in particular from external enemies, by means of their arms.
Since even mere contact with a weapon defiles the Brahmin,5 the Ksatriya
is the warrior par excellence. He alone has the duty and the right to
carry weapons. In peace time, it is upon him that the task falls of main-
taining order within the realm and concord amongst its inhabitants
(Äp., II.5.10.6). Moreover kings must be chosen from this varna, for
the right to punish properly belongs to them (Gaut., X.8).
It is up to the Vaisya to secure the economic life of the country. He
must devote himself to agriculture, commerce, and cattle-breeding
(Äp. II.5.10.7). Lucrative business, like money-lending, is also permitted
to him (Gaut., X.49; Baudh., 1.10.2; Vas., II.19).
The duty of the Südras is to serve the superior varnas. Their merits
increase as they devote themselves to the service of a higher varna (Äp.,
1.1.1.6-7). The Ärya under whose protection a Südra is placed must
secure his maintenance, even when he is no longer capable of work.
4The three other varnas should live according to the teaching of the Brahmin The
Brahmin shall say what are their duties' (Vas . 1.39-40).
5*A Brahmin shall not take a weapon in his hands, even if he intends only to examine it'
(Äp . 1.10 29. 6)

--- PAGE 53 [DIRECT] ---

32 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
And if his master falls into distress, the Südra must help him (Gaut.,
X.61-62). If he cannot find employment with the superior castes the
Südra has no course open but to maintain himself by occupations whose
servile and, especially, manual tasks are despised by the Äryas (Gaut.,
X.60).
We should note here that the occupations specifically assigned to the
four varnas are not simple professions, but rather social functions.
The Brahmin's privilege is to study and to teach, but this is also his
duty, as it is the duty of the Ksatriya to defend the other classes or the
duty of the Vaisya to cultivate the soil or do business. The hierarchy
between the functions does not prevent their being strictly complementary
to each other. Each varna is equally necessary to social order. Each
relies, or even leans, on the three others. Thus a Vaisya or a Südra is
fully quit of his social duty if he accomplishes his allotted task, however
humble it may be. Our texts promise him then, as a recompense, the
prospect of being reborn in a higher caste. At the same time they threaten
the members of high castes who neglect their duties with rebirth in an
inferior caste (Äp., II.5.1.10-11; Gaut., XI.29-30).6
Each man's lot is fixed for this present life by his birth, determined
by his karma. Varna is therefore hereditary. One is born a Brahmin,
one does not become one, even after prolonged studies, no more than
a Vaisya can become a Ksatriya by the exercise of arms. But grave
misconduct can lead to an immediate fall, exclusion from the community
of Äryas. relegation to the rank of Südra.
In point of hierarchy, permitted and forbidden occupations, and
heredity, the varnas display traits in common with the castes, the jätis.
But they are not. properly speaking, castes. No doubt the varna encom-
passes the jätis, and the two words can even be used indiscriminately
the one for the other. But the dharma-sütras invariably use the word
jäti when they want to indicate the real castes.7 There are only four
varnas, although the number of castes is unlimited (M., X.4). In modern
India, where castes proliferate, it is impossible to reduce them to so simple
a framework as the Brahminical theory. The varna of the Brahmins
holds its ground, no doubt; yet it does not constitute a caste, but rather
castes distinct from each other. The varna of the Vaisyas embraces so
many professions that one can hardly make it out amongst the multi-
plicity and variety of castes. As for the Südras it is in vain that we search
for a caste to which they could correspond. In its census operations
6This solidarity between the varnas is placed in relief by a passage in the 
Brhadäranyaka-
upanisad (1.4. 11-15) which shows the divine Brahman incapable of manifesting itself
until it has produced the four varnas and dharma which rules them all.
7Except perhaps in a passage in Äpastamba (II.3. 61) where jäti does seem to have been
used for varna.

--- PAGE 54 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
33
the Government of India long ago gave up all hope of usefully employing
the Brahminical tradition.
It is true that the fragmentation which we see before us could be explai-
ned by the centuries, if not millennia, which separate the voicing of that
theory from our own day. The varnas could have divided in course of
time. New conditions could have given rise to new castes. Such an explana-
tion is not without a serious basis. Megasthenes was able to distinguish
castes (genea or mere) in that part of India which he visited.8 However,
we cannot accept that explanation, at least so far as the age of the dharma-
sütras is concerned. From that very period, in fact, castes properly so
called, actual jätis, have existed, and our authors were so aware of them
that they constructed a theory to assign them to the four varnas and
to account for their existence. In their view the jätis were born of a mixture
of the four varnas, the issue of unions contracted between members
of different varnas, in short a cross-breeding of the varnas, as well as
arising from the relegation undergone by superior castes for not having
kept to the rules and performing the duties of their respective castes.
From the union of a male of higher caste and a female of a lower caste
are born children belonging to special castes, the names of which are
furnished by the dharma-sutras. Thus the child of a Brahmin father
and a Vaisya mother is an Ambastha; of a Brahmin and a Südra woman
a Nisäda or Pärasava; of a Ksatriya and a Südra woman an Ugra, and
so on (Baudh., 1.17.3-5; Vas., XVIII.8-9; Gout., IV. 16). Each of these
names denotes a special caste with its own particular occupation. We
find other names where the union is in the "inverse order", i.e. where
the woman is of the superior caste. Then the relegation of the offspring
is much more degrading. From a Ksatriya male and a Brahmin woman
is born a Süta, from a Vaisya and a Ksatriya female is born a Magadha,
from a Südra and a Brahmin woman a Candäla and so on (Gaut.,
IV. 17; Baudh., 1.16.8.17.7-8). Unequal unions between these jätis produce
new castes again. This system, called that of the "mixed castes" (varna-
samkara), was already complicated in the dharma-sutras and later achie-
ves a high degree of complexity in the Code of Manu. It is obviously
theoretical, invented to furnish an explanation for what was already
a complex reality and at the same time to justify the existing hierarchy
between the castes. Its artificial character will deceive no one. It is in
keeping that Gautama (IV.21) derives the Yavanas, i.e. the Indo-Greeks,
from an irregular union between Südra males and Ksatriya females.
Manu in his turn (X.43-44), depicts "as Ksatriyas whom various misdeeds.
.. .have reduced to the status of Südras, the tribes of Paundrakas, Codas,
Drävidas, Kämbojas, Yavanas, Sakas, Päradas, Pahlavas, Cinas, Kirätas,
Daradas, that is to say all the non-Hindu warrior peoples of India or
8Arrian, Ind. xi-xii.

--- PAGE 55 [DIRECT] ---

34 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
abroad, Dravidians and Chinese, Persians and Greeks, Scythians and
aboriginals"9 This evidently amounts to a system thought up rather
late in the day to attach these nations to the Brahminical organisation.
In Senart's view the varnas were never the origin of castes, but only
of social classes. As far as the Vedic texts are concerned, the famous
hymn to Purusa in the Rgveda is the only one to mention the four varnas
by name. This hymn is generally believed to have been written later and
inserted into the collection only during the next period. It cannot prove
anything for the Vedic period itself. In all other contexts the Veda uses
the word varna in a sense analogous to race : ärya-varna, the "Aryan
race" is opposed to däsa-varna, the enemy race, those who are also called
the Dasyu, the men with black skins. This antithesis is the prototype
of what is later expressed by ärya and südra, and a perfect equivalent
to it."i° Moreover, Apastamba (1.9.27.11) and Vasistha (XVIII.18)
employ the expression krsna-varna for südra. The Südras were aboriginals
whom the Aryas encountered when they immigrated from the North-
west of India. However much cross-breeding took place between con-
querors and conquered, between invaders and autochthonous peoples,
the antinomy persisted. It is only reaffirmed in the later texts. The Südra
is the population which was conquered or reduced to applying itself
to such manual labour as the conquerors disdained to do.11
As far as the Aryan element of the population is concerned (ârya-
varna), the Vedic hymns distinguish three broad categories which are
surely at the origins of the three superior varnas : the priests (brahman),
the chiefs (rajan), and the clans (vis), that is to say the commonalty.
A Rgvedic hymn (VI11.35.16-18) even shows them ranked in the well-
known hierarchy: "The clans (vis) bow spontaneously before the chief
(rajan) who is preceded by a Brahmin". Rajan signifies the chief and
the aristocratic class of governors, of those who command. It is the
origin of the varna of the rqjanya, later Ksatriyas. As for the via, they
are the mass of the people, the clans which surround the chiefs in war.
The derivative vaisya properly means head of a house (vw, Gk. oikos,
9E. Senart, Les Castes dans l'Inde (Paris, new ed., 1927), 123. In Sir Denison Ross's
translation (Caste in India, London, 1930) the passage is at p. 102. An unexpected practical
use for Manu X.43-44 and associated texts (e.g. A/a/uz¿>/kzrato. Anu&sana-parva, XXXIII.
18-19, XXXV.18) has arisen in India, now that Hindus may marry Christian European
women. See Derretfcat Madras Law Journal, 1970, vol. 2. Journal section, 1-8. [trs.]
™Ibid.t 145 (in Ross's trans., p. 123).
11 This theory of the origin of the südras is nowadays disputed. According to R.S. Sharmä,
Sûdras in Ancient India (Patna, 1958), the varna of the südras will have comprised besides
non-Aryan tribes some groups which were of the same race as the conquerors, reduced to
südra status after intestine wars or as a result of economic and other causes. See also W.
Ruben, Über die frühesten Stufen der Entwicklung der altindischen Südras (Berlin, 1965),
who criticises Sharmä's views.

--- PAGE 56 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
35
Lat. vicus), head of a family, a sense still attested in particular in Buddhist
literature along with the special sense which it has acquired in the theory
of the four varnas. The three groups distinguished in this way seem like
three classes, analogous to those which one finds in all societies at a
certain stage of development. We have no reason to suppose that there
existed during the Vedic period any other barriers between these groups
than those to which class pride might give rise. A number of Indologists
have searched patiently to find there the essential elements of caste;
but they have failed. All that we may conclude from research is that
the sacerdotal class was already learned and ambitious, and was alone
in a position to perform the complicated sacrificial rites. It must have
tried in very early times to safeguard its interests and its prestige by
isolating itself and by setting a greater value upon purity of blood than
did the other groups. What could be more natural than that the class
of chiefs, too, should try. there as elsewhere, to form a nobility with
its own traditions, anxious to avoid marriages beneath them? However
it still remains to be shown that the functions of Brahmin or of räjan
were really hereditary at that early epoch. No one could dream of seeing
a caste in the vis. In reality they amounted to the whole of the free popu-
lation, all of the Third Estate.
The opposition between the two Vedic varnas, dry a and dasyu, the
latter soon to become Südra, as well as the division of the äryas them-
selves into three categories, gave birth in the next period to the theory
of the four varnas. That period saw the supremacy of the Brahmin class
finally affirmed. There are legends which perhaps conceal some historical
data and make out that the supremacy was not established until after
violent conflicts between Brahmins and Ksatriyas. However that may
be. during that period Brahmins really became "earthly gods", as a
hymn proclaims. They had no other king but Soma. Their class was
closed to newcomers and isolated. It resembled castes which were already
multiplying. At that point the hereditary principle was triumphant
with the rule of endogamy, which did not permit a Brahmin's daughter
to marry anyone but a Brahmin. Later on, when the Brahmins undertook
to provide rules for Indian society nothing was more natural than that
they should try to attach the jätis, which existed in reality, to varnas,
a division into classes which was more or less theoretical. Consequently
they consolidated their privileges, giving as the basis for the rules of
their caste the authority of the Vedas and the sacred tradition. The
other castes managed equally to enter within the varna framework.
Their multiplicity and diversity was explained through cross-breeding
between the four "primordial" castes. The classical theory thus amal-
gamated the factual situation with the tenacious theories of the past.
"Memories of the past and the realities of the present melted into a

--- PAGE 57 [DIRECT] ---

36 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
hybrid system. The living scheme of castes fell into a framework provided
by the ancient distinction between the races and between the classes
which were demarcated to that effect.. .The castes were superimposed
on a régime to which they were originally strangers, less by any organic
development than by an intellectual construction."12
Senart insists emphatically on the artificial character of this "cons-
truction", the fruit of "a scholastic speculation more disdainful than
any other of facts and of history."13 "The Hindu", he says, "never hesi-
tates to generalise without bothering about limitations which we should
regard as most essential.... A taste for classifications and a disdain
for facts, a disregard for our sense of logic and a superstitious regard
for formulas, everything conspires in their minds, along with the tyranny
of the scholastic approach and the unquestioned domination of a priestly
class, to hasten the incubation of systems, to lend to the most artificial
constructs a wholly unmerited prestige!"14
It is not our present task to assess the value of such generalisations
about the spirit of India. But what Senart objects to, above all, in the
Brahminical theory of castes is that they masked under a specious
and incorrect simplicity a multiplicity and diversity of facts. There
never was a Brahminical caste, but rather "innumerable castes, unequal
in law, in rank also, separated in this respect by huge distances.. ..
As for the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, their very name has only survived
in a few traces, as suspect as they are rare... As separate, authentic
castes one never comes across them. We shall never see more in them
than generic names, a huge cadre, intended to embrace and also to conceal
an infinite genuine fragmentation."15
I feel that this judgment is a little severe, and it probably rests on a
misunderstandng. It is not free from a tendency which Senart himself
rightly condemned in other Indologists, namely to see everywhere trie
priest's hand, and to attribute a very exaggerated importance to the
priest's influence upon the organisation of society.
Further, the opinion of Senart on the origin of the varnas cannot be
sustained today without taking into account the results of Dumézil's
research into the same subject. Senart sees no more in the varnas than
some classes such as one might find in any country. To him the Brahmini-
cal theory seems an artificial construction, really intended to secure
to the class of Brahmins that supremacy which they had won in post-
Vedic society. Dume'zil shows, on the contrary, that the first three varnas
correspond to a v^ery ancient tradition in fact to a tripartite conception
12E. Senart. op. cit., 152-3 (Ross. p. 129).
"Ibid.. 152 (Ross. p. 129).
"Ibid.. 124-5 (Ross. p. 104).
^Ibid.. 124 (Ross. pp. 103-4).

--- PAGE 58 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
37
of the world and of society which turns up at the very foundations
of the ideology of the majority of European nations.16 Indo-Europeans
visualised the world and society as formed of three organs, ranked within
a hierarchy and securing three functions, namely magical and juridical
administration, military force, and fertility. Such a conception is found
in a fossilized condition at Rome in the archaic triad of gods. Jupiter,
Mars, and Quirinus, and the hierarchy of the three major flamines (priests).
It is found also in many legends which form the beginnings of the tradi-
tional history of Rome. One finds it in the legends or legendary annals
of Scandinavia and Ireland. In Greece the old traditions of the Dorians
and Ionians kept the memory of a functional division of society into
three parts, priests, warriors, and the Third Estate (or commons). Plato's
ideal society seems like an Indo-European reminiscence, for it is consti-
tuted by the harmonious arrangement of three functions: the philosophers
who rule, the warriors who fight, and the commons, made up of laborers
and artisans alike, whose function it is to create wealth. In Iran, as Senart
had already noticed, society is likewise divided into three or four Estates
superimposed on one another, priests, warriors and herdsmen-agricultu-
ralists. This is the conception which India had expressed in her turn by
representing the whole Aryan community as divided into Brahmins,
Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas. The Vedas only mention classes, but with a
functional division of society into three parts which is common to Indo-
Europeans, and which contains the principle of a hierarchy as well as
a necessary solidarity amongst the three Estates. Our Brahmins did
not have to invent it. It suggested itself, even if it did not impose itself
upon them as a tradition enjoying a considerable prestige.
Now it is probable, as Senart thinks, that the segregation of these
Estates and their hardening into castes was due in some measure to a
racial reaction on the part of the Indo-Europeans to contact with non-
Aryan peoples. We might even suggest that those non-Aryan peoples
themselves furnished the invaders with certain elements of a caste-system.
Whatever might be the origin of the castes properly so called—an origin
which was certainly very complex—no one could nowadays sustain the
theory that the doctrine of the varnas was thought up to justify the caste
system and to attribute a religious value to it, for the doctrine is far older
than the system. But if, on the other hand, it is true that the castes were
not born, as the Brahminical theory would have it, from a mixture of
varnas—ox perhaps it would be more exact to say, if the castes were not
born solely from a mixture of varnas—one could still not contend that
there is no link between varna and jäti. So it seems unjust to reproach
our authors for having treated the varnas as the prototypes of the castes,
16See. above all. the series: Jupiter. Mars. Quirinus (Paris. 1941); Nuissance de Rome
(Paris. 1944); Naissance d'archanges (Paris. 1945); Jupiter. Mars, Quirinus IV (Paris. 1948).

--- PAGE 59 [DIRECT] ---

38 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
or rather for having tried to integrate the castes within the varnas. More-
over they found in the varnas a handy framework apt for the purpose
of expounding the duties which are incumbent on each one according
tó his caste. And, if we reflect a little, they could hardly have proceeded
otherwise. They found themselves confronted by a society already divided
into very numerous castes, practising the most diverse customs. Even
supposing that they were practically capable of going into the details
of the rules which applied individually to everyone, that was not their
mission. Their object was not to codify custom, which would be the
task of jurists, but to teach each individual that rule of life which would
secure his destiny. All the dharma-sütras confine themselves to sanction-
ing within an authoritative formula the imperative force (so far as tempo-
ral power is concerned) of the rules which distinguish the different jätis,
the real castes, from each other. In the process they take care to observe
that these rules must not be repugnant to dharma. "The customs of coun-
tries," says Gautama (XI.20), "of castes (jäti), and of families, are equally
authoritative, provided they are not contrary to the [sacred] texts." And
Vasistha (XIX.7), for his part, recommends the king, "while taking into
account the customs of countries, castes (jäti) and families", to constrain
the four varnas to fulfil their respective duties.
While they reduced the innumerable castes of their days to the four
main groups known to tradition, and while they invented the theory
of the mixed castes in its totality, the Brahmins were by no means giving
way to their "taste for classification". Thanks to their system they ended
by keeping only those duties which, in their view, had a religious signi-
ficance, i.e. the rules which they thought essential for the conduct of
life, and by painting a simplified and perhaps idealised picture of the
facts, which arranged them without distorting them. This way of describ-
ing caste within the framework of the varnas had the great merit of not
fixing the contemporary scheme in its then existing state, of not fixing
custom which remained exterior to dharma, and thus of permitting sub-
stantial variations within the theoretical outlines provided by that tradi-
tion. Such a conception had obvious advantages over any codification
of the actual usages of the different castes, had that been remotely possi-
ble. Indian society became able to adapt, to assimilate, and to renew
itself. The names of the mixed castes given by Gautama and Manu
prove that these possibilities did not remain in the realm of theory, but
passed into actuality.16a
Above all, to identify the castes with the Vedic varnas was to mark
out a hierarchy without which the caste system would only have been
a ferment of social disintegration, a fragmentation of autonomous
groups, mutually isolated and doomed to proliferation. Senart himself
16*See below. Appendix by the Translator.

--- PAGE 60 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
39
admits that it was the Brahminical theory which brought hierarchy to
that anarchy of castes. It is probable that that hierarchy already existed
as a fact. If it did the "Brahminical theory" not only made it precise
but also legitimised it to some extent by deducing it from the Veda,
presenting it as if it conformed to the natural order of things. Further,
hierarchy is not simply a matter of a gradation in point of value. It has
been emphasised that it implies that the elements are mutually comple-
mentary: the varnas, and therefore the castes, are mutually dependent,
and the whole social structure is maintained only through their harmony.
From that moment the chief task to be performed by teachers of dharma
was to take care to identify the obligations incumbent upon each indi-
vidual by reason of his membership of a caste.
Now that we know the point of view our authors had, it is plainly
useless to try to find out what was the true caste system of the days when
our dharma-sütras were composed by making a literal research into
their propositions. The multiplicy of individual constitutions17 dis-
appears behind the simplified picture which the varnas project. Neverthe-
less it is possible, since the varnas are dealt with like castes, to make out
the most general features of the system and, by comparison with our
contemporary facts, to draw some useful inferences about the develop-
ment of the institution of caste. It is obvious, too, that our authors were
not so disdainful of facts as they had been made out to be, and that their
theory was supple enough to cope with the already complex reality which
lay before them.
It is in this way that the rule that caste functions are specialised under-
goes considerable modifications. Members of one varna are absolutely
forbidden to apply themselves to occupations reserved for higher varnas.
For example, the priestly function can be exercised only by a Brahmin.
A Vaisya cannot bear arms, except in self-defence or to prevent a mixture
of castes (Vas.r III.24). Yet Äpastamba (II.2.4.25) admits that in times
of distress a Brahmin can receive religious instruction from a Ksatriya
or even a Vaisya. This is an isolated and exceptional provision, it is
true, but none the less noteworthy in an author taken as severe in his
views. On the other hand all our dharma-sütras admit that in times of
distress the members of one varna may have recourse for their subsistence
to occupations proper to inferior varnas {Gaut., VII.6-7.26; Vas.f II.
22-23). A Brahmin may enter into business and even do the humblest
work without being degraded. But certain traffic is always forbidden to
him. and certain professions are accounted too impure (Gaut., VII.
8-15; Äp., 1.7.20.12-13; Baudh., II.1.76-78; Vas., 11.24-29). And by
"times of distress" (äpad) is meant not merely periods of famine or
calamities, but difficult periods which frequently arise in this Age of
17ln the sense of legal statuses. Statuts puvticuliers.

--- PAGE 61 [DIRECT] ---

40 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Iron. Further, Gautama permits a Brahmin to apply himself to agricul-
ture or commerce at all times, just as if he were a Vaisya—provided that
he does not do the work personally. He authorises him even to lend
money at interest (X.5-6). Baudhäyana (I.2.2-5) reports certain customs
peculiar to Brahmins of the North and to those of the South, customs
which are elsewhere forbidden. This indicates that even within a varna—
and a varna, too, as precise as that of Brahmins—there were already
different groups entirely separated by the customs peculiar to them.
Briefly, the dharma-sutras' doctrine was as elastic as modern custom
is. What degrades a man is not so much the exercise of a profession or
a craft as the impurity of the contacts which it involves, or rather the
gravity of the breach of the caste rules for the time being. No one can
accuse our authors of being over-severe at this point. Once again, they
were satisfied to point out what the duties were. The Brahmin who lives
only to study and to teach is certainly superior to the one who takes refuge
in the occupations of the Vaisyas: nevertheless the latter does not
necessarily lose his caste.
There is a point at which the theory parts company with the facts
of modern life, namely at the relations between the varnas. The first
three are not separated from each other by the multiple taboos which
even the higher castes erect between each other out of that care to avoid
contact which manifests itself by so many curious scruples. All that one
can notice is a tendency on the part of the Brahmin caste to isolate itself
by more rigorous precepts in matters relating to the notion of purity.
These precepts could still be explained by the Brahmins' sacerdotal
functions.
There is a real aversion only between the three higher varnas taken
together, i.e. the twice-born, and the Südras. The latter do indeed consti-
tute the impure caste, contact with which and even, in some cases, mere
sight of whom taints. Äpastamba (1.3.9.9) and Vasistha (XVIII.11-13)
account the Südra like a burial place, and that is why the Veda may not
be recited in a SQdra's presence or must be interrupted when a Südra
comes on the scene. It is a capital sin. involving exclusion from caste,
for a Brahmin to teach the Veda to a Südra. The Südra cannot even
hear the sacred word. *Tf he intentionally hears the recitation of the
Veda, let his ears be filled with melted zinc or lac. If he recites Vedic
texts, let his tongue be cut off \ enjoins Gautama (XII.4-6). The Südra
who assumes an equal place (with that of a member of a superior varna)
in speech, on the road, a bed or a chair, shall be flogged" (Äp., II.10.
27.15; Gaut.t XII.7.cf.A/., VIII.28).
Senarf s view is that there must survive in this aversion of the twice-
born for the Südras the contempt of the conquering Äryas for the aborigi-
nals, the Dasyu, the black-skinned ones. However, at the time when

--- PAGE 62 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
41
the dharma-sutras were written the Südras were no longer enemies,
but an inferior class of various races, probably mixed but speaking the
language of the Aryas and participating in Indian social life, integrated
within the framework and forming a varna. We have seen that they might
perform very simple domestic rituals, without recitation of mantras.
The original place of the Dasyu is occupied by the barbarians, the mlec-
chas (those who "jabber"), who are outside the varnas and outside Hindu
society as well. A Brahmin should never speak as much as a word to
such people (Gaut., IX. 16), and he is forbidden to learn their speech
( Vas., VI.41). So by this time, the Südra has someone below him. More-
over the aversion seems to be blunted or to have been blunted from time
to time. Äpastamba (II.3.4-9) authorises the master of the house to
use Südras to prepare food destined for the Visvedevas. provided that
they do so under the direction of members of the superior castes, and
he lays down that such food is fit for the gods and will be eaten by the
master and mistress of the house. But the same author elsewhere (1.6.
18.13-14) reports that there are those who do not allow a Brahmin to
accept food offered to him by a Südra unless he has no other means of
livelihood. This is the rule to be found in Gautama (XVII.5) and Vasistha
(XIV.4). and Manu hallows it (IV.223). Mere contact with a Südra
taints a Brahmin, and he must purify himself from it. If a Südra touches
him during his meal he must stop eating (Äp., I.5.17.1). He must not
even touch food brought to him by a Südra. even when the latter has
not actually put his hand on it (Äp., I.5.16.22). In times of distress these
rules are almost entirely waived. Thus a Brahmin is permitted, subject
to a light purification (by gold or the fire), to accept food "even from a
Südra who lives under his protection [and who makes this offering of
food to him] for the sake of obtaining spiritual merit" (Äp., I.6.18.14).
On a par with the rules of commensality. and by a natural connexion
between the ideas, the rules of marriage are much less severe in the Brah-
minical theory than they are in the modern caste system. The law of
endogamy is one of the essential*elements of that system.18 One cannot
contract a legitimate marriage except with a woman of the same caste.
The rule is hardly relaxed in favour of sub-castes within the same caste.
Yet all our dharma-sutras accept marriage between different varnas.
Baudhäyana (1.16.2-5) allows members of each varna to marry, apart
from a wife of their own varna, another wife in each of the inferior varnas,
so that a Brahmin may have four wives (including a Südrä), a Ksatriya
three, a Vaisya two. and a Südra one. But Gautama (XV. 18), as well
as Äpastamba (I.6.18.33) and Vasistha (XIV.11), forbids one to invite
18The relaxation introduced in India in 1949 (Act 21 of 1949). and confirmed in the Hindu
Marriage Act (s. 5 of Act 25 of 1955). is a fundamental reform, confined at present to India,
and very rarely utilised by any but the most sophisticated Hindus, [trs]

--- PAGE 63 [DIRECT] ---

42 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
to a meal in honour of the dead (a sräddha) "him whose only wife is a
Südrä". and he allows a child born of a Brahmin father and a Südra
mother "if he is obedient like a pupil", nothing more than maintenance
out of the estate of his deceased father if the latter left no other issue
(XXVIII.39). The marriage of a dvija with a Südrä cannot in general
have the rank of a marriage between two dvijas, because a Südra woman
cannot participate in the domestic cult. Vasistha says (XVIII. 18). "a
Südrä. who belongs to the krsna-varna ("dark varna"). [is married]
for pleasure, not in order to perform a duty". Finally marriage with a
Südra woman ends up by being regarded as an irregular and blame-
worthy union. Äpastamba(I.9.27.11) holds it a sin. expiable by a penance
for three years, for a Brahmin to have "served" a woman of the krsna-
varna one day and one night, that is to say, according to certain commen-
tators, to have cohabited with a Südra woman. Vasistha (1.24) allows
no more than three wives to a Brahmin, two to a Ksatriya. and one to
a Vaisya as to a Südra. He expressly forbids marriage between a dvija
and a Südrä, "for such a union involves unquestionably the degradation
of the family and, after his death, the loss of heaven" (1.25-27). Baudhä-
yana (II.2.7) in effect relegates to the rank of Südra any Brahmin who
begets a son on a Südra woman. The rule is hallowed by Manu (III. 15-19).
The dharma-sütras thus establish an unpassable barrier between dvija
and Südra.
But one finds nothing of the kind in regard to unions between members
of the three higher castes. Only pratiloma unions ("against the hair")
or forbidden. These are in the inverse order of castes, i.e. with a woman
of a superior varna. Such unions cast the unfortunate offspring into
very low castes. It follows that a Brahmin girl cannot be married except
in her own caste, whereas a Ksatriya girl can be married to a Brahmin
or to a man of her own caste. But. by contrast, we have seen that all the
dharma-sTitrus recognise marriages in the order of varnas, i.e. contracted
with a woman of the next inferior or more inferior varna. This system
of hypergamy (more properly "hypergyny") is still in vogue in our own
day for marriages between sub-castes. In principle a male of a superior
sub-caste can take a woman from a lower sub-caste, whilst refusing to
give his own daughters to that sub-caste. It is true that the dharma-sütras
regard such unions with disfavour. The desirable marriage, which secures
to sons born of it all the qualities necessary to perform the domestic
cult, is the union contracted according to the prescribed rituals with
a woman of equal varna. Children born of unequal marriages belong to
special groups of inferior rank, a subdivision of the varnas which is the
source, according to the Brahminical theory, of the true castes. But
this system is far from being absolute or rigid. According to Gautama
(IV. 16) and Baudhäyana( 1.16.6). thesonbornofa marriage with a woman

--- PAGE 64 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
43
of the next inferior varnas is a savama, i.e. he belongs to the "same varna"
as his father. Gautama (XXVIII.35ff.) allows him. if he is the eldest
son, the same share in his father's estate as the younger son born of
a woman of the same varna as her husband, provided only that he is
virtuous. The same rule is found in Baudhäyana (II.3.12). It would seem
to follow that the children born of a woman of the immediately lower
varna are of the same rank as those born of a woman of equal birth.19
One must of course except the case of a Vaisya who marries a SQdra
woman: the child born of such a union is a rathakära (Baudh., I.17.6).
When the degree of inferiority is greater between the varnas of the
father and the mother the child is not a savama, and a smaller share
is allotted to him in the paternal estate. But the taint resulting from the
inferior status of his mother is not indelible. It is removed at the end of a
certain number of generations (seven according to Gautama IV.22 or
five according to an even older author cited by Gautama at IV.23), if
the daughter born of the mixture of castes and her descendants have
contracted marriage with males belonging to the father's varna. For
example, if an Ambastha girl, born of a Brahmin male and a Vaisya
woman, marries a Brahmin, and her daughter and her descendants do
the same, the son will be a Brahmin in the seventh generation, or even
the fifth according to some authors. Baudhäyana (I.16.13-14) admits
that even the posterity of a Nisada, born of a Brahmin and a Südra
woman, can arrive at Brahmin rank in the sixth generation. Conversely,
the descendants of children born of the mixture of castes fall finally
to the varna of the mother when successive marriages are contracted
with men belonging to that varna. This dual theory called jätyukarsa
("elevation of caste") and jätyapakarsa ("collapse of caste") is taken
up again by Manu (X.64-65) and by Yäjnavalkya (I.96). Therefore not
only is the principle of endogamy not strictly followed, according to
which only a child born of parents belonging to the same group should
be integrated within that group. #but even the principle of the heredity
of the caste is frankly breached, since at the end of a period, assuredly
a long one. the descendants of one varna can rise to a higher varna or
descend to an inferior varna. Perhaps this is the point at which the Brah-
minical theory differs most from the facts of modern life.20
Finally, although the varnas' only function for our authors is to provide
19Baudhäyana. 1.17. 3-5. says expressly that the son of a Brahmin male by a Ksatriya
is a Brahmin, and the son of a Ksatriya male by a Vaisya is a Ksatriya.
2(lHowever one should note that according to H.A. Rose. Glossary of Tribes ami Castes.
cited by H. Hutton. Caste in India (4th edn. Bombay. 1963). 64. there exist near the northern
frontiers of India regions where the progeny of a male of high caste by a woman of low
caste can. after several generations, be accepted as belonging to the higher of the two
castes. C. v. Fürer-Haimendorf. "The inter-relations of castes and ethnic groups in Nepal'.
B.S.O.A.S. 20(1957). 243-54. [trs.]

--- PAGE 65 [DIRECT] ---

44 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
them with a framework within which they might settle the jäti-dharma,
this is by no means an artificial scheme. The rules of conduct incumbent
on everyone according to his caste, the precepts which they contain
touching the permitted and forbidden occupations, the relations between
the castes, and the rules about marriage form a picture whose resemblen-
ces with and also differences from the modern facts present an image,
perhaps simplified but probably correct on the whole, of the reality which
they had in front of them. There are moments when we feel that that
reality hindered them in formulating a gradation of values which, as
spiritual preceptors, they would have preferred to be more systematic.
Generally speaking, caste as it appears through the provisions of the
dharma-sütras, is not so closed nor so firmly subject to strict rules as
in modern India. The hereditary principle is far from triumphant there.
Several generations, consequent upon successive marriages, can raise
or lower themselves in the social scale. If we put aside certain functions
reserved for Brahmins and Ksatriyas, the first three varnas share all the
non-servile occupations. Endogamy applies rigorously only in regard
to Südras who can marry only women of their own caste. Over-severity
is thus a product of a later development of manners. To that the teaching
of the Brahmins may well have contributed something, not to speak
of other factors. We have already noticed that some of our authors are
more rigorous, even more puritanical. Vasistha (1.25) says that there
are those who permit marriage between a dvija and a Südra woman,
privided no Vedic texts are recited at the ceremony. He himself, and
all the others, condemn such a union in formal terms. All agree in extolling
and placing in the first rank a marriage between spouses of the same
caste. Äpastamba goes further. He censures those who approach a woman
of another caste (II.6.13.4) and he pronounces clearly in favour of mono-
gamy. He does not allow a dvija to take a second wife unless the first
has remained barren or cannot participate in the cult; moreover it must
be before he has celebrated any sacrifice conjointly with her (II.5.11.
12-13).
Thus we can grasp certain indications by which our authors attempt
to act upon a mass of diverse customs, to orientate them towards a
morality which they hold to be higher, and to organise them into a cohe-
rent whole. They praise certain usages, while proscribing others in the
name of the moral law whose interpreters they are. They lay down the
general duties which it will be society's task to sanction in order to deve-
lop in a sound direction. That is where their mission ends. For the remain-
der, that is to say for all the special rules of the various castes, we have
castes, we have seen that the dharma-sütras refer us to custom, to esta-
blished usage. Respect for such is a condition necessary to social peace,
and that is why the dharma-sütras make it a duty of the king to see to it

--- PAGE 66 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
45
that this usage should be observed. But respect for custom has not any
bearing on the spiritual future of the individual, and consequently our
authors do not esteem it. Nevertheless, a large field is left in which custom
may evolve and conform to the image of the great ideal castes which
the varnas are. By the same token we see that it would be useless to expect
a faithful description of caste from our writers. If they are not theorists
pure and simple, neither are they jurists or legislators.
2. The Theory of the Four Stages of Life
To the division of society into four varnas there was added, so far as
the Äryas were concerned, a division of life itself into four steps or stages
called äsramas (from the root sram, to labour, and particularly to devote
oneself to austerity). Men became successively student, householder,
hermit or anchorite, and ascetic.
The first stage commences with the ceremony of initiation (upanayana),
a very important ceremony, since it confers a second birth on the neophyte
and makes a dvija of him. The preceptor {guru or äcärya) who places
the sacred triple thread upon the youth, hands him the antelope skin
to cover himself and the brahmacärin 's staff, and teaches him the formula
of the gäyatrl is considered as his spiritual father. This spiritual parentage
is held to be superior to natural parentage (Äp., I.1.1.16-18). Prior to
his second birth the young man cannot participate in religious life;
he is on the level of the Südra (Baudh., 1.3.6; Vas., II.6; Gaut., II. 1).
In principle, initiation takes place at the age of eight for a Brahmin and
three and four years later for a Ksatriya and a Vaisya. Thereupon the
young dvija goes to live with his preceptor in order to study the Vedas
and the ancillary sciences under his direction. For each of the Vedas
twelve years' study is considered requisite, so that the period devoted
to study can be prolonged up to 48 years, though it can be reduced to
a minimum of twelve years (Äp., 1.1.2.12-16; Gaut., 11.45-47, etc.). In
any case it is not necessary to prolong study of the Vedas beyond the
point at which the student has them by heart, and Baudhäyana (I.3.5)
quotes a passage from the revealed texts according to which "one must
kindle the sacred fire [i.e. after finishing one's studies] when one's hair
is still black". In exceptional cases one may stay all his life attached
to a guru in the status of brahmacärin. In that case, when the guru dies,
he should serve his son. or an older fellow-student, in the same way as
he served the guru himself (Gaut., III.4-9).
The word brahmacärin is not well rendered by our word "student",
for it implies a life devoted not only to study but also to the practices
of austerity which are intended to purify the pupil's soul. He must learn
to master his senses, to keep himself from all impure contact, to be
satisfied with a frugal way of life, to practise the virtues appropriate

--- PAGE 67 [DIRECT] ---

46 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
to his status, such as humility and obedience. Instruction is inseparable
from moral education.21
The end of the first phase of life is marked by ceremonies including
a purificatory bath (snänä), whence the name snätaka which is given
to the dvija who has finished his studies and has returned to his paternal
home. The snätaka is subjected to special obligations, to a kind of life
which is not yet that of the householder but which prepares him for it.
Soon after his return to the paternal hearth he must contract marriage
and enter the second äsrama, that of the householder (grhastha). Marriage
is a social and religious duty for every Ärya, bound as he is to continue
the family and to secure the perpetuation of the domestic cult. Thus
the dharma-sïïtras consider the householder phase as the most important
for it is the one upon which the three others depend (Gaut., III.3; Vas.,
VIII.14; Baudh., II. 11.27; Vis., VIII. 14—15).
The third step commences when the householder "sees he has wrinkles
and white hairs" and he has seen "the son of his son" born (Vis., XCIV.
1-2. Cf A/., VI.2). Then he should go and live in the forest like an ancho-
rite (vänaprastha)?2 His wife can accompany him or even stay at home
with the children. He has a fixed abode, a hermitage, and so he is still
bound to sacrifice morning and evening, to make the daily five great
sacrifices, as before, and to keep the ritual fire. But he should give himself
over to meditation and to study. He should submit to various kinds of
mortification, clothing himself in bark or the skins of animals, live
chastely, expose himself in summer to the heat of the sun in the middle
of four fires, lie on the ground during the rainy season, wear damp clothes
in the winter, abstain from speech for long periods, practice prolonged
fasting, sustain life generally only with fruits, flowers, roots and vegeta-
tion growing in the forest, finally only with fruits which drop spontaneous-
ly from the tree.23 If he wishes to drive his austerities further he may
even more substantially reduce his diet and leave for the "great journey"
(mahäprasthäna): turning to face the North East, living only on air and
water until he falls exhausted (Àp.y II.9.23.2; Baudh., III.3.13-14. Cf A/.,
VI.31). But normally the austerities which he undergoes during his life
as a hermit are intended to prepare him for the fourth and last stage.
"He who has passed from one äsrama to another", says Baudhäyana
(11.17.16), "who has offered oblations in fire and overcome his senses,
becomes at length, worn out by alms-giving and offerings, an ascetic."24
21 On the importance of the education given during the brahmacärin stage see K.V.
Rangaswämi Aiyangär, Some Aspects of the Hindu View of Life according to Dharmasästra
(Baroda. 1952). 142-4.
^Gautama, III.2. uses the word vaikhänasa. which seems older.
23Baudhäyana. III.3, classifies the different sorts of vânaprasthas according to their diet
or their manner of eating it.
24This stage is referred to by various names: parivmjaka (the wanderer), samnyäsm
(the renuncíate), muni (the silent?), vat i (he who masters his senses), bhiksu (mendicant).

--- PAGE 68 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
47
His entry into this new phase of existence is marked by an imposing
ceremony which Baudhäyana describes (II. 17.18-42), wherein he performs
a last sacrifice (isti) of particular solemnity, after which he throws into
the fires of the altars the sacred utensils and announces in a loud voice
his resolution to become an ascetic. He is thereupon dead to the world,
and when he actually dies, no funeral ceremonies will need to take place.
He himself will not need to observe mourning for any of his relatives,
save only for a ritual bath if he receives news of the death of father or
mother ( Vas., X.27). Thereafter, "he will live without fire, without home,
without joy, without protection. Maintaining silence and not opening
his mouth except to recite the Veda, begging no food but what will suffice
to keep him alive, he will wander without care for this world or for heaven"
(Äp., II.9.21.10). He should always live alone, without a companion.
He is not allowed to settle in one spot except during the rainy season
(the vassa of the Buddhist monks) (Gaut., III.13). He should live only
on alms, should eat only once a day and then only certain natural products,
and should cover himself with rags or even go naked (Äp., II.9.21.11-12).
Thus liberated from all ties with the world, indifferent to joy as to pain,
to truth as to lies, he will search only for the Ätman (the Spirit) (Äp.,
II.9.21.13).
The theory of the four stages of existence is fully established by the
epoch of the dharma-sütras, but it appears after Vedic times. The word
itself is not found in the samhitäs or the brähmanas. The first two stages,
however, are known from the Vedas onwards. The Rgveda (X.I36.2)
speaks of the munis clothed in air and rags. The Chändogya-upanisad
(11.23.1) distinguishes three orders (skandhä) of life following the rule
of dlutrma as practised, which could correspond to the first three äsramas
(the ascetic does not figure there), but each of these orders enables one
to attain heaven after death. The äranyakas, on the other hand, presup-
pose that the life of the hermit was already organised. What they have
in mind is clearly an autonomous mode of life. It is only in the dharma-
sutras that the four äsramas appear as successive stages of life.25
Some Indologists. like Deussen, are full of admiration for this theory.
'The whole history of the world has little to equal the grandeur of this
conception", he writes.26
Others, by contrast, see nothing there but a completely theoretical
ideal and accuse the Brahmins, once again, of a large appetite for genera-
lisation and for scholastic classification.
This does not mean to say that they deny that hermits and mendicant
monks actually existed in India, side by side with brahmacärins and
25Or in other post-Vedic texts, such as the Jäbäla-upanisad. 
Käne. II. 418 22.
26P. Deussen. The Philosophy of the Upanishuds. 
tr. A.S. Geden (Edinburgh. 1908). 367
Also in Hastings' Encyclopedia 
of Religion 
and Ethics. 
II. s.v. äs'rama.

--- PAGE 69 [DIRECT] ---

48 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
householders. If the stage of the student has been reduced in our own
day. more often than not to the initiation ceremony itself, we know
that it was not always so. Megasthenes tells us of the thirty-seven years
of austere life which the Hindu "sophists" must pass with a teacher
before founding a family. What AI Blrüni tells us about the student and
the householder agrees entirely with the Brahminical rules. If the stage
of the anchorite seems to have fallen into desuetude very early, the fact
that it was practised in the past is attested by inscriptions and by Buddhist
sculptures, as well as by the evidence of the Greeks, who called the ancho-
rite\)\6ß\OQ(hylobios)< a literal translation of vänaprastha. Finally the
mendicant monks of the Brahmins live on into our own day in the sam-
nyäsins of the Saivite sects and the so-called fakirs. Their doings astoni-
shed Alexander's Macedonian comrades as they astonish travellers
now. From their habit of going naked the Greeks called them gymnoso-
phists.27 If the yogins and fakirs of today are often professionals living
on the credulity of the public, sincere examples are not wanting, and
the custom of ending one's life in asceticism is not lost. In 1886 the Prime
Minister of the State of Bhavnagar crowned a distinguished career by
becoming a samnyäsin seven years after his retirement.28
It is clear that our Brahmins did not invent these four stages from
top to bottom. Everyone agrees that the Ärya who is faithful to the
duties of his caste must pass a part of his youth with a master, prior to
taking a wife and obtaining a son who will continue the tradition of
family ceremonies. But it is denied that the two other stages were ever
obligatory. "We are a long way out", writes Senart," if we follow the
texts and imagine all the Brahmins exclusively devoted to study and
penance, dividing their careers into four periods and devoting the last
two to the life of the hermit and to the profession of a wandering fakir \
The Compilers of these books have simply welded into a system some
isolated facts, more or less exceptional in themselves, and conferred
an imperative quality upon what was only a perfectionist's ideal, realised
only in the rarest cases."29
I feel these criticisms, too, unwarranted. One could reply first that,
as with the theory of the four varnas, our authors had not the least inten-
tion of codifying custom, but rather of teaching everyone what his duties
were according to his age and status. Moving from this position they
found in practice four modes of existence, which sought to coordinate
and present in an order that could satisfy their intent. Since they were
bound to fix the rules of life of the hermit and the ascetic, it is natural
enough that they tried to integrate these rules in the picture as a whole,
21Der kleine Pauly II. 891 (Gymnosophisten).
2«L.S.S. O'Malley. Popular Hinduism (Cambridge. 1935). 210.
29E. Senart. op. cit.. 125-6 (Ross. p. 105).

--- PAGE 70 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
49
and to present the four modes of existence as a progressive elevation,
an upward movement towards salvation.
But such a reply would make too great a concession to the critics.
We must not attribute to the writers' exposition a rigorous quality which
it never had. at least so far as the dharma-sütras are concerned. Here
too they did not "theorise" as much as is often said, and they did not
give their "system" so "imperative" an aspect as is often assumed.
Although we find expressed the idea of a plan of four stages of life
successively to be undergone by all the Äryas, it is never formulated
as a mandatory rule or a dharma in that sense! Just as it is exceptionally
allowed that one should prolong the brahmacärin phase throughout
one's life, so it is admitted (not unreservedly, it is true) that one may
pass immediately from the brahmacärin stage to that of the religious
mendicant or ascetic, as soon as the period of study is over (Baudh.,
II.17.2-5; Vas.ß VII.3. Cf Yäj., III.56). On the other hand, the order
of succession between the third and the fourth äsrama is inverted in
Gautama (III.2) and Äpastamba (II.9.21.1), which indicates the prefer-
ence these authors have for the ascetic stage which, naturally, renders
the hermit stage superflous; the choice is however, left to the individual.
Gautama (III.36) goes further. The Vedas, he says, expressly prescribe
no stage but that of the householder. In their eyes this alone is obliga-
tory. In his commentary on that passage, Haradatta adds that the two
last stages were founded for those who were unfit to set up a hearth.
For Vasistha (VIII. 17) equally the two last stages are facultative.30
He declares that the Brahmin who fulfils his duties as master of the house
cannot fail to reach the heaven of Brahma after his death (X.31 and
Bühler's note). Thus it is not necessary to pass the last portion of his
life in mortification and austerity. Basically all our authors are hostile
to mere asceticism. Baudhäyana (II. 17.3-5) recommends it only for
those who are childless or widowed, and generally after one has attained
one's seventieth year and after the children are fully established in per-
formance of their own duties.
We have already noticed that the dharma-sütras regard the stage of
householder as the most important, because without him there could
be no brahmacärin, no anchorite, no mendicant monk. "Just as all rivers
and all streams find in the ocean their place of rest, so men of the various
stages (äsramas) go and take refuge under the protection of the house-
holder" (Vus., VIII.15. Cf A/., VI.90. Manu returns more than once
to the superiority of the grhastha.) Äpastamba (II.9.23.3-12 and 24.1-8)
discusses at length the opinion, based on a passage in a puräna, that
attributes excellence to a chaste life, which he refutes by citing the Veda:
i4Thou art reborn in thy issue; this, O mortal, is thy immortality....
30*Facultative' in the sense that they are optional, one may enter them if one wishes.

--- PAGE 71 [DIRECT] ---

50 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
They live with us, says Prajäpati, they who fulfil the following duties:
study of the three Vedas, studentship, the procreation of children, faith,
religious austerities, sacrifices and gifts. He who praises other duties
becomes dust and perishes" (the same sütra is in Baudh., II.6.11.34).
It really seems that we have here an allusion and a reply to a movement
of ideas which was directed against dharma and against the doctrine
of the efficacy of acts. In the opinion of our authors one must, above
all. be quit of the sacred triple debt: towards the Sages by studying the
Vedas, towards the gods by performing sacrifices or religious rites, and
towards one's ancestors by founding a family and having children to
continue the cult of the pitrs (forefathers) (Baudh., 16.4-7; Vas., XI.48).
If our authors envisage a situation where the father of the family
becomes old, abandons his property to his children and then retires
to the forest, it is probably because they were bound to take account
of a widespread custom amongst primitive peoples, obliging the aged
to yield control to younger people. Some savage tribes actually go so
far as to drive old men and women to suicide when they are no longer
of any use. Europeans long ago were content to place a senile parent
under the guardianship of his children. Perhaps it was partly to avoid
this humiliating wardship that the custom was introduced whereby
parents voluntarily gave up their assets—the origin of the distribution
of an ascendant's goods as we find it in modern law. The causes which
explain our voluntary surrender of assets can account for the third
äsrama of the Brahminical theory. The speculative and religious nature
of the Hindu and the peculiar point of view with which the authors with
whom we are dealing approached social rules have simply given to this
phase of life a unique character. This is therefore no theoretical cons-
truction, but rather perhaps a religious transposition or sublimation
of an ancient, barbarous custom.
As for the fourth äsrama, it is doubtless the result of a defensive policy
on the part of our Brahmins vis-ä-vis the ascetics who competed with
them in the field of religion. Baudhäyana (II.6.11.28) goes so far as to
say that the last two äsramas were invented by an asura (demon) (Kapila.
son of Prahläda) to annoy the gods, since the latter could not receive
offerings from vänaprasthas or parivrajakas. There has never been a
time in India when there were not mystics disdaining knowledge and
seeing the surest road to union with God in penance and austerity.
The Rgveda already knows the muni, "the ecstatic visionary who lets
his hair grow and who goes all naked or barely covered with a few rags
ilPartages d'ascendant. This is unknown to the common law. but is held in common
by the Hindu law and the laws of most continental countries. In India fathers frequently
distribute their estates during their lifetimes, even prematurely : see Athilinga v. Ramaswami
Indian Law Reports 1945 Madras, 297. [trs.]

--- PAGE 72 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
51
of an orange hue. People thought he was in intimate commerce with
the gods, and in one hymn the sun is praised under the simile of a muni' ,32
With the infusion of Dravidian elements, or simply under the influence
of the hot-house which is the Hindu environment, it is probable that
such mysticism developed dangerously. Beside recluses in the forest
who were still attached to Brahminism, there were all kinds of ascetics,
practising ecstatic methods, mortifying themselves and living on alms.
They enjoyed great prestige amongst a credulous population, gaining
reputations as sorcerers, healers, soothsayers, and so on. In fact these
people came from every corner of the Hindu world, from all castes.33
Their way of life placed them outside Brahminical precepts. Hence the
Brahmins thought of canalising and damming up this current of mysti-
cism by making it into a fourth äsrama. No one who becomes a samnyäsin
is under any further obligation to keep up a domestic cult. He no longer
has a hearth. He has destroyed his sacrificial instruments. According
to Vasistha (X.I8). he should not carry any visible sign of his status.
He could, or should, have shaved his head, removing the top-knot which
every Hindu keeps on his crown (Gaut., III.22; Vas., X.6). He should
even have removed the sacred thread which distinguished him from the
non-Äryas. Thanks to the creation of the fourth äsrama the door is now
open for a broad assimilation which might permit some check to be
offered to a competition which was dangerous for the orthodox ascetics.
At the same time our authors lay down rules to safeguard Brahminical
tradition. They forbid the Ärya to become an ascetic or a hermit before
he has passed through at least the brahmacärin stage (Äp., II.9.21.3-4.8;
Gaut., III.l). or even before he has been a householder (Äp., II.9.22.7-8).
Äpastamba (II.9.24.8) and Baudhäyana (II.6.11.34) threaten with hell
anyone who seeks final emancipation without having first paid the triple
debt (cf M., VI.35.37). All require the samnyäsin as well as the hermit
to recite the Vedas. a step which effectively debars from that way of
life all who are not dvijas.
Despite our Brahmins' effort's, the life of the samnyäsins escaped
their control and went on more or less outside the orthodox framework.
Hventually it was acknowledged that no rule of dharma survived for
the samnyäsin. People of low caste. Südras, became ascetics. However,
the authority of our authors continued in the juridical field. According
to the case-law of the Anglo-Indian courts no juridical effect was'allowed
(except where a properly proved custom established the contrary) to
a SQdra's taking to asceticism. The law treated the ascetic's links with
his family as still unbroken.34
*2 Works of Barth. Quarante ans d'Indianisme. Oeuvres de Auguste Barth. 4 vols. (Paris.
1914 8). I. 42.
"Arrian. xii.9 : 'One may become a "sophist" no matter which class one comes from'.
34Käne. II. 952. On the impropriety of an ascetic's attempting to leave the stage of %samn-

--- PAGE 73 [DIRECT] ---

52 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
3. The Rules of Law in the Dharma-sütras
The dharma-sutras' object is to teach men their dharma, the rules of
:onduct which produce spiritual merit according to their caste and app-
ropriate to the stage of their lives. The general plan, though often some-
what irregularly observed, consists of taking the Brahmin as a basis,
following him through the four äsramas, and then of formulating rules
peculiar to the three other vamas.
Consequently the dharma-sütras contain a great many precepts on the
duties of the student, regulating minutely his daily life and his deportment
towards his master, his master's wife and children, explaining how one
should meet them, greet them, and behave in their vicinity. Similarly
they prescribe the periods of the year and the localities where teaching
should take place, showing in which circumstances teaching should be
interrupted, and the like. Once the study stage is over the Brahmin who
has now returned to the paternal home but is not yet married—the
snätaka—h bound to observe numerous duties special to his status,
and these are set out in equally minute detail. Similarly, the life of the
householder is enveloped in a network of precepts which govern even
the most humble of his activities. Details are given of the foods he may
eat. and those he may not; and of the people from whom he may accept
it. The gifts and charitable acts which he must perform are laid down—
and the merits which arise if he performs them (Gaut., V.18ff.; Baudh.,
II.5.19-20). A considerable number of rules are devoted to the manner
of treating guests, according to their caste and the time of their arrival,
since hospitality is a truly religious duty and "the guest furthers one's
attaining heaven, whether he is welcome or one is indifferent to him",
say Apastamba. who compares attentions paid to a guest to sacrificial
rites (11.3.7.1-10). A Brahmin ought not to refuse hospitality even to a
Südra (Äp., II.2.4.19; Baudh., II.5.14). He should feed him after having
given him work. or. without treating him like a guest, he should get his
servants to feed him (Gaut., V.43-45). "Lacking other things, a place
to rest in. water for washing, grass, and a kind word are never found
wanting in the house of a good man", says Apastamba (II.2.4.14) with
Vasistha (XIII.61) and Gautama (V.35-36), and Manu repeats this
(III. 101).
Our authors are keenly preoccupied by notions of purity and impurity.
They enumerate multiple sources of impurity and show what are the
purificatory practices by which one may purify oneself and the things
one uses. Naturally obligations relating to domestic sacrifices occupy a
large place in our collections, though the rules of the sacrifices themselves
yäsa. and the Hindu law's insistence upon a final breach with the family, with the special
exception of Südras, see the interesting comparative study by Y. Krishan at Annals of
the Bhandarkar Or. Res. Institute 50 (1969). 75-89. [trs.]

--- PAGE 74 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
53
come from the grhya-sfitras. The precepts about sräddhas are particularly
detailed. These are sacrifices for the dead which consist essentially of a
feast to which an uneven number of Brahmins are invited (Gaut., XV.7).
Our authors lay down what qualifications are required of possible candi-
dates for an invitation, indicating who must be rigorously excluded,
and they lay down the time and place where such feasts should take place,
and the deceased relatives to whom the offerings of pindas (rice balls)
should be made. The duties of the anchorite and the mendicant monk
are laid out generally in much less detail, except in Baudhäyana, who
distinguishes between various kinds of hermits according to their mode
of life (III.3.1-15). Some sütras, like the Vaikhänasa-dharma-sutra,
are undoubtedly more particularly orientated towards the duties of the
two last asramas.
The whole of these duties is called äcära. This amounts to the practices
of the sistas, though consigned to writing.
Every breach of these duties or ritual obligations is a fault, a sin which
will infallibly (unless the sinner performs the due penance) involve
punishment, if not in this life then in the next world or in after-lives.34<2
He will go to hell, will be reborn in a lower caste, or even in the form of
an animal. These sins are classified according to the gravity of the sanction
which is attached to them. Our authors distinguish between sins "which
cause fall" (pätaka or pätanTya), i.e. those that involve exclusion from
caste, and those which involve only a temporary defilement (asucikara).
In the first category, a distinction is introduced again between cases
where the exclusion is final and those where the culprit can be readmitted,
and between those cases where readmission into the caste is easy and
those where it is not. This leads to a classification of faults which is
already advanced, although not fully developed until Visnu and Manu.
It betrays the great importance which the caste system had for society.
The ceremony of excommunication from the caste is described by
Gautama (XX.2-7) and Vasistha (XV.11-14), and recurs in Manu
(XI.183-188). It consists first in performing the funeral of the culprit.
Then a slave brings an old broken vessel picked up from a rubbish-
heap, fills it with water taken from a pot belonging to a slave-woman
and. facing the South,35 turns it over with his left foot, saying "I deprive
so-and-so of water". With untied hair and wearing the sacred thread
over their right shoulders and under the left, the culprit's relations
touch the slave. After taking a purificatory bath, they return home.
No Ärya may speak to the excommunicated person, nor sit near him,
nor have any relationship with him. Anyone who speaks to him must
perform a penance, and one who continues to remain in contact with
34aSee U.C. Sarkär at Visvesvaränand Indological Journal I (1963). 91-101. [trs.]
35The South is the most inauspicious quarter, the direction of the abode of the Dead, [trs.]
For the ceremony see P. Rolland, KAN. 
Sastri Vol. (Madras, 1971), 487-91.

--- PAGE 75 [DIRECT] ---

54 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
him for a year exposes himself to the danger of being excommunicated
(Vas., 1.22; Baudh., II. 1.2.35). The excommunicated individual is naturally
excluded from all the functions and ceremonials of the caste. He loses
his rights of succession, and if he was the eldest son he loses his right
of primogeniture and the privileges attached to it. On his death he goes
to hell (Gaut., XXI.5-6). However, his children must maintain the
excommunicated parent, although without being allowed to appropriate
his goods (which, according to Haradatta, are confiscated to the king).
Gautama (XXI. 15-16) and Vasistha (XIII.47) declare that the mother
is never an outcaste to her son. Äpastamba (I.10.28; 9-10) says that he
must continue to serve her, provided he does not perform sacrificial
acts in her company. Baudhäyana (II.2.3.42) says that he must secure
her maintenance, but without speaking to her. Excommunicated people
can live together outside inhabited places, may sacrifice for each other,
teach each other, and intermarry. If they have sons, these could be
admitted into the society of Äryas, provided that their parents are
separated from them (at an early stage?). But this is not allowed by
Äpastamba (I.10.29.8-14) nor by Baudhäyana (II. 1.2.18-25), who
admits however that they may be reintegrated after they have done
penance. Vasistha for his part (XIII.51-53) wants the sons of the excom-
municate to share their parent's condition, but not the daughters, for
these will enter the families of their husbands upon their marriages.
The ceremony for readmission to caste is the antithesis of that of
excommunication. A new or golden vessel is brought; it is filled with
spring water or water from a sacred stream; then the relatives of the
excommunicate pour the contents over him and bathe along with him
in a sacred pool. They offer the vessel to him. The excommunicate recites
mantras, makes a sacrifice, and gives presents to a Brahmin or to his
preceptor (Gaut., XX. 10-14). The ceremonies which follow are the same
as the sacrament for the new-born (Vas., XV.21). After society has
readmitted him he is submitted to a last test, according to Manu (XI. 197).
He must offer grass to cows; only when they accept this fodder from
him can he be considered definitely to be worthy of readmission.
Äpastamba alludes to this test (1.9.24.20), if his commentator Haradatta
is to be believed.
A sinner must purify himself in this life if he wishes to avoid the punish-
ment which threatens him in the next world. Consequently, he will not
be reintegrated into his caste until he has expiated his guilt by means
of penance (prch'ascitta, "prime thought", or "thought about finding").36
In very early times the question was raised whether the theory of karma
was not contradicted by this notion of penance. It gave rise to a short
discussion in Gautama (XIX.2-11), Baudhäyana (III.10.2-9) and
36On the various proposed etymologies for this word see Kane, IV, 57-61.

--- PAGE 76 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
55
Vasistha (XXII. 1-8), where the efficacy of penance is affirmed on the
authority of Vedic texts. The accepted explanation is that penance
balances the effects of an act of an adharma (non-dharma, or anii-dharma)
character. Penances are prescribed for the culprit by his guru, whether
the latter was approached by the former of his own free will, or some
relative of the culprit or leader of the caste has put the matter before
the guru. Even if the misdeed in question is not one which involves
automatic fall from caste, the sinner risks being excommunicated if he
fails to perform the prescribed penance. Threat of exclusion plays a
role at all times as an indirect sanction obliging the culprit to rectify
his fault. These notions of sin and expiation, which are very ancient,
led our authors to classify penances according to their relative severity
in a table corresponding to their classification of sins. All our dharma-
sütras devote at least one chapter to this subject, a section resembling
the Penitentials of the Middle Ages. Their theory of penance is already
a learned one. We find their source in the brähmanas of the Säma-veda,
especially the Sämavidhäna (ed. Burneil, 1873), from which Gautama
and Baudhäyana have borrowed. The doctrine is identical, and the list
of sins hardly differs. Account is taken of the degree of reflection and
the age of the culprit, and how far the act was intentional (Äp., I.29.2—4).
Self-defense is admitted as a ground for absolution (Äp., 1.29.7; Vas.,
III.15),37 but repetition of a sin aggravates the penance. The latter
applies to accessories and accomplices as well as to the wrongdoer
himself (Äp., II.29.1).
There is a great variety of penances. Those which match the gravest
crimes amount to a death-sentence, for they force the culprit to commit
suicide. Thus he who murders a Brahmin must, in order to gain absolution,
seek death in battle or cast himself into fire (Vas., XX.27; Äp., 1.9.25.11-
12; Gaut., XXII.2-3). One who drinks fermented liquor from which he
must abstain dies purified if he swallows such liquors heated to boiling
point (Äp., 1.29.25.3; Gaut., XXJII.l). He who has defiled the bed of his
guru must lie on a red-hot bed of iron, or embrace an iron figure of a
woman which has been made red hot, or even cut off his genitals and,
holding them in his joined palms, walk towards the South38 without
stopping till he drops dead (Äp., I.9.25.1-2; Gaut., XXIII.8-9; Vas.,
XX.14; Baudh., II.1.1.13-14). For minor sins there is a whole range
of penances : fasts more or less prolonged during which the fasting
becomes more severe (krcchra, tapta-k., ati-k., cändräyana); recitation
of mantras (especially of the säman) accompanied by other observances
such as fasting or mortifications; fines in the form of gifts to be made
*7Even the killing of a Brahmin is not sinful if done in legitimate self-defense 
(Vas..
III. 17 18; Baudh.. 1.10.18. 12-13). The contrary view is found, but at much later periods.
*»See above, p. 53, n.35.

--- PAGE 77 [DIRECT] ---

56 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
to Brahmins ; ascetic practices ; various weakening practices, continence,
control of the breathing, and postures which involve more or less strain.
There are some odd ones, such as the penance of panca-gavya, to which
Vasistha (XXVII. 14) and Baudhäyana (IV.5.14) allude and which
consists of swallowing the five "products of the cow", namely milk,
curds, butter, urine and dung. One who has killed a cow must look
after a herd, watch over the animals with the greatest care, and feed
exclusively on pañca-gavya. Vasistha (XXII.12) and Gautama (XIX.14)
also mention going to certain holy places on pilgrimage as having
expiatory virtue.39
There are some discrepancies in the fixing of penances, and at times
the same sin can be the object of different prescriptions even in the same
author. So for the intentional killing of a Brahmin Gautama provides
(XXII.4-8), in place of the suicide of the culprit, a period of austerities
lasting twelve years, which could however be shortened if he saves the
life of a Brahmin or if he thrice recovers from the hands of brigands the
stolen property of Brahmins. For the same crime Äpastamba (1.9.24.11-
15) also concedes that the culprit may be purified by twelve years of
austerity, unless he has killed his guru or a learned Brahmin, in which
case he must live in the same austerity all his days. On the other hand
there are certain general penances which enable even the gravest sins
to be expiated. A sinner can be purified by performing certain sacrifices.
Thus he who offers the horse-sacrifice40 overcomes all sins; this sacrifice
destroys the sin arising even from Brahmin-slaying (Vas., XXII.6).
And in many cases, the recitation of prayers suffices to purify the sinner
from numerous sins he may have committed. According to Baudhäyana
(IV.5.31) kthe who, at sunrise, murmurs the gäyatrl 1,008 times is freed
from all sin, provided he has not killed a learned Brahmin".
What impression can we form of Indian society, what indications
do we have of the rules effectively governing social relations, when
we look at the sum total of these precepts?
We must enter a preliminary caveat here. The teaching of dharma
proceeds from Brahmins who were extremely preoccupied^with questions
of purity and impurity, of guilt and expiation, and with ritual observances
and the regular practice of the same. For them the different phases of
life were really the âsramas, which were a series of attempts to regulate
the conduct of life according to rules laid down in advance. Only a
narrow circle wa^s involved, perhaps hardly representative of the total
population but enjoying, for all that, a considerable authority within it.
Our authors figured as "confessors",41 but with a wider field of activity
because of the breadth of the concept of dharma.
39For a detailed account of penances see Käne. IV. chh. iv and v.
40A sacrifice confined to conquering kings who have proved they possess imperial qualities.
^Directeurs de conscience. Referees on matters of morals and religion, or duty generally,
as is not seldom experienced to this day.

--- PAGE 78 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
57
The precepts which set out what äcära is belong essentially to religious
law. But. to our eyes, some of them possess a juridical character. They
deal, besides, with institutions which used to belong to religious law in
Europe but which, in India, existed until a very recent date in secular
law. So it is, for example, with the rules relating to marriage which find
their place, naturally, at the commencement of the duties incumbent
on a man entering the second äsrama. The dharma-sütras lay down the
conditions for a valid marriage. They show, somewhat rapidly, the rules
of endogamy and exogamy. For a marriage fully efficacious from the
religious point of view one must marry a girl of the same varna, but
belonging to a different gotra. She should not be related to her future
husband through an ancestor nearer than six degrees on the father's
side or four degrees (counting exclusively of the intended spouse) on the
mother's side (Gaut., IV.2; Vas., VIII.2), or six degrees in both lines
according to Äpastamba (II.5.11.16). Gautama (IV.1-2) and Vasistha
(VIII. 1) add that she should not have the same pravara, or mythical
pedigree.42 The girl must not have been married already. A father is
advised to marry off his daughter before she reaches marriageable age,
even while she still goes about naked (Gaut., XVIII.21-23; Baudh.,
IV. 1.11; Vas., XVII.70).^ Indeed the father commits a sin if he keeps
a marriageable girl at home, a sin equal to that of killing an embryo
(Vas., XVII.71; Baudh., IV.1.12). Thus a marriageable girl who has
not yet been given in marriage may choose a bridegroom for herself
after three years of waiting (Vas., XVII.67; Baudh., IV.1.14), or even
after three menstrual periods, as Gautama says (XVIII.20). The forms
of celebration of marriage are described in the grhya-sutras. The dharma-
sutras enumerate the different rituals, six in Äpastamba and Vasistha,
but eight the Gautama and Härita, a number which becomes classical
in the later literature.
An even smaller number of precepts assigned to the same äsrama
deal with relations between husband and wife and with the rights of the
married woman, both personally and in respect of her property. A woman
always requires protection; she is always within someone's power.
"As a child she is under the protection of her parents; when she is married
under that of her husband; in old age under that of her son", declare
Vasistha (V.3) and Baudhäyana (II.3.45), and Manu repeats this (IX.3).
Gautama (XXVIII.24) however makes allusion to the personal property
of a woman which, at her death, will pass to her unmarried daughters
or. in default of them, to poor married daughters. This alludes to the
special devolution of women's absolute property, called strldhana.
The rules relating to partition of family assets are set out by Äpastamba
4 2On the words pravara 
and gotra see Käne II. 482-99.
**Naf>nikä. 
Käne. II. 440.

--- PAGE 79 [DIRECT] ---

58 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
immediately following the duties of the householder. It is before the
stage of hermit or ascetic, i.e. in the lifetime of the father, that family
property should be divided among sons, according to the theory of the
four äsramas. The rules of this "partition of goods" are also applicable
to problems of actual succession which may arise at the father's death.
In all the dharma-sütras the rules of succession have a large place in the
collection of duties which makes up acara. Everything that concerns
sonship and parentage will be found in general either there, or in passages
dealing with sräddha ceremonies. The heir is he who performs the funeral
rites, who offers the rice-balls calledpindas to the ancestors. The succession
to property is a corollary of succession to sacra, or the religious obligations
of the family.44 Thence comes the scheme of different orders of heirs :
the sons, the sapindas, the teacher or fellow student (sa-brahmacärin),
the king (except for Brahmin decedents, whose estates can pass only to
Brahmins) (Äp.ß II.6.14.1-5; Vas., XVII.81-87). After the sapindas,
Baudhâyana (I.5.11.12) introduces the sakulyas, i.e. ascendants (and
their issue) who are entitled only to the lepa (residue of the offerings
of pindas) and Gautama (XXVIII.21) the sagotras and samänärsas.
The meaning of these words is later taken differently by different com-
mentators, and different kinds of sons, amounting to twelve, are enu-
merated (Baudh., II.2.3.15-30; Vas., XVII.12ff.). Vasistha (XV.l^)
admits that parents have the right to give, sell, or abandon their children;
but this precept appears in connection with adoption, and the same
writer forbids giving or receiving an only son in adoption. He devotes
several sufras to adoption (XV.5-10).
In connection with the occupations allowed to Vaisyas and, in times
of distress, to members of the first two varnas, Vasistha (11.41-51) and
Baudhâyana (I.5.10.21-22) fix the maximum interest rates (15% in
principle, but variable according to the caste of the borrower, the nature
of the commodity borrowed, and also according as the loan is, or is not,
backed by a surety or other security) (cf Gaut., XII.29). In passing
Vasistha (11.44) lays down the rule that in principle the lender of a sum
of money cannot demand a total of interest higher than the amount
of principal lent : "For gold, double; for cereals, triple (the amount of
the loan)"—a rule which has lasted to our own day under the name
of dámdupat.45
The majority of these rules are taken up again, explained, developed
and completed in the later literature of the sastras and the commentaries.
They doubtless reflect practices in vogue at our authors' periods. But,
integrated within äcära, they have become something different from
mere customary rules. They have received a religious value, the notion
principle is neatly formulated at Visnu XV.40 : vas cärtha-harah sa pinda-däyl
45Derrett. Introduction to Modern Hindu Law (Bombay. 1963). ss. 824-9. [trs.]

--- PAGE 80 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
59
that it was a sin not to conform to them! By the same token our authors
were led to make a choice, to recommend certain rules which perhaps
were followed only by an elite, to leave in the shade or even to condemn
expressly others which were perhaps in general use, in short to apply
to the mass of customs a process which may, or may not, have been
uniformly effectual. Their hesitations and contradictions indicate the
difficulties they had to surmount or circumvent in order to try to make
the rule they wished to see adopted triumph over its competitors.
We may take as an example the forms of marriage. The dharma-sütras
describe the eight forms which we meet later in Manu. The first four
(only three in Apastamba and Vasistha) consist essentially of the gift
of the girl by her father to the bridegroom. The fifth is marriage by
purchase of the bride (the rite of the Äsuras, or mänusya). The sixth is
marriage by mutual consent (the rite of the Gandharvas). The seventh
is marriage by rape (the rite of the Räksasas, or ksätra). Finally the
eighth, ignored by Apastamba and Vasistha. is a violation of the woman
who is asleep or unconscious (the rite of the Pisäcas [devils]). It will be
conceded that our authors must have met these different kinds of union,
and that each of them was regarded as regular by at least one section
of the population.
They commence by classifying them hierarchically. The first is superior
to the second, the second to the third, and so on. "The quality of the
child to be born depends on the quality of the marriage rite"
(Äp.ß II.5.12.4; Baudh., 1.11.21.1). For Apastamba (II.5.12.3) and
Baudhäyana (I.I 1.10-11) only the first three or four forms, i.e. those
where the marriage is a gift of the woman, are regular (dharmya); the
others are all degrading. Gautama (IV. 14-15) is of the same opinion,
but adds that certain authors allow the two following.
Marriage by purchase is forbidden to members of the higher castes.
Apastamba (II.6.13.11) does not recognise the parents' right to sell
their children. He tries to prove that the word "sell" which figures in
certain Vedic texts or in the gfhya-sutras in connection with gifts made
at the time of the marriage is used metaphorically, for these are the
rites which give effect to the marriage (II.6.13.12). The same opinion
is found in Vasistha (1.36-38). Baudhäyana (I.11.21.2-3) declares that
"the woman who has been bought is not a wife; she cannot participate
in sacrifices offered to the gods and to the manes (shades). Kasyapa says
that she is a slave". And he condemns energetically the father who
gives his daughter for money, saying that he commits a great sin and
destroys his family to the seventh generation. However, the same author
allows marriage by purchase for Vaisyas and Südras "who are not
particular in what concerns the choice of their brides" (1.11.20.13-15)
(or 'who lack scruples or rules").

--- PAGE 81 [DIRECT] ---

60 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Marriage by mutual consent is not allowed by Baudhäyana (1.11.20.12)
except in the case of Ksatriyas, but he adds that some authorities recom-
mend the rite for all the castes "because it rests on mutual affection"
(I.I 1.20.16). Apart from that he authorises, as does Vasistha, a mature
girl's choosing a bridegroom for herself if she had remained unmarried
for three years.
Marriage by rape, simply mentioned by Äpastamba, Gautama, and
Vasistha, is allowed by Baudhäyana (I.I 1.20.12) for the Ksatriyas only,
"for force is their attribute".
The last form, ignored by Äpastamba and by Vasistha, is allowed
by Baudhäyana (I.I 1.20.14) for Vaisyas and Südras for the same reason
that induced him to allow marriage by purchase.
From the whole of these rules one can only conclude that our authors
have tried to induce those who wished to raise themselves or to maintain
themselves in superior castes to accept an obligation to contract a marriage
consisting in a simple gift of the girl by her father. They tried to proscribe
marriage by purchase and reserve marriage by mutual consent for
Ksatriyas alone. Then they formally condemned the lowest types of
union, tolerating marriage by rape only in the case of Ksatriyas. Further,
whatever the form, no marriage was regular unless it was accomplished
with the aid of the rituals laid down in the grhya-sutras. "The girl who,
after being carried away by force, is not married with the sacred formulas
can be given in marriage to another man : she is equal to a virgin",
says Vasistha (XVII.73). We notice that our authors endeavoured to
circumscribe and even banish practices of which they disapproved.
But it would be going too far to suppose that their precepts were actually
accepted as a whole in the society of their times.
A similar conclusion is to be drawn from a glimpse of the precepts
relating to the different kinds of sons. In order to secure the perpetuity
of the domestic cult ancient Aryan custom seems to have made compa-
rable to am aurasa, or real son born of a regular marriage between his
parents, all kinds of people who had no blood relationship with the
head of the family, whenever the latter shows signs of remaining childless :
the son born of a daughter designated by her father to provide him with
a son (putrikä-putra) ; the son born of niyoga. i.e. procreated by one
other than the husband himself after his death or even during his lifetime
(ksetra/a); the adapted son (dattaka, krtima, i.e. "fictitious"); the son
born in the house but to an unknown father (güdhaja or güd/iotpanna) ;
the abandoned and subsequently found child (apavidha) ; and so forth.
The dharma-sütras classify and arrange the different categories of sons
hierarchically. They retain some as heirs, but admit others to sucession
only in default of the first (Vas./ XVII.25.39; Baudh., II.2.3.31-32; Gaut.,
XXVIII.32-33). They are' not always in agreement on the order which

--- PAGE 82 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
61
should be given to these different categories. Gautama gives the tenth
rank to the son born of an appointed daughter {putrikä-putra). while
Baudhäyana places him in the second rank. The adopted son (dattaka)
is placed by Gautama (XXVIII.32) in the third rank as heir. Whereas
Vasistha (XVII.28) places him in the eighth position and denies him
the status of an heir. They insist on the primacy of the aurasa. born of
a regular marriage of two spouses of the same caste (Vas., XVI 1.13;
Baudh., II.2.3.14). He alone is identified with his father.46 Again, they
surround the "formalities" of niyoga with severe restrictions {Gaut.,
XVIII.4-7; Vas., XVII.56-66; Baudh., II.2.4.7-10). If these rules are
not observed the son belongs to his begetter {Vas., XVII.63; Gaut.,
XVIII.11-14). Baudhäyana (II.2.3.18-19) even declares that the ksetraja
should be considered as having two fathers and as belonging to two
families. In principle, the child belongs to his begetter {Gaut., XVIII.9;
Äp. 11.6.13.6). Similarly, our authors recommend the head of the family
to keep a watch over the women: "Through his negligence a husband
loses all value from the birth of a son" {Baudh., II.2.3.34-35, citing a
gäthä of Aupajahghani, a rsi of the Black Yajurveda). "He who gave
the seed takes the son, after his death, into the world of Yama" {Äp.,
II.6.13.7, citing the same gäthä). All this tends to lead to a condemnation
of practices like niyoga, which Äpastamba (II.10.27.4) forbids "because
of the weakness of the senses of men (of our epoch)". And he adds,
"If the vow (of the spouses) is transgressed (husband and wife) will go
together to hell; the reward (in the after-life) arising from obedience to
the restrictions of the law is to be preferred to a progeny obtained in
that fashion (i.e. by niyoga)" (II.10.27.6-7).
Another example could be taken from the rules relating to partition
of family property. All the dharma-sutras recommended partition, either
after the father's death, or —as Äpastamba considers preferable (11.6.14.
1) - even in the father's lifetime prior to his entering the third or the fourth
phase of life. It actually follows from a passage in Gautama (XV. 19)
that the son may force a partition on his father. But he condemns this
practice by excluding such sons from participation in sräddha feasts,
thereby depriving them of their rights of succession. Partition during the
father's lifetime should not take place without his permission : such is
the rule laid down by Baudhäyana (H.2.3.8), implicit in Äpastamba
(II.6.14.1). But Gautama (XXVIII.3) tells us that the whole estate could
be passed to the eldest son. who would then be bound to secure the main-
tenance of the family and to behave towards his brothers as a father would
do. He also gives several rules about the organisation of this joint
46Baudhäyana. II.2.3. 14 cites a verse (found in the Mahäbhärata and elsewhere): Thou
art produced from my various limbs, thou art born from my heart, thou art myself under
the name of "son" . . .'

--- PAGE 83 [DIRECT] ---

62 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
family. In particular he shows that a learned member can withdraw,
at his option, whatever he may have acquired by his own means (XXVIII.
30). At all events he holds partition to be spiritually preferable (dharma-
vrddhi takes place) (XXVIII.4). Äpastamba (II.6.14.10-14) and Baudhä-
yana (II.2.3.2-3) are more forthright: they rely on the Vedic text to which
we have already referred (Manu's partition of his goods between his
issue), and lay down that partition should take place.
These rules evidence contradictory practices in which one is already
able to see the seeds of the two great systems of succession still (with
some minor modifications) in force in India today, that of the Däyabhäga
and that of the Mitäksarä.41 Our authors pronounce in favour of the
principle which results in multiplication of domestic cults. But we should
not attribute a legal value, an imperative quality, to their precepts. As
Gautama actually says, the father increases his dharma (or increases
dharma) by proceeding to partition; but that does not mean that partition
was the rulfe in Gautama's time (cf M., IX. 111).
The authors vary in their interpretation of the rules affecting partition.
They debate the shares to be allotted to different sorts of sons, and the
special share (uddhära) to be given to the eldest. Reconciling different
views, Baudhäyana (II.2.3.3-4) admits that the father may partition his
assets equally amongst all the children (save the daughters), but he could
just as well make differences between them according to their seniority
and the castes of their mothers (ibid., 9.12). Unequal partition is the only
one indicated by Vasistha (XVIII.42-51) and. with some variations, by
Gautama (XXVIII.5-17). Äpastamba (II.6.14.1.11-14) declares on the
contrary that equal partition between sons conforms to the Veda. Our
authors are far from agreed as to what rights should be allowed to daugh-
ters in the succession. Vasistha (XVII.46). Baudhäyana (II.2.3.43) and
Gautama (XX VI11.24) permit them to inherit only certain of the mother's
goods and exclude them from all rights in succession to their father.
On the other hand Äpastamba (II.6.14.4) calls the daughter to succeed
to her father, but only in the absence of all relations and even pupils,
and immediately before the king would take by escheat. There is no
greater agreement on the rights of the widow, whom only Gautama
calls to succeed the husband in default of sons, in competition with
(or after?) sapindas or sagotras. Äpastamba (II.6.14.9) confines himself
to allowing her as part of the estate her own jewellery and the assets
she received from her own family, unless indeed she is included amongst
the sapindas called to the succession in default of sons (ibid., 2). To sum
up. here we do not really come across formal rules. One may simply
note a tendency, still a shy one, towards equality of sharing at a partition,
and to the total exclusion of females.
47Derrett. Religion. Law and the State in India (London. 1968). ch. xii.

--- PAGE 84 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
63
If a great part of what we call personal legal status is found amongst
the precepts of äcära, the criminal law appears in its turn, in large measure,
in the theory of sins and penance.
A number of penances have all the rigour of penal sanctions. I have
already mentioned some that amount to a death sentence. Fines appear
in the guise of gifts to be made to Brahmins. This form of penance is
common. Penance can include mortifications or prolonged austerities
which inflict punishment no less severe than imprisonment would have
been. Frequently penance, like punishment, acquires an exemplary
quality. Thus the killer of a Brahmin or the culprit who has committed
a crime of equal gravity must beg in seven households of the village
during his years of penance, crying out. "Who will show charity towards
an abhisasta (accursed one)?" {Äp., I.9.24.15; Gaut., XXII.4). The
adultress's penance in Vasistha (XXI. 1-5) includes an ignominious
parade, seated on an ass naked and smeared with butter.
Penance varies, as does punishment, with the gravity of the offence.
For the killing of a Brahmin the period of austerity is twelve years, of
a Ksatriya six years, of a Vaisya three years, of a Südra one year. The
fine which accompanies this decreases likewise with the caste: 1,000
cows for a Ksatriya, 100 for a Vaisya, 10 for a Südra, plus a bull in each
case (Gaut., XXII. 2-16; Äp., 1.9.24.1-25; Baudh., 1.10.19.1-2). We find
the same gradation, with different figures, in Baudhäyana (II. 1.6-10)
and Vasistha (XX.31-33) who increases to three years the length of the
penance required for the murder of a Südra.
Again,we have seen that before determining the appropriate penance
account was taken of the element of intention, as well of the age of the
culprit and whether or not he had relapsed into guilt; that, again, self-
defense would eliminate guilt (Äp., I.10.29.7; Vas., IX.15); and that
accomplices follow the principal offender in point of guilt {Gaut., XXI.2;
Äp., II. 11.29.1). Gautama (XXI. 19) even adds that he who. being able
to prevent the commission of an act of violence against a defenseless
person, abstains from intervening to save him. incurs the same guilt as
if he had himself committed the act.
It is true that penance, as distinguished from punishment, is voluntary.
But we must not forget that the threat of exclusion from caste is an indirect
means of constraint, often quite sufficiently efficacious to make the
culprit perform the prescribed penance.
Penance is thus not simply expiatory. It is also deterrent. There has
been some debate whether punishment was derived from penance, or the
other way about. We are tempted to see the concurrence of the two
as Barth did:48 'Expiation and punishment are correlative conceptions,
and it does not seem that the second developed after the first and at its
^ W o r k s (see a b o v e , p. 51, n. 32), III, 7 1 - 2 .

--- PAGE 85 [DIRECT] ---

64 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
cost... Short of presupposing an absolute theocracy I cannot visualise
any form of society, and certainly not a society at the nomadic stage,
where a single religious penance, undergone voluntarily, could, with
everyone's consent, have sheltered the culprit from all claims on the
part of the community or its chief, and the legitimate vengeance of the
party wronged." In effect, confusion between penance and penalty
frequently occurs, the penance being equivalent to the penalty and
taking the form of a punishment.
However, the system is imperfect and incomplete. It is imperfect
because, in spite of everything, the real object of penance is to cleanse
the sinner of his guilt. The fact that it has the quality of chastisement
as well is a secondary consideration. Even if it takes that form at times,
it does not have chastisement as its nature or its object. Further, the
multiplicity of penances and the enormous importance attached to
practices which are purely expiatory, such as pious donations and the
recitation of prayers, often attenuate or even reduce to vanishing point
whatever penal content they have. Finally, as regards the Südra, penance
as such is somewhat illusory, since he cannot be outcasted if he fails
to perform it.49 It must be imposed upon him, and thus it becomes a
veritable penalty. But it is not the role of Brahmins to punish! That is
the king's prerogative. It is his task to keep the various members of the
community to their proper duties by means of appropriate punishments,
of which he is the sole judge. Penal law, properly so called, derives exclu-
sively from secular power.
The system is also incomplete in that, so far as it acts as a deterrent,
it secures no compensation to the victim or person wronged. The fines
in the form of donations go to the Brahmins, not to the victim. Here
too we must be on our guard against too absolute a view of the matter.
Penance inflicted on the wrongdoer often provides a kind of public
reparation for the victim, sufficient to assuage his desire for vengeance.
Occasionally, too, the penance devised takes into account reparation
due to the victim. Thus Baudhäyana (I.10.19.1) provides that the cows
to be offered in a case of homicide are given by the culprit vaira-niryä-
ttmärtham, "in order to escape vengeance", while the supplementary
bull is given präyascittärtham, "to expiate his sin".50 The cows given
by the sinner originally represented the blood-price, the wergeld, paid
once -and perhaps still paid in Äpastamba's day —to the relatives of the
victim. This would tend to prove that at least in this instance it is the
penal law which was the source of the penance or had served as a model
for it. But in reality, as is the case with penalites, there is much confusion
49Manu. X.I26. declares that the Südra cannot commit a sin which causes fall from
caste (pätaka).
Bühler's note on Baudh.. 1.10.19. 1 and Äp.. I.9.24. 1.

--- PAGE 86 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
65
between the two conceptions, and it is doubtless quite natural that
compensation should be transformed into a simple penance by a process
analogous to that which, in Europe, changed compensation into a penal
fine.51
If the penal or expiatory aspect, in the form of penance, holds so
important a place in the dharma-sütras this does not mean that their
authors were unacquainted with the concept of compensation. Their
self-imposed task was to teach dharma, to clarify the saving or expiatory
virtue of the actions in question. They were concerned above all to tell
the transgressor of the law how he could purify himself from his sin,
to reestablish the (occult) order broken by his guilt and the balance of his
own karma which he had upset. This only qualified Brahmins had autho-
rity to do. As for compensation for the wrong inflicted by his crime,
this was a matter exclusively for the temporal order, which derived from
the king's power. It was, in general, the same with all private disputes
which could arise between individuals. The solution did not interest
Brahmins in their capacity as gurus, since it was to be found, not in the
acara or religious usage, but in practice, in custom as we understand it.
Nevertheless, though it was foreign to their concerns, our Brahmins were
led to penetrate into that domain and to make some room in their sufras
for questions of a purely juridical character.
Their intervention seems to have been a consequence, a natural pro-
longation of the teaching of dharma; it was imperceptibly and almost
by force of circumstances that spiritual preceptors had to emerge as
jurisconsults. Having to teach the duties of the four varnas, they could
not fail to specify those which were peculiar to the Ksatriyas. The duty
of the Ksatriya is above all to protect the other varnas againt their enemies.
He alone has the right and the duty to bear arms. He commits no sin
in killing enemies (Gaut., X.I7). And here our authors remind the Ksa-
triyas of the laws of war: "The Äryas do not kill those who have put
down their weapons, nor those who beg for mercy, their hair loosened
and their palms joined, nor fugitives", declares Äpastamba (II.5.10.11).
They spare also "those who have lost their horses, their chariots or their
weapons" (Gaut., X.I8). They do not use barbed or poisoned weapons
(Baudh., I.18.10)rBut this little war code, where one also finds rules
relating to the distribution of booty (Gaut., X.20-23) and precepts upon
how to engage in combat (Vas., III. 17-19), touches only one part of the
attributes of the warrior caste. To the Ksatriyas, and especially to him
amongst them who is chosen to be king, belong equally the cares of
government and the mission to ensure peace amongst the subjects
by a good administration of justice. All the dharma-sütras have a more
5iAccording to Baudh., 1.10.19. 1 the cows go to the king. In his view, therefore, it is
a penalty.

--- PAGE 87 [DIRECT] ---

66 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
or less extended chapter on the official duties of the king (raja-dharma),
in which the uncontested supremacy of the Brahmin caste is affirmed.
The chapter is very short in Baudhäyana. He contents himself
with reminding the king that the taxes he levies on his subjects
are due to him only by way of payment for his doing his duty
of protecting the people (1.18.1) and with bidding him to chose a
Brahmin as his chaplain (purohita), whose advice he should follow
(1.18.7-8). The growing authority of this chaplain or confessor, and of
Brahmins in general at the courts of princes, explains why the other
authors are bound to detail these pieces of advice, of which there was
a wide variety. They are concerned with brief recommendations as to
the locating of the capital and the palace, which should include a hall
of audience (ämantrana) and a hall open to all dvijas (Äp., II. 10.25.2-13);
the appointment of functionaries charged with the administration of
towns and villages and the revenue, and those responsible for thefts
committed within their jurisdictions (Äp., II. 10.25.4-9); the rates of
duties, varying with the subject's profession (Gaut.y X.24-28,31) or the
nature of the commodity taxed {Baudh., 1.10.14); individuals who ought
to be exempt from taxation (Äp., 11.10.26.10-17; Vas., XIX.23-24);
and the king's duty to come to the aid of women whose husbands had
been killed in war (Vas., XII.20). These rules, as a whole, form an embryo
administrative code.
Finally our authors do not omit the two special functions of the king,
his special dharma: to protect—and to punish (Gaut., X.7-8; Vas., XIX.
1.8). The king must protect his subjects against external enemies, taking
command of the army and securing its victory. Further he must protect
them against disturbers of the public tranquillity, those who hinder others
from accomplishing their own duties, people who are like thorns (kantha-
ka) in society, following the metaphor which Manu later made classical.
The king must be watchful lest the subjects transgress their duties
(Vas., XIX.7). In this respect he is only the servant of dharma and the
Brahmins' auxiliary. They prescribe the penance: he must see that it
is carried out and punish the recalcitrant (Äp., II.5.10.12-16; 10.1).
Here the penalty seems like a complement to the penance. But it is really
an independent notion. The king does not intervene in order that the
culprit may be purified from his guilt, but in his capacity as judge, having
as his mission the task of protecting the community and defending it
against those whcMnjure it. That is his dharma, and the king who neglects
it can be liable to a penance himself (Gaut., XII.48). "If the king does
not punish an act deserving of punishment, the guilt recoils onto him"
(Äp., II.11.28.13). Vasistha (XIX.40-41) explains the penance which
the king and his chaplain, should perform, if he leaves the culprit un-
punished. The right to punish is considered the essential prerogative

--- PAGE 88 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
67
of the king. The only passage of the dharma-sütras in which the king
is compared to a god is that which deals with the right of punishment
(Vas., XIX.48. cf M.t V.93). He is free to fix the nature and extent of
the punishment as he thinks fit, for his decision is inspired above all
by temporal considerations. He acts in the interests of the community.
However we get the impression that the dhcirma-sütras wish to guide
him in this duty as in others. They do not fail to remind him of the Brah-
mins' immunity. According to Gautama (VIII. 12-13), that immunity
is practically total: a Brahmin, he says, ought not to be beaten, nor put
in irons, nor condemned to a fine, nor banished (from the village or the
realm), nor censured, nor abandoned. Other authors content themselves
with exempting him from all corporal punishments. However grave
his crime he cannot be punished with death. The heaviest punishment
that may be imposed on him is banishment. Baudhäyana, however,
permits the king, before banishing him, to brand him on the forehead
with a sign which recalls the crime he has committed. Gautama himself
(XII.47) provides for branding. Äpastamba (II.27.17) allows the Brahmin
culprit (who has killed, stolen, etc.) to be blinded (but the commentator
understands merely that he should be blindfolded...).
Next, the dharma-sütras furnish principles for determining the punish-
ment to be inflicted. Before giving sentence, says Vasistha (XIX.9) the
king must take account kkof the place and the time (when and where
the crime was committed), the functions, the age, and the associations
(of the culprit) and of the part of the body of the victim which has been
struck", if it is a question of blows or injuries. For Gautama (XIII.51-52)
the sentence must be framed with an eye to the status of the criminal,
the force he used, the nature of the crime and the fact whether or not
he had relapsed into crime. Pardon could be granted on the unanimous
advice of an assembly of men learned in the Vedas. Äpastamba gives
the spiritual preceptor, the officiating priest, a snätaka, or the king the
right to intercede for an accused if he had not committed a capital offense,
in order to obtain a commutation of the penalty. But our authors are
capable of going further and. for certain crimes, they detail the nature
and the amount of the penalty. Thus Gautama (XII.8-14) gives a schedule
of fines for insulting people, the amounts varying with the varna of the
offender and that of the person insulted. The same author (XII.15-16)
likewise fixes the amounts of fines for theft. It is eight times the value
of the object if the thief is a Südra. doubled if he is a Vaisya, and doubled
again (thus amounting to 32 times the value) if the theft was committed
by a Ksatriya. As a general rule the penalty increases with the status
of the culprit (Gaut.' XII. 17). The same author gives another schedule
of fines for damages caused to crops by straying animals. The rate varies
according to the animal (XII.22-26). Thus parallel to the scale of ^ins

--- PAGE 89 [DIRECT] ---

68 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
and penances there arose a scale of purely penal sanctions, an embryo
of criminal law, as we understand it, whereby the State deters individuals
from committing crimes.
Nevertheless, we cannot establish a line of demarcation between
religious sanction and penal sanction. At times they seem to have been
cumulative. Thus Äpastamba provides banishment for the dvija who
commits adultery with a Südra woman (II. 10.27.8). Sometimes the two
sanctions seem to have been mutually exclusive. On this subject we
seek in vain for a generalisation. Yet Vasistha declares (XIX.45), "Crimi-
nals who have been punished by the king are purified and go to heaven,
like virtuous people who have done good deeds" (cf. A/., VIII.318),
thereby admitting that the chastisement administered by the king avails
as a penance. Again, we find in all dharma-stttras (Vas., XX.41 ; Baudh.,
II.1.16-17; Äp., 1.9.25.4-5; Gaut., XII.43-45) a provision according to
which the thief (of gold belonging to a Brahmin) who voluntarily comes
before the king and confesses his crime, carrying a club or a stake on
his shoulder, is purged from the sin of the theft as soon as the king has
struck him a blow with the club, whether he dies on the spot or survives.
This provision, like that of Vasistha cited above, passes into Manu
(VIII.314-316,318). "Whether he is killed or pardoned, he is purified;
and if the king does not strike him the sin recoils upon the king" (Gaut.,
XII.44-45; Baudh., II. 1.17). The religious law and the secular law thus
interpenetrate each other. The two domains are never clearly distingui-
shed. However, the rules of penal law occupy little space in the dharma-
sütras. They are not arranged systematically, as are sins and penances.
The topic was plainly secondary and accessory so far as our authors
are concerned. We have every right to presume that Hindu princes
exercised their right to punish without waiting for the sütra-käras'
precepts on that subject! What we have in front of us are the Brahmins'
earliest efforts to provide rules for the chiefs justice, which up to that
point must have been arbitrary or customary in character, and to inte-
grate it within their already learned system for expiation of sins.
Another function of the king, an essential attribute which is also a
corollary to his duty to give "protection", is to arbitrate differences
between his subjects on matters which did not come within äcära. Disputes
in the realm of private law form what is generally called vyavahära
(business). Here again the topic does not interest our authors directly;
it arises exclusively from duties bearing upon the king's conscience.
Organisation of justice is his concern alone : it is his: justice. Apart from
that, the control of such disputes belong to custom properly so called,
usages observed amongst the people in their transactions. The king's
only course is to refer to the customary rule and to pass sentence against
the party who has infringed it.

--- PAGE 90 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
69
Now ordinary custom, the breach of which does not constitute a sin.
is foreign to the teaching of dharmci. But just as our authors were brought
to concern themselves with the law which really belonged to the king,
namely the punishment of criminals, they are led to advise the king in
his exercise of the other important prerogative of his, namely the right
to put an end to private differences. Hence we have certain rules, not
however very numerous, on the composition of the tribunal, on the
choice of judges, on the modes of proof, and on procedure in general.
Amongst approved means of proof the first place is naturally occupied
by the evidence of witnesses. All our authors devote at least some sütras
to the subject. Gautama actually devotes a chapter to it (XIII). The
witness must take an oath before deposing. He must be reminded of
the torments that await him in the other world if he does not tell the
truth. False evidence is in any case punished by a public admonition
and an even graver sanction. As once with courts in Europe, the evidence
of a single witness will not normally suffice. In principle as many as three
are required (Gaut., XIII.2). The witness, questioned by the judge, is
bound to reply on pain of a penal sanction (ibid., 6). Äpastamba (II.
5.11.3) is the only writer to mention, alongside witnesses, ordeals (dixya)
as a means of proof. But he does not describe them, and he does not
explain what their probative worth is. The subject is regulated by custom.
Vasistha (XVI. 10.14-15) is the only one to speak of title deeds (likhita,
written evidence) in connection with the proof of property. He seems
not to admit the evidence of witnesses in the context unless written
evidence is lacking or the deeds produced by the parties are in mutual
contradiction. We would be wrong to rely on the silence of the other
dhanmi'SÜtras on this topic as evidence of their antiquity relative to Vasis-
tha. They must have known of title deeds. If they keep silent about
them it was because the topic comes within the province of the customary
law.
The rules of procedure are naturally the same in civil suits as in criminal.
However, certain differences are Vo be observed. In civil cases witnesses
tendered by the parties should be beyond suspicion of partiality towards
either side. They should be selected from among individuals who are
irreproachable and worthy of being believed by the judge (Gaut., XIII.2;
Äp., II.29.7). According to Vasistha (XVI.30) a witness should belong
to the same caste as the party on whose behalf he appears: "Women
should testify for women, dvijas of the same rank for dvijas, honest
Südras for Südras; and men of lower castes for those belonging to the
lower castes" (cf. M., VIII.68).52 In a criminal case, on the contrary,
no objection can be raised to a witness (Gaut., XIII.9). On the other
hand Gautama (XIII.27) and Vasistha (XVI.3) seem to suggest that
52But the preceding sütra would appear to contradict this rule.

--- PAGE 91 [DIRECT] ---

70 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the king cannot act ex officio except in a criminal matter. The rule is
not formally expressed until the time of the dharma-sastras. It is a rule
which implies a juridical quality well worthy of note.
The dharma-sütras allot very little space to these procedural rules.
But, just as the Brahmins are called to assist the king in his judicial func-
tions and even to replace him in those functions, it is inevitable that such
topics, marginal to the essential preoccupations of our authors, should
gradually take and keep the attention of professors of dharma. Visnu
has more detailed rules than Gautama on oral evidence. He devotes a
special chapter to written evidence and four chapters to ordeals.
Our Brahmins were originally even less interested in the regulation
or determination of disputes than they were in the methods to be followed
in hearing and disposing of the cases. Such regulation belonged entirely
to the temporal sphere and was governed by custom. Baudhäyana is
practically silent on this sphere. In fact, as Gautama in particular says
(XI.20-25). the rule must be found out from the practices of countries,
of castes, of corporations, and of families. The king must thus enquire
about the practices in vogue amongst authorised representatives of
the groups of society, and deduce from them by analogy or inference
the proper solution of the case submitted to him (Gaut., XI.20-24).
However, the same author adds that in difficult matters where the solution
is doubtful, the king should take counsel with the Brahmins and make
a decision conformable to their advice (ibid., 25). And so we find Brahmins
occupying themselves with vyavahära, or disputes between individuals.
We grasp that, in order to ease their own mission as well as the king's,
the authors of the dharma-sütras must set forth rules to be followed
for the solution of the most common cases. The result is that the civil
law carved itself a place alongside and, as it were, in the margin of dharma.
It was still a little place, where the most diverse propositions succeeded
each other with no order at all. Thus Gautama, the richest (or, should
we say, the least poor?) in this class of rule, deals successively with com-
pensation in cases of theft;53 money-lending (maximum rates of interest,
limits to the accumulation of interest, different species of interest, etc.)
(X.29-36); then acquisition by possession alone (length of time, things
susceptible of being acquired in this way, exceptions in favour of certain
persons) (XII.37-39); debts which should be paid by heirs (XII.40-41);
the liabilities of a depositary, or a borrower, or of a purchaser where
the object has been löst (XII.42)—the whole intermixed with rules of
a penal character.
Vasistha and Äpastamba are much more brief. The first devotes several
53The king must secure the restitution of the stolen object. Otherwise he is liable to pay
its value out of his own coffers (X.46-7), a rule which survived at least in theory into the
early British period.

--- PAGE 92 [DIRECT] ---

INDIAN SOCIETY 
71
sütras to the servitude (or easement) known as right of passage, fixing
the width of the path involved (XVI.11-12), to the means of proving
title to land and to acquisition by possession (XVI.16-18), then to debts
which can be recovered from heirs (XVI.31). Äpastamba is content
to lay down certain rules relative to leases of farms, the responsibility
of herdsmen, and compensation payable when uncontrolled cattle do
damage. Our authors naturally take an interest in the most common
causes of litigation. That is why rules concerning agriculture, cattle-
breeding, and landed property are relatively numerous. Hence
also the rules about loans and deposits, the two contracts typical
of a society still subject to a closed economy. But certain of these provi-
sions already witness the exercise of a juridical mind. They are set down
in a form which can be recognised as scientific. We may take some sutras
from Gautama as examples. "One becomes owner by succession, pur-
chase, partition, taking possession, and finding. One must add for the
Brahmin acceptance of a donation, for the Ksatriya conquest, and
for the Vaisya or the Südra labour" (X.39-42). Or again, "The property
in an asset is acquired by him who has possessed it for ten years under
the eyes of the true owner, provided the latter is not deprived of reason
or become senile (bäla). Nevertheless the goods of srotriyas,54 ascetics,
or officers of the king cannot be acquired by prescription" (XII.37-38.
Cf. Vas., XVI. 16-18). One reads in Äpastamba (II. 11.28.1): "If the tenant-
farmer cannot produce any fruit from the soil, he must pay the owner
the value of the harvest which the land could have produced". It is evident
that our authors are well aware of other rules of the same kind and that
they proffer nothing more than a selection, leaving to custom what really
belongs to its sphere. Civil law, henceforward, is none the less grafted
onto the study of dharma and is to be developed considerably in later
literature. Visnu contains a long chapter (196 "verses") on topics of
civil and criminal law, followed by a special chapter (43 "verses") on
the recovery of debts. But, as with the old dharma-siitras, the rules follow
without any order, and with no apparent connecting link between them.
They do not aim to cover the whole field of private law.
This analysis of the dharma-sutras shows that the substance of the
little treatises is already quite complex. Their authors are above all
keen to teach members of the higher varnas their äcära, or religious
custom, along with practices of an expiatory and purificatory character.
But they touch law properly speaking only in an indirect and accessory
manner, whether in connection with institutions having a bearing on
äcära, or in connection with the duties of the king. However, they already
contain the germ of what will later have all the apparent characteristics
of law-giving. 1 say 'apparent" because, if the rules which they extol
54Learned Brahmins, thoroughly versed in the Vedas (and observing their rituals).

--- PAGE 93 [DIRECT] ---

72 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
appear to have been borrowed from custom, their method nonetheless
implies a selection, always and exclusively consisting of advice, which
they give in order to secure that superior order of things which it is their
mission to proclaim, but which it can never be their business to impose.

--- PAGE 94 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER IV
THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS: THE MANU-SMRTI
IT IS generally agreed that the great treatises on dharma, as closely attached
to smrti as to the dharma-sütras, follow, historically speaking, immediate-
ly after the latter. The name dharma-sästras is reserved for this new
category of writing. These works, the most celebrated of which are the
dharma-sästras of Manu, Yájñavalkya and Nârada, differ from the
dharma-sütras in three main respects.
1. In point of form they differ because, while the sütras are (as in the
case of Gautama) entirely in prose, or in prose mixed with verse, the
dharma-sästras are written entirely in verse, the metre, sloka (anustubh),
being that used in the two great epics, the Rämäyana and the Mahä-
bhärata. The style is less archaic and very close to classical Sanskrit. It is
no longer elliptical- It attempts to be clear, easy to comprehend.
2. As for subject-matter, the dharma-sästras deal with the same sub-
jects as the dltarma-sütras, but they are much more extensive works
and they give a much larger place to rules of a juridical character. The
sütras are concerned, above all, to lay down the duties incumbent on
members of the different castes, and confine themselves to giving several
particular solutions, or to expressing certain general principles to regulate
disputes which arose. The dharma-sästras by no means neglect the observ-
ances and practices of religion or ritual, but they undertake to give
in detail the rules which should guide the king in the exercise of his
functions. The role assumed by these subjects in the new treatises is imme-
diately apparent if one turns to the chapters where the duties of the
king are set out. including his judicial functions, and where we find
what might be called the "legislative" element. Though the sütras devote
but a small fraction of their texts to these topics, they occupy conside-
rably more than a third of the texts of Manu and of Yájñavalkya. The
dharma-sütras include rules which are developed only in the contexts
of family and succession law. As for the remainder they are quite in-
adequate and give only isolated rules, without coordination and without
plan. In the dharma-sästras, by contrast, the rules intended to assist in
the administration of justice are methodically classified, studied under
a fixed number of heads. There we find a branch of the science of dharma
which is tending to disengage itself from the others, and to be envisaged
as an autonomous discipline.
3. The dharma-sütras form a part of the kalpas belonging to Vedic
73

--- PAGE 95 [DIRECT] ---

74 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
schools. They have close connections with the grhya-sutras and the
rituals of the respective schools, prolonging and completing them. They
are essentially manuals intended for Brahmins belonging to a carana,
having in mind the teaching which should be given to students. Their
authority, at least originally, does not extend beyond fairly narrow
circles. Moreover, they contain little or no philosophical speculation.
They profess to be nothing more than treatises written by ordinary mortals
and based on traditions of the Sages, including the practices of those
who are versed in the Vedas and observe Good Custom. Äpastamba
and Gautama recognise this expressly. Äpastamba laments occasionally
the vices and "weakness" of men "of late times", and Gautama inveighs
against those who would wish to imitate some of the irregular activities
of the Ancients, whose subsequent disgrace was only prevented by
their generally high level of virtue. The dharma-sästras, on the other
hand, arrive surrounded by legend attributing a mythical origin to them.
They purport to be the Word of Brahma, gathered by demigods or
Sages, and transmitted in an abridged form to our days. At the same
time they bear no relation to any school of the Veda in particular. They
evince no preference for any particular ritual. They are fully detached
from the grhya-sutras. They appear to be works which are specially
and uniquely devoted to the study of dharma. As a result the rules which
they prescribe are authoritative for all the Äryas, and no longer limited
to the circle of any carana.
The dharma-sästras evince then not only a widening of the teaching
of dharma, both in its content and in its importance, but also a specialisa-
tion in what is now an independent discipline.
This specialisation is marked by the appearance of special schools
of dharma, distinct from all caranas. According to Bühler, it is due to
a development of the six so-called ancillary sciences, taught nominally
as a complement to the study of any particular Veda, as if they were
ahgas (limbs) of the Veda.1 In the Vedic schools the essential object
of teaching was to provide a complete and profound knowledge of the
sacred texts. The student had first to know the samhitä, the text of the
mantras and brähmanas, the method of breaking up words and phrases,
the different kinds of recitation. This essential task must have occupied
a large part of the time devoted to study. For the ancillary sciences,
such as grammar, astronomy, ritual, and so forth, the time must have
been limited. While the ahgas amounted to brief treatises it was still
possible for the student to learn them and understand their contents
during the period of instruction. But this became practically impossible
when, due to the progressive growth of materials and the improvement
lThe Laws of Manu (Oxford. 1886). Introduction, xlvi-lvi. The idea is taken up again
by A.B. Keith. History of Sanskrit Literature (Oxford. 1928). 403-5.

--- PAGE 96 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTR AS 
75
in techniques of dealing with them, these sciences gave rise to substantial
works. This was the case with the science of grammar, which attained
a high degree of complexity as well as perfection with Pänini and his
commentators. It is also the case with ritual. The sütras dealing with the
latter amounted to treatises of an imposing bulk. Thereafter the members
of Vedic schools must have faced a choice between two methods: either
they could learn by heart all the Vedic texts of their school, with the
Vedähgas, without trying to understand what they learnt, or they could
resign themselves to learning and studying only a certain number of
those treatises. Students who chose the first method became, as Bühler
says, living libraries, but they were unable to use the learning which
they carried within them.2 Those who opted for the second method
could become scholars in the science of ritual, of grammar, or of astro-
nomy, but they could not rival the former class in verbal knowledge of
the sacred texts. Consequently the Vedic schools had to lose their high
authority as centres of intellectual life for the Äryas. and they were
supplanted by special schools in which only one science was taught.
This specialisation is not a recent phenomenon. It goes back to the
distant past. Very early, even before historical times, some sciences
became detached from the course of studies of the Vedic schools, and
were taught in special schools whose teaching was accepted as authorita-
tive everywhere. One such school was devoted to grammar, a science
particularly esteemed amongst the Hindus, who applied their philoso-
phical talents to it at very early period and excelled in it. No surviving
grammatical treatise belongs to any Vedic school. The sütras of Pänini,
which belong to the class of ahgas and go back to the sütra period (fifth or
fourth century B.C.). are accepted by all schools. Similarly for astronomy:
the oldest treatises which survive show no relationship to the Vedas
or Vedic schools, apart from their being attributed to some rsis or des-
cendants of a rsi.
In what concerns dharma. the fact that the Vedic schools as late as
those of Äpastamba and Hiranyakesin possessed dharma-sütras proves
that this subject continued longer than the others to be a part of the
courses of the caranas. However, certain dharma-sütras themselves
show that there already existed special schools of dharma in their own
times. Vasistha (III.20) and Baudhäyana (I.1.8) enumerate amongst
individuals capable of forming a parisad, (i.e. a meeting qualified to
propound a rule where the formal texts were silent), "he who recites
Precisely the same dilemma was experienced in the Land of Israel by the first century,
and developed there and in Babylonia' in the next four centuries amongst Jewish scholars.
The expounder of the Law required the services of a Tanna\ whose task it had been to
memorise, but not to expound, maxims and propositions embodying the sacred learning.
B. Gerhardsson. Memory and Manuscript (Copenhagen. 1964). [trs.]

--- PAGE 97 [DIRECT] ---

76 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
dharma (dharma-päthakay\ along with "him who knows the angas".
This shows that at the time of Vasistha and Baudhäyana, there existed
people who were already devoted to the study of dharma in general
and who knew more than one dharma-sütra—otherwise it would have
been sufficient to call to such a parisad kkhe who knows the angas''. Special
schools of dharma, and perhaps even special manuals, must have existed
in the time of the sütras. As soon as dharma was studied independently
and methodically as a sästra (discipline), the imperfections and gaps
in the sütras could not have failed to make themselves evident. The
very importance and abundance of the topics which they embraced
must have led the study of dharma to become detached from the mass
of Vedic studies and constitute an autonomous discipline in itself.
However the role which Brahmins played as the king's councillors,
a role which grew with time, especially in judicial administration, deman-
ded that questions of juridical significance should be submitted to a
much more complete and systematic development. Thus schools of
dharma came into existence just as already there had arisen schools in
which nothing but grammar or astronomy was studied. The name dharma-
scistra can conveniently be reserved for treatises composed in such schools,
in contrast with the dharma-sütras that appertained to Vedic schools.
But we must note in passing that the word dharma-sästra is often
applied to the dharma-sütras, since they too had as their object the dis-
ciplining of students in dharma. On the other hand it is not utterly impossi-
ble that the oldest dharma-sästras were composed in the form of sütras.
If we could not have attributed to particular Vedic schools the dharma-
sütras which have come down to us in isolation, such as those of Gautama
or Visnu, they would have had to be placed with the dharma-sästras.
Thus it is really only a question of a convenient nomenclature. As far
as the commentators are concerned the two kinds of work have equal
authority.
We are bound to add to Bühler's explanation for the appearance of
dharma-sästras certain factors of a social character without which the
success and the development of this new kind of literature would be
hard to understand. It is possible that, as N.C. Sen-Gupta thinks,3 a
need made itself felt in post-Vedic society for some law-statement in
the largest sense of the word, to safeguard the cultural unity of all those
elements in the population which claimed a part in Brahminical tradition.
That tradition was a heritage from Vedic times, but was profoundly
changed by contact with non-Aryan cultures. The authors of the dharma-
sütras struggled to define it and to preserve it, fighting against practices
which they considered to be aberrations. But their influence was practi-
cally confined to the narrow circle of the Brahminical schools, and each
^Evolution 
of Ancient 
Indian Law (Calcutta. 1953). 15.

--- PAGE 98 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
77
school codified for its own purposes what it held to be the law of the
Äryas. The authors of the dharma-sästras want to substitute for these
fragmentary and limited pictures of Indian society, or even to superim-
pose upon them, a new picture gathering together all characteristics
and offering, as it were, a synthesis of the dharma-sütras. We might
suppose that the Hindu élite which remained faithful to its Vedas reacted
to historical circumstances, such as the formation of the great empires
or even the expansion of doctrines subversive to its own, by becoming
aware of the community of beliefs and rituals which, in spite of local
variations, united them all. It is just this awareness of a community
o£ culture which can account for the appearance of the dharma-sästras.
Those works could well offer some kind of code of Indianness.
The dharma-sästra literature, which could have commenced after
the era of the sütras, is very rich, for it did not come to an end until the
ninth century A.D., by which time the earliest surviving commentaries
must have appeared. Those which enjoy the highest authority and are
generally regarded as the oldest are those of Manu, Yäjnavalkya and
Närada.
THE MANU-SMRTI
The Manu-smrti or Mänava-dharma-sästra, which we call the Code
of Manu.-is much more celebrated than any other smrti. As a source
of dharma it is classed in India at the head of all smrtis, immediately
after the Veda. It has enjoyed the same prestige in further India, in
Champa. Cambodia. Indonesia—and has followed the Indian civilization
everywhere, even if not always in Brahminical forms.
It is also amongst the first Sanskrit works to be translated into a Euro-
pean language. Sir William Jones' translation (Institutes of Hindu Law
or the Ordinances of Manu...)was published in Calcutta in 1794. after
Sacontalä or the Fatal Ring (1789. 1792) by the same translator, and
the Bhagavad-Gîtâ and the fables of the Hitopadesa translated by Charles
Wilkins (1785-1788). A second edition appeared in Calcutta and London
two years later, in 1796. This translation, a most meritorious work,
remains the basis for all later works on the Manu-smrti, save the most
recent. Another English translation was commenced by Arthur Coke
Burnell and finished after his death by Edward W. Hopkins, the celebrated
specialist in the epics, and was published in 1891 in the Trübner Oriental
Series. The best and unquestionably the richest in references is that
of Georg Bühler (called The Laws of Manu) published in 1886 in the
Sacred Books of the East collection, where it appears as Vol. 25. He
provided an important preface on the different problems raised by the
work attributed to Manu. Finally a new English translation was provided

--- PAGE 99 [DIRECT] ---

78 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
by Gangänätha Jhä. along with a translation of Medhätithi's commentary
and followed by a collection of numerous extracts from other commen-
taries. The five volumes, in several parts each, with three volumes of
copious notes, appeared from Calcutta between 1921 and 1929.
The Manu-smrti was translated into German by Hüttner in 1797,
and Julius Jolly provided a translation of Book VIII and the beginning
of Book IX in the Zeitschrift für vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft (vols.
3-4).
A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, pupil of A.L. Chezy, the first holder
of the chair of Sanskrit at the College de France, published in 1833
a French translation called Lois de Manou under the auspices of the
Societe Asiatique. This remained for long the only one in that language.
It was reproduced in 1841 in the collection of sacred books of the Orient
published by Pauthier, and was thereafter translated into Portuguese.
It has often been republished and was for some time available in a popular
edition. "It is generally exact and faithful, certain errors of detail apart,
and it moves at an elegant pace", says Strehly, but, "for the ease of
non-Indologist readers", he adds one could wish for "a more coherent
commentary, with much more information". G. Strehly, in his turn,
published a new translation in 1893 under the title Les Lois de Manou
for the Annales du Musee Guimet (it is vol.2 of the Bibliotheque df etudes).
The French translator had previous versions at his disposal, and he
notes, where appropriate, how they interpreted the passages in question.
The commentary is less sober than that of Loiseleur-Deslongchamps.
But there are no references to other dharma-sästras or to the dharma-
sütras, and this leaves a considerable superiority with the work of Bühler
referred to above.
1. Analysis of the Manu-smrti
The work has a total of 2,694 slokas or couplets, and is divided into
twelve Books (adhyäyas, "readings").
In Book One the Great Sages (maharsi) approach Manu and ask him
to tell them the dharmas of all the castes k*for you are the only one who
knows the effects, the true nature, and the object of this universal order
established by Him who is self-existent (Sväyambhü or Brahma), un-
knowable and unfathomable" (I.3).4
Manu replies and describes the creation of the world by Brahma
and his own birth, as issue of Brahma himself by way of Viräj. Manu
in his turn created the ten Great Sages (amongst whom we notice Vasistha,
Bhrgu and Närada) and from them came as issue seven other Manus,
charged with the task of successively creating and recreating the world
4[The French original here was taken from G. Strehly's version.]

--- PAGE 100 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
79
during the alternate periods of creation and destruction of the cosmos
called "periods of Manu" (manvantaras).
Manu received from Brahma the content of the dharmasästra. He
taught it in his turn to the ten Sages. He then ordered Bhrgu to recite
it from one end to the other, "for this Sage has learnt it entire from me"
(1.60). Bhrgu takes up the tale and continues it till the end, saving the
rare interruptions due to questions put by the rsis. He gives the names
of the six Manus descending from Manu Sväyambhü. Each one during
his period created and protected created beings. That gives him the
opportunity to tell of the division of days and nights for the gods and
for men. and the length of the four ages (yuga) of which one Manu-
period is composed. In the course of these ages dharma declines. Likened
to a bull, it has four feet in the first, but it is progressively deprived of
one foot in each of the following ages. The life of men goes on diminishing
also, and their duties change. For the protection of the world the Most
Resplendent one has assigned distinct occupations to the members
of the four vamas born from his mouth, his arms, his thighs and his
feet. There follows praise of the Brahmin (1.92-101), later praise of the
sästra of Manu. The Book ends with a table of contents of the whole
work (1.111-119).
This first book, which is but an introduction—yet how imposing it is!
—does not correspond to anything to be found in the dharma-s'utras.
Only the first chapter of the Visnu-smrti offers a remarkable analogy to
it. On the other hand, the five Books which follow deal with the same
matters as the ancient treatises and in the same order—or disorder—in
which the majority of them (notably Gautama) rejoice.
Book Two. after explaining the sources of dharma, lists the first sams-
käras, from birth to initiation, and fixes the point at which each varna
should be initiated, etc., sets out in detail the conduct proper to a Brahmi-
nical student, namely his duties towards his preceptor (his spiritual
father), and how he should receive his instruction and connected matters.
The three following Books are devoted to the second stage of the
life of the dvija in which he takes a wife and become a householder.
Book III commences with marriage: the qualities required of a spouse,
the eight forms of marriage, which of them are authorised.for each
varna and what religious effects are attached to each of them. Next
we find precepts on the duties of the spouses, next a series of verses on
the respect due to women. Manu expresses in passing (III.51) his rejection
of the sale of a daughter by her father. Next he enjoins upon the house-
holder the performance of the five daily sacrifices, called the great sacrifices
(mahä-yajha), for "he who is diligent in performing sacrifices sustains
all this (world), animate and inanimate" (III.75). Thence we pass to an
eulogium of the status of householder, superior to the three other stages

--- PAGE 101 [DIRECT] ---

80 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of life because they subsist by means of him (III.77-78). Next come the
rules relating to hospitality. Like the dharma-sütras, Manu regulates
minutely the duties to be rendered to the guest according to his varna,
the moment when he should arrive, and the quality of the offering to
be made to him. The remainder of Book III (122-286), more than a half,
is devoted to the monthly ceremony of sräddhas in honour of deceased
relatives, which consists essentially in the offering of rice-balls called
pindas and in a feast to which, in principle, the only proper guests are
learned Brahmins who represent the manes. Manu relates who, in default
of Brahmins, can be invited to sräddhas, and who, on the other hand,
should by no means be allowed to attend (III.150-167), and how the
offerings themselves should be offered.
Book IV explains the way of life and the means of subsistence permitted
to a Brahmin who has left his studentship, or to a householder, regulating
his behaviour in minute detail, including how one should answer the
calls of nature (IV.48-51, 56). There follow precepts about the Brahmin's
first duty, the study of the Veda and the teaching of it, on the solemnity
with which the period of study should be commenced (upäkarman)
and that with which it comes to an end (utsarga), the places and the
circumstances in which one should give up recitation of the Veda. After
this Manu returns to rules of conduct, notably to presents which it is
desirable to accept and those which should be refused. The remainder
of the book contains rules relating to diet. There is a long list of foods
which are impure by reason of the identity of the one who offers them
or are soiled by impure contact (IV.205-220). In conclusion, a fine
encomium of charity (IV.227-235) and of the practice of virtue appears,
since man will not have any companion in the other world but the fruit
of his actions (IV.238-243).
The first third of Book V is devoted again to precepts about food.
There is a long list of foods forbidden to Brahmins and to dvijas by
reason of their natural impurity (V.5-26). There are cases when one is
permitted to eat meat (only in the course of a religious ceremony; one
should not kill an animal except with a view to sacrificing it) (V.27-56).
There follow numerous rules (90 slokas out of 169) on the impurity
caused by the death or the birth of a relation or by an impure contact,
and also on the means of purification. The last verses speak of the duties
of women. They are perpetually incompetent and "should never do
anything on their own sole authority, even in their homes" (V.I48).
"The authority of the husband derives from the gift (of the girl by her
father)" (V.I52). She should remain faithful to her husband even after
his death. "A virtuous woman who remains chaste after her husband's
death goes to heaven, even if she has no child, just like Brahmins who
remain chaste from their youth and die without posterity" (V.I59-160).

--- PAGE 102 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
81
Book VI, the shortest by far (97 slokas), deals with the last two phases
of life, the stage of the hermit and that of the mendicant monk. Manu
comes back at the end to the announcement about the superiority of the
stage of the householder (VI.89-90).
The five Books which we have rapidly analysed hardly contain anything
new by comparison with the earlier literature. Bühler, who has made a
minute comparison between the text of our dharma-sästra and that of
the dharma-sütras which have come down to us,4a concludes that more
than three-quarters of the verses contained in these five Books have
precepts corresponding to them in the dharma-sütras. However, Manu
is no mere copyist. Most often he amplifies or develops the rules in the
sütras. He insists upon some more than others. The portions who have
no point of correspondence with the sütras are principally philosophical
digressions, which disclose speculations quite foreign to the authors of
those sütras.
In the three following Books (VII to IX) our dharma-sästra differs
profoundly from the dharma-sütras and suggests no more than a distant
resemblance to them. Here his originality is to be found.
After setting out the duties of the anchorite and the mendicant monk,
and finishing the study of the four stages of life, Manu conforms to the
plan of the dharma-sütra of Äpastamba and other dharma-sütras. In
Book VII, he attacks the topic of räja-dharma, the study of the duties
incumbent upon the king. First we have a eulogy of punishment, which
alone keeps the ruler's subjects to their duties (VII. 17-25). Then Manu
sets out the qualities which the king must cultivate and the vices which
he should avoid (VII.30-53). Precepts follow on the choice of ministers
and ambassadors, and on the choice of site for the capital and fortresses
(VII.54-76). Manu next tells of the laws of war. With the dharma-sütras
he recalls that an Ärya never strikes an enemy on foot (while he is himself
in a chariot), nor a suppliant, nor him who surrenders at discretion,
nor non-combatants, nor him who is already fighting with another
adversary, and so forth (VII.91-93). For the protection of his realm the
king should appoint a chief for each village (gräma), a chief for ten
towns, and a chief for twenty, a chief for a hundred, a chief for a thousand,
each chief being subordinate to his superior in the hierarchy (VII. 115-117).
Manu fixes the reward to be provided for these functionaries, as well
as the minimum salary to be given to palace servants. Several verses
follow on the taxes which the king may levy (VII. 127-137). One is reminded
in passing that a learned Brahmin cannot be obliged to pay any taxes.
Then Manu passes to advice on policies to be followed with regard to
neighbouring states and on the conduct of war when that could not be
4*See also G.B. Beaman. On the Sources of the Dharmasästras of Manu and Yäjnavalkya
(Leipzig, 1895).

--- PAGE 103 [DIRECT] ---

82 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
avoided "for when two adversaries are locked in combat there is no
certain means of knowing on which side victory or defeat may emerge"
(VII. 199). "A well-instructed prince should try to triumph over his
enemies by conciliation, corruption, or division, employed together or
separately—never by warfare at the outset" (VII. 198). But if these three
expedients have not succeeded, then, assuming that his preparations
are adequate, he should fight to vanquish his enemies. Manu lays down
the policies to pursue with regard to conquered countries. He extols
alliance rather than annexation: "While acquiring gold and territory
the king does not prosper as much as he would if he had made a faithful
ally, who could become powerful in the future" (VII.208). On the other
hand the laws and customs of neighbouring countries must be respected
by the conqueror, just as they are (VII.203). The book ends setting out
the king's timetable, from when he should take his midday meal to his
bedtime.
Only a quarter of the matter dealt with in Book VII can be traced
in the dharma-sütras. It is evident that here Manu encroaches upon the
domain of politics rather often. This is not an absolutely novel feature,
but it is much more frequent in Manu than in the dharma-sütras. It is a
manifest sign that the Brahmins have acquired an important place in
the king's councils.
Books VIII and IX demonstrate an even greater originality than
Book VII, as much by the arrangement of the topics as by the novelty
of the matters taken up. The two Books are devoted to the regulation
of disputes in private law so far as they appertain to the justice given
by the king. While the dharma-sütras propounded rules for the solution
of only certain of the most common disputes that the king would have
to know, Manu tries to embrace all the types of litigation that could
possibly arise, and to enumerate the different types of dispute. At the
beginning of Book VII (4-7) he declares that all disputes brought to
the royal court are reducible to eighteen heads. These are the celebrated
eighteen märgas ("paths, roads") or vyavahära-padas ("footings of
'business'") which constitute for India the first attempt at methodical
classification of contentious business, the first systematic proposition
of law. These eighteen "heads" are : (1) non-payment of debts; (2) deposit;
(3) sale by one not the owner; (4) relations between partners; (5) recovery
of things given; (6) non-payment of wages; (7) breach of regulations of
certain associations and corporations; (8) resiling from sale; (9) disputes
between the owner of a herd and his herdsmen; (10) disputes relating
to the boundaries of villages and properties; (11) assault; (12) insults
by word of mouth; (13) theft; (14) acts of outrage; (15) adultery and
rape; (16) duties of husband and wife; (17) partition (of heritage); and
(18) gambling and wagering.

--- PAGE 104 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SASTRAS 
83
As Jolly has shown, this classification is reasoned; the topics are not
thrown together by chance but in a certain order, corresponding to the
economic conditions of the period.5 The first nine mär gas are really
concerned with obligations. The non-payment of debts, or rather the
non-repayment of money lent, naturally occupies the first place because
of its great practical utility. Then comes the title "deposits", a contract
of great importance as a result of the insecurity of property, etc. The
tenth deals with disputes about boundaries, that is to say with actions
about immovable assets and the right of property itself. The five following
"heads"—assault, insult, theft, etc.--concern crimes against the person.
All that concerns the law of the family is contained in the two penultimate
mär gas.
In the course of Book VIII precepts relating to the first fifteen "heads"
are propounded. As an introduction several rules are set out on the
composition of the tribunal, which should be presided over by a Brahmin
in the king's absence; on the duty of the king to protect handicapped
people, children, women without families, and the sick; on the part
which comes to the king from lost property which is found, and from
treasure-trove. Along with the first märga we are also given the rules
relating to proof. If the debtor denies a debt, the burden of proof falls
on the lender (VIII.52). Something is said about proof by witnesses;
the persons who may be entertained as witnesses; which penalties strike
those who perjure themselves, both in this world and the other. In default
of witnesses to discover the truth, the judge can take recourse to the
oath and to ordeals. Apart from the oath Manu mentions only the
water and fire ordeals (VIII. 114-115). It is also ä propos of the recovery
of debts that Manu enumerates the weights and measures used in such
transactions and fixes the interest which should be paid; he deals with
securities, viz. pledge and suretyship, with acquisition by prescription,
and with what vitiates consent.
In some confusion at the end of the book are thrown a series of rules
on points which have not found ä place under the fifteen rubrics previously
dealt with. Here are found rules concerning the king's duty to fix the
prices of merchandise; here also are rules for the rates of tolls payable
according to the nature of the vehicle, and about the seven kinds of
slaves and the servile status in general.
Book IX begins by expounding the duties of husband and wife, which
forms the sixteenth märga. Manu insists on the need to watch women
and to keep them in lifelong tutelage. He discusses at length the question
which has already preoccupied the authors of dharma-sütras, namely to
whom belongs a son: to him who has begotten him or to the husband
of the mother? He concludes that the son ought to belong to the last,
?J. Jolly, Hindu Law and Custom (Calcutta, 1928), 35.

--- PAGE 105 [DIRECT] ---

84 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
just as, barring a special agreement to the contrary, the harvest belongs
to the owner of a field and not to him who scattered the seed (VIII.31-56).
In passing he prohibits the husband's sale of his wife (VIII.46). There
follows another discussion on the practice of niyoga, which Manu
prohibits after having seemed to admit, it (VIII.57-58). He concedes,
however, that the brother of a bridegroom-to-be is bound, if the latter dies,
to marry his betrothed (VIII.69-70). He deals next with the cases where
a wife could be repudiated or replaced, and he condemns the practice
of paying a bride-price, even if the father is a Südra (VIII.98). The title
of "duties of husband and wife" ends with the principle of indissolubility
of marriage (VIII.101-102).
Only about a quarter of the slokas contained under this head can
be found in the dharma-sütras. By contrast there are relatively few new
rules in the portion devoted to partition of heritage, which forms the
seventeenth märga. Manu deals first with partition amongst children,
with the preferential share for the eldest son, with the share to be given
to the son of a putrikä (daughter appointed by her father to provide
him with an heir in the absence of male issue of his own), with the adoptive
son (dattrima, which is identical with the dattaka), and with the ksetraja
(born of a woman authorised to bear a child by someone other than
her husband). Then he passes to partition amongst sons born of different
women. He lists and defines the twelve sorts of sons, the legitimate son
(aurasa) and those who are qualified to replace him in the funeral cere-
monies. The rules about devolution of the inheritance in the absence
of sons are outlined succinctly (IX.185-187). In default of natural heirs,
the inheritance passes to the king, unless it is the estate of a Brahmin
(IX. 189). Rules follow relating to assets which are the property of the
wife (strl-dhana) and to the devolution of them. Some verses on the
grounds for disqualification from succession, and a few more on the
possible prolonged indivision of an estate bring the title of partition
to a close.
The eighteenth and last märga gives rise to only ten slokas (IX.221-231).
Manu condemns and prohibits gaming and wagering which, he says,
"are nothing less than manifest theft" (IX.222). One verse (IX.233)
seems to express the rule of res judicata, and the following provides a
right of appeal to the king from all unjust decisions passed by a minister
or the judge.
The penalties and penances prescribed for four of the Great Sins
(murder of a Brahmin, the drinking of spirituous liquor, theft, sexual
intercourse with the guru's wife) and several precepts on the king's
fulfilling his role as giver of justice bring to an end the exposition of the
royal administration of justice.
The king is further bound to maintain internal order by seeking out

--- PAGE 106 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
85
the "thorns" of the kingdom, criminals and wrongdoers of all sorts.
He must have public places watched, punish the officials or neighbours
of any place where a crime is committed, and deter the commission of
crimes by the imposition of appropriate penalties. A series of additional
rules follows (IX.252-293), almost all of them foreign to the dharma-
sutras, the majority relating to criminal law properly so called.
The king's mission is then evoked in a series ofslokas where his activity
is compared to that of the gods and the elements (IX.303-312). But
immediately afterwards the status of Brahmin is extolled, for even if he
is ignorant or employed in lowly avocations, he must always be honoured
as the highest divinity (IX.313-322).
Book IX finishes (326-336) by summarily listing the duties of the
Vaisyas and the Südras. For these last "obedience towards Brahmins
[who are] learned in the Vedas, householders and renowned [for their
virtues]: that is their supreme duty, which will lead them to bliss" (IX.334),
and it will enable them to be reborn in a higher caste (IX.335).
Book X deals with the mixture of varnas and the means of subsistence
allowed in times of distress, when the normal rules cannot be followed.
The dharma-sütras deal with these questions either ä propos of marriage
or ä propos of succession. They list one or two groups of castes called
"mixed" and confine themselves to describing rapidly their origins and
sometimes their modes of subsistence. They add a few precepts about
the alteration effected on the status of individuals born of a mixture of
varnas at the end of a certain number of generations, and also the signs
whereby an individual of low birth may be recognised. Manu takes up
all these questions, but he goes into much greater detail and introduces
a large number of names of mixed castes unknown to the sütras. The
rules which follow on the occupations proper to the castes and their
means of subsistence in times of distress bring, by contrast, little which
is quite new.
The first forty-three verses of Book XI deal with rules about the gifts
to be made to persons in need and especially to Brahmins, and on the
performance of sacrifices, for which Brahmins lacking the necessary
objects are permitted to take them from others. The remainder of the
book is devoted to penance and to expiation. Those who have not expiated
their misdeeds are reborn with deformities and diseases varying according
to the nature of their acts (XI.48-53). Hence the necessity for purification.
Sins (pätakas) are then classified according to their gravity into Great
Sins (mahä-pätakas), Secondary Sins (upa-pätakas), sins involving loss
of caste (jäti-bhramsa-kara) or likely to consign the sinner to a mixed
caste (sahkari-karana), sins rendering one unfit to receive donations
(apätra), and sins merely involving taint (malävaha). Appropriate
penances (präyascittas) are provided for all these kinds of sins, with

--- PAGE 107 [DIRECT] ---

86 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
much precise detail. Manu attaches a purificatory effect to confession and
repentance. "In so far as a man guilty of a sin confesses it spontaneously
he is absolved from it, as a snake (sheds) his skin; to the extent that his
spirit regrets his evil deed, to that extent his body is freed from that
wrongdoing" (XI.229-230). But above all, men are absolved from their
misdeeds through austerities, and Manu understands by austerity (tapas)
the performance of the task allotted to each one according to his caste
(XI.235-245). The Book ends by noting the mantras which should be
recited as a penance when the sin has remained a secret.
The whole of Book XI faithfully reflects the spirit of the dharmasütras.
The portion relating to penance and the classification of sins finds a
close analogy in the Visnusmrti.
Book XII, the last, resembles the first in its philosophical and religious
character, which gives it a feature in common with puräna literature.
It commences by classifying the acts which result in different human
conditions : it explains how the three essential qualities (the gunas) of a
soul, namely goodness (sattva), passion (rajas) and ignorance (tamas)
influence transmigration.6 It sets out the penalties which await in the
other world those who commit wicked acts, and also which await them
in future lives. By contrast it enumerates the acts whose performance
will procure supreme bliss. For Brahmins the best means of attaining
final bliss are austerity and the sacred learning, i.e. knowledge of the
Veda and of dharma. This is why Manu introduces several slokas here to
indicate those who are authorised to decide the rule to be followed in
any case which is doubtful or not provided for (XII. 108-115). This is
the only passage in Book XII which has a corresponding passage in the
dharmasütras. The last verses recall the divine origin of the treatise
revealed by Bhrgu, and exalt the Supreme Male (Purusa) whom "some
call Agni, others Manu, I ord of Creatures, and others Indra, others
the vital breath, others the eternal Brahman" (XII. 123), into whom is
absorbed only a man who "by means of his (individual) soul recognises
the (universal) soul in all beings" (XII. 125).
This analysis shows what a large scope is to be found in the Manusmrti,
which condenses a vast literature. It is a veritable encyclopedia of religion,
morality, politics, and law. Nearly half the work exceeds the framework
of the dharmasütras. Dharma is entirely detached from the teaching of
ritual, and its study is founded directly on that of the Veda in the largest
sense of that word, namely the philosophical and social concepts of the
Hindu world. The teaching of the dharmasütras is found therein in its
entirety, but it is encased in an exordium and a peroration which curiously
heighten its tone and significance, and it is intermixed or interpenetrated
óOn the three gunas see L. Renou, L'Inde classique, s. 1432. Käne, V, 1357. S. Rädhä-
krishnan, Indian Philosophy (London, 1941), II, 262-6, 310-1.

--- PAGE 108 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
87
by a philosophy far removed from the normal dry approach of the sütras. *
This method of presentation by itself would be enough to place the Code
of Manu in a class apart.
But for us its originality resides above all in the important place
assumed by questions of a juridical character and in the attempt at
classification represented by the eighteen märgas. The scope of royal
justice is also delimited, doubtless still with a certain amount of hesitation,
and disengaged from questions properly appertaining to religion. Yet
there is no point at which the latter loses its rights, since it is always
with reference to dharma that Manu advises the king how to conduct
litigation.
This is the moment to observe that if the work was intended to reach
a much larger audience than the dharma-sütras reached, it was none the
less addressed essentially to Brahmins and to Ksatriyas, the latter re-
presented above all by the king—that is to say to the ruling and educated
elements of the population.
2. The Origin of the Manu-Smrti
The mythical character which the Manu-Smrti attributes to itself makes
research into its true origins rather difficult. The Manu who revealed
the Law of Bhrgu is descended from Brahma, the Self-Existent, and he
is himself the progenitor of humanity, which has taken his name (manava-
man). His nature enables him to participate in the divine and the human
condition. The Rgveda names him amongst the most ancient sages, and
a celebrated passage presents him as the father of a family dividing his .
wealth amongst his sons. In the smrti itself (VII.42) a verse refers to him
as a king who obtained sovereignty by humility. As the father of humanity
it is natural that he should have been regarded as the ancestor of kings,
and as an offspring of Brahma he is regarded as the mediator between
the Supreme Being and the race of men. Likewise he appears as the
discover of sacrifice, and especially of funeral rites. The revelation of
rules on which the social and moral order is founded is understandably
attributed to him. From Vedic times onwards he is seen as the first
legislator. This function remains especially attached to him in the coun-
tries of further India, whose indigenous codes take shelter under the
authority of his name even though their precepts have basically little
common ground with those contained in our Manu-smrti.
To attribute the work to Manu was to evidence the unparalleled
authority which it enjoyed, but not to reveal its sources to us. No one
believes now that the Laws of Manu are really primitive. Many passages
show that the author, far from having been the first legislator, had
numerous predecessors. He reports controversies on many subjects,
even contradictory opinions, just as the dharma-sutras had done before

--- PAGE 109 [DIRECT] ---

88 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
him. He expressly says that "some" authorise something, and "some"
forbid it. Further some passages allude to the existence of a "dharma-
sästra", a term which could equally designate the dharma-sütras. He
might even be referring to Gautama and Vasistha. Finally there is an
allusion to heretical sects, atheists who reject the authority of the Veda,
which could well have Buddhists in mind, which at any rate suggests a
period well after Vedic times. It is unquestionable that the work pre-
supposes a rich previous literature on dharma.
How is the birth of the Manu-smrti to be accounted for? Max Müller
suggested in 1859 (A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature) a hypothesis
which, taken up again by Bühler, is still of fairly general currency in
Europe. The Manu-smrti was (so it was said) a refashioning of an ancient
dharma-sütra originally attached to the kalpa-sutra of a particular Vedic
school, the Mänava school, a subdivision of the school of the Maiträ-
yanlyas devoted to the study of the Black Yajurveda. The existence of
such a school is attested by tradition, which attributes to the äcärya
Manu the composition of srauta and grhya ritual-manuals. Only the names
of these ritual works were known in the time of Max Müller, but the texts
have since been recovered. Moving from the existence of a Mänava-
grhya-sütra and taking his stand on the traditional opinion according to
which every Vedic school possessed its complete collection of kalpa-
sütras, Max Müller concluded the existence of a Mänava-dharma-sütra.
completing the srauta- and grhya-sütras of the same school. There was
a confusion between Manu, the human author of the sütra, and Manu,
the mythical ancestor of the human race. After the formation of special
schools of dharma, the Mänava-dharma-sütra was chosen for preference
over all others because of its attribution, and it served (so it was said)
as a basis for the composition of the sästra which has come down to us.
The ingenious hypothesis of Max Müller, who relied on little more
than the similarity of the names, seemed at first to be confirmed by
later research. It was possible to attach to particular schools the isolated
dharma-sütras which have survived. Gautama is an example. We have
traced out the grhya-sütras and srauta-sütras corresponding to certain
dharma-sütras and shown the links which permit us to see in them all
the work of a single school. At the same time we have grasped the tendency
of the dharma-sütras to separate themselves from the manuals of ritual,
and to be treated as independent works which are authorities for all
caranas. Above all we have had the case of the Visnu-smrti, which (as
we have seen) arose from a dharma-sütra peculiar to the katha school
of the Black Yajurveda. In the hands of a Vaisnavite, it became trans-
formed into a work of divine inspiration. So it appeared quite plausible
that our Mänava-dharma-sästra had as its origin nothing but the dharma-
sutra of that Mänava school which produced those srauta- and grhya-
sütras.

--- PAGE 110 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
89
Most unfortunately, the later discovery of the ritual-manuals of that
very Mänava school, as well as other works of the same school, tended
to contradict rather than to confirm Max Müllefs hypothesis, as Bühler
was bound to admit. There are actually serious divergencies between
some rules in the Manu-smrti and the manuals of the Mänava school,
the details of which are given by Bühler. The agreements which can
also be shown prove nothing, because the rules were common to the
manuals of all schools. Though Bühler persisted in- believing in the
existence of a dharma-sutra of the Mänava school which must have served
as the basis for our smrti. it seems better to give up the hypothesis for
want of evidence to support it. Between the Mänava-grhya-sutra and the
Mänava-dharma-sästra there is nothing in common but the names.7
But Max Müller's hypothesis has not been altogether fruitless. In
order to prove the existence of a dharma-sutra of Manu earlier than our
smrti Bühler and other Indologists have tried to find whether there was
not, in the sütra literature, allusions to or borrowings from a treatise
on dharma attributed to Manu. These researches led to a double con-
clusion. First they have established that there existed, from a very ancient
period, a floating mass of adages or precepts in verse form which formu-
lated a rule of law or a moral duty. These precepts, dharma-slokas.
analogous to the maxims (brocards) of Europe but in a popular and
spontaneous style, are found in the sütras. Sometimes they are anonymous,
but sometimes they are attributed to Manu : manur abravit "so said
Manu". Here, no doubt, Manu is the mythical progenitor of humanity,
and the rule is attributed to him only because his authority is immemorial
and beyond discussion. There was certainly no question of an individual
author for them. It is however possible that the founders of special schools
of dharma, the dharma-päthakas whom the sütras mention, had them-
selves launched these aphorisms which summed up in a happy formula
solutions which they had reached. In this way a rich stock of current
maxims grew, covering little by little the diverse fields of juridical activity.
It expressed immemorial custom and the reflections of the Sages, in either
case fathered on Manu, who was the first to have revealed the Law to men.
If thereafter someone collected all these isolated precepts and classified
them methodically following a dharma-sutra framework, he would have
put together a work bound to enjoy high authority. No subterfuge was
necessary to attribute it to Manu, since the compiler had contented
himself with collecting "the sayings of Manu", that is to say the rules
about which everyone (i.e. nearly every Ärya) was agreed.
This is a continuing debate. L. Renou, Les ecoles vediques (Paris, 1947). 194-5 and
the bibliography at the note. A recent commentator, S.C. Banerji, cited above at p. 22, n. 3,
at pp. 39-44 recognises the force of the arguments supporting the existence of a Mänava-
dharmasütra but holds that they are not decisive. See Käne, I2, s.13, p.149.

--- PAGE 111 [DIRECT] ---

90 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
That just such a work did exist from an early period is the other con-
clusion to which the researches undertaken by Bühler. Hopkins, and
other Indologists have led. Beside that floating mass of maxims attributed
to Manu one finds, in the sütra literature as well as in the puränas and
the Mahäbhärata, passages which suggest that their authors were acquain-
ted with a treatise owing its authority to Manu. The Mahäbhärata
possesses a good number of verses in common with the Manu-smrti.
Bühler thought that not less than a tenth (260) of Manu's verses could
be found in the epic (especially in Books XII and XIII), where they
were sometimes even given a better reading, but where they appeared
without any significant order. It is natural to wonder whether the author
of the Mahäbhärata and that of our smrti did not utilise a common
source, which must have been the original Mänava-dharma-sütra. But
the most conclusive evidence for the former existence of a Manu treatise
earlier than our smrti is to be found in Vasistha's dharma-sütra. Many
passages in this text attribute opinions to Manu which are much too
complex and elaborate to have been conveyed in the form of adages.
Moreover Vasistha actually quotes the text of a "Manavam", that is
to say a treatise by Manu.
However, if these opinions agree more often than not with those of
our smrti they also differ occasionally from them. And then again the
citation of the Mänavam is in prose, and not in sloka metre as is the smrti.
So it seems well established that there existed in Vasistha's time a dharma-
sästra attributed to Manu, but written partly in verse and partly in prose,
close to but not identical with the Manu-smrti. Following Max Müller's
hypothesis. Bühler sees this as the dharma-sütra of the Mänava school.
But it is possible to see it merely a^jth^jKXKJuct of a special school of
dhamicL independent of every Vedic school, for we know that such schools
did exist at ä very early period. The name of Manu was attached to this
treatise because, as we have seen, it completed the traditional teaching of
the sütras with the aid of precepts attributed to the first lawgiver.
Thus the original of our Manu-smrti does not have to be a dharma-sütra
of any Vedic school, and particularly of the Mänava school, chosen
simply because of the similarity of the name of its founder with the
Manu of mythology. One can see it rather as an attempt, perhaps the
first, which a school of dharma made to formulate, apart from all caranas,
the general rule of conduct for Äryas. Yet this first Mänava-dharma-
säst ra was probably close in form and in substance to the dharma-sutras,
and it remains likely that one of them supplied him with his framework.
As the citation in Vasistha shows, it was written, just like the sütras,
partly in prose and partly in verse. The Manu-smrti itself has preserved
in the details of its lay-out many traces which can hardly be explained
by any reverence for the traditional ground-plan of those sütras. The

--- PAGE 112 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
91
place occupied by certain topics within the total composition, however,
is not intelligible except upon the footing that they already occupied
the same position in the sütras.
It is not possible to settle the contents of the early treatise which was
the foundation of the Manu-smrti. A minute comparison such as Bühler
made between the text of that smrti and those of the dharma-sütras is
helpful in that it shows what a considerable contribution the editor of
our version of Manu must have made. But similarity or analogy with a
dharma-sutra could not be a sure criterion for distinguishing a prototype
from that which followed it, once it became uncertain whether the
Manu-smrti really was a reworking of a sütra belonging to a particular
Vedic school. From the very beginning it ought to contain a great many
rules foreign to the sütras, particularly in the portions relating to the
duties of the king and to the administration of justice, for these must
have been developed extensively by that time. But the original work
undoubtedly underwent numerous additions and profound alterations
before it could reach its present form. For example, the celebrated
division of the eighteen märgas seems to have been introduced all at once,
for it is unknown to the ancient authors who refer to the original treatise
and also to the Mahäbhärata, the composition of which seems virtually
contemporary with that of our Manu-smrti.
Could there have been several successive versions of the work attributed
to Manu? We have noticed that the Manu-smrti itself purports to be
revelation not direct from Manu, but as propounded by the great Rsi
Bhrgu, a revelation of the law of Brahma as he, Bhrgu, heard it from
Manu's mouth. Then Manu says, at the beginning of the first Book,
that after having received the law from Brahma, he taught it in turn to
ten Great Sages created by him (1.58). So the Manu-smrti ought to be
attributed not to Manu, but to Bhrgu, or at least ought to be considered
to be the Bhrgu (i.e. Bhärgava) recension of the Mänava-dharma-sästra.
Some later texts in India do actually refer to it in those terms, and an
inscription in Champa belonging to the end of the twelfth century does
the same (an inscription to which we shall return). Are we to think that
there were many recensions of the fundamental text? What then is the
place occupied by our smrti in this series of recensions? According to
the prose introduction to the Närada-smrti (in the text edited by Jolly).
Manu composed a dharma-sästra in 100,000 slokas, divided into 1,080
Books, which were successively reduced to 12,000 slokas by Närada.
8.000 by Märkandeya (another of the ten Sages), then to 4,000 by Sumati.
the son of Bhrgu. So our text, which has only 2,685 slokas would be only
the last link of a long chain.
But the Närada-smrti"s own composition proves that it belongs to an
epoch well after that of the Manu-smrti. The legend appearing in it

--- PAGE 113 [DIRECT] ---

92 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
seems to have drawn upon a very old tradition echoed in one purclna1
(the Bhavisya) and in the Mahäbhärata, according to which Brahma
composed an enormous work in 100,000 chapters (or slokas) on dharma.
ar theft and käma, a work which was reduced to more and more modest
proportions by a succession of Sages. This legend in turn could have
had its origin in the actual conversion into a dharma-sästra of that
considerable quantity of aphorisms of which we have already spoken.
The author of the Närada-smrti took possession of the legend and
deliberately adjusted it in order to increase the prestige of his production.
The digests of the Middle Ages also contain citations taken from a
Brhan-Manu ("Great Manu") and a Vrddha-Manu ("Old Manu"),
which are not to be traced in the Manu-smrti. But the opinions expressed
therein betray a much more developed juridical technique than is to be
found in our Manu. On the contrary, these works look as if they were
amplified versions of the Manu-smrti. The version of Bhrgu seems to
have been the earliest, and the surviving text looks like the first of the
dharma-sästras \ that is, it was the first treatise entirely versified in form,
in which the study of dharma is propounded as a science (sästra) in
its own right.
3. The Date of the Manu-Smrti
The most serious argument in favour of the relative antiquity of the
Manu-smrti is furnished by the as yet imperfect character of its rules on
procedure and private law. If one compares its rules with those of the
dharma-sütras, then with those of the other dharma-sästras, one arrives
at the impression that they are somewhat more explicit than the former,
and yet not a little inferior to the latter. As far as procedure is concerned,
the Manu-smrti sti\\ gives more attention to the moral aspect of the judge's
function than to a demonstration of the trial, which is described much
more clearly and with more detail in the codes of Yajnavalkya and Närada.
In that respect it is to be classed immediately after the dharma-sütras,
with which it agrees particularly in not mentioning written plaints and
written evidence, as well as in the brevity of its rules on ordeals. As in
the case of certain dharma-sütras, the silence about documents is not to
be explained by any suggestion that Hindus were unaware of writing,
but simply that the author of the Manu-smrti was still, in spite of every-
thing, imbued with the spirit of the sütras. He attached more importance
to morality than to technical aspects, and only interested himself to a
moderate degree in questions relating more to custom than to dharma.
Many passages of Manu do imply that documents were in general use,
especially in commercial transactions, and the work points to the existence
of a developed maritime commerce. If the Manu-smrti is silent on the
use of documents as a means of proof and differs in this respect from
•See F. Laszlo, Die Parallelversion der Manusmrti im Bhavisyapuräna (Wiesb., 1971).

--- PAGE 114 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
93
the other dharma-sästras, that is best explained by the supposition that
the author knew only the dharma-sutras.
Not less significant is the brevity of the rules about ordeals. Among
the dharma-sütras only Äpastamba recommends as a general rule the
employment of the "divine proof (divya), and he gives no details.
On the other hand, the codes of Yajnavalkya and Närada describe five
kinds of ordeals and Närada, in particular, enters into the details of the
rules which must be observed. The Visnu-smrti itself expatiates sufficiently
long on ordeals. Once again the silence of the dharma-sütras does not
imply that ordeals were unknown in ancient India, but simply that the
authors considered that this topic should be left to custom. The authors
of the dharma-sästras, on the other hand, wanted to fill the gap left by
their predecessors. Yet they were probably satisfied to bring various
local customs into a system which was gradually completed. Thus, the fact
that the rules in Manu are placed midway between those of the sütras and
those of the other codes which are in verse is one more reason for holding
that the Manu-smrti was the oldest of the surviving dharma-sästras.
Finally, in its treatment of litigation before the king, which is a new
section, the Manu-smrti's inferiority relative to works of the same class
is evident in various ways. After the attempt at classification into 18
märgas, the rules of law are often ill arranged. Twice, at the end of the
eighth and the ninth Books one finds a series of precepts which are isolated
and could have figured under one or other of the eighteen "titles" of
litigation. Further, the rules of a juridical character are constantly
intermixed with moral exhortations, a characteristic which disappears in
the smrtis of Yajnavalkya and Närada. Certain "heads" of litigation
are treated in a most summary fashion and give rise to the enunciation
of only particular solutions, insufficient to enable us to deduce a general
principle from them. Another gap to be observed in the Manu-smrti
is the almost complete absence of legal definitions. On all points the
superiority of the codes of Yajnavalkya and Närada is evident. The
inferiority of the Manu-smrti can only be explained on the basis that it
was compiled at a period when interest in questions of a juridical character
was indeed awakened, but when the study of them had not yet reached
the degree of perfection demonstrated in the other smrtis. This seems
to be the strongest argument to bring to the aid of the opinion of practi-
cally all Indologists that the Manu-smrti is older than the other dharma-
sästras.
So it is possible to accept as true the statement made in the work
itself that the version of Bhrgu was the first and by far the most ancient
of the versified versions of a primordial work attributed to Manu/But
if the relative antiquity of the Manu-smrti can be established plausibly
within juridical literature as a whole, the task becomes much more

--- PAGE 115 [DIRECT] ---

94 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
delicate when we attempt to fix an historical date for its composition.
Sir William Jones attributes to the Manu-smrti a very high antiquity,
between 1280 and 880 B.C. Chézy, followed by Loiseleur-Deslongchamps.
makes the compilation go back to the thirteenth century B.C., principally
because it makes no mention of the Buddha "who, according to common
opinion, lived about a thousand years B.C." (!) (from the Preface to
Loiseleur-Deslongchamps' translation) and because of "the antique
simplicity" of its religious doctrines. Monier Williams (in his Indian
Wisdom, 1875) more judiciously proposes the fifth century B.C.
In our days opinion has settled against so early a date. Burnell takes
note of the age of the philosophical doctrines appearing in Manu and
presumes that Book VII, concerning as it does politics and the proper
conduct of kings, is an addition made for the advantage of some powerful
king and patron of letters, attributing the inspiration of the work to the
founder of the Cälukya dynasty, Pulakesi, who reigned in the middle of
the sixth century A.D.8 AS their inscriptions show, the kings of this dynasty
did actually take the title Mânavya, which can be explained by the custom
of princes to take the gotra of their purohitas. Though the reasons behind
this hypothesis are ingenious they have not convinced all scholars.
Manu's mention of Yavanas and Sakas, that is to say the Greeks
(or Indo-Greeks) and the Scythians, amongst the "mixed castes" leads
Bühler to think that the work could not have been composed before
the third century B.C. But the presence of these words in a single couplet
(X.44) can hardly be conclusive of the date of the whole poem, especially
when Bühler himself admits the possibility of an interpolation for the
word Pahlava which he finds in the same list! The dharma-sütra of
Gautama also mentions Yavanas as one of the mixed castes, and Bühler
does not hesitate to excise the passage as interpolated.
Our only relatively solid landmark for the dating of the Manu-smrti
is Medhätithfs commentary, the Manu-bhäsya, the most ancient of the
surviving commentaries if we exclude that of Bhäruci, which Medhatithi
used but which is much less rich in incidental information than Medha-
tithi.9 Medhatithi himself, about whom we know hardly more than his
name, lived probably in the second half of the ninth or the beginning of
the tenth century. He frequently cites readings and opinions of his
predecessors (including Bhäruci), but he seldom names them, being
content to refer to them en masse as "the ancient commentators" (dram-
tana). From sucfi* meagre data Bühler arrives at the conclusion that
«Introduction (p. xxvii) to his translation of the Manu-smrti. Ordinances of Manu, com-
pleted and edited by E.W. Hopkins in 1891.
9Derrett. A newly-discovered contact between Arthasästra and Dharmasästra : the
role of Bhäruci'. Z.D.M.G.. 115 (1965). 134-152; 'A jurist and his sources: Medhatithi's
use of Bhäruci'. Adyar Library Bulletin. 1966. 1-22. [trs.]. Kane, I2, 568-71.

--- PAGE 116 [DIRECT] ---

THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
95
the Manu-smrti could not have been composed later than the second
century A.D. One can only admire the boldness of his reasoning. It is
true that he appeals to other arguments which he regards as subsidiary,
especially the dates of the compilation of the Närada- and the Brhaspati-
smrtis, works held to be later than Manu. But the dates presumed for
these two smrtis do not rest on any sure criteria. It is true that inscriptions
begin to make some reference to a work or treatise attributed to Manu
by about the end of the second century, but the allusions are vague
enough, and no one can say for sure whether they really refer to our
smrti. The oldest certain citations of our text do not appear until the
works of the great religious teacher and mimämsaka Sarikaräcärya.
whose age is not far antecedent to Medhätithfs.
Thus, failing all external evidence, we cannot assign the composition
of the Manu-smrti to any date more nearly approximate than between
the era of the sütras (itself vague enough) and that of the earliest commen-
tary upon it. Indologists have been virtually forced into the position
of adopting Bühler's opinion and agreeing to place the work between
the second century B.C. and the second century A.D. The rediscovery
of the commentary of Bhäruci has had little effect in principle, since
however much older Bhäruci may be than Medhätithi there remains
no sure method of assessing the gap that must exist between the earliest
surviving commentary and the text of Manu himself.10
It is to the same period around the beginning of our era (perhaps
broader still, three centuries on either side, according to Winternitz)
that Indologists are more or less agreed today to place the composition
of the Mahäbhärata. Between the epic and our dharma-sästra there
is an undeniable relationship. The immense epic poem purports also
to be a religious, moral, and political encyclopedia for the Hindu world.
Indeed it also can be classified as smrti. Like the Manu-smrti it aims to
broaden sacred learning, to free it from the monopoly of the Vedic
schools, and to render it accessible to every educated Hindu. Further,
the Mahäbhärata has many verses in common with the Manu-smrti.
and it actually cites the sästra of Manu. It is true that Indologists are not
in agreement as to the relative date of the epic and the Manu-smrti.
Bühler, following Hopkins, believes in the relative antiquity of the epic,
and he sees in the passages common or virtually common to both the
borrowings by both authors from a common source, namely the Mänava-
dharma-sutra of which he supposed the smrti to be a reworking. On the
other hand. Käne pronounces in favour of the seniority of Manu, arguing
that while the Mahäbhärata several times names Manu as the author
of a sästra. it is not named by Manu once. Whatever might be the outcome
of this discussion the two works certainly belong to the same epoch in
>»[trs.]

--- PAGE 117 [DIRECT] ---

96 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
point of style, vocabulary and character, to such a degree that research
designed to determine the age of the epic will serve indirectly to throw
light on that of Manu. It follows that the rather adventurous hypothesis
of Bühler gains a certain amount of support. Whichever of the two works
preceded the other, it is clearly within those two extreme dates, two or
three centuries B.C. and A.D., that most probably both the epic and the
Manu-smrti must have been composed. That is a vague approximation
indeed, but we must be content with it in default of any precise reckoning.
It is worth adding that it was precisely in the course of the first centuries
of our era that Indian culture took a firm root in the countries of further
India, and the Hinduised kingdoms of Fou-Nan, Champa, and the Malay
Peninsula appeared.11 This "Hinduisation", due solely to the prestige
which Indian civilisation exercised on the populations of Southeast
Asia, and by which they have remained characterised ever since, implies
that culture in India itself had at last ceased to be the monopoly of res-
tricted circles of cultivated Brahmins, and had found an expression in
works which had effectively popularised it. Likewise it is just round
about the commencement of our era that one is tempted to place that
awareness of a community of culture of which we have spoken above,
and which is betrayed by the appearance of the dharma-sästras. The
Code of Manu carried with it, through the majesty of its tone and the
breadth of topics treated in it, the radiation of a triumphant civilization
which could not fail for long to exercise a seductive influence outside
India itself.
nG. Coedes. Lcs Etats hindouises d'Indochine et d'Indonesie (Paris. 1948). 36-40.

--- PAGE 118 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER V
THE OTHER DHARMA-SÄSTRAS
AMONGST THE dharma-sästras whose texts have come down to us in full
only two, namely those of Yajnavalkya and Närada, deserve to be placed
close to Manu in point of the importance of their contents and form.
But numerous other dharma-sästras have enjoyed an authority equal
to these works of front rank and have contributed equally to the for-
mation of the traditional system. Some, by no means the least important,
are known to us only from quotations given by commentators and
compilers of digests.
1. The Yäjnavalkya-Smrti
The Yäjnavalkya-smrti was published and translated into German by
A.F. Stenzler in 1849. Editions have multiplied since that date, as have
translations.1 The text arrived at with the aid of the surviving commen-
taries does not suffer from too many variants having an appreciable
difference in meaning.
Like Manu, Yajnavalkya is a mythical personage. He figures amongst
the most illustrious Sages of the Vedic age. In the Mahäbhärata and in
other sources, he purports to have received the White Yajurveda as a
revelation from the Sun, and likewise the Satapatha-brähmana and
certain other sacred texts. The Brhadäranyaka-upanisad shows him in
the aspect of a celebrated theologian. He is also credited with a well-
known treatise on yoga.
Though the author of the dharma-sästra affirms his identity with one
of the Vedic Sages (III.110), no relationship can be made out, whether
in substance or in form, between our text and the works attributed to
that Sage. On the contrary, we can see in the dharma-sästra some con-
nections with the White Yajurveda, which leads Jolly to think that the
smrti arose from a dharma-sutra belonging to a school attached to that
Veda. Stenzler previously drew attention to the correspondence which
exists between certain passages in the smrti and the domestic ritual-
manual of one of these schools. Jolly notes that "evident" connections
also exists between the Yäjnavalkya-smrti and the grhya-sütra of the
Mänava school which itself belongs to the Black Yajurveda. He further
concedes that the author, whilst taking a dharma-sutra of the White
•As a general rule the relevant bibliographical data are to be found at the end of this
volume.
97

--- PAGE 119 [DIRECT] ---

98 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Yajurveda as his basis, must have utilised other dharma-sütras and also
our Manu as well. In the end there seems to be no reason whatever for
holding that Yajnavalkya had any particular dharma-sütra as his point
of departure, or for relating it to any particular Vedic school. All that
we, with Kane, can guess is that the author of the smrti could well have
belonged to a school of the White Yajurveda and that in consequence
the mantras of that Veda and the ritual-manuals relating to it were more
familiar to him than other Vedas and sütras.2
Whoever might have been its author, the dharma-sästra of Yajnavalkya
early acquired a great notoriety, attested by the numerous commentaries
written round it. One of those commentaries, the Mitäksarä, acquired
during the British period and as a result of the system of legal adminis-
tration in the Anglo-Indian courts the status of a quasi-legislative instru-
ment in certain contexts. The result was as J.C. Ghose puts it, that
"If it is true that all Hindus bow before the authority of Manu, we must
not forget that in reality they are ruled by the Code of Yajnavalkya".3
This fame is explained by the intrinsic qualities of the work. Of all
the smrtis which have come down to us that of Yajnavalkya is assuredly
the best composed and appears to be the most homogeneous, even
though it may have been made up of elements borrowed from various
sources. We are struck, especially if we have just read Manu, by the sober
tone, the concise style, and the strictness with which the topics are
arranged. We find none of those lyrical flights which are, after all, the
literary beauty of Manu. The cosmogony which occupies practically
the whole of the first Book of Manu is entirely omitted. But there are
some digressions, of which the most curious is a description of the life
of the embryo and of the human body which is given a propos of the
duties of the ascetic, and which extends to not fewer than forty couplets
(III.69-109).4 Yet we come across no repetitions, no contradictions,
none of those "second thoughts" which make the meaning of Manu
at times somewhat less than definite. The author has obviously sought
to make his formulas as brief as is consistent with clarity: he succeeds
more often than not. There are cases where he appears to compress
two slokas of Manu into one. The result is that he reduces to one thousand
or so the 2,694 couplets of Manu, even though several topics, especially
in private law, are dealt with far more completely and in greater detail.
The work is divided into three Books (adhyäyas) of about equal
length, the first devoted generally to religious custom (äcära), the
second to administration of justice (vyavahära), and the third to penance
2The question is still open to debate. L. Renou. Les e'coles vediques (Paris, 1947). 196.
^Principles of Hindu Law (Calcutta. 1906). xi.
4There is a French translation in Renou's Anthologie sunsetite (Paris. 1947). 202-4. For
English versions see Bibliography below.

--- PAGE 120 [DIRECT] ---

THE OTHER DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
99
(präyascitta). This tripartite division, which bears witness to the author's
readiness to systematise, provides a logical classification within the vast
domain of dharma, and it has proved fundamental for the development
of commentators' expositions.
As for the material substance in it, the Yäjnavalkya-smrti is in general
very close to Manu, but it occasionally manifests a remarkable indepen-
dence. Thus it refuses absolutely to accept the validity of marriage
between a Brahmin and a Südra woman (1.56). The author does not
formally condemn niyoga (1.69). He recognises the rights of succession
of the widow and the daughter in the absence of male issue (11.135).
Some of Manu's favourite ideas are etiolated: there is a damper on the
glorification of the king, and an almost complete silence about the
privileges and immunities of Brahmins!
On the other hand, the second Book, which corresponds to Books
VIP. and IX of Manu, gives more numerous and more detailed rules,
which could conceivably have been intended to complete Manu's Code.
While in the domain of judicial proof Manu makes proof rest essentially
on oral evidence, with the two ordeals of fire and water merely mentioned,
Yäjnavalkya gives preference to documentary evidence above other
modes of proof and gives very detailed rules about the drawing up of
legal documents (11.84-94). He gives the whole law of ordeals, describing
five kinds in practically the same terms as Visnu (11.95-113). Likewise
he gives the principles regulating possession and acquisition by possession
alone (11.24-29), to which Manu makes a bare allusion. In the same Book,
Yäjnavalkya takes up in a slightly different order the eighteen titles of.
litigation propounded by Manu, but the prescriptions required turn
out to be more developed, so that these topics, which have a fully juridical
character, hold a much more important place in the work as a whole
than they do in the Manu-smrti. Good examples of this are the importance
assumed by rules relating to suretyship (11.53-54) and the regulation
of commerce (11.244-258).
The evident technical progress which the work demonstrates, as well
as the form of the whole, hardly permits a doubt that as a complete
composition it must be later than that of the Code of Manu. Yet debate
rages on the question when that composition must have been made.
Jolly proposes the fourth century A.D. at the earliest. His reason is that
the Yäjnavalkya-smrti must be placed after Manu by several centuries,
and naturally before his earliest known commentator, Visvarüpa. He
takes account also, as does Stenzler, of the knowledge which the author
seems to have had of Greek astronomy, and the use he makes in two
contexts of the word nänaka, which means a coin of a type which cannot
have begun to circulate in India until a somewhat late date. In turn.
R.G. Bhandarkar takes up an argument of Stenzler which appeared to

--- PAGE 121 [DIRECT] ---

100 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
have been abandoned, proposing to come down as late as the sixth
century. He relies on a passage in the first Book dealing with the worship
to be paid to Ganesa.5 None of these arguments has convinced Käne.
who believes that at the latest the composition of the work must be
placed in the first two centuries of the Christian era, and that it could
even have occurred as early as the first century B.C.
2. The Närada-Smrti
There are two versions of the smrti attributed to Närada, a short version
(called the Vulgate) and a longer version. The short version, which was
the first one to be known outside India, was translated into English by
Jolly in 1876. The longer version, believed to represent the original work,
was furnished by a manuscript where the text is accompanied by the
commentary of Asahäya, an author who is thought to have lived in the
seventh century. This was published by Jolly in 1885, but since the
manuscript stopped at verse 22 of section V, the text had to be completed
with the aid of the short version. Further, Jolly added under the title
of appendix (parisistam) a chapter on theft taken from an old Nepalese
manuscript. In 1929, K. Sambasiva Sastri made a new edition of the long
version, accompanied this time by a complete commentary by Bhava-
svämin, of uncertain age but generally agreed to belong to the beginning
of the seventh century.6 These two texts are very close to each other,
though there are numerous variations in wording. The order of topics
is the same.7 But we must take note that when Jolly published a new
translation in 1889 he added, by way of complement, more than a hundred
other verses which are attributed to Närada by commentators or authors
of digests and which cannot be found in the text which he edited. It
seems then that there were other versions of the Närada-smrti than
those which have survived.
As we have seen already in connection with the origins of the Manu-
smrti, the Närada-smrti purports to be a recension of the law of Manu
which is older than that of Bhrgu. According to the preface to the version
commented upon by Asahäya, which is in prose while the rest of the work
is in verse, Manu, the mythical ancestor of humanity and child of the
Self-Existent, had composed a book in 100,000 slokas and 1,080 chapters
to serve as a basis and rule for human activity. Manu communicated this
to Närada, one of the ten Great Rsis created by him, who, realising that
^Vaisnavism, 
Saivism and Minor Religious Systems (Strasburg. 1913), 148.
6This is the date adopted in the Dh. k., p. xxx. According to Burnell. a Bhavasvämin.
author of a commentary on the Baudhävana-srauta-sütra, lived in the eighth century (Käne.
I, 32).
7It is worth noting that the prose introduction to Asahäya's version is not present in
that of Bhavasvämin, nor II. 1-44. III.1-18. On the other hand we do find there the chapter
on theft, and that upon ordeals, which the editor thought were only resumes.

--- PAGE 122 [DIRECT] ---

THE OTHER DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
101
so vast a work could not be retained by mortal minds, made an abridge-
ment in 12,000 slokas and transmitted it to Märkandeya, another rsi.
He, in turn, reflecting on the shortness of human life, reduced Närada's
abridgement to 8,000 slokas and communicated them, so reduced in
bulk, to Sumati, son of Bhrgu. At last Sumati made a new abridgement
in 4,000 slokas. It was this highly condensed version by the son of Bhrgu
of the colossal work of Manu, which was brought to the knowledge of
men, the gods alone being able to read the text of Manu in its original
state. But one chapter of the first abridgement, which was devoted to
the administration of justice, namely that of Närada (the ninth), had
been preserved and was transmitted to us in the dharma-sästra that
bears his name.
We have already seen that this legend of successive recensions of an
original Code of Manu relied upon an ancient tradition, which was
known to the author of the Manu-smrti himself. However, very late
sources, notably an inscription of Champa of the end of the twelfth
century,8 describe the Närada-smrti as the recension by Närada (Näradlya-
samhitä)9 of the Code of Manu, just as they represent the Manu-smrti
as the recension by Bhrgu (Bhärgaviya-samhitä) 
of the same work.
Nevertheless the fable which the legend contains itself betrays the seniority
of the Manu-smrti over the Närada-smrti, since it admits that prior to
the "revelation" of the Närada-smrti the recension of Bhrgu was the
only one known to men.
A comparison of the contents of these two smrtis fully confirms that
Manu was the senior in age.
After the prose preface which we have just analysed, the Närada-smrti
contains by way of introduction three chapters on the subjects of general'
procedure and judicial organisation. Then come the rules relating to
control of litigation. Närada10 places them like Manu under 18 titles
or heads which correspond, apart from slight modifications, to the 18
märgas of Manu. Like Manu, Närada deals with proof in connection
with the first title, that which deals with recovery of debts, and, like him,
gives in a kind of appendix a series of rules intended to complete the
duties of the king in judicial contexts. So there is a remarkable corres-
pondence between Närada and the eighth and ninth Books of Manu
in regard to the order of treatment. Apart from that, about fifty couplets
are common to the two works, and in the numerous cases where the
two authors express themselves in a different form their opinions are
very close to each other in substance.
8L. Finot. Notes d'epigraphie indochinoise (Hanoi, 1916), 183.
9This is the name which the Närada-smrti bears in Bhavasvämin's version (which has
no prose introduction): näradiya-manu-samhitä.
10When I speak of 'Manu'. 'Yäjnavalkya', 'Närada'. and so on. I mean, naturally, the
author or compiler of the Codes attributed to Manu. Yäjnavalkva. Närada. etc.

--- PAGE 123 [DIRECT] ---

102 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
But in the Närada-smrti the topics handled by Manu are classified
or distinguished into more numerous, and sometimes even entirely new.
categories. Thus the 18 titles of litigation are subdivided into 132 rami-
fications (Int., 1.20). Manu mentions only the two ordeals of fire and
water (VIII.114-116); but Närada enumerates five, describes them at
length, and even adds two more (1.247-348). Manu distinguishes only
seven kinds of slaves (VIII.415), but Närada mentions fifteen, of which
only the first four cannot be manumitted (V.26-29). Närada classifies
assets into three types, according to the manner in which they were
acquired, and each of these types is subdivided into seven varieties
(1.44-47). Similarly the problems to which gifts can give rise are set out
under four heads which are themselves subdivided into thirty-two
sections (IV.2-3). These new classifications and sub-classifications,
unknown even to Yäjnavalkya, show the importance accorded to the
study of problems of a juridical character in the schools of dharma.
This importance stands out from one fact alone, namely that Närada
has about a thousand verses, while the second Book of the Yäjnavalkya-
smrti, which corresponds to him, has no more than 307.
On the other hand the rules of procedure, which often agree with those
of Yäjnavalkya, demonstrate an appreciable progress in the analysis of
court-work. Those which concern framing of the plaint, methods of
entering a defence, disqualified witnesses and such matters are set out
with much more detail and contain a number of additional provisions.
Närada is especially to be distinguished from the other smrtis by his
great concern for precision. Thus he gives a group of rules on juridical
capacity and on the effect of documents executed by persons under an
incapacity (1.26-42). The purchaser's exercise of his right "to resile"
( kraya-vikrayänusaya ) , that is, the freedom which is allowed him to
rescind a sale, is limited and regulated (IX. 1-7). Similarly hiring of labour
and engaging of services are dealt with at length and give occasion for
several new rules (VI).
Speaking of the Närada-smrti and emphasising its clarity, brevity
and precision, A. Barth wrote in 1876, "If we except the monuments of
Roman legislation, antiquity has not perhaps left us anything which is
so strictly juridical. I imagine that a jurisconsult would immediately
feel at home in running over these briefly formulated definitions and
precepts, disposed, as they are, according to a simple and well-conceived
plan".11 Rodolphe Dareste, the legal historian, gave his own appreciation
of our smrti and actually asked in all seriousness whether Närada "could
not have had some acquaintance with Roman law ... Why could he
not have had before him some texts of Ulpian or of Paulus? His method
of proceeding by definition and division recalls that of Gaius".12 His
"Works 
(see above, p. 51, n. 32), III, 232.
!2R. Dareste, Etudes d'histoire du droit, I (Paris, 1889), 99.

--- PAGE 124 [DIRECT] ---

THE OTHER DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
103
suggestion has little probability, but that it could have been proposed
by a scholar of such standing testifies loudly to the scientific quality of
the Närada-smrti. The frequent philosophical or moral speculations of
Manu have entirely disappeared. It is very significant that Närada deals
exclusively with the juridical portion of the dharmasästra, the vyavahära,
and leaves to one side the religious portion, sacred custom and penance.
It is true that several authors of the Middle Ages (Hemädri, Mädhava.
and Devanna-bhatta) quote verses of Närada which deal with äcära,
sräddhas and präyascittas, which shows that at their times there used
to exist works attributed to Närada which dealt with the other aspects
of dharma. But they had before them works quite distinct from our
smrti, for the text on which Bhavasvämin and Asahäya commented—
the only two commentators whose productions we have upon this
smrti—is devoted exclusively to vyavahära.
So far as his content is concerned Närada, like Manu, exalts the
function of the king, created by the gods to maintain peace and social
order. He places the accent on the personal power of the king whose
will should encounter no obstacle. If, in general, he seldom strays from
decisions laid down solemnly by Manu or Yäjnavalkya, a number of
his opinions stand out by reason of their innovative quality. This can be
very striking, as when he permits five cases when a wife may remarry
(XII.97), or when he limits or even abrogates the privilege of the eldest
son as he declares that even a younger son can take over control of the
family property if he is particularly fit to do this (XIII.5), or even when
he allows unmarried daughters a share in succession to their fathers
(XIII.50).
Such rules, and the general character of the work, led Jolly and Käne
to place its composition after the Codes of Manu and Yäjnavalkya,
perhaps about the sixth century of our era (as Jolly suggested) or between
the second and the fourth as is the opinion of Käne.
3. Other Smrtis
The list of dharma-sästras is far from coming to an end with the name of
Närada. Käne (I2, p. 304) estimates the number of these works known
to writers of the Middle Ages at about a hundred. Some survive only in
the form of abridgements, and the majority are known to us only from
quotations which the authors of commentaries and digests preserve
for us.
But we should make an exception of the Paräsara-smrti, which bears
the name of a celebrated rsi, the author of several Vedic hymns and the
father of Vyäsa, the traditional author of the Mahäbhärata. The work
is relatively short (592 verses); according to Käne (I, p. 195) it must
have been composed between the first and the fifth centuries and so

--- PAGE 125 [DIRECT] ---

104 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
could have been earlier than the Närada-smrti. It deals only with religious
custom (äcära) and penance (präyascitta), but in the fourteenth century
its commentator, Mädhava, completed it with a long digression on the
subject of judicial administration, the basic text not providing any rules
on that subject. A particularly notable verse of the text (1.24) says that
in the four Ages of the world the four dharmas successively proclaimed
by Manu, Gautama, Sarikha-Likhita and Paräsara were (or are) autho-
ritative. Paräsara does indeed declare that he expounds rules of conduct
valid in the Kali Age. But, as Kane notices (III, p. 885), a considerable
number of important institutions are sanctioned in the smrti which are
elsewhere prohibited as incompatible with the conditions of the Kali Age.
A number of dharma-sästras have been quoted so abundantly by authors
of commentaries and digests that it has been possible if not actually to
reconstruct their text, at least to determine their characters and tendencies.
Such is particularly the case with the two smrtis attributed respectively
to Brhaspati and Kätyäyana.
Brhaspati is, in the Rgveda, the name of a deity. He is the purohita
of the other gods, with whom he intercedes in men's favour. He was
thus perfectly qualified to be counted amongst the makers of codes of
dharma. The dharma-sästra which bears his name seems to have enjoyed
a considerable authority amongst commentators, from the oldest to the
most recent. Jolly gathered and classified 717 verses dealing with the
administration of justice. He provided a translation of this collection
immediately after his translation of the longer version of the Närada-
smrti. K.V. Rangaswämi Aiyahgär, took up this work later and gathered
a total of 2,400 verses of Brhaspati cited by jurists. The most numerous
relate to the administration of justice, but a not inconsiderable proportion
(more than a third) deal with the sacraments (samskäras), rites for the
dead (sräddhas) and penances (präyascittas).^ The original work thus
embraces the three branches of dharma and seems in bulk at least to
equal, if not surpass the Code of Manu.
Brhaspati follows the Manu-smrti very closely. He considers it as the
highest authority (Brh., Aiy., samskära, 13). He refers to it and quotes
it often, and in many contexts he seems to be merely a commentator
on Mariu, whose terms he explains and whose precepts he develops.
He throws new light on certain topics such as documentary evidence,
which he deals with minutely, and the regulations or by-laws passed
by members of certain local or professional bodies, the function of which
he explains (XVI 1.5-24, taking the place of Manu's three verses, viz.
VIII.219-221). At times he swerves from the decisions recommended
^Brhaspati (Reconstructed), Gaekwad's Or. Ser., 85 (Baroda, 1941). The text should
not be read without reference to the remarks of Renou in his 'Notes sur la Brhaspatismrti'.
Indo-Iranian Journal, 6 (1962), 82-102 and Etudes Vediques et Pänine'ennes, XI (Paris. 1963).
AndseeKäne, P,491-5.

--- PAGE 126 [DIRECT] ---

THE OTHER DHARMA-SÄSTRAS 
105
by Manu, especially in his favourable treatment of the rights of women
in their father's or husband's property.
If it is hardly doubtful that Brhaspati is later than Manu, his position
relative to Yäjnavalkya and above all to Närada is the subject of some
discussion. Jolly and Kane place him clearly after Yäjnavalkya, but they
see him as approximately contemporary with Närada. Rahgaswäml
Aiyarigär does not share their opinion but puts Brhaspati earlier than
both Närada and Yäjnavalkya.
Kätyäyana, like Brhaspati, is frequently cited by both ancient and
modern commentators. Fragments of his work, 973 verses concerning
the administration of justice, were gathered and published with an English
translation by Käne in 1933. Later 121 more verses on the same subject
were recovered by Rarigaswämi Aiyahgär in his edition of the Vyavahära-
nirnaya of Varadaräja.14
Kätyäyana, like Brhaspati, is named at the beginning of the
Yäjhavalkya-smrti amongst the Sages who had codified dharma. But
the smrti which we know from the jurists' citations is generally held
to be well posterior to the Code of Yäjnavalkya. According to Käne,
the author took Närada and Brhaspati as his model. He completed their
work and clarified some of their rules. He often refers to the opinion of
Bhrgu, by whom he means apparently Manu. The rules which he attri-
butes to Bhrgu are however not always to be traced in our Manu-smrti,
which discovery served as an argument for the theory of successive recen-
sions of Manu. Kätyäyana deals in considerable detail with the personal
property of women (stri-dhana). In him we see the first smrti author to
have defined the various categories of such property carefully, to have
fixed the woman's powers in respect of it, and to prescribe rules of devo-
lution to be applied to those assets when their owner died.
We have a work attributed to Kätyäyana, the Karma-pradipa ("The
Lamp of Karma"), devoted to religious custom. One may well ask whether
it is not by the author of the Kätyäyana-smrti. If that really was the case
there must have existed a vast Work passing under the name of Kätyäyana
and covering the whole domain of dharma. Jolly and Käne are in agree-
ment that the composition of his smrti must be placed somewhat later
than Brhaspati.
After Brhaspati and Kätyäyana the names most often cited are those
of Vyäsa, whose dharma-sästra, according to Käne, was contemporary
with those of Yäjnavalkya and Brhaspati, and which, to judge by the
citations, gave special attention to procedure and proof; Pitämaha.
who seems to have been an authority on ordeals; Yama; Sarikha (or
Sarikha-Likhita) to whom is also attributed a dharma-sutra: Samvarta;
14Varadaräja, Vyavahäranirnaya. Adyar Library Ser. 29 (Adyar, 1942).

--- PAGE 127 [DIRECT] ---

106 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Härita; and Angiras—to mention only those names which will recur in
the later part of this book.
It sometimes happens that several dharma-sästras are attributed to
the same mythical personage. To distinguish amongst them their authors
(or perhaps commentators) have qualified their names with the prefix
vrddha (old), laghu (small), madhyama (middle), brhat (long), and so on.
Thus besides an unqualified "Manu", which means our Manu-smrti,
reference is made to a Vrddha-Manu, or a Brhan-Manu, and likewise
to a Vrddha-Yäjnavalkya, Brhat-Paräsara, Vrddha-Kätyäyana, and
so on. These names may refer to collections of verses omitted from the
current versions, or perhaps abridgements, or even entirely independent
compositions. These compilations could go back to a relatively ancient
period, for Visvarüpa, a commentator of the beginning of the ninth
century, already knew the Vrddha-Manu and the Vrddha-Yäjnavalkya.
On the whole these texts, which are sometimes rather tendentiously
called "spurious", tend to expand, qualify or correct the law laid down
in the "genuine" smrtis of which we have spoken at length above.15
The dharma-sâstra literature continued to be produced, according to
Kane, up to the ninth or even the tenth century, that is to say well up to
the period in which the first commentaries appeared.16 Medhätithi, the
great commentator on Manu who is attributed to the ninth century,
actually says (on A/.. II.6) that in his day an author could compose a
work having as much authority as the Manu-smrti. But it seems that
what he had in mind was a doctrinal work rather than a real smrti, for
he adds that such a work would have authority only for subsequent
generations, after it had received the approbation of the sages and those
who were fully trained in dharma. That seems to have happened with
the Smrti-sangraha and the Caturvimsati-nwta, which are unknown to
commentators prior to the twelfth century. The first purports to be a
compendium (sañgraha) faithful to the views of the great writers;
the second purports to embrace the substance of the teaching of no
less than twenty-four Sages (Manu, Yäjnavalkya. Atri, Visnu. and so on)
on religious usages and penances.
i5[trs.]
16This is also the view of A.S. Altekar, Sources of Hindu Dharma (Sholapur. 1952). 20.

--- PAGE 128 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER VI
THE COMMENTARIES AND THE DIGESTS
IT IS generally agreed that the literature of the commentaries and
independent treatises followed immediately after that of the dharma-
sästras. There was no loss of continuity, and the last smrtis could well
have appeared long after the first commentaries had become available.
This concomitance of the two types of literature, and a fortiori their
overlapping, has a certain improbable element about it. One has only
to look at the status attributed to the dharma-sästras by the time of the
commentators. In that period the human origin of those works had indeed
been completely obliterated. It was an article of faith that the precepts
which they contained derived from Sages of the remotest antiquity,
and their authority was accordingly beyond dispute. They appeared as
if they were scripture, timeless, eternal; the whole of them, along with
the epics and the puränas, brought to men the voice of a tradition which
was both holy and in conformity with the order of nature. The comment-
ators and authors of juridical treatises could not imagine their role as
anything other than that of interpreters, concerned only to explain the
meaning of texts whose authenticity and religious importance they did
not doubt for one moment. So it seems more probable that a long interval
elapsed between the publication of the last works appertaining to the
smrti category and the appearance of the first commentaries. Yet at the
same time the date of composition of the dharma-sästras which are
regarded as "late" and that of the most ancient commentaries which
survive are equally impossible to determine with any exactitude. I am
on the whole inclined to think that after a period of silence, perhaps
between the sixth and the ninth centuries, a veritable renaissance of
dharma-MtevdturQ occurred. Its products began to build up from then
onwards without interruption urttil well into the nineteenth century.
This new class of literature includes two main kinds of works: the
commentaries and the treatises. The commentaries (blulsya, vrtti, vyäkhyä,
vivarana, etc.) were devoted to one particular smrti and were intended
to explain its text. As is natural enough, these came first. By contrast
the treatises (nibandhas), a form preferred by jurists from the twelfth
century onwards, attempt to embrace the whole of the smrti literature
or one of its branches; to this end they group under certain rubrics extracts
from different smrtisrelating to the same topic, but linking them together
with more or less evolved commentaries such as this arrangement of texts
107

--- PAGE 129 [DIRECT] ---

108 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
evokes. Because of the analogy presented with Justinian's Digest, the
British —perhaps Colebrooke was the first to do this—gave the treatises
the name of "digests".1 There is not really a clear line of demarcation
between the two different types of work. The commentators are usually
not content to explain simply the text of one smrti. They quote corres-
ponding passages from other smrtis. They indicate how far the texts
agree, and they try to reconcile them if necessary. The result is that
some commentaries seem almost like real digests. This is notably'the case
with the Mitäksarä, or the Paräsara-mädhavlya. These, though they
purport to be commentaries, the one on the Yäjfiavalkya-smrti and the
other on the Paräsara-smrti, are in reality sizeable compilations, making
substantial use of a range of works outside the text upon which a com-
mentary is being made.
The first interest to be derived from a study of the commentaries and
the digests is that they enable us to be better acquainted with smrti
literature. A number of dharma-sästras which were accessible in the
Middle Ages have disappeared by now and are known only by the quo-
tations to be found in these writings. Sometimes the quotations are so
abundant that there has been little difficulty in gathering them and
either reconstituting the orignal work or, at the very least, forming a
general impression of its contents. That has been the case with the smrtis
of Brhaspati and Kätyäyana. Even when these quotations were originally
taken from an author whose work we do possess, they are still useful
since they can offer significant variant readings. These variants must
have come from different versions which were once every bit as authentic
as those which have survived, but which have since been lost. Not the
least valuable profit to be obtained from the study of commentaries and
digests is that one is put on one's guard against assuming (as would
otherwise be natural) that any particular versions of the smrtis are
"original" or "primitive". In reality the text only ceased to be subject
to variants and interpolations when literature intended to interpret it
began to circulate. In this very sense one could say that the "composition"
of the smrtis was prolonged until the age of the commentaries.
But if these works really continued or took up anew the work of the
dharma-sästras, their character is profoundly different. During the
period when they were made the literature deriving from smrti was
at an end. The different sources of dharma had dried up, with the excep-
tion of sadäcära which, at a late date, appeared once again in certain
writers but with a new meaning. Thus the task was to use existing written
sources and to draw from them conclusions about the rule to be followed.
Un the preface to his translation of Jagannätha Tarkapancänana's digest (1797). The
word is already to be found in a letter of Sir William Jones to the Supreme Council of
Bengal in 1788. a portion of which is cited in that preface.

--- PAGE 130 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
109
This was indeed a considerable task in view of the mass of texts which
might be consulted and the inevitable divergencies, let alone contradic-
tions, which their comparison would bring to light and which would
then have to be resolved.
The need for unification and simplification which drove the juris-
consults of the Late Roman Empire and Byzantium to compile codes
and to proffer selected extracts from the classical jurists made itself felt
in India once the sästras had been consecrated as an inspired literature.
As long as India lived subject to its own traditions that need did not
cease to be felt. But there was a big difference from the situation in the
Roman Empire. What we have in India is a new flowering of writing,
as considerable, perhaps even more considerable in bulk than the anterior
literature upon which it was founded. True, our writers brew the same
old texts over, again and again. They repeat them, and themselves, and
they copy from each other. Yet they were none the less achieving a work
of simplification and synthesis. First of all the great number of their
sources and the variety of topics with which they dealt caused them to
multiply the divisions within the realm of dharma, each of these divisions
or subdivisions giving rise to a treatise or a chapter. Instead of the simple
tripartite division of the Yäjnavalkya-smrti into äcära, vyavahära, and
präyaseitta, we find in the Kalpataru, one of the most ancient digests
which we possess (twelfth cent.), the rules of the sacred books spread
under fourteen kändas or sections, wherein texts are collected successively
concerning the duties of the brahmacärin, those of the householder,
daily observances, offerings to the manes, donations, the ritual for the
consecration of idols, the rituals of worship, pilgrimages, etc. Sometimes
vyavahära is subdivided into vyavahära properly so called, treating of
the composition of courts of justice and procedure, and viväda, dealing
with the 18 titles of litigation. Certain works or portions of works collect
the rules relating to adoption, or partition of inheritances, to the duties
peculiar to the Südras, etc. As a result, precepts scattered in innumerable
sources are found methodically classified. This classification, which
presupposes a considerable spoliation or stripping down of the texts,
is proof enough by itself of a powerful effort at synthesis. At the same time
it reveals all the amplitude and diversity of the domain of dharma itself.
But the authors generally do not stop there. They also comment upon
their texts, explaining terms where passages are obscure and clarifying
them with examples. They are not content to bring them together. They
try to harmonise them, to disengage from them a coherent system of
rules. When their precepts disagree they must try to justify one way
out of the conflict. Either they must show that the discord is only apparent,
or they must prove that one solution is superior to another. By this work
of interpretation, the commentaries and the digests appear to have been

--- PAGE 131 [DIRECT] ---

1 10 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the sequel and goal of the smrtis of which they provide the gist. However,
this new contribution to the teaching of dharma no longer has the character
and value of the rules which the sästras themselves contain. In the place
of books held to be inspired we are handling human compositions whose
origins are not wrapped in any mystery. The names of the commentators
and authors of treatises are known to us, and, what is more, in the majority
of cases, the period and the milieu in which they lived are also known,
if not some details of their lives as well. Many of them were ministers
or councillors of kings or princes well known to history. Further, their
way of approaching problems, and even the solutions which they recom-
mend, could not have had the authority of the precepts laid down in
the smrti. They are no more than personal opinions, whose value is no
higher than their power to convince other people. Moreover, commen-
tators and digest-writers had no hesitation in criticising the views of their
predecessors or contemporaries, and such discussions and criticisms take
up at times a considerable amount of room in their writings. Thus although
the whole of the precepts on which their interpretation rests is immutably
fixed, it is by its very nature diverse and variable. It reflects the evolution
of ideas and manners. It is a living and a direct source of law.
Some commentaries or treatises have acquired in matters of juridical
importance so great an authority that they have ended up by casting the
dharma-sästras quite into the shade. It is a fact that when the British
took in hand the administration of justice in India it was not the Code
of Manu which was cited before their judges, nor even the smrti of
Yajnavalkya or that of Närada, but this or that work which had been
accepted by the parties subject to the jurisdiction as the correct expression
of the law applicable to them. Thus it is hardly surprising that the com-
mentaries and treatises were known to Europe before the great works
which were actually their basis, with the sole exception of the Code of
Manu which the enthusiasm of Sir William Jones introduced to Europe
from 1794 onwards. Three years later Colebrooke produced his trans-
lation of a premier digest, which had been written, however, on the
instructions of Jones himself. Later a whole series of translations of juri-
dical works was to appear, and naturally these were the commentaries
or treatises chosen first on account of their practical value. British
judges had an urgent need of these translations in order to be less depen-
dent upon their native assistants. It was only after these translations had
answered the calls, above all, of simple utility, that the first translations
of the dharma-sütras and dharma-sästras appeared, whose interest was
entirely intellectual. The commentaries and treatises or at least some
examples of those classes have thus assumed in British India a legal
character, and the Anglo-Indian courts, and their successors in indepen-
dent India, have referred to them constantly.

--- PAGE 132 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
1 1 1
The intervention of British methods of administration undoubtedly
resulted in increasing the authority which these sorts of work could
enjoy, beyond, indeed, what could have been done by the patronage of
princes or Hindus of high prestige. But, leaving aside for the present the
role of interpretation in the adaptation of the rules of the sästras to
social reality, i.e. to law, it is equally beyond doubt that the appearance
of this kind of literature soon began to impede access to the original
texts themselves. They were concise, and they were archaic: by the
Middle Ages many passages of smrti were unintelligible without com-
mentary. We can be sure that the bare text seldom circulated. On the
other hand the digests offered the advantages of methodical classification
of the smrtis. Infinitely more commodious to handle, for they amounted
to a complete library; easier to understand; and more useful since they
tried to reduce divergencies between the source materials, it seems natural
enough that they should have ended up by being substituted for those
sources. In Further India where the name of Manu honours the first juri-
dical compilations, we can be sure that it was not the real text of the
Manu-smrti which was used for the purpose, but some treatise in vogue
amongst the Indian colonists, or some version strictly associated with
one or more commentaries.2 In modern India compendia of quite loca-
lised usage often take the places, in certain ritual contexts appertaining
to äcära, of the great treatises themselves, which remain unknown to
the public. This shows us the importance of the role which the commen-
taries and treatises have had to play at all times during the passage of
the rule of dharma into law-in-action.
The abundance as well as the frequent high quality of this literature
demonstrates the interest which the Hindus have evinced in the science
of dharma throughout their long history. It has been of dimensions
of which one could not have dreamed unless one had passed all the surviv-
ing specimens in review. We are virtually forced to limit ourselves here
to pointing out some of the more celebrated works or those which are
most helpful for our present purpose. The bulky first volume of Kane's
History of Dharmasästra presents a more complete picture.
1. The Commentaries
Of all the dharma-sästras it seems that the Mänava-dharma-sästra is
the one upon which commentaries have been most frequently written.
The oldest commentary on Manu to reach us is that of Bhäruci. Except
2F.H. Van Naerssen has showed that the author of a work in Old Javanese of the Maja-
pahit period, the Astadasavyavahära, had before him and incorporated into his commentary
certain Sanskrit commentaries on the Manu-smrti, amongst which it seems possible to
recognise the Manvarthavivrtti of Näräyana. The Astadasavyavahära in Old Javanese',
translated from Dutch in the Journal of the Greater India Society 15 (1956), 11 Iff.

--- PAGE 133 [DIRECT] ---

1 12 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
in a few places it is not an extensive commentary. It was possibly a
South Indian production and betrays a knowledge of an arthasästra
text little if at all removed from the Kautiliya Arthasästra. It was amongst
the sources used by Medhätithi.2fl
Medhätithi is placed in the ninth century or at the latest at the beginning
of the tenth.3 One knows nothing about him save that he lived in Kashmir.
The text of Manu which is commented upon in his very voluminous
Bhäsya is close to that with which other sources provide us, suggesting
that the Code of Manu was already in a nearly fixed state. Medhätithi
cites numerous smrtis, and earlier commentators whose names he seldom
specifies. Bühler pays homage to his erudition and to his skill in cons*
truing difficult passages. He praises the clarity of his eludication of the
text, and he objects only to what appears to him to be an excessive
veneration for the opinions of his predecessors. The Bhäsya of Medhätithi
was translated in its entirety, albeit somewhat hastily, by Gahgänätha
Jhä.
There are no less than five other commentaries on Manu, amongst
which the most extensive is the Manvartha-muktävali of Kullüka, which
provided the greatest assistance when the first English and French
translations of Manu were made. The author wrote at Benares and
lived probably in the fifteenth century according to Bühler (Kane's
opinion, which is much more probable, places him before the fourteenth
century and assigns his floruit to c. 1250). His commentary is rather long,
but it is never prolix, always clear and precise. Though he prides himself
on the superiority of his knowledge to that of his predecessors, he lacks
originality. He is often content to plagiarise without acknowledgement
older works such as Medhätithi's Bhäsya and the tikä of Govindaräja
which, according to Käne, was composed in the second half of the
eleventh century. Three other commentaries upon Manu which deserve
mention are those of Näräyana, whose work belongs to between 1100
and 1300, Räghavänanda who belongs to the fifteenth century at the
earliest, and Nandana, who appears to have been even later.4 Räghavä-
nanda was a favourite author in Bengal, and Nandana seems to have
been a southerner.4a
After Manu the srnrti most frequently commented upon is that of
Yäjnavalkya. The oldest of his commentators, Visvarüpa. wrote the
2a[trs.]
^Käne (P, 583) places him between 825 and 900. Medhätithi (on M., 11.22) alludes to
successive invasions of Mlecchas who failed to find an enduring footing in Aryan territory.
It is not improbable that he refers to Muslim incursions. If he does we may well conclude
that Medhätithi wrote his bhäsya prior to the conquest of the Punjab by Mahmud of Ghazni
(998-1030).
4In V.N. Mandlik's edition Manu's text appears with six commentaries.
4a[trs.]

--- PAGE 134 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
1 13
Bälakrldä (Child's Play), a work belonging to the beginning of the
ninth century according to Kane and thus a contemporary of Medhätithi
if not even earlier.5 The portion corresponding to the second Book
of Yäjnavalkya is really poor, but the developments which emerge in
the course of the other two Books run to a considerable length.
The commentator par excellence on Yäjnavalkya 
is a yogin,
Vijnänesvara, who lived at the end of the eleventh century in the reign
of Vikramäditya VI of the Cälukya dynasty of Kalyäni (in the former
Nizam's Dominions, now Maharashtra), one of the great emperors of
the Deccan (1076-1127). Though his commentary, the Rjumitäksarä,
more commonly known as the Mitäksarä ("measured in its syllables"),
purports to be an abridgement of Visvarüpa's commentary, it is a large
work, using a crowd of texts coming from various smrtis and taking
into account the opinions of numerous earlier glosses. Though it has
the form of a commentary it is a veritable treatise on dharma in which
the author discusses and criticises the views of his predecessors and
utilises with ease all the resources of a subtle dialectic. His merits early
secured him a wide distribution and an eminent place in the literature of
interpretation of smrti. Under the influence of the Anglo-Indian courts
it obtained in certain contexts, especially those related to the law of
inheritance, the status of a legislative text throughout the Indian
subcontinent, except for Bengal and Assam, where the Däyabhäga
prevailed. In 1810 the portion which deals with succession and the
joint family was translated by Colebrooke6 and that which deals with
procedure was translated by W. Macnaghten in 1829. Today we have
a complete translation from the pen of J.R. Ghärpure.
The Mitäksarä was commented upon in its turn by Visvesvara (the
Subodhinl) in the second half of the fourteenth century, by Nanda-pandita
(in the Pramitäksarä) who is also to be found as a commentator on
the Visnu-smrti and an author of a treatise, and, at the end of the eigh-
teenth century and beginning of the nineteenth century by Balambhatta
(in the Bälambhattl) who was one of the pandits of Colebrooke.
Apart from the Mitäksarä we have three other commentaries on the
Yäjhavalkya-smrti. One is attributed to Aparärka, king of the Korikan
and a subject of the Cälukyas, who reigned at the beginning of the
twelfth century (1110-1140). Like the Mitäksarä, it is a veritable digest.
It is more voluminous and richer in citations of every kind of source
(there are very many extracts from puränas as well as dharma-sütras),
but the author's argumentation is more sober.
5Visvarüpa is certainly later than Kumärila, but it is difficult to decide his terminus
ante quern. Käne. I. 261-3.
6This translation was translated, in its turn, into French by G. Orianne. puisne justice
at the royal court of Pondicherry. in 1844.

--- PAGE 135 [DIRECT] ---

1 14 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
The second commentary, the Dlpakalikä, which is a contrast by its
brevity, was written by Sülapäni, and the third, the VIramitrodaya,
by Mitra-misra. These two authors will reappear later in our story.7
Närada was commented upon very early, since his earliest known
commentator, Asahäya ("the incomparable"), is cited by Visvarüpa
and Medhätithi. But his bhäsya has come down to us only in a reworked
and incomplete form.8 He commented also upon Gautama and Manu.
Käne places him between the sixth and the seventh century, a period
which is perhaps a little remote for him (Jolly proposes about the eighth
century). We noted above the commentary of Bhavasvämin which was
published in 1929.
The Visnu-smrti was commented upon by Nanda-pan<Jita, the prolific
author who commented also upon the Mitäksarä and the Paräsara-smrti,
and wrote the Dcittakchmimämsä, and more works on law, philosophy and
even poetry. His commentary on the Visnu-smrti, the Vaijayantl? was
composed in Benares in 1622 at the request of King Kesava-näyaka of
Mathurä. It is a work of great merit, abounding in citations and interesting
digressions.10
The Paräsara-smrti was made the object of a voluminous commentary
called the Paräsara-mädhavlya, by Mädhava, called Vidyäranya ("Forest
of Learning"), an allusion to his status as samnyäsin at the end of his life.
The writer was celebrated above all for his philosophical works, being
the guru and minister (mantrin) of King Bukka, who ruled at Vijaya-
nagara in the middle of the fourteenth century. His commentary covers
about 2,300 pages of the edition printed at Bombay. It is a veritable
encyclopedia of dharma, according to Jolly. In fact Mädhava completed
the smrti of Paräsara by interpolating into his commentary a digression
which deals with vyavahära and which occupies more than quarter of
the volume. This digression is called Vyavahära-mädhava. The portion
devoted to succession was translated into English by Burnell in 1868.
The dharma-sütras too had their commentators. Haradatta, from
South India, who (according to Käne) lived between 1100 and 1300.
wrote the Ujjvalä-vrtti, a commentary on the dharma-sütra of Äpastamba.
and the Mitäksarä, a commentary on the dharma-sütra of Gautama.
Bühler has a high opinion of his knowledge, and refers to him constantly.
Maskarin, whose date is even more uncertain,11 commented upon
7Extracts from these three commentaries are given by Ghärpure in his translation of
the Mitäksarä.
8Extracts are provided by Jolly, in his translation of the Närada-smrti.
9The name of Indra's banner.
10Extracts are given by Jolly in his translation of the Visnu-smrti, but the whole text
is now available in a luxury edition from the Adyar Library (1964).
11 Käne places him after Haradatta, though some suppose him to have lived in the eighth
century. See p. 273 below, [trs.]

--- PAGE 136 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
1 15
Gautama, and Govindasvämin, certainly a late author, wrote a commen-
tary on the dharma-sütra of Baudhäyana.
2. The Digests
Even though commentaries continued to be written until a very late
period, indeed right up to our own times,12 the general tendency from
the twelfth century onwards is to compose treatises or digests.
One of the most ancient which we possess is the Krtyakalpataru
(or KaIpataru)P composed by Laksmldhara, chief minister (malw-
sändhi-vigrahika) of Govindachandra, king of Kanauj (1104-1154), in
the first part of the twelfth century, half a century prior to the Muslim
invasion, about the same period as Aparärka. This is a large work
(it is exceeded only by the Vlramitrodaya in point of size), including
about 30,000 slokas. It is roughly a third of the size of the Mahäbhärata,
though it is hard to compare exactly a verse work with one in mixed
verse and prose as is Laksmidhara's. No digest gathers so rich a collection
nor arranges texts so logically. He has gathered texts from sruti as well
as smrti, and in the latter must be included the epics and puränas. He
usually limits himself to arranging the citations, grouped methodically
under fourteen kändas, adding only a very brief commentary. His in-
fluence was great up to the sixteenth century : many later writers borrowed
extensively from him.
The Smrticandrikä14 of Devanna-bhatta, composed about 1200. is an
equally important work which has enjoyed high esteem not only in
the South of India, whence its author originated, but also in the North.
It has three divisions (kändas) : ähnika, vyavahära, and sräddha. It has
very numerous citations (especially abundantly from Kätyäyana and
Brhaspati). But the author is not content with merely quoting them.
He quotes and criticises the views of other interpreters and expresses
his own point of view. A Tamil summary, the Vyavahära-sahgraha,
composed about 1830, was translated into French by Sice.14a
Hemädri, minister and chancellor (snkaranädhipa) of King Mahädeva.
one of the last of the Yädava dynasty, who ruled at Devagiri (Daulatäbäd)
from 1260 to 1273, wrote the Caturvargacintämani (The Philosophers'
Stone for the Four Classes), a gigantic work dealing above all with
rituals and religious observances, but occasionally also with matters
connected with vyavahära. The four volumes published in the Bibliotheca
Indica amount to 6,000 pages.
12Krsna-pan<Jita wrote, in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, a commentary on
Vasistha's dharma-sütra which was available to Bühler.
liKalpataru, kalpavrksa, or kalpadruma means 'wishing-tree\ 'tree of abundance' (i.e.
repertory, florilegium). the title of several works.
]4Candrikä. 'moonlight' (i.e. illumination), figures in the title of numerous works.
l4&Abrege substantiel du droit (Pondicherry, 1857).

--- PAGE 137 [DIRECT] ---

116 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
From the thirteenth to the fifteenth century juridical literature blos-
somed in Mithilä (modern Tirhut). in the East on the borders of India
and Nepal, to such an extent that the authors came to form a special
school. Thanks to its geographical position. Mithilä could escape the
worst of the ravages of the Muslim invasions.15
In the first quarter of the fourteenth century. Candesvara. prime
minister of the king of Mithilä. Harasimha-deva. composed a digest
in seven parts or "treasure-mines" (ratnäkaras). One of these parts,
the Viväda-ratnäkara, contains a detailed exposition of the 18 titles of
litigation, accompanied by a great number of citations. In 1324 Hara-
simha-deva. vanquished by the Muslim armies, retired to Nepal. At the
request of his successor. King Bhavesa (or Bhavesvara), a feudatory
of the Sultan of Delhi, Candesvara wrote the Räja-nlti-nitnäkara, which
deals with the functions of the king.16 The most celebrated representative
of this Mithilä school is Väcaspati-misra. who was a minister or councillor
of Kings Bhairavendra and Rämabhadra of the Kämesvara dynasty,
and who lived in the second half of the fifteenth century. A prolific author,
he has left especially a series of works called cintämtmis, of which the
Viväda-cintämani, which deals with the 18 heads of litigation, and the
Vyavahänhcintämani, 
which deals with procedure, are well known.
The same author wrote various treatises called nimaya (solution),
such as his Dvaita-nimaya on controversial points of dhamui (composed
at the command of Queen Jayä, spouse of King Bhairavendra). Mahädäna-
nirnaya (on gifts), and Suddhi-nirnaya (on purification).17 This class of
work, which was in fashion from the fifteenth century, presents rules
which are apparently in conflict with each other and attempts to reconcile
them. We need only mention the Vyavahara-nirnaya of Varadaräja.
which is a minor digest, the succession chapter of which was translated
in 1872 by Burnell.
A king of Orissa of the Gajapati dynasty, Pratäparudra-deva, who
reigned at Kataka-nagari (Cuttack) (1497-1539) had the Sarasvati-
viläsa™ composed, probably in the first quarter of the sixteenth century,
by a group of pandits. This treatise was intended to embrace all dharma.
He declares at the outset of the work that he wished by means of this
composition to spare all future interpreters the pain of obtaining an
agreement from the commentators, and to render superfluous the works
15M. Chakravarti. 'Contributions to the History of Smrti in Bengal and Mithilä. Part II.
Mithilä'. J.A.S.B., 
1915, 377-406.
16On the author's bibliography see K.P. Jayaswal's Introduction to his edition of the
RäjanTtiratnäkara (Patna, 1924).
17On the life and works of Väcaspati Misra see the Introduction by L. Rocher to his
edition of the Vyavahäracintämani.
^'Possessing the charm (or grace) of Sarasvati (goddess of eloquence and learning)',
a not uncommon title.

--- PAGE 138 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
1 17
of predecessors from that time onwards. The work is divided into several
kcmdas, of which the Vyavahära-kända is the most important, and indeed
the only one of which any knowledge is generally available.
Nanda-pandita, who lived at Benares at the end of the sixteenth
century or at the beginning of the seventeenth, was the author of numerous
works on dharma, some composed at the request of reigning princes or
important persons. We have already mentioned his commentary on the
Visnu-smrti, written at the request of a prince of Karnätaka. He also
commented on the Paräsara-smrti and the Mitäksarä. He got together a
digest called the Smrti-sindhu, at the request of King Harivamsa-varman
and the Mähendra dynasty. His most celebrated work is the Dattaka-
mimämsä, a treatise on adoption which was soon adopted by the British
authorities as if it were a classical work on the subject, along with the
Dattaka-candrikä}9 a work of authority in practice and purporting to
be by one Kubera-bhatta. Both treatises were translated by Sutherland
in 1821.
Another Benares writer was Kamaläkara-bhatta, a contemporary of
Nanda-pandita. He belonged to a family of jurists likewise hailing from
the Deccan. His father Rämakrsna wrote a digest. His uncle Sarikara-
bhatta is the author of the Dharma-dvaita-nirnaya. He himself composed
numerous works. The most important are the following : (1) the Nirnaya-
sindhu, written in 1612, devoted mainly to ceremonies of a religious
character; he mentions, according to Mandlik, thirteen works of sruti.
131 smrtis, 68 puränas and 272 nibandhas, tlkäs and commentaries;
(2) the Südra-kamaläkara, a treatise on the duties and religious obligations
incumbent on the Südras; and lastly (3) the Viväda-tändava, devoted
to procedure and to rules of a juridical character, analogous to the
Vyavahära-mayükha of his cousin Nilakantha, though somewhat less
extensive.
Born at Benares to the same illustrious family of jurists coming from
the Deccan, the cousin and rival of Kamaläkara, Nilakantha wrote
the Bhagavanta-bhäskara in the first half of the seventeenth century
at the request of a Rajput prince, Bhagavanta-deva, who reigned at
Bhareha (Baicho) at the confluence of the rivers Chambal and Jumna.20
It is a real thesaurus of dharma (97 smrtis are quoted), divided into
twelve mayükhas ("rays"). Its author, writes Kane, remains unequalled
amongst all commentators for his perfect knowledge of the vast smrti-
literature, for the brevity of his exposition, the conciseness and smoothness
19This work, which was at first attributed to Devanna-bhatta. was suspected of being a
forgery made in Colebrooke's circle. Alternatively it has been attributed to a writer of
the 16th century. Derrett. Religion, Law and the State in India. 255-6.
2()For Nilakantha see the Introduction to Kane's edition of the Vyavahäramayükha
(Poona. 1926).

--- PAGE 139 [DIRECT] ---

1 18 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of his style, the clarity of his views and the sobriety of his judgments.
The part of the work which is best known is the Vyaxahära-mayükha,
which was translated into English by Borradaile in 1827 and later by
other scholars including Kane himself. We can only mention among the
other portions his NTti-mayükha, the Präyascitta-mayükha, and the
Pratisthä-mayükha,
Even more voluminous than the Bhagavanta-bhäskara is a work of
the same epoch (the first half of the seventeenth century), the Viramitro-
daya, itself a vast treatise covering the whole domain of dharma. Its
author was Mitra-misra, who belonged to a family originating from
Gwalior. He wrote the work at the request of Virasimha (Vir Singh),
a king who reigned at Orccha (Bundelkhand) from 1605 to 1627 and
who, at the instigation of the future emperor Jahangir, caused the
assassination in 1602 of Abul-Fazl, the friend of the emperor Akbar
and his historian.21 The work is divided into prakäsas. The Vyavahära-
prakäsa is probably the most extended treatise on that subject. It has
four chapters, the first relating to the composition of courts and the
rules of procedure, the second to the different modes of proof, the third
to the 18 titles of litigation and the last, which is very short, dealing
with the matters which the king may take up ex officio. The author
frequently discusses the opinions of his predecessors and flatters himself
that his work will render a reference to other nibandhas superfluous.
Mitra-misra also wrote a commentary on the Yäjnavalkya-smrti, and
that too bears the name of Viramitrodaya.
Visvesvara-bhatta, an author already mentioned as the writer of a
commentary on the Mitäksarä, was originally from the South of India.
He migrated to the North and wrote several works under the patronage
of King Madanapäla, a vassal of the Sultan of Delhi, who reigned at
Kästhä (Kätha) on the Jumna, to the North of Delhi, in the second
half of the fourteenth century. The most important of these works is
the Madana-pärijäta which deals with all the matters comprised within
dharmasästra, with the somewhat unfortunate exception of vyavahära,
which is represented only by its chapter on succession. The fact that
this chapter was chosen for treatment, and thus given some sort of
priority, throws light on the relative importance of succession as a
topic at the period. We may also mention the same author's Smrti-
kaumudl which is devoted to the legal status of the Südras.
With Jimütavähana, the author of the Dharmaratna, there appeared
one of the most celebrated jurists of India. His period is not quite certain.
Jolly and Räjkumär Sarvädhikäri place him in the fifteenth century.
21The work's title plays on the words Vira and Mitra and can be translated either 'the
brilliance (literally, dawn) of the gods Vira and Mitra\ or "the brilliance of the friend of
Vira (sc. the king)'.

--- PAGE 140 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
1 19
which appears to be too late. Käne, for excellent reasons, chooses between
1090 and 1130.22 All that we know for certain about him is that he belonged
to a family of Brahmins of Bengal. The Dharmaratna survives in only
three parts, one of which, known by the name of Däyabhäga, relates
to the management and partition of family property and its descent
on the death of the ancestor; a second, called Vyavahära-mätrkä, deals
with judicial organisation and procedure; and the third, Käla-viveka,
deals with the fixing of times suitable for performing ritual acts and
religious duties. The Däyabhäga is the most celebrated of the three.
The rights of inheritance and the powers of the head of the family as
described by him are based on doctrines fundamentally different from
those presented in the Mitäksarä. The differences are reflected in Anglo-
Hindu law by the coexistence of two great "schools" that of the Däya-
bhäga and that of the Mitäksarä, the one an authority in Bengal and
Assam, and the other in the remainder of India.23 The Däyabhäga has
been commented upon by more than a dozen authors, amongst whom
Raghunandana (below) is prominent. .A more recent commentary, the
Däya-krama-sahgraha of Sri Krsna Tarkälarikära, was translated into
English by P.M. Wynch in 1818 and into French later by G. Orianne.
After Jimütavähana, the most famous member of the Bengal school
is Raghunandana, called Smärta-bhattäcärya (Preceptor of the Scholars
in Smrti), but a predecessor of his is still consulted, namely Sülapäni,
the author of a commentary on the Yäjnavalkya-smrti which we have
already referred to. Käne places him between 1375 and 1460.24 His
commentary is brief but throws light on Bengal opinions of the period.
He wrote a series of little treatises intended to form, when collected,
a large digest bearing the name Smrti-viveka. Fourteen of these sections
have reached us. The best known is the Sräddha-viveka, which has been
commented upon several times and is consulted for opinions outside
the scope of its nominal subject-matter, sräddhas.
Raghunandana is certainly the most famous disciple of JImütavähana.
Perhaps he was the greatest of the jurists of Bengal. Apart from his
commentary on the Däyabhäga^ which we have already mentioned he
wrote a treatise named Smrti-tattva (The Fact, or Truth, about Smrti),
divided into twenty-eight sections all called tattvas. This is a work of
great erudition on the different branches of dharmasästra, in which he
cites not less than 89 authors. The Däya-tattva which deals with inheri-
tance and partition is the best known, having been translated by the
a discussion of dates proposed for him see M. Chakravarti. cited above, p. 116.
n. 15. Part 1. Bengal'. J.A.S.B. 
321 7. This writer would place JImütavähana at the begin-
ning of the twelfth century.
23See above, pp. 98, 110, 113, and below, p. 177.
24For Sülapäni see Chakravarti, cited above, p. 116, n. 15, at pp. 336-343.

--- PAGE 141 [DIRECT] ---

120 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
celebrated Hindu practitioner and jurist, G.C. Sarkar Sästii. The Suddhi-
tattxa contains, incidentally, one of the fullest Sanskrit authoritative
sources on the practice of suttee (sati). Raghunandana seems to have
lived in the first half of the sixteenth century.2~s
From the beginning of the same century or the end of the previous
one, we possess the Nrsimha-prasäda, a vast work divided into twelve
säras (Wholes) which cover all the realm of dharma. Its author, Dalapati
(which could conceivably be a title, "general"), was minister and archivist
of a king called Nijämasäha who ruled at Devagiri (Daulatäbäd) and
whom he praises at the beginning of the Samskärasära. This Nijämasäha
is no other than the founder of the Muslim dynasty of Ahmednagar.
Ahmed Nizam Shah, who ruled from 1490 to 1508.
A work of a similar type is attributed to Todar Mal (Räja Todara-
malla), the famous general and finance minister of the Emperor Akbar.
It is entitled Todaränanda (The Joy of Todar) and is divided into several
saukhyas (Delights). The Vyavahära-saukhya does not deal with the
18 titles of litigation, which are merely enumerated, but with the duties
of the king as judge, with procedure and the organisation of the courts.
The other saukhyas deal with times propitious for marriage, gifts,
sräddhas, astronomy, etc. Todar Mai died in 1589.
In the seventeenth century Ananta-deva, the descendant of a Mahratta
holy man, composed the Smrti-kaustubha at the request of Bäz Bahadur
Candra, king of Kumaon, a vassal of Delhi, who reigned over Almora
and Nainital from 1638 to 1678, in the time of Aurangzeb. It is a lengthy
work, divided into kaustubhas}^ subdivided in turn into dldhitis (rays).
In this digest he used five sruti works, 104 smrtis, 28 puränas, and 92
commentaries or nibandhas. The Samskära-kaustubha is the most popular.
The section relating to adoption, the Dattaka-didhiti, forms an important
treatise on the subject. The Räjadharma-kaustubha is especially interesting
for its rules on succession to the throne and for its description of
coronation ceremonies.
Mention should be made too of the Smrti-muktäphala of Vaidyanätha
Diksita, a work composed in South India. Though not devoted directly
to vyavahära it contains information occasionally availed of for the
development of Anglo-Hindu law.27 Jolly and Käne date it about 1600.
Ghärpure, who published the text, places its composition between 1686
and 1696.
25For Raghunandana see the last-mentioned article at pp. 351-7 and 363 375. See
also Bhabatosh Bhattächärya. Raghunandana's Indebtedness to his Predecessors, referred
to at Indian Stud. Past and Pres., 9/2 (1968). 113.
2(> Kaust ubha was the mythical jewel produced from the churning of the ocean and worn
by Visnu and Krsna.
27[trs.]

--- PAGE 142 [DIRECT] ---

THE COMMENTARIES AND DIGESTS 
121
In the eighteenth century one Ratnäkara compiled at the request of
king Jayasimha of Mathurä (Jai Singh of Jaipur) the Jayasimha-kalpa-
druma (1713). We should also not overlook the Dharma-sindhu (Ocean
of Dharma) by Käsinätha, composed in 1790-1791, devoted primarily
to religious observances. The work is very popular in the Deccan, and
we have da Cunha Goncalves's authority for the assertion that it is the
prime sästric source to be consulted in the former Portuguese India,28
for it deals incidentally with matters like the right to be adopted.
When the British took into their hands the administration of Bengal
several digests were compiled at their request. The earliest is the Vivädär-
nava-setu (Bridge over the Ocean of Litigation), compiled in 1775 for
Warren Hastings by a jgroup of eleven pandits of Bengal and Northern
India. Since it was translated into English by N.B. Halhed from a Persian
version (called Tarjamah i Dharm-shästra) made from the pandits'
Sanskrit original by Zain al-Din "Ali Rasä'I and was published under
Halhed's name in London in 1776, the work is conveniently known as
Halhed's Gentoo Code. It was translated from the English of Halhed
into French and German in 1778. A critical edition of the Sanskrit Jext
is awaited, for the demand for copies was such that interesting variations
are said to have crept into it. Another work of the same type and purpose
was compiled in 1789 by Trivedi Sarvorusarman at the request of Sir
William Jones. It is called the Viväda-särärnava but has never been
published.
The most remarkable of these digests is the Viväda-bharigärnava
(Ocean of Solutions of Cases) composed also at the instance of Sir
William Jones by Jagannätha Tarkapancänana. Apart from the section
dealing with criminal law, this work was translated by Colebrooke and
published in English in Calcutta in 1797 under the title A Digest of Hindu
Law. A second edition in three volumes appeared in London four years
later. This translation, along with Jones' Manu, formed a point of departure
for the study of Hindu law in Europe. It was long a source of information
and reference for the Anglo-Indian courts in Bengal and elsewhere,
and its usefulness is by no means exhausted in such contexts. As a collec-
tion of texts it is "simply invaluable", according to J.D. Mayne, the writer
on Anglo-Hindu law. The author has been accused of not knowing how
to come to a decision between divergent opinions, and it has been chara-
cterised as "the best book for an advocate and the worst for a judge".
But this may conceivably not do justice to the author's own intentions.29
To end we should pay a tribute to the Dharma-kosa, the brain-child
»[trs.]
29The needs of the British administration provoked a veritable flowering of treatises
until the middle of the nineteenth century. Derrett. Religion .... ch. 8 (The British as
patrons of the sästra.'). [trs.]

--- PAGE 143 [DIRECT] ---

122 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of an ascetic and an enthusiast for dharmasästra in Maharashtra some
thirty or so years ago. It is a digest of a new type, intended not so much
for the assistance of the courts as for the intellectual study of Hindu
institutions. It gives texts relating to dharma (including sruti, smrti and
arthasästra), divided under various rubrics and classified as nearly as
may be according to the commonly accepted chronology. The most
significant commentaries are extracted, and the extracts follow imme-
diately after the texts. Three volumes complete the vyavahära-kända:
the first deals with rules of procedure and evidence, and the two others
with fundamental rules of substantive law.

--- PAGE 144 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX
SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE
CHRONOLOGY OF THE DHARMA-SÄSTRAS
THE CHRONOLOGY of the dharma-sästras, like everything relating to
ancient India, is bedevilled by uncertainty. Following upon Bühler and
Jolly but improving on both, Käne has assembled in the first volume
of his imposing History of Dharmasästra 
(1930, 21968) all the data
which we have in order to place the composition of the works in time
or, at the very least, to classify them chronologically. He has examined
and discussed the principal opinions on this subject published in Europe
and in India, and he has attempted in his turn to disengage the elements
which permit us to limit the problem of dating within some determined
historical period. No one is surprised to learn that this labour occupied
the entire leisure of the author for five years, and one cannot but pay
homage to his conscientiousness, his erudition, the sharpness of some of
his observations and the clarity of his reasoning in general. Since the
time of publication this volume (of which a second edition is awaited)
has become a classic, and his conclusions, which are often especially
wise, are very generally accepted. Yet complete unanimity is lacking,
and the recent work of the late K.V. Raiigaswämi Aiyarigär1 tends to
place Kane's chronology in some doubt.
In my own view almost insurmountable obstacles stand in the way
of any solution being given to the chronological problem. They force
it to depend on deductions which are bound always to have a purely
hypothetical character.
To begin with, there is the total lack of reference to historical events.
This is so often insisted upon as a trait common to the dharma-süstras
that repetition is hardly necessary. Their attribution to mythical persons
does not allow us to assign them to any age at all. But when we reflect
on the truly historical movements which India has known during the
very long period within which these writings must be placed—the deve-
lopment of Buddhism, the campaign of Alexander, the rise and the
fall of the great native empires, the first invasions or incursions of Muslims
we cannot hide our astonishment at the perfection with which the
authors of their works have managed to dissimulate the epoch at which
they wrote and the circumstances which led them to write. Unless,
'Notably the important Introduction to his edition of the Brhaspatismrti, Gaekwad's
Or.Ser., 85 (Baroda. 1941).
123

--- PAGE 145 [DIRECT] ---

124 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of course, anything of their personality which was then apparent has
been effaced little by little in the course of the transmission of their
texts. Indologists such as Burnell, who searched for some clue in the
ideas and political theories of the code of Manu have been led to con-
clusions which have not carried conviction. The link proposed between
the author's thought and the data of history seemed much too vague
or fragile. Thus it is that Jayaswäl supposed that the exaltation of the
royal function in certain passages of the Närada-smrti, where royalty is
propounded as of practically divine origin, revealed that it was composed
in the period of the powerful Gupta empire, in the fourth century A.D.2
The connection is possible enough, but one can hardly say that it impresses
one as plausible. One is tempted to say the same of the hypothesis formu-
lated about the date of compilation of the Devala-smrti, a hypothesis
taken in some quarters as axiomatic. The work provides purificatory
rites to be undergone by Hindus forcibly converted to Islam, in order
that they might be readmitted to Indian society. A.S. Altekar does not
hesitate to connect these precepts with the conquest of Sindh by Muslims,
and to attribute the book to a "social thinker of Sindh", which would
place its composition in the ninth century at the earliest.3 No doubt the
connection is plausible. But we need something more than a simple
mention of mlecchas before we can be convinced, since Muslims were
by no means the first "barbarians" to come into contact with the Hindus.4
It seems even more hazardous to try to determine the epoch in which
a book was compiled from the religious or philosophical colouring of a
passage, as Burnell has done for Manu, and Stenzler and Bhändärkar
have done for the Code of Yäjiiavalkya. The appearance and development
of a philosophy or a sect involve too much imprecision to offer a footing
upon which any sort of reliance can be placed. It is only where the work
reveals a decidedly sectarian character that we can assign it to a late
epoch. Even the case of the Visnu-smrti shows that in so doing we are
bound to be very discreet.
Nor is any real help to be obtained from a general examination of the
style, for all our smrtis are written in classical Sanskrit and depart only
by accident from grammatical tradition. All that we can say is that
2Manu and Yäjnavalkya (Calcutta. 1930). 74-5. And an economic historian of ancient
India. S.K. Maity. unhesitatingly bases his findings upon the smrtis of Närada. etc.. as if
they belonged to this epoch, [trs.]
^Sources of Hindu Dharma (Sholapur. 1952). 19. A footnote to Kane's account of Devala
is provided by Bhabatosh Bhattächäryya at his Studies in Dharmasastra in Indian Studies :
Past and Present (Calcutta. 1964). 8-10. [trs.]
4I might add that some of the verses of the Devala-smrti are attributed to Äpastamba
by the author of the Mitäksarä and by Aparärka (Käne. I. 121). No doubt this would,
in the eyes of modern scholars, have been a work distinct from the dharma-sütra of Äpas-
tamba. but it enjoyed an equally high authority in the eyes of commentators.

--- PAGE 146 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX 
125
the versified literature of the smrtis is in contrast with the form and
style of the literature of the sütras, and succeeds to it. But the epoch
of the sütras is itself very uncertain. It would be naive to suppose that
it came to an end the moment versified smrtis made their appearance.
As Barth wrote, "the (Vedic) schools are ancient, that may well be ...
but we need other proofs beyond a few barbarisms and other sins against
Päninfs grammar before we can admit that the voluminous collections
of their sütras go back to the same period and that the dharma-sütras
in particular form a part of those collections from that period."5
Finally epigraphy for its part provides nothing helpful for dating
them. It seems that very few ancient inscriptions textually reproduce
a passage identifiable in a particular smrti. The allusion made in many
of them to Manu or even to a work attributed to Manu is not sufficient
to affirm that what was meant was the text we know by the name of
Code of Manu. The references which explicitly or indirectly recall the
smrtis of Brhaspati or Vyäsa are quite worthless for, even as dates ante
quern, they are far too late to be of any significance. The same must be
said of the quotation of Vasistha XXVIII. 16 in the Ragim copper-plates
of Tivara-deva, dated in the last quarter of the eighth century by Fleet
(Gupta Inscriptions, No. 81).
There are those who take account of the use of certain isolated words,
such as yavana, nänaka, dinära, pustaka, etc., to date a whole work,
or at least to fix a date after which it must have existed. Apart from the
fact that we are not agreed as to the time when these words passed into
the language, nor in some cases what they actually meant thereafter,
it seems bold indeed to attach the chronology which some think possible
to the entire work or even to the verse in which the relevant word is
found. Even if we admit that Yavanas means Greeks (which is not
certain), and that accordingly wherever the word is used to designate
a caste it could not have been used with this meaning until after the
rise of the Indo-Greek kingdoms, it remains always open to wonder
whether the word itself or the verse where it is found was really part
of the original text. Although Hindus are represented as being endowed
with prodigious memories, * I beg leave to doubt, especially when we
are dealing with a text which is not liturgical and which must as a matter
of principle remain intelligible, that it has come down to us intact,
free from supposed corrections, amendments, or additions, throughout
a long oral tradition or after multiple successive scribal copies. No one
is unaware of the risk involved when one evokes the possibility of inter-
polations. It is an argument used with irresponsible freedom in many
fields.50 But when we see serious commentators of the standing of
s Works. V. 93.

--- PAGE 147 [DIRECT] ---

126 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Medhätithi or Vijiiänesvara6 doubting the authenticity of certain verses
transmitted with the smrti, one may well question the reliability of the
reasoning which would rely on one word or an isolated verse in order
to date a whole work.
Another fact which may corroborate the possibility of interpolation
is the diversity of attribution frequently encountered with regard to the
same text in the commentators. In the introduction to his edition of the
Brhaspati-smrti, Aiyahgär cites a large number of examples where a
verse is attributed by some to Brhaspati, by others either to Manu or
Kätyäyana, or to Närada, or to Vyäsa, and so on.7 In the introduction
to his edition of the Kätyäyana-smrti Käne cites numerous cases where
a verse of Kätyäyana is attributed either to Brhaspati, or to Närada,
or to Manu, Vyäsa, Devala, or Pitämaha.8 Aiyahgär and Käne do not
absolutely reject the hypothesis of mere error of attribution on the
part of the commentators. But they are led to contemplate the possibilities
that the author of one dharma-sästra borrowed from another, or both
borrowed from a common anterior source—of course quite a hypothetical
one—now lost; all of which comes down, in either case, to admitting
the possibility (on a substantial scale) of interpolations.9
On the other hand, it is generally admitted that the great smrtis which
have come down to us entire, such as the Code of Manu and that of
Yäjnavalkya. are not homogeneous compositions. For example, without
entering into details, the first Book of Manu and his last seem really to
form just a framework added at one go to the collection of rules which
form the main body of the code, themselves of various origins.10 As for
the Yäjhavalkya-smrti, it is not out of the question, even since the ingenious
theorising of Käne, to see as a relatively recent addition to the other
two books the portion devoted to vyavahära, which is repeated practically
word for word in the Agnipuräna. Käne himself goes so far as to admit
(I, p. 174) that the original underwent a certain amount of rewriting
between 800 and 1100, although he places the composition of the work
in the first two centuries of the Christian era. As for the Närada-smrti
everyone agrees in general that the prose prologue which describes its
origin is a text which was originally quite independent of the original.11
Despite the fragmentary nature of the work which he has reconstructed,
Aiyahgär does not hesitate to recognise that the Brhaspati-smrti, the
composition of which he dates about the beginning of our era, has
^Medhätithi on A/.. IX.93; Mit., on Yaj., 1.256.
7K.V. Rarigaswämi Aiyarigär. Brhaspati (Reconstructed). Introduction. 145 8.
8Käne. Kätyäyanasmrti-säroddhära (Bombay. 1933). pp. viii-ix.
9The matter is debated at length by Aiyarigär. op. cit.. 145 51.
1()G. Bühler. Laws of Manu (Oxford. 1886). lxvi-lxxiii.
1 • In any case the prologue is wanting in the version upon which Bhavasvämin commented.

--- PAGE 148 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX 
127
undergone revision and addition, and even a new edition in the fifth
or sixth century.12 If the dharma-sästras have reached us arranged in
this way and made-up to this sort of appearance, it can hardly be good
sense to try to date their composition by relying upon isolated passages,
and it would hardly be good sense even if they contained a definite
historical allusion.
It is the absence of or inconsistencies between internal criteria, which
might otherwise have sufficed to determine the age of the composition
of any work, which has developed amongst scholars another method,
consisting in looking for indications adequate to mark it as anterior or
posterior to some other work. In this way a beginning has been made
at a relative chronological classification which permits us to place the
dharma-sästras in a scale of regular succession after the Code of Manu,
which is considered the oldest of them all, up to the period of the first
commentators. If these two limits are taken into account all that is left
to do is to imagine what interval might have occurred between the
composition of two successive dharma-sästras in order to arrive at an
approximate dating.
We must recognise that this method has given results which are
intellectually much more satisfactory. Some discussion is necessary,
however, because the criteria for chronological classification are some-
times slender enough.
We have, though there is no need to insist upon it, the lists of smrti-
käras which certain dharma-sästras, like Yäjnavalkya (I.4-5). themselves
give. Apart from the fact that there we have isolated verses particularly
subject to alteration, falling under the objections which we have already
noticed, we have no means of being certain that the often mythical
persons figuring in those verses have any connection with the works
attributed to them amongst surviving literature. The fact that Yäjnavalkya
cites Kätyäyana amongst his predecessors (or contemporaries) does not
hinder Käne from considering the latter "much later". The fact that
Yäjnavalkya himself is cited in Sarikha-Likhita does not hinder him
from holding that the latter is much older than the Yäjnavalkya-smrti.1*
In any case Yäjnavalkya dofcs not fail to place Sarikha (and) Likhita on
his own list! So we cannot place any reliance on the fact that one author
is cited by another in order to establish an order of precedence, for even
authors who are said to belong to distant epochs actually cite each other.
Thus Pitämaha cites a sloka which he attributes to Brhaspati. from
which Käne concludes that Brhaspati is much older than he (I2, p. 516).
But Aiyaiigär (Introduction, p. 105) produces a sloka of Brhaspati who
refers to Pitämaha, and concludes that 'kthe assertion of Mr. Käne is
12Aiyarigär, op. cit., 97, 158.
i*Käe, I2, 429-30 (cf 142!); 496, 501.

--- PAGE 149 [DIRECT] ---

128 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
open to question". Of course we can always suggest that the name in
question refers to two different works, only one of which has come down
to us. the other being an earlier version, now lost. But this kind of argu-
ment has hardly any more weight than the mere fact that it is offered.
Yet again, chronological classification of the dharma-sästras is usually
based upon a comparative examination of their contents. The method
is a delicate one and presupposes a vast collection of references. Käne,
in the wake of Jolly, has recourse to such with great ingenuity and in-
comparable learning. The order of priority at which he arrives, if not
his actual dates, will strike many as proved or at least plausible. From
the fact that one work presents, in relation to another, new elements
or developments, a more developed working out of the institutions of
law. a greater care for precision or a more marked technical character,
it is natural enough to hold it to be later than the other. It is possible to
arrive by this means at a succession or progression : Manu, Yäjnavalkya,
Närada. Brhaspati, Kätyäyana (to cite only the principal smrtis). This
is a highly probable order. However, the method is not beyond criticism,
because we are free to suspect that the differences which have been
detected are due primarily, or notably, to the nature of the works con-
cerned. J.J. Meyer makes this very observation ä propos of the date of
Närada, whom he places before Yäjnavalkya and even before Manu.
If the Nävada-smrti clearly has a more juridical character than the other
two. says he. it is not necessarily because it is more recent. It could be
because its author was essentially a practitioner, with first-hand ex-
perience of the courts, while Manu and even Yäjnavalkya remained
essentially moralists.14 After all is it not an analogous argument used in
connection with Manu himself, to explain his silence on documentary
proof and his brevity regarding ordeals? In much the same way the
highly schematic stratification which is G. Mazzarella's contribution to
the study of the dharma-sästras is open to suspicion.15 Although he is
able to check legal development by reference to cultures other than the
Indian, it is not clear that he has exhausted other possibilities to account
for differences between the Indian sources, which he regularly attributes
to "epochs".
If we were to neglect this line of criticism we should soon come across
another kind of difficulty which risks rendering altogether illusory the
work we have undertaken. It should be clear that while we seek to place
14J.J. Meyer. Über das Wesen .. . (cited above, p. 22, n. 3), passim. Aiyarigär {op. cit..
136) takes up the same point. Närada is clearly a compendium for professional men.
Manu's for scholars'. See also p. 121 regarding the rules relating to procedure which are
set out in the Brhaspati-smrti.
15Derrett. Juridical ethnology : the life and work of Giuseppe Mazzarella (1868-1958)'.
Zeitschrift Jür vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, 71 (1969). 1-44. [trs.]

--- PAGE 150 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX 
129
the dharma-sästms in point of time this is not merely, as is the case usually
with literary works, in order to assign to them a more or less approximate
date. It is also, and even primarily, with the intention of grasping what
was the evolution of ideas on social relationships, quite apart from the
question of technical progress. Even if a classification on the basis of
purely technical criteria reveals tendencies progressively realised, it often
rebuffs us by the anomalies which it high-lights. For example, given the
increasing importance of adoption amongst the legal means of securing
continuity of legal personality, it seems rather paradoxical that there
should be in a dharma-sütra, i.e. in a work thought well prior to dharma-
sästra literature, namely the dharma-sütra of Vasistha (Käne places it
between 300 and 100 B.C.), the greater part of the texts which were
available to commentators when they wanted to regulate the institution.
A whole chapter (the 15th) is devoted to the subject, whereas the smrtis
hardly do more than mention the name of the dattaka. Conversely it is
curious to observe, as indeed Aiyarigär does (p. 115), that the provisions
regarding ordeals become abundant as the works containing them
become more recent. In the dharma-sütras, Äpastamba (II. 11.29) barely
mentions this mode of proof; Manu (VIII. 174) lists two kinds of ordeals;
Yäjnavalkya (II.95-99) five or six, Närada and Kätyäyana (411^61)
seven, Brhaspati and Pitämaha (in 200 verses) nine. It seems as if with
the development of judicial procedure the recourse to ordeals would,
on the contrary, have inspired progressively less interest.
It can also happen that the same author proffers propositions which
at times estrange him from and at other times connect him with authors
placed before him, in such a way that it is impossible to trace a definite
design. The line is a zigzag which passes from recent writers to old writers
and from the latter again to the former. Thus the eulogy of the sat! in
the Vyäsa-smrti seems to Jolly to indicate that the work is not old. But
the Paräsara-smrti (IV.32-33), which Käne (I., p. 193) places between
Yäjnavalkya and Närada, equally extols the satT. In reverse. Manu
appears to dissuade from this practice (according to Medhätithi. on
M., V.I57). But Brhaspati, wfio is ordinarily so faithful to Manu's
teaching, actually recommends it (Aiy., p. 133). Aparärka cites a text
of Äpastamba which inflicts a severe penance (präjäpatya penance) on
the widow who resiles from her resolve to mount the pyre of her husband.
The Mitäksarä (on Yäj., I.86) cites many verses on suttee (satf) which
it attributes to Sarikha and to Härita, authors ofdharma-sutras.^ 
Yäjna-
valkya seems to state a newer rule than Manu when he calls the widow
to succeed to her deceased husband in the first rank if he died without
lf>K.V. Raiigaswämi Aiyarigär. Räjadharma (Adyar. 1941). 186--9; Käne. II. 629. Visnu
XXV. 14 (older or younger?) for his part offers the widow the choice between leading a
chaste life or mounting her husband's pyre.

--- PAGE 151 [DIRECT] ---

130 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
sons, from which Käne concludes that Yäjnavalkya should be posterior
to Manu who seems actually to refuse the widow all rights of succession
to her husband. But Närada, whom Käne believes more recent than
Yäjnavalkya, does not recognise the rights of succession of a widow.
Brhaspati returns to the position of Yäjnavalkya and proclaims loudly
what the widow's rights are. But Kätyäyana (928) who generally follows
Brhaspati. drives the widow from the succession (cf. 922-927). Aiyarigär
gave some attention to the wife's legal status as represented by the
different dharmasästrct writers (p. 135) and concluded that the vacillation
of opinion is such that it is impossible to draw from the degree of interest
they show in the question any indication whatever as to the relative age
of the works themselves. Remarks of this kind could be cited again and
again, which subtract all credit from a method often practised by scholars
as a secondary device, which consists in guessing the epoch of a work's
composition from the presumed evolution of manners. Quite apart from
the fact that the historian has no knowledge of any such classification,
one has only to fear that it will end by inserting into the texts a logical
evolution which exists nowhere except in our own minds. Could there
not have been in India any backward movements, or local variations?
And could one never have encountered divergent opinions in the works
of a single author?
The upshot of these observations is that it seems we must renounce
all hope of arriving at certain dates. This does not mean to say that so
far as the great smrtis are concerned, whose texts have come down to us
intact, we could not hold a chronological classification to be generally
valid if it is based on a comparative examination of the contents envisaged
from the point of view of its technical character. That is how it seemed
probable that the version of Manu's Code with which the commentators
have furnished us was, in general and upon the whole, earlier than all
other dharmci'Sästras. But we are bound to admit that all the parts of
the work do not necessarily date from the same epoch, that certain
rules could have been introduced at a later date than that of the com-
position of the original work, and that, conversely, certain rules apper-
taining to the original failed to find a place in the versions which Manu's
commentators make known to us. Otherwise it is inexplicable how so
many verses attributed to Manu either in smrtis or in the digests of
appreciable antiquity cannot be found in the complete version, of the
Code. It is hardly an adequate reply that what we have there are adages,
maxims, precepts fathered on Manu as the human race's first legislator:
for that very reason, they ought to have found a place in our Code.
In conclusion, we are led to think that, during the long period of time
in which the different dharma-sästras were composed, these texts remained
open. They underwent alterations or reworkings which are not betrayed

--- PAGE 152 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX 
131
by any criterion. Mutual borrowing occurred, a sort of interpenetration
which explains the difficulties which one experiences in classifying the
texts in some order of priority, even if it appears that one is more recent
than another in point of its more advanced technique. The commentaries
whose authority was established by the end of the ninth century had the
advantage of putting an end to these reworkings and fixing the texts.
But (of course) they fixed them in general in the condition of the manu-
scripts as they found them, for it is unusual for a commentator to dispute
the authenticity of a proposition or passage which he found in his source.
Yet after the appearance of the first commentaries, the same influences
probably continued to operate on the dharma-sästras which we know
only from the extracts quoted by the writers of the Middle Ages. At any
rate these, and they are really numerous, could not conceivably be
subjected to any chronology. In their case the additional and delicate
question arises whether they are authentic. The term "spurious11 is
sometimes heard in their connection. We know that, when making a
citation, the commentators and digest-writers confine themselves to
giving the name of the author, without offering any other indication
and without (with the rarest exceptions) bothering to specify the title
of the work from which the extract is taken. There are even texts which
are cited as part of smrti without attribution to any particular author.
There are thus cases where we lack even the most elementary means of
verifying a citation. Not only is the same extract frequently attributed
(as we have seen) to different authors, but it is equally common for the
same name to apply to different writers. Numerous passages may be
attributed to the author of a well-known smrti preceded with the quali-
fications "Laghu-", "Vrddha-", "Brhat-", and so on, about which it
would be impossible to say what, if any, their relation is with the smrti
of that name (they could have borrowed from older or different versions,
and could as well have come from works which were always independent).
And the mere name of an author does not always suffice to identify him,
because an unavoidably limited number of persons had acquired the
reputation as a promulgator of dharma. Thus when an extract attributed
to Närada cannot be found in*recensions of the smrti which have come
down to us, we cannot be sure that it is the same Närada.17
Every criterion of form proves useless. One begins to snatch at criteria
of substance and to suppose, for example, that different works must be
involved when the texts express inconsistent opinions. We know the
usefulness of that criterion in the field of Roman law when attempts
were successfully made to reveal the interpolations in the Digest. It is
not clear that it could be used efficaciously in our present domain, where
it is not exceptional to meet contradictory opinions in the same smrti.
17Käne, I, 238, a propos of Vyäsa. [Elaborated at P, 533.]

--- PAGE 153 [DIRECT] ---

1 32 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Moreover it is difficult to see what precise conclusion one could arrive
at with reference to the thought of an author of whom we know only
some isolated verses which we have no means of replacing in any context
whatever.18
The authenticity of the attribution and, consequently, the very value
of the extract in its capacity as a rule of dharma rests entirely and defini-
tively upon the authority enjoyed by the commentators or digest-writers
who selected and fixed it. From then onwards it becomes part of a mass
of texts whose dates, relative to each other, were of no interest whatsoever
to their interpreter.
18From the work which Renou devoted to the text of Brhaspati as published by Rariga-
swäml Aiyahgär it appears with full force what diflficulties one must encounter, if one
attempts to establish the original form of the smrti. Not only is the attribution of numerous
verses to Brhaspati himself not certain, whether because some commentators have attri-
buted them to other sources, or because the Brhaspati to whom they are attributed may
not be the one to whom the verses on vyavahära are assigned (Kane. I, 126); but apart
from that the commentators' citations demonstrate multiple variants, between which it
seems seldom either easy or judicious to make a distinct choice, especially when, as often
happens, these variants relate to legal doctrine, and some commentators rely upon one
reading while others rely upon another. We may take as example Brh. Aiy., I, 19, where
the variant vardhate ('increases', 'prospers') is taken up by Devanna-bhatta (Smr. cand.,
II. 11) instead of the reading avahlyate ('is supplanted') which is furnished by the Vyav.
cint.. 715 and the Kalpataru, Vyavahära-kända. 261. It would be gratuitous to suspect the
good faith of these writers. It is more to the point to recognise the character of these texts
as having halted at an indecisive stage of development. This character is emphasised,
moreover, by the sufficiently common fact that slokas (couplets) make their appearance
with two lines which, in other smrtis, each form a part of two quite different slokasl

--- PAGE 154 [DIRECT] ---

PART TWO
FROM DHARMA TO LAW

--- PAGE 155 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 156 [DIRECT] ---

THE PROBLEM
IN THE old Vedic schools the study of domestic ritual was completed
very early on by the rules of a discipline primarily of religious inspiration,
which were intended to define dharma, or the conduct of the individual
according to his age and station in life. Though fairly scanty in the
dharma-sütras, precepts of a juridical character took a more and more
important place in the dharma-sästras. At the same time, they were
expressed in a more and more certain and scientific form. The immense
literature of the commentaries and digests finally presents a sum-total
of all those works whose authority was confirmed by time. Study of
the sacred tradition is prolonged by it right up to our own days, but at
the same time it is limited, for only texts in which that tradition is embodied
may be utilised.
Yet the rules of a juridical character which one finds in the dharma-
sästras continue, as in the times of Gautama or Äpastamba, to be in-
corporated with rules of a purely religious and ritual inspiration. It
matters little that they are enunciated ä propos of the duties of the
householder or those of the king, that they appear in the äcära section
or the vyavahära section. Their object is to certify the virtue of the act
in question. When Yäjnavalkya for example provides (11.24) that he
who sees his land occupied by another for twenty years, without making
any objection to this, is subject to a loss in respect of that land, etc.,
that rule, for all its completely juridical tone, is of virtually the same
nature as that which enjoins upon a dvija the duty of not marrying a
woman of a varna higher than his own (1.57). In either case the precepts
put into the mouth of Yäjnavalkya express or rather determine the
requirements necessary to maintain the cosmic and moral order. It is
the duty of men to profit from this if they want salvation. Thus the king,
or his delegated judge, knows that he will commit a sin if, when a suit
for repossession of land is before him, he does not apply the rule laid
down, and likewise a Vaisya knows that he will commit a sin if he marries
a Ksatriya woman. The two sins would not have the same degree of
gravity, but of necessity both would involve a sanction in this world
or in the next if they are not effaced by an appropriate penance. These
are not simple recommendations which wisdom would tender, or rules
of equity that ought to be obeyed. The rule of dharma retains its peculiar
quality even when it involves juridical consequences. Its authority
135

--- PAGE 157 [DIRECT] ---

136 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
resides essentially in the faith of the Hindu in a divine regulation of the
world, the law of which is expressed by that rule.
Hence we are led to wonder in what measure the rules of law which
we meet in the dharma-sästras—presuming that they do really belong
to dharma—actually express juridical solutions. They are enunciated in
order that spiritual merit may be gained or secured. It is unquestionably
a religious duty to conform to them, and in this respect they are certainly
amongst the origins of law. But what is their exact significance? Are they
direct sources of law, i.e. have they the quality of legislation, the authority
of which bears directly upon the judge? Or are they sources of law only
in the sense that religion and morality are amongst the sources of law
in Europe—that is, have they managed to exert an influence upon the
development of social institutions as an historical or explanatory cause
of law rather than a true sour eel
From the day that the British took into their hands the administration
of justice in India, they were confronted by the problem of the value
suitable to attach in practice to the sästras' precepts. This problem has
remained open to controversy ever since. In 1772, Warren Hastings
laid the foundations of the jurisdiction of the courts which the East
India Company should institute by virtue of the Diwani grant obtained
a few years earlier from the Emperor at Delhi. He provided that in
certain matters, such as those concerning succession, marriage, caste
and religious institutions, the Hindus and Muslims would be ruled by
their respective laws. Likewise, after the Indian Empire had been joined
to the Crown of the United Kingdom, in her Proclamation of the 1 st
November 1858, Queen Victoria solemnly renewed the promise made
to her subjects to respect their laws and customs.1 But, so far as the
Hindu element of the population was concerned, where were these
laws and customs to be found? The Regulation of 1772 provided that
in the cases in which the Hindu law must be applied the British judge
must be assisted by a native Law Officer, whose opinion he must seek
before making his decision. This system owed something to methods
known to the Muslim courts, and it was not abolished until 1864. Its
result was to give the judges the impression that the srarf/-literature had
the status of legislation. The Law Officers were not professional jurists
in the western sense (India had none, so far as we know), but men edu-
cated in the sästras, one might say "doctors in dharmasästra". They
always cited as authorities for their opinions texts taken from the dharma-
sästras or from works relying upon the latter. In truth the judges were
not slow to perceive that the texts often had only a slight connection
>*We disclaim alike the right and desire to impose our convictions on any of our subjects.. .
We will that generally in framing and administering the law due regard be paid to the
ancient rights, usages and customs of India.'

--- PAGE 158 [DIRECT] ---

THE PROBLEM 
137
with the point of law in issue. There were times when they seemed to
be cited only as a matter of form, or to illustrate the pandit's own learning.
There were times when they appeared to contradict the opinion prof-
fered. Harmony between the opinions themselves was not always main-
tained, and the pandits were not always consistent with themselves.
Thanks to translations, the British judges gained well before 1864 some
personal acquaintance with the alleged written law which their pandits
relied upon, and they ceased to follow their opinions blindly. This critical
spirit, however, went only so far as to cast doubt on the interpretation
of the texts. It never reached their juridical quality. The result was that
the legal force attributed to precepts of the sästra came to be confirmed.
Once a text had been produced as the basis for a rule of law, the British
judge had only to attempt to find its sense and implications and to apply
it with all the consequences it seemed to involve.
Now it was not long before realisation began to dawn that the pandit,
in conformity with national usage, most frequently gave opinions which
conformed to his compatriots' (or some of his compatriots') conception
of what would be just; and that the vanity or the corruption with which
he tended to be accused by no means always explained the useless osten-
tation of texts with which he amused himself or the text-torturing in
which he indulged. It was early discovered also that precepts of the
smrtis were not always obeyed with rigour, that they were not all under-
stood in the same sense, and that at times even custom contradicted
them flatly and prevailed in practice without discernible objection.
Further, a Regulation was passed in the Bombay Presidency in 1799
which required the courts to ascertain in each case whether there did
not exist a customary rule which might furnish a solution to the dispute'
and, if there was, to apply it to the exclusion of all provisions emanating
from the written texts (Bombay Regulation IV of 1799). But though it
was recognised that custom took precedence over the law of the sästras,
the difficulty of its proof when the existence of a custom had to be estab-
lished, and the infinite diversity of the customary rules forced the judges,
more often than not, to fall back on the precepts of the smrtis under the
influence of their pandits, or rather to the interpretation of those precepts
which had been established locally. Resistance to improper application
of the written law was accentuated in regions or circles where the judges
were better informed about actual customs. Hindu law defied attempts
to grasp it.
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century a lively reaction occurred
against the use which the courts were making of the "Brahminical codes"
and their substitutes. It tended even to deny their practical value. Some
suggested that they be replaced by a new legislation made entirely by
British authority. Others proposed that custom alone should be the

--- PAGE 159 [DIRECT] ---

1 38 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
guide, since in their view custom was the only real law which India had
ever known.2
The most impetuous champion of these reforming ideas was James
H. Nelson, a District Judge in the Madras Presidency. His three works.
A View of the Hindu Law. . . , A Prospectus of the Scientific Study of the
Hindu Law, and Indian Usage and Judge-made Law in Madras, published
respectively in 1877, 1881, and 1887, resounded somewhat loudly.
They are fighting works, almost pamphlets.20 Because of his practical
responsibility Nelson had personal acquaintance with the difficulties of
which he speaks, and he was perfectly au fait with the problem. In spite
of his exaggeration his critique could not fail to arouse attention and
was bound to lead to a better understanding of the Hindu law.
Nelson takes up the cudgels against the case-law handed down by
the High Court at Madras, which he attacks as being biassed in favour
of the Sanskrit texts and which he accuses of an excessive reluctance
to apply the customary law although a recent statute (The Madras
Civil Courts Act, 1873, sec. 16) had recognised its legal force. He cites
several principles solemnly laid down under that system which led to
decisions as unjust as they were contrary to established customs. But
his criticism had a more general bearing. He was inspired by views
advanced by Burnell,3 and his critique amounted to a denial of the
juridical value of the smrtis and digests. In Nelson's view those works
2The same problem arose before the courts of the French possessions in India, the French
government having undertaken to administer justice to Hindus "according to the laws,
usages, and customs of their castes'. But it seems that the court at Pondicherry. guided
by earlier practice, was quick to recognise the fundamental importance of custom. See
Leon Sorg, Introduction a Vetude du droit hindou (Pondicherry, 1895).
2aDerrett at C.H. Philips, ed.. Historians of India. Pakistan and Ceylon (London. 1961).
ch. 26.
3Burnell, to whom Nelson dedicated his first work, wrote in the preface to his translation
of the Däyavibhäga portion of the Paräsara-MädhavTya, which he published in 1868. the
following, which Nelson quotes at p. 133 of his View: 'The digests however were never
intended to be actual codes of law; they were written in a language understood by a very
few. and because of the Vedic quotations in them, they must have remained almost exclu-
sively in the hands of the Brahmans. Again they refer for the most part to the Brahmans
only, and utterly ignore the numerous un-Aryan peoples scattered about India, and which
form the greater part of the population of the South, whose usages (whatever they may
call themselves) can in no wise be referred to the Dharmasästra. There is not a particle of
evidence to show that these works were ever even used by the Judges of ancient India as
authoritative guides; they were, it is certain, considered as merely speculative treatises,
and bore the same relation to the actual practice of the courts, as in Europe treatises on
jurisprudence to the law which is actually administered.' Burnell's views here, and in his
edition of a part of the Varadaräßyam (1872). were not free from exaggeration, and were
expressed in an over-dramatic style. That the sästras (interpreted in a very wide sense)
were actually consulted in legal contexts is proved by the important inscription from South
India published in Ann. Rep. S.I. Epigraphy, 1936-7. pp. 92-3 (A.D. 1584). See appendix
below, [trs.]

--- PAGE 160 [DIRECT] ---

THE PROBLEM 
139
never were taken to be sources of law! It was a great blunder to place
them in the same category as the Institutes of Justinian or the Napoleonic
Code. Their reputation was in any event a recent one, and was due in
no small measure to the enthusiasms of European Sanskritists. Prior to
the publication undertaken by Sir William Jones, he argued, a Madras
pandit would have been astonished to hear the Code of Manu referred
to as a source of law. Smrtis were purely literary and theoretical works.
They had no contact with reality. They were the fruit of speculations
altogether out of touch with practice and propounded ideal rules for
which not a single Hindu cared in the business of life, if we except a few
very restricted circles of Brahmins. They were of no weight at all so
far as concerned the crowds of inferior castes and the peoples of Dravidian
race. Their authority was practically nil even for the Aryans and those
who pretended to be Aryans. If the experience of the author was of any
value, a native of South India, whatever his class, would be highly
embarrassed to say according to which of the smrtis or which of the
digests he claimed to be judged. In fact the dharma-sästras had nothing
to do with law at all. Hindu law was entirely customary. Far from
simplifying the British judges' task, recourse to Sanskrit texts which
were inaccessible except by way of translations had created greater
difficulties. In order to extricate themselves, the judges had often been led
to abandon this alleged written law in order to substitute for it their
own sense of equity. This method has given rise only to arbitrary and
incoherent decisions. An artificial law resulted from it, a veritable monster
engendered by "Sanskritists without law and lawyers without Sanskrit".
In his view this monster should be executed and buried without delay,
and then a commission should be got together to gather and to arrange
in a simple form the practices and primitive customs which were common
to all the castes or the majority of them.
The works of Nelson have the merit of putting the problem clearly.
The remedy he suggests seems rather naive, but his critique is in general
well founded. It is marred only by his exaggerated tone and by his pre-
judices against what he calls the "Sanskrit Books", prejudices which
were not justified.
Jurists naturally replied to him.4 But the most pertinent reply, because
it takes the problem as a whole, is that made by the celebrated Indologist.
Auguste Barth (to whom Nelson dedicated his second book) in his
reviews in the Revue critique for the years 1878. 1882, and 1888.5
4Mr. Justice Innes made a detailed reply in 1882. Sarvadhikari discussed some of Nelson's
opinions in his Tagore Law Lectures for 1880. 'On the Hindu Law of Inheritance'. J.D.
Mayne. in his turn, drew attention to the weaknesses of Nelson's argument in the preface
to the third edition (1883) of his classic treatise Hindu Law and Usage.
Works 
(see above, p. 51, n. 32). II. 39-40; III. 296 304 and 403 13: IV. 47 52.

--- PAGE 161 [DIRECT] ---

140 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Barth criticises Nelson with some severity for arguments which leave
no stone unturned in an attempt to lower the authority of the Code of
Manu, the Yajnavalkya-smrti and the Mitäksarä. But he is not far from
him in thinking that the smrtis are basically literature and nothing more.
"The treatises", says he, "are almost all of them apocryphal. They have
a character which is primarily didactic and often purely literary. They
never had the force of positive ordinances, and the doctrine itself which
they propound, half religious and half juridical, undoubtedly shares the
fate of holy and ideal books. They agree only moderately with the way of
the world and are more respected than obeyed."6 So he does not accord
them the status of legislation. Yet he adds, "If it would be an error to
place the sästras on the same level as the Law of the Twelve Tables or
the Code Civil, it would be no less an error to attempt to judge them by
the same standard. We must take them for what they are, a written
tradition, and that at epochs and under influences sundered by many
diversities, not compiled by legislators but by scholars unrelated, for the
most part, to public authority.7 Apart from certain doctrines relating to
social pretensions rather than to civil law properly so called, or wherever
that tradition is outside reality, those scholars did not work otherwise
than in good faith and were never inspired simply by personal fantasies."8
Barth admits, then, that dharmasästra authors were not pure theore-
ticians or simple poets, but that they tried at least in some domains to
make a practical work, taking their inspiration from custom in order
to enable their conception of wisdom to prevail. Likewise, in opposition
to Nelson, he recognises that the smrtis have exercised an undeniable
influence over Indian society and that their precepts in certain contexts
have acquired a legal force. He may be going a little too far when he
says, "We do not hesitate to concede that in civil questions, in what
concerns the constitution of families, the management of property,
contracts, partition, succession, all questions of which the codes treat
in a practical fashion and conformably to conditions obtaining amongst
the majority of the inhabitants, we can really speak of a 'Hindu law'
as having been effectively recognised from the Himalayas to Cape
Comorin". It is true that he adds, "Only, we must not claim more for
this law than it claims for itself, and never lose sight of the qualification
it constantly exhibits, that its validity stops where a contrary custom
prevails".9
«Ibid., Ill, 299-300.
7A gratuitous assumption. Except for indications, in certain cases, which are in any
event hypothetical, about their countries of origin, we know nothing about the personalities
of the authors of the dharma-sästras.
8 Works. Ill, 405.
»Ibid., III. 302.

--- PAGE 162 [DIRECT] ---

THE PROBLEM 
141
Without any other definition of its nature, Barth recognises that the
dharma-sästras have enjoyed a certain authority and that authority
has not been without effect. "Mr. Nelson", he says, "rightly attaches
great importance to the fact attested by judicious and well-informed
observers that at a recent period as much as in the time of Megasthenes.
the inhabitants of the various regions of India did not refer to any written
law in order to regulate their differences.10 But when he concludes
from this that before William Jones's publication one would have asto-
nished a pandit of Madras by citing the Code of Manu to him as a book
of authority in matters of law, his conclusion is certainly erroneous.
The pandit would not have spoken of the code as an Englishman would
speak of an Act of Parliament, but he would certainly have recognised
in it one of the numerous expressions of the eternal dharma"xx
He concludes, "The history of the juridical literature of India, whether
native or European, imperfect, uncertain, full of lacunae as it is, like
everything applying to the past of that singular country, is not really
the formless chaos nor the tissue of contradictions that it appears to
be to the rather overheated imagination of Mr. Nelson. What is true
is this: Britain, in undertaking to respect as far as possible this multiple
tradition, and at the same time, to apply it with the aid of institutions
and methods without which justice cannot be imagined in the West,
has assumed a task which was difficult from the first, and its complications
have become gradually more obvious as we have learnt better to guage
the present as well as the past conditions obtaining in that land."12
The eminent Sanskritist here put his finger on the true cause of the
discomfort experienced by the British judges. The principal lesson to
be drawn from this long controversy amounts to this, that the Hindu
concept of law marries ill with our methods of administering justice.
Our judicial system demands an imperative rule, emanating from an
organ having legislative power, or appertaining (in the case of the common
law) to a source the authority of which is equal to that of legislation
until it is validly repealed. Now there never was in India, prior to the
British period, a power able to pass legislation, in our sense of that
word, at least in matters of private law. However, law did not reside
entirely in custom. Certainly the dharma-sästras were not Codes in
the European sense of that word. But their precepts did not thereby
lack a certain authority in the eyes of all Hindus, specially because of
their origin but also, and particularly in the judge's eyes, because they
were the only ones which were the fruit of a profound study and, as a
result, offered some framework of juridical reasoning. The written law
10Cf. Derrett. J.A.O.S. 
88 (1968). 776ff.
"Ibid.. III. 405.
uibid.. III. 408.

--- PAGE 163 [DIRECT] ---

142 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of the sästras and the customary laws of the different groups of humanity
thus existed side by side, equally respected though often in notable
disagreement with each other. The former acted upon the latter and
restricted its mobility; but the latter also acted upon the former through
the medium of interpretation. The result was an extremely variable
and diverse law, the application of which required the judge to use a
power of assessment quite incompatible with our conception of the
judicial function. What was needed was a judge who had the power to apply
as the case demanded the law of the holy rsis or the custom of ancestors,
a judge who could decide with sovereign independence and total liberty
so far as the choice of law was concerned, in short an arbitrator rather
than a judge. And Barth was wise enough to detect that that was how
it was.13
To understand the notion which the Hindus had of law prior to the
intervention of western concepts, it is important to try to define the
authority which they attributed to the dharma-sästras. The precepts to
be found in those works could stumble against several sorts of obstacles :
particularly that of custom, and that of the governmental policies.
We must, then, look into the-relations that obtained between custom
and the written law of the sästras, on the one hand, and, on the other,
the role incumbent on the king in the application of that written law
according to traditional notions. In either case the preliminary labour
done by interpretation pioneered the road and prepared the passage
from dharma to law.
13 This law ... is addressed rather to arbitrators than to judges and contains at least
as many recommendations as it does precepts/ Ibid., IV, 50.

--- PAGE 164 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER I
INTERPRETATION
1. The Scope of Interpretation
THE APPEARANCE of the commentaries and the digests marks an important
phase—perhaps we ought to say a turning-point —in the evolution of
juridical thought in India. A technique of interpretation,1 already pro-
vided with all its principles and all its methods from the oldest works
which have come down to us, is there put to work and is applied without
alteration until the British period began and even thereafter. The law
which was effectively in force during this long period was born of that
technique, and it is no exaggeration to say that it was only with that
interpretation that a true juridical science began in India.
If it' were really permissible to believe, as many scholars do, that
the succession of dharma-sästras represents a series of stages passed
through, one after another, in the elaboration of law, this presumption
would certainly have to be abandoned from the moment when the era
of the commentators commenced. According to the Hindu interpreter,
all the dharma-sästras were the expression of the same eternal law,
that is to say it is from the whole of written tradition, and not from
this or that smrti in particular that one must deduce the rule to be followed.
Thus Bhäruci and Medhätithi, the oldest commentators on the Manu-
smrti who have survived, do not rest content with commenting upon
the text of Manu; they compare the verses of Manu with material taken
from other smrti works to which they attach the same authority, and,
where it is appropriate, they reconcile the propositions. All other com-
mentators do the same. This doctrine of consensus to which we shall
return is one of the essential and characteristic traits of Hindu inter-
pretation. It is in the smrti, founded on the Veda, or Truth, that rules
of conduct must be found, and precepts responding to the very nature
of things. Here, in its own ideal image, Indian society has ceaselessly
]\ take the word interpretation in the sense given to it in Roman law. The commentators
and digest-writers have, in effect, a task analogous to that of the jurisconsults. They are
not expected to state law. properly so called, but to propose solutions to disputes, solutions
which they approve and which they certify to be conformable to the texts. They prepare
the way for the judge and they simplify his work, but they do not take it on. There were,
in other respects, several notable points of resemblance between the role of the prudentes
and that of our Hindu interpreters' (as I shall call them) which explain the high opinion
which both groups had of the significance of their function. They both regarded it as a
veritable priesthood.
143

--- PAGE 165 [DIRECT] ---

144 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
sought itself, and has always aspired to its own rediscovery. The role
of interpretation amounts to this: it offers society the means whereby
it can rediscover itself in fact.
We have already noted the gigantic task to which the commentator
was exposed by the equal value attributed to the different expressions
of smrti, chiefly because of the enormous mass of texts which he must
assemble and classify before any kind of construction could be under-
taken. If citations from the dharma-sütras and dharma-sästras occupy
the largest place in the commentaries and digests, the other works
contained within the concept of smrti, especially the epics and puränas,
are likewise laid under contribution, and Vedic texts too. There is one
observation we must make. The commentators and the digest-writers
were bound to make a choice between rules found in the works which
they had before them or carried in their memories. Now every choice
implies a rejection, and the rules which are not retained, whatever might
have been the authority of the work which contained them, are in every
sense of the word dead letters. As for the works which we know only
from the commentators' citations—and we have seen how numerous
these are—only the citations matter, for they alone have been taken
into account in the working out of the law. It follows that, if one were
so lucky as to discover the dharma-sästra attributed to Harita, for
example, one could not make anything of that part of the discovery
which is at this moment hidden from us. It will be appreciated how
such a hypothesis must inflict uncertainty upon the study of institutions
belonging to a pre-commentary epoch! Interpretation has fixed the
totality of authoritative texts; it has demarcated the scope of smrti.
Law owes nothing to what interpretation neglected or spontaneously
rejected. An arbitrary element has thus entered into the constructions
which the commentators made, for they selected their sources for them-
selves. It could be said in reply that the texts utilised are sufficiently
numerous and varied, and that they afford sufficient diversity and varia-
tions for us to be able to trust the commentators and concede that their
citations do correspond faithfully to the totality of smrti rules. One
might add that the interpretors are numerous and of divergent views,
and that omission of an essential text by one of them could not have
failed to be detected and reprehended by others. However, before the
luxuriant flowering of works classified as smrti which, according to
everyone, must have continued during more than a millennium, the
problem must still be considered an open one. And where an author
of the sixteenth century produces passages from dharma-sütras which
cannot be traced in the published versions which we owe to their com-
mentators, we are bound to retain some doubts.2
2I allude to the SarasvatT-viläsa and its citations of the dharma-sütras of Visnu and

--- PAGE 166 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
145
If interpretation aims to play upon all smrti (and sruti) literature,
by contrast it leaves all texts not belonging to smrti severely alone.20
Not only do we find no reference to any ordinances passed by any his-
torical king in our commentaries or digests, nor any documents used
in practice—which the system of interpretation itself suffices to explain-
but it is only quite exceptionally that any account is taken of works
which are indeed neighbours of the dharma-sästras and are devoted to
the arthasästra. This omission from the sources used by our writers
should now be explained.
Just like dharmasästra, the compound word arthasästra has two
senses, as the word sästra is taken in the sense of "science" or in that
of "treatise". Artha signifies wealth or means, economic profit, and the
science of artha (arthasästra) tries to teach men generally the means
of securing their material welfare; whilst the science of dharma (dharma-
sästra) is aimed at teaching them the means of acquiring merit and
thus securing their salvation. Each of these sciences has its distinct
domain, and the rules regulating human activity which they inspire
meet upon an approximately equal footing in the elaboration of law-
in-action. Manu himself observes that men are very frequently guided
by interest, and he says that the ideal of the Sage is to know how to
reconcile the practice of virtue (dharma) with interest (artha) and
pleasure (käma). Thus the authors of the dharma-sästra (the treatise)
could not confine themselves to dharmasästra (the science), and they
were bound to make some room for artha in their precepts. Yäjnavalkya
(11.21), Närada (I.37), Kätyäyana (32) and others, in verses which we
shall study later, name arthasästra (the discipline) expressly beside
dharmasästra (in the same sense) as the foundation of a judicial decision.
Aparärka (on Yäj., 1.3) ranges arthasästra amongst the auxiliary sciences;
he sees in it a drsta-smrti, a discipline directed to matters having a "seen",
that is to say worldly, end or object. As such it is doubtless inferior to
dharma-sästra which is primarily concerned with actions whose effect
is "unseen", that is to say supernatural, but knowledge of it is no less
indispensable for the government of men. As a science the arthasästra
is an integral part of the knowledge required of the interpreter, even
though research into and study of the rule of dharma must be his pre-
dominating concern.
In the sense of a treatise, arthasästra means a class of works whose
domain is much less vast and more precise than their title suggests.
Gautama. Derrett. *Kuttä\ B.S.O.A.S..2\ 
(1958). 69; "A strange rule of^mr//and a suggested
solution'. J.R.A.S., 
1958. 24n. In his view the citations may well be authentic, since they
could have been eliminated by commentators who had before them versions more complete
than our surviving texts.
2aSee L. Rocher at Journal of the Oriental Institute. Ill (1953-4). 1 7. [trs.]

--- PAGE 167 [DIRECT] ---

146 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Their real object is to give counsel in practical wisdom to kings, which
is intended to secure the prosperity of the kingdom and the stability of
the throne. They are treatises on royal policies, viewed as the interest
of the king and of the state. Composition of such works went back
very far, to the period of the sütras, and it continued parallel to that of
the dharma-sästras, providing a literature which must once have been
as large. From this old arthasästra literature only two works have actually
survived, Kautilya's Arthasästra, the date (or dates) of which are in
debate, and Kämandaka's Nltisära. Kämandaka describes himself as a
disciple of Visnugupta, another name for Kautilya.3 Apart from these,
and apart again from citations (the most numerous of which are found
in the Säntiparvan of the Mahäbhärata), we know only the names of
authors to whom such works are attributed and who are sometimes the
same as those to whom dharma-sästras are assigned, namely Manu,
Brhaspati, Närada, Paräsara, etc., besides Usanas (alias Sukra).
We might surely suppose that this literature must have had some
influence on that of the dharmasästra, at least on the portions of the
sästras devoted to the function and duties of the king.4 However no
author of the arthasästra is so much as named in the sästras themselves,
so that any such influence must remain conjectural. By contrast the
commentators and digest-writers certainly know of such treatises. They
refer to them occasionally, or simply refer their readers thither.5 Above
3Kautilya's Arthasästra, rediscovered in 1905, has given rise to an abundant literature
(Käne. L 86). We need mention here only the translations of R. Shämasästry (Mysore,
1908 10). of J.J. Meyer (Leipzig. 1925) and of R.P. Kängle (Bombay. 1963). Kautilya.
alias Visnugupta or Cänakya. is supposed to have been the preceptor and later the minister
of Candragupta. the founder of the Maurya dynasty who owed his elevation to the throne
to his political successes. Some scholars would place the composition of the Arthasästra
in Candragupta's era (the first quarter of the fourth century B.C.). Others attribute it to
the third or fourth century A.D. Renou. L'Inde classique II, s. 1598. The Nitisära of Käman-
daka (often called simply the Kämandaklya) is generally dated in the eighth century. We
cannot mention Jain works here, and must pass with a bare mention the oft-cited Sukrariiti.
the apocryphal character of which is fully established (Lallanji Gopal. The Sukraniti.
a nineteenth-century text'. B.S.O.A.S.. 25 (1962). 524-56). On the relationship between
Kautilya and related works on the one hand and dharma-sästra texts on the other valuable
information has been gathered by L. Sternbach in his 'Quotations from the Kautiliya-
Arthasästra. I; IT. J.A.O.S.. 88 (1968). 495-520. 717-27. That Kautilya was not Cänakya
has been suggested by T. Burrow, [trs.)
4H. Jacobi. J.J. Meyer. P.V. Kane. K.V. Raiigaswämi Aiyarigär. and U.N. Ghoshäl
have pointed out undeniable correspondencies between the Arthasästra of Kautilya and
the smrtis of Manu. Yäjnavalkya and Närada. It is quite hypothetical to conclude from
these affinities that one author borrowed from another or that there was a direct influence.
5For Bhäruci, see above, p. 94, n. 9. For Sternbach's investigation see above, n. 3.
Aparärka cites prose passages from Usanas. Visvarüpa on Yäj.. I. 307 advises the king
to appoint ministers according to the opinions expressed in the works of Brhaspati and
Usanas. Vijnänesvara on Yäj., II.21 also names Usanas as a classical author in the field
of arthasästra. Medhätithi on A/., VI1.43 declares that the word danda-nJti in the text

--- PAGE 168 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
147
all in the parts of digests devoted to the royal function we may expect
to find citations borrowed from arthasästra works. Yet, even there
citations are rare. The case of Bhäruci has already been mentioned,
and Medhätithi followed him to that extent. However, Laksmldhara
in his Räjadharma-kända and Ananta-deva in his Räjadharma-kaustubha
stick strictly to smrti texts. Nilakantha in the Niti-mayükha and Mitra-
misra in his Räjariiti-prakäsa cite only the Kämandaklya. Candesvara
is a notable exception. Though he takes Laksmldhara for his model,
his RäjanJti-ratnäkara contains numerous extracts from works of artha-
sästra.
The interpreters' reticence with regard to arthasästra treatises does
not depend upon a fundamental opposition between the characters of
those works and that of the dharma-sästras. Under the title of räja-
dharma the dharma-sästras teach the king, as arthasästra works do.
how he should govern if he is to perform his task properly. Manu
(VII.99—100) and Yäjnavalkya (I.317) recommend him a programme of
action which does not differ from the quadruple object of the arthasästra
according to the definition of Kautilya (1.4.3). Likewise the preoccupation
with artha, profit or economic interests, especially when the context is
the exercise of royal power, cannot be totally foreign to the outlook of
dharmasästra writers, any more than could a concern for dharma, religious
and moral duties, remain absolutely a matter of indifference to artha-
sästra authors. As Vijnänesvara,. the author of the Mitäksarä, observes
(on Yäj., II.21), there is no essential difference between the two sorts
of works; it is only that dharma occupies the principal place in the first
and a subordinate place in the others. In fact the distinction relates not
to the object, which is similar, but to the way of seeing things. In the
dharma-sästras the function of the king is seen under its aspect of the
duties incumbent on him in order that his mission should be accom-
plished. It is studied as an element in the social system of which it forms
the keystone. In the arthasästra works it is studied in and for itself,
in its aspect as an institution whose stability must be secured by the
means appropriate to it.6 It follows that if their precepts furnish a picture
much more complete than the dharma-sästras do of the machinery of a
kingdom's administration and the various instruments of royal policy,
these precepts, inspired by the interests of the state, could have only a
weak response from the commentators and authors of digests. For
them, royalty, which they believed to be as indispensable to the pros-
refers to the works of Cänakya (alias Kautilya) and others. The relationship between the
arthasästra and the dharmasästra as two sciences and two literatures must remain something
of a puzzle, in spite of the detailed studies of R.C. Hazra in Our Heritage.
6Cf the very relevant remarks of U.N. Ghoshäl, A History of Indian Political Ideas
(Oxford. 1959). 82.

--- PAGE 169 [DIRECT] ---

148 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
perity of the kingdom as did the arthasastra authors, could not be regarded
as an end in itself. In their eyes it was essentially a source of duties which
above all, it was important that kings should be taught to know.
2. The Method of Interpretation
The interpreter must first of all explain, if the need arises, the meaning
of the words of his text. That is the simplest part of his task, but not
the least useful, for at the period of the commentators certain terms
were no longer in general use in the sense in which they were used iri
the smrtis; and the text itself might be obscure by reason of its formu-
lation or its conciseness. In this respect the value of interpretation is
such that a sütra or a verse unaccompanied by commentary is some-
times unintelligible. This does not mean that the commentators always
agree as to the meaning of a word or a phrase. At the very least their
opinions, however diverse they may turn out to be, have the merit of
not being arbitrary.
But one of the essential tasks of interpretation distinguishes it com-
pletely from literary exegesis. It is the search from amongst the rules
of smrti, for that which ought to be held for an obligatory rule of conduct,
viz. a rule the breach of which is a sin, a rule of dharma. As for our juridical
texts, but with still more amplitude, there are multiple distinctions to
be made between the rules of the smrti so far as concerns their nature
and their significance. The western jurist appeals to the intention of
the legislator or to the end which he pursued. Such criteria cannot assist
the interpreter, for the rule of dharma rests on a divine commandment
whose profound reasons are beyond human intellects. Its formal aspect
enables it to be grasped; its expression, and its expression alone, reveals
what it means. This explains the importance of certain disciplines for
the method of interpretation. Grammar, Logic, and above all the
Mimämsä have played a great role. Of the last one writer has no hesi-
tation in saying that without a profound knowledge of that system it
is out of the question to debate problems in Hindu law.7
Besides the sources (müla) properly so called of dharma, Yajnavalkya
(1.3) ranks the Mimämsä amongst the bases (sthänas) of the knowledge
of dharma, along with Nyäya (the system of formal logic) and the Vedän-
gas. Vasistha (111.20), Baudhäyana (I.1.1.8), and Manu (XII.111) call a
mimämsaka to sit in the parisads which are given the role of resolving
controversial questions. It seems that very early the Mimämsä was
regarded as an indispensable science for the interpreter.
The Mimämsä ("investigation")8 is a method of exegesis which was
7Gangänätha Jhä, Introduction to his translation of the Viväda-cintämani (Baroda.
1942), vii.
8Also known as pürva-mimämsä to distinguish it from a 'subsequent' investigation
(uttara-mlmämsä), namely the Vedänta.

--- PAGE 170 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
149
originally confined to the Vedic texts. Its object was to secure the correct
performance of sacrificial rites. Since the content of these rites is
fixed by the "injunctions" (codanä, vidhi) of the Veda, the Mimämsä
propounds rules which enable the scholar to recognise a true injunction
and to determine its sense and significance.9
The oldest treatise is the collection of sütras attributed to Jaimini
(whose date differs between the third century B.C. and the third century
A.D. according to different scholars). The text is accompanied by a
commentary (bhäsya) of Sabarasvämin (fifth cent.?), which was itself
commented upon by Kumärila-bhatta (end of the seventh cent.) and
by Prabhäkara (called Guru), who was slightly later.10 There are many
more recent commentaries.
The sütras of Jaimini were divided into 12 adhyäyas, each one of
which is divided into many (generally four) pädas (quarters) and in
each päda one or more sütras are grouped into adhikaranas (topics,
subjects). Each topic is in principle subdivided into five parts : the subject
of the investigation (visaya), the doubt which it raises (samsaya),
the hypothesis or prima facie view (pürva-paksa), the reply (uttara-
paksa), and the conclusion (siddhänta or nirnaya).
As Colebrooke observes,10*7 this method of discussion is not without
relevance to the method followed by the jurist in elucidating a point
of law. This alone would suffice to explain why the Mimämsä was the
school where interpreters were trained for argument. But above all,
since the real object of Mimämsä was to study the injunctions and to
develop a theory about them, interpretation found in it material ready
to subserve its ends. It is true that the word dharma as understood in
Mimämsä is merely the ritual act, and that the Vedic injunction is only
studied with a view to the correct execution of rituals; but the trans-
position of ideas was the easier for the fact that under the orthodox
doctrine the rule of conduct which conforms to dharma takes its own
source, directed or presumed, in the Veda. Likewise the Mimämsä
rules of interpretation found a domain of application ready-made in
the sästras' precepts concerning Good Custom and penances. But even
in what concerns the rules of a specifically juridical character which
go to make up the vyavahära chapter(s), the extension of this method
to the texts of smrti was in no need of justification. The regulation of
9On the Mimämsä in general see L. Renou. L'Inde classique, 
II. ss. 137Off. There is a
bibliography in Jhä's Pürva-mJmämsä 
in its Sources {Benares. 1942)and Käne. V. 1200 1201.
The same volume of Kane's work gives an excellent chapter on the subject.
10The bhäsya of Sabarasvämin was translated by G. Jhä (Gaekwad's Or. Ser. Baroda,
1933-36); the same writer has also translated the Tantravärtika 
and the 
Slokavärtika,
Kumärila's commentaries on the work of Sabara (Bibl. Ind. ser.. Calcutta. 1903 24 and
1900-08).
10*Miscellaneous Essays (London. 1873). I. 342.

--- PAGE 171 [DIRECT] ---

150 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
disputes is presented by the dharmasästra authors as a sacrificial act.
or as if it were a sacrificial act, the rules of which must be scrupulously
observed under pain of sin.
The Mimämsä appeared to interpreters from the oldest to the most
recent as a source for references on the same basis as the texts of smrti
themselves. Some seem more versed in them than others, but all of them
use those principles without debate. It is true that the sütras of Jaimini
themselves sometimes give rise to discussion and that the opinions of
his commentators differ. The interpreters of dharmasästra simply adopt
the point of view of whichever of the commentators appears favourable
to their outlook. By their time, however, the ritual acts with which the
Mimämsä is occupied had for the most part fallen into desuetude.
The Vedic religion had been virtually dead for centuries, or had lived
on in a more or less antiquarian atmosphere. Further, the arguments
which the interpreters borrow from the Mimämsä occasionally give
rise to astonishment. It had become pure casuistry, speculation whose
object had virtually ceased to have a reality. It found in the interpretation
of smrti a happy hunting ground, and thereby took on a new life. That
life actually went on long after commentaries and digests had ceased
to be written, and it is not the least curious aspect of legal practice in
our own days that one can see the Anglo-Indian courts right up to the
Privy Council discussing the bearing and meaning of a Mimämsä principle
in litigation.11
The way in which the commentators have utilised the Mimämsä
throws light on the resources of their dialectic and illuminates their
mentality too. A systematic exposition of the way they proceeded would
not be possible here. We can only refer to writers who have tackled
this subject.12 I shall confine myself to giving some examples of the
most frequent uses of the technique. We shall meet others in the course
of this chapter.
In the view of J.D. Mayne,13 the Mimämsä rules of interpretation
were for the most part rules of good sense which any jurist might be
11 Sri Balusu Gurulingaswami v. Sri Balusu Ramulakshmamma (1899) Law Reports,
26 Ind. App. 113. J.D. Mayne. Hindu Law and Usage, 11th edn. (Madras, 1953), s. 20,
p. 37. Käne, III, 676. n. 1277.
12The classic work is K.L. Sarkär. The Mimänsä (sie) Rules of Interpretation 
as applied
to Hindu Law (Tagore Law lectures for 1905. Calcutta. 1909). See also J.N. Bhattächärya.
Commentaries 
on Hindu Law 3rd edn. (Calcutta. 1909). I. 97 152; the short but substantial
treatment by A.B. Keith in the last chapter of his Karmamlmämsä 
(London. 1921); A.S.
Nataräja Ayyar. Mimämsä Jurisprudence (The Sources of Hindu Law) (Allahabad. 1952).
Kane's section in volume V (as noticed above) extending from p. 1152 to 1351 learnedly
analyses the different forms of the MImämsä's contribution to the interpretation of smrti
precepts.
nOp. cit.. 8th edn. (Madras. 1914). s. 33. The passage has been retouched in the 1 lth edn,
s. 20. pp. 35-6 and s. 21. p. 39.

--- PAGE 172 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
151
brought naturally to use. The remark is only partly correct. There are
maxims (nyäyas) taken from the Mimämsä which are very like the
Latin tags which western jurists are fond of citing to support or embellish
their arguments and which express a generally accepted rule, a rule in
many cases of simple good sense, such as nemo dat quod non habet (no
one can transfer what he does not have). But such a citation strengthens
the argument, and it is by no means useless to recall some primary truth
in the course of juridical discussion. This is how it was with the use of
certain axioms taken from the Mimämsä which differ from ours only
in point of their specifically Indian style. That is the case, for example,
with the maxim of the black beans (mäsa-mudga-nyäya). A Vedic text
declares that black beans and some other cereals are unsuitable for
sacrifices. Another text prescribes that on certain occasions offerings
must be made with green beans (mudga). If green beans are unobtainable
can they be replaced by black ones? The question is examined according
to the system indicated above (Jai., VI.3.20). The conclusion (siddhänta)
is that since the black kind have been expressly forbidden, one must
avoid them even when they are mixed with the green variety and even
when it would be difficult to distinguish the one from the other. When
carried over into the usage of the sästric interpreters, the rule means
that every act contrary to the law is forbidden (cf. contra legem facit
qui id facit quod lex prohibet, he breaks the law who does that which
the law prohibits.). To some this may seem tautology, but none the less
it elucidates numerous doubtful cases. For example, scholars are engaged
in discussing whether a coheir who kept for himself property which
was liable to partition, believing that it belonged exclusively to him,
should be considered an offender. Jimütavähana {Day., XIII.8) believes
that he can not be held to be a thief because that which he converted
to his own use was at least partly his. He has not committed a sin, and
all he must do is to bring into hotch-pot the goods in question. But
Vijnänesvara {Mit., on Yäj., II.127), referring to the maxim of the black
beans, holds the selfish coheir to be an offender and deprives him of his
quotient in the goods concealed or withdrawn. He relies on Manu
(IX.213) according to whose terms "the eldest son who through cupidity
has despoiled his younger brothers is no longer an elder brother; he
should be deprived of his (preferential) share and be punished by the
king". He concludes from this that since the prohibition of appropriating
to oneself the goods of another is quite general it must be applied in a
case even where the offender was a coproprietor.14 From the very same
maxim it has been concluded e contrario that everything which is not
prohibited is permitted (cf. quod non est lege prohibitum intelligitur
concessum, that which is not prohibited by law is understood to be
14Kane, III. 636-7.

--- PAGE 173 [DIRECT] ---

152 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
allowed). This is what Vacaspati Misra does (Vyav. tint., 298.1) ä propos
of Manu VIII. 118, where the people are enumerated whose testimony
is not to be accepted in court. When it is impossible to produce a witness
possessing the required characteristics, it is permitted to substitute for
him persons not fulfilling those conditions, with the sole exception of
those explicitly disqualified by Manu's text. No one will doubt that in
either case the reference to the maxim of the black beans is ineffectual :
what has happened is simply that the authority of the Mimämsä is used
to reinforce the reasoning.
Further, when a precept taken from the Mimämsä (III.2.1) lays down
that the same word should not be taken in two senses in the same sentence
(barhir-nyäya), or even (VI. 1.6-16) that the singular includes the plural
and what is said of a male applies equally to a female (grahaikatva-
nyäya),15 we are in the presence of rules (no doubt subject to their
exceptions) which belong to the semantic stock in trade of the interpreter.
But we are in another sphere of application when the solution required
by the Mimäipsä is regarded as an oracle in itself and justifies, or appears
to justify, the interpretation. Thus Saunaka, the author of a dharma-
sästra cited by Manu (III. 16), declares that at the commencement of
the ritual appropriate to an adoption the adopting parent shall honour
the king and virtuous Brahmins with an offering of madhuparka (a
mixture of honey, liquid butter and curds). Since the word is "Brahmins"
in the plural, how many have the right to the offering? The author of
the Dattaka-candrikä16 resolves the difficulty by simply alluding to the
maxim of the white partridges (kapinjala-nyäya) (Jai., II. 1.38-45).
A Vedic text prescribes that on the occasion of the horse-sacrifice one
should sacrifice white partridges as an offering to Vasanta (the god
of Spring). In this Mimämsä passage the significance of the plural of
the word partridge (kapihjalän) is examined. At first sight the plural
suggests any number exceeding two.17 But the correct opinion is that
here it means three only, for the Vedic injunction is entirely satisfied
by the sacrifice of three partridges, and since one has done everything
which the injunction prescribes by sacrificing three partridges one would
be doing wrong if one went on and sacrificed more than the three. By
analogy the author of the Dattaka-candrikä concludes that the plural
brähmahäh of the text ought to be understood as meaning three Brahmins
and not more. In this case the solution which is adopted rests solely on
the authority of the Mimämsä.18
15Cf genus masculinum complectitur et femininum (words in the masculine include also
the feminine). For the rule by statute in England see Maxwell. Interpretation of Statutes,
lOthedn., 349, 412.
16In Sutherland's translation (Stokes's collection), p. 637.
17Sanskrit, like Greek, having the dual number and inflections accordingly.
18We may compare, from the 5m. Cand.. II, 297, an authoritative application of a

--- PAGE 174 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
153
The few examples I have given so far of the application of Mlmämsä
concepts to the interpretation of sästric rules are intended to show the
originality—some might say bizarreness—of such a use. But just as
the Latin tags with which western jurists embellish their writings are
far from representing what their professional education owes to the
Roman or the common law, so the maxims (nyäyas) taken from the
Mimämsä of which the commentators make abundant use are only a
feeble indication—a detritus—of the training which has made them
what they are.19 In reality the Mlmämsä has served the interpreters as
a model even of exegetical methods. The deep discussion which they
found there regarding questions of vocabulary, grammatical usage,
syntax, and so on, has shown them the ways in which certain of their
difficulties could be overcome and has given them help, almost philo-
logically speaking, analogous to that afforded them from time to time
by grammar. Only a transposition was needed to adapt to their own
ends the reasoning of commentators on Jaimini and thus to find the
key to a way of escape from their dilemmas.
The Mlmämsä has as its primary object the study of the injunction.
It determined and examined the different forms under which it could
present itself in the Vedic texts and undertook to define their respective
scopes of application. Thus beside the primary injunction pure and
simple (utpatti-vidhi), it distinguished also the injunction of application
(viniyoga-vidhi) which fixes the relation between the principal rite and
a subsidiary action; the injunction of employment (prayoga-vidhi)
which fixes the order in which the different parts of the rite should be
performed; the injunction of qualification (adhikära-vidhi) which fixes
the conditions required if the doer of the action is to obtain the fruits of
the ritual he has put into effect; the restrictive injunction (niyama-vidhi)
which submits the doing of the act to determined conditions, excluding
others which are equally possible; and the injunction of exclusive speci-
fication (parisankhyä-vidhi, which operates as a prohibition), and so
forth. These subtle distinctions furnish the sästric interpreter with
ready-formed means to analyse and classify the precepts of the smrti
and to define their nature and'significance rigorously.20
But the prime task which the Mlmämsä undertook was to disengage
the rules by which one could know from amongst the Vedic texts which
were the propositions uttering a true injunction, distinguishing from
Mlmämsä rule of interpretation (Jai.. V.l. 14) to resolve a doubt about the dual pitarau
in the text of Yäj.. 11.135. in a manner diverging from that of Vijnänesvara. who. for his
part, relies upon Pänini and his commentators. Kane. III. 720-3.
19Käne, V, 1139-1351. gives a list of the maxims (nyäyas) which are most frequently
cited by the commentators.
20On the different kinds of vidhi and the assistance which such distinctions can afford
to the interpreters see Käne. V. 1228-1232.

--- PAGE 175 [DIRECT] ---

154 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
them those which were not imperative for the validity of the sacrificial
act. First of all, an injunction emanating from the Veda, which is the
very revelation of Truth, is peremptory, in the sense that one must
conform to it for the sole reason that it is formulated. It requires no
justification. It is self-validating. However, it often happens that the
Vedic author adds to the utterance of the injunction some proposition
which exalts the virtue of the act or has a bearing on some speciality of
its performance. These subsidiary particulars, called arthavädas, have no
bearing at all on the significance of the injunction and should not be
understood to explain or justify the act. Thus it is prescribed in certain
sacrifices that the homa libation21 should be poured by means of the
sürpa (winnowing fan) and some texts add, "because it is by means
of the sürpa that that food is prepared". One wants to know whether
these words supply the reason why one should use the sürpa. Jaimini
says not (1.2.26-30), for the injunction is self-sufficient. The phrase is
an arthaväda which has no other object than to emphasise that the sürpa
should be used. If we understood it otherwise we might be led to think
that the Veda prescribed the use of the sürpa only because that utensil
is used for the preparation of the homa and that therefore any utensil
equally employed for that purpose could be used in the sacrificial act.
Such a conclusion would be contrary to the contents of the injunction
which mentions only the sürpa.
There exist several varieties of arthaväda: descriptive passages,
metaphorical passages, allusions to past events, allusions to current
notions, etc. Vedic texts abound in them, and it is often difficult to
know if what we have before us is an arthaväda or an injunction.22
The interpreters frequently avail themselves of the distinction between
a vidhi and an arthaväda, either to resolve a conflict between the texts
or to determine the meaning of a precept of smrti. They use it with great
virtuosity, as we shall see. Here we may confine ourselves to one particular
case which is specially interesting because of the long controversy which
the application of the Mimämsä produced before the Anglo-Indian
courts. Vasistha (XV.3) prescribed that one should neither receive nor
give in adoption an only son. "For", says he, "[he should stay] to continue
the line of his ancestors". It is clear that, by analogy with the rules of
interpretation of the Mimämsä, that last phrase should be taken as an
arthaväda, intended merely to underline the importance of the only son.
Vasistha wishes simply to prohibit the adoption of an only son. But if
it is to be seen as the reason for the prohibition, the latter is weakened
thereby, since a condition is imported into its application. The adoption
of an only son would indeed be a sin on the father's part, but it would
21 An oblation in fire, a ritual frequently prescribed for domestic ceremonies.
22Käne. V. 1238-44.

--- PAGE 176 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
155
not be invalid. Thus Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., 11.129-133). Nanda-
pandita (Dattaka-mimämsä IV. 1-6), the author of the Dattaka-candrikä
(1.27) and Nflakantha (Vyav. may., IV.v.9, 16) pronounce in favour
of absolute prohibition.23
On the other hand, if the authority of the injunction arises solely
from the fact that it was formulated as such in the Veda, how can we
recognise the same origin and consequently the same authority in pres-
criptions of the smrti which do not happen to be referrable back to a
Vedic text? Doubtless the rules set out in the dharma-sästras, emanating
from Sages versed in the Veda, are presumed to rest upon a Vedic injunc-
tion, jven when their textual source cannot be verified. But this is only
a presumption which the nature of the rule might rebut, then there are
in the dharma-sästras precepts whose very form reveals that they could
not derive their authority from a Vedic injunction. According to Sabara
(on Jai., 1.3.3-4), the essential criterion is to be found in the motive which
inspired them. The Vedic injunction really relies upon an invisible
spiritual motive whose effect is not shown until the other world. If a
precept of smrti seems to be founded visibly on a worldly purpose,
like the profit of him to whom it is addressed, that motive alone is the
source from which its authority is drawn and that source cannot be
located in the Veda, even in cases where it would not be in conflict with
known Vedic texts. On the other hand, we may infer of a rule which
appears to have no visible motive that it is founded on the Veda and
that its authority stems solely from the Veda. Kumärila discusses this
opinion at length and has a few reservations, observing that it is often
impossible to dissociate in a Vedic injunction the invisible spiritual
motive which inspired it from the visible motive—the two being inextri-
cably blended.24 To his mind one should find the criterion rather in
the effect of the act. Every precept of smrti whose effect cannot be experi-
enced until the after-life and which remains as a result invisible in this
world, should be presumed to have its basis in the Veda. Conversely
a precept whose effect is shown in this life has no authority save that
visible result.25
This criterion is of capital importance for the interpreters who 'refer
sometimes to Sahara's commentary and sometimes to that of Kumärila.26
23However, the opposite conclusion was reached in Anglo-Hindu law after a debate
which lasted the best part of the nineteenth century. Mayne, op. cit., 1 lth edn., s. 174, p. 229.
24Thus. according to Kumärila, the rule that the brahmacärin must rise before the approach
of his master as a sign of respect has a visible' motive, namely to please the master who
will take a greater interest in teaching his pupil, and an 'invisible' motive, namely to secure
that the Veda is taught him fully.
25The discussion is summarised by Kane. Ill, 835-40 and V, 1260-3.
26Sabara's gloss is cited by Kullüka on A/., III.7. But Medhâtithi, on M., I1.18, cites a
passage of the Tantravärtika according to which 'a smrti which is contrary to the Veda,

--- PAGE 177 [DIRECT] ---

156 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
It allows them to distinguish between the precepts of the smrti which
have a religious value and consequently in their eyes a preeminently
imperative character, and those precepts whose value is confined to
their utility in the affairs of daily life. Surely this is evidence of their
awareness of the difference between the profane (or secular) and the
sacred. Thus Yajnavalkya lays down (1.52-53) amongst the conditions
for marriage that the bride should not be affected by any incurable
malady and that she should not be a sapinda21 of her future husband
nor of the same gotra (patrilineage) or pravara as he. Commenting on
this text, Vijnänesvara observes that the precept not to marry a girl
with an incurable disease has a "visible" motive—the fear lest that
disease should be transmitted to her offspring. This should be seen,
consequently, as mere advice. On the other hand, the precept not to
marry a girl who is a sapinda or of the same gotra is not founded on
any visible motive and can have only a spiritual effect: it is therefore
a rule of dharma. And Vijnänesvara concludes from this that if a man
marries a girl subject to an incurable disease he must risk the consequences
(his children may inherit the disease) but the marriage is none the less
valid. On the other hand, if he marries a girl who is a sapinda or of the
same gotra the marriage ought to be treated as null and void.28 Similarly,
commenting on the verse of Kätyäyana (35) according to which "the king,
having entered the court, shall look into the cases of the litigants, modestly
clothed, with concentrated mind, seated facing the East", Vacaspati
Misra remarks that the precept that the king should be modestly dressed
has a visible motive: the intention is to avoid intimidating the litigants.
Conversely, that of being seated and facing the East, has no apparent
motive. It must thus be founded on a motive of a spiritual kind, and to
fail to observe it would be a sin on the king's part.29
We may note that the criterion founded on whether the object is
visible or invisible (drstärtha, or adrstärtha) comes from, or is connected
with, the traditional classification established by the trivarga between
the three ends or motive forces in human activity : dharma (righteousness,
the Good), artha (the Useful) and käma (the Pleasant). The rule of
conduct which is inspired by a visible motive, that is to say a worldly
one, is necessarily in the domain of artha or käma, for this motive cannot
be other than either the interest or the pleasure of the individual subject
to it. By contrast a rule which is observed without reference to utility or
pleasure in this world must belong to the domain of dharma from the
or disapproved by it. or which subserves a visible object and which proceeds from perceptible
motives, can never depend upon the Veda'. It can never claim Vedic authority.
27On sapindaship according to Vijnänesvara see Käne, II. 452-8.
28Käne. III. 837-8.
v>Vyav. tint. 9.1-2 and n. 162.

--- PAGE 178 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
157
moment when it is found prescribed in the smrti. Its invisible effect,
the apürva ("non-previous") (the word could conceivably suggest also
that the effect has no spontaneous motive), cannot be known until the
after-life. The dharmasästra authors and their interpreters considered
that conduct ruled by dharma was preferable to conduct inspired by
interest or pleasure, because of the spiritual benefits which it secured.
But this does not mean to say that a rule of artha or even of käma must
automatically be neglected, for, being the fruit of human experience,
it might well formulate useful advice of current morality or provide a
solution to difficulties of a practical nature. In other words, it could
well have the status of a recommendation or even of a rule of law. This
would not be the case where the rule of dharma is in contradiction with
a rule of artha or käma when, according to our authors, it must take
priority. Thus Yäjnavalkya declares (1.352) that the king must take
pains to secure friends, for, he says, friends are worth more than gold
or territory. This is valid advice in general, but given to the king in his
own interest it appertains to the domain of artha. Likewise, when the
same author enjoins the king to render justice according to the precepts
of the sästras, the king should decide the cases submitted to him without
being concerned whether he makes friends thereby, for to follow the
precepts of the sästra is a religious duty for him, a rule of dharma, failure
to observe which will react upon his future destiny through the operation
of a cause otherwise unknown to us.
The principle is enunciated in the smrti quite clearly : "A rule of
dharma has more weight than a rule of artha" (Yäj., II.21).30 But one
must note by the same token that where it is not repugnant to a rule of
dharma a rule of artha is fully valid (as advice or as a rule of law).
It seems none the less curious on the part of the interpreters that they
attribute superiority to dispositions of smrti which are without any
motive or visible object, i.e. without apparent utility. In reality nothing
shows better than this criterion how very far their conception of their
task was from that of a jurist in our sense of that word.
3. Conflicts between texts
THE PRINCIPAL task of the interpreters was to extract the rules of dharma
from the mass of authoritative texts. Our first duty is to examine the
means by which they managed to resolve the difficulties inevitably
arising from the variety of legal propositions with which they were
faced.
At the period of the commentators, smrti had become the essential
source for the knowledge of dharma. It had encompassed the precepts
^arthasästrät tu balavad dharmasästram iti sthitih. The same rule appears at När.. Intr.
1.39 and Kät. 32.

--- PAGE 179 [DIRECT] ---

1 Do 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of sruti, and wherever the rule it contained could not be traced back
to a known Vedic text, it was presumed to be founded on a passage
which had escaped human knowledge. Manu himself (11.10) declares
that sruti and smrti "ought to be above all discussion (amimämsye)
on any point, for it is from those two that dharma proceeds". And
Brhaspati (Aiy., samskära 228) compares to a one-eyed man any Brahmin
who is versed only in sruti, since sruti and smrti are like a pair of eyes.
So the two written sources of dharma tend to be confused in a common
interpretation.
When ä propos of the same sacrificial act, the Vedic texts prescribe
two different rules, it is possible, according to the Mimämsä, to opt for
either. This principle is found in Manu (11.14): "In a case of divergence
between two precepts of sruti both are taken for [rules of] dharma (dharmäv
ubhau smrtau), for both of them were declared dharma by the Sages".
Medhätithi, like Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., I.4-5) extends this principle
to texts of smrti itself. If there is a conflict between a precept of sruti
and one of smrti, the majority of the interpreters, following the opinion
of Kumärila, believe that the rule formulated in smrti will not lose any
authority, and in consequence an option is permitted between them.31
But this option is not a solution which can be generalised. It may
be that in a ritual context it is often possible to leave the choice between
two methods of performing the act to the sacrificer himself. But, by
their very nature, precepts of a juridical character generally demand
that in any given context one must pronounce for one alternative and
against the other. To admit an option is never better than a last resort.
Therefore we are not allowed to admit that a conflict exists unless no
other solution is conceivable.32
To resolve such difficulties we can take no account whatever of the
relative age of works in which the conflicting texts are found. A verse
attributed to Pitämaha has as much force as one from the Yäjnavalkya-
smrti. Brhaspati (Aiy., samskära 13) gives superiority to Manu above
all the other smrtis and declares that a smrti which contradicts Manu
has no authority (manvartha-viparitä tu yä smrtih sä na sasyate). But
this opinion has not prevailed, and Brhaspati himself often differs
from Manu on important points.33 Likewise no more than an echo
has been heard of the verses of the Paräsara-smrti (I.22-23) according
to which the rules proclaimed by Paräsara alone would be valid for the
31Cf the passage of the Äcärasära of Laksmana-bhatta. cited by Mandlik in the Intro-
duction to the Vyavahära-mayükha, 
p. xxvii. Medhätithi admits the option (on A/.. II.6)
but thinks, as indeed does Kumärila. that it is preferable to follow the rule of sruti.
32That is the principle which is accepted by the Mimämsä elsewhere, according to which
option (vikalpa) is subject to eight faults. Käne. V, 1250.
33Käne, P, 487.

--- PAGE 180 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
159
Kali Age. In any case, the fact that this smrti deals only with Good
Custom (äcära) and penances and leaves vyavahära alone withdraws
a good deal of interest from its pretensions. For its part, the Gobhila-
smrti (alias the Karma-pradipa of Kätyäyana) declares that in a case
of conflict it is the rule accepted by the majority of authors which should
be observed. This mechanical method of resolving conflicts (which
recalls the curious "Law of Citations" of the late Roman empire)34
seems never to have been employed by our interpreters.
Thus the interpreters were obliged to attempt to resolve by reasoning
alone the apparent contradictions between texts of equal authority.
Manu (II.11) inveighs against the critical spirit which would seek to
undermine the authority of the sacred texts, and he even declares (IV.30)
that a logician has no more right to the hospitality of a dvija than has a
heretic. But he is only condemning the ill use which could be made of
reasoning, and his commentators explain that the word for logician
(hetuka) means here sceptics or adherents of false doctrines. Manu
(XII.Ill) does grant a place in parisads to a logician (hetuka) beside
the mimämsaka. And he fully recognises the value of reasoning when
he says (XII. 106), "He alone and no other knows dharma who ponders
on [the teachings] of the rsis and on the precepts of dharma relying on
[a method of] reasoning not opposed to the Veda". This method of
reasoning (here tarka)*5 is nothing other than Mimämsä for interpreters
such as Medhätithi and Kullüka. And all the resources of a dialectic
which scrupulously respects the sacred texts are laid under contribution
by the interpreters in general.
In order for a conflict to exist, both texts must state a genuine precept.
If it is admitted that one of them does not have an imperative quality,
the conflict disappears. The interpreters often have recourse to this
point of view to remove texts which, otherwise, would have been embar-
rassing. Thus, a passage in the Taittirlya-samhitä (III.5.2.7) declares
that the eldest son takes a larger share of his paternal estate than that
of his brothers. Some authors do not accept this inequality at a partition.
They say that it is inoperative, for the text contains no injunction, but
a mere recital of events pasTt (anuväda) : it tells us what certain people
do or have done.36 Likewise a passage in the Rgveda (VI1.4.7-8) seems
to condemn adoption. But smrti texts provide for adoption with a ritual
under the form of a homa sacrifice, which allows us to presume that
there was a Vedic injunction behind the smrti. Consequently the Vedic
341.3 C. Th. de resp. prud. (1.4). R. Sohm, The Institutes, 
a textbook 
of the history and
system of Roman Private Law, 3rd edn. (Oxford, 1907). 118 9. [trs.]
?5Gautama. XI.22-3 uses the same word tarka to indicate reasoning such as enables the
king to unravel the truth in a dispute.
?6Käne. III. 622. The discussion is found at Äpastamba. II.6.14. 13.

--- PAGE 181 [DIRECT] ---

160 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
text which disapproves of adoption is a simple arthaväda which cannot
annual a smrti precept recommending adoption and followed by an
obligatory homaP The same argument is employed, sometimes with an
astonishing virtuosity, with regard to the precepts of the dharma-sästras
which appear to conflict.
Thus Närada (I.81) says, "An object given as a pledge, boundaries
(sima), the property of a child, a deposit, a loan (upanidhi), women,
the property of the king or srotriyas does not cease to belong [to their
owners] by being in the possession of another". But the following verse
decides, "Only excepting a woman or the property of the king, even
pledges, etc. (ädhyädiny api) are lost to their owner when they have
been openly in the possession of another during twice ten years". It
seems that we are in the presence of two contradictory texts, the one not
admitting that the owner of a pledge can lose his ownership, the other
admitting on the contrary that, save for women and the property of the
king, ownership is lost at the end of a certain lapse of time. Väcaspati
Misra (Vyav. tint., 510-511) gets rid of this contradiction by seeing
in the second text an arthaväda intended only to bring out the non-liability
of a pledge to be acquired by prescription. He relies on the word api
("even") which signifies emphasis and he calls to mind, as an analogy,
a phrase like this : "Even drinking poison would be better than to dine
in that man's house". The words "even drinking poison" obviously
do not mean that it is ever permissible to drink poison. Their only object
is to emphasise the recommendation not to eat in that house. In the
same way, the second verse of Närada is simply directed to reenforce
the rule laid down in the first. Medhätithi has recourse to the same
special method of reasoning to deprive of all significance that verse of
Manu (VIII.350) by which he allows that in self-defense one may kill
even a Brahmin. For Medhätithi the killing of a Brahmin is always an
inexpiable sin, for Manu elsewhere (IV. 162) formally and unconditionally
prohibits the doing of any harm to a Brahmin. Thus the first verse of Manu
can only be taken to justify fully the right of self-defense in general : "If a
natural reaction drives one who is attacked to kill even a Brahmin,
who is a sacred person [whom no one has the right to touch] what need
be said when the assailant is a non-Brahmin?"38
When this attempt at exclusion of conflicts cannot apply, and we
are confronted with two precepts really dealing with the same matter,
they should, in principle, be held to be mutually complementary. The
interpreter must attempt to reconcile them, especially by trying to see
whether one does not express the general rule and the other the exception,
wVTr.. par.. 27. Nirnaya-sindhu 
cited by Kane, III. 657 n. 1244.
3 8The same process of reasoning is found at Vijñánesvara. Mit., on Yäj.. II.21.

--- PAGE 182 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
161
or whether each does not have its own proper scope of application.39
We cannot fail to remark how the method of reasoning is always abstract.
Our authors discuss only texts and existing opinions about texts. They
never presuppose a standard other than pure logic, aiming—or at any
rate seeming to aim—at nothing other than a rational solution.40 They
do not hesitate to have recourse to quibbles in order to support a solution
which they believe to be well-founded, but the best of them deploy in
their handling of the texts a technique which might well be the envy of
our most subtle casuists or experts in distinguishing decided cases.
Let us take as an example the commentary of the Mitäksarä on verse
24 of Book II of the Yäjhavalkya-smrti. The text goes as follows :
pasyato 'bruvato bhümer hänir vi/nsati-värsikl
parena bhujyamänäya dhanasya dasa-värsikl.
"Of him who sees without objection his land occupied by another,
a loss (häni) is undergone with regard to that land at the end of twenty
years; [if it is] a moveable asset (dhana), ten years [are sufficient]".
According to certain commentators anterior to Vijnänesvara, especially
Asahäya (on När., I.78), this verse would signify that after an uninter-
rupted possession of twenty or ten years under the eyes of the owner
and without protest on his part, the possessor acquires property in
the object. The word "loss" (häni) would mean the loss of the thing
itself, loss by the true owner of his right of property. Vijnänesvara
discards this opinion as conflicting with a verse of Närada (I.87) which
says "He who enjoys [the asset of another] without title, even for centuries,
the lord of the land [i.e. the king] should inflict on that sinner the penalty
39Mimämsä principles (II. 1, 46) recalled especially by Vijnänesvara, Mit., on Yäj.,
1.4-5 and by Medhätithi on A/.. XI.216.
40Cf the verse from the (unpublished) Bhavisya Puräna cited in the Vyav. cint., 10.
smrtyarthayor virodhe tu arthasästrasya bädhanam, paraspara-virodhe tu nyäya-yuktam
pramänavat. 'Where there is a conflict between smrti and artha, the rule of artha is barred.
Where there is a conflict between two rules of the same nature that which conforms to
logic (nyäya-yukta) is authoritative.' The translation of nyäya by equity, preferred by
L. Rocher, is debatable, for nyäya refers to a process of reasoning which facilitates a choice
between the two rules, rather than a subjective notion which would make the choice depend
upon the interpreter's assessment. Equity, as we know it, has no place here, but rather in
the administration of justice where the king or his delegate, the deciding judge, is free to
take into account the circumstances surrounding the matter before him. The interpreter,
for his part, is confined to speculating on the texts. I do not think we need pay attention
here to När., 1.40, which also is cited in the Vyav. cint. 11 : dharmasästra-virodhe tu yukti-
yukto vidhih smrtah, or, according to Bhavasvämin's version (1.34): -yukto pi dharmatah.
'Where there is a conflict between two precepts of the sästras, it is the injunction which is
obtained by reasoning (yukti-yukto) which should be respected/ For that verse refers to
the administration of justice and the word yukti envisages reasoning based upon the circum-
stances of the case. Lingat, Les quatre pieds du proces', J.A.. 1962, 502 n. 18.

--- PAGE 183 [DIRECT] ---

162 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
denounced against thieves". Whence it would appear to result that
possession without title cannot lead to the acquisition of the property.
It is true that Vijnänesvara recognises that the verse of Närada applies
only to the trespasser, to one who knows that neither he nor any of his
predecessors have ever had any title to ownership of that asset. As for
the possessor in good faith verse 27 of Yajiiavalkya provides that pos-
session without title cannot serve as proof of ownership unless it is
prolonged through a line of ancestors (pürva-kramägata), that is to
say three generations, which Vijnänesvara equates with a century.41
After all, facts going back further escape human memory, and one can
not expect a possessor to justify the origin of his possession. In other
words, immemorial possession dispenses with title or enables it to be
presumed. But wherever possession does not have this character it is
entirely inoperative, because, since it cannot enable ownership to be
presumed, it cannot a fortiori enable it to be acquired.42 Now this is
precisely the case with a period as short as ten or twenty years envisaged
in v.24. Therefore this text cannot mean that property in the asset has
passed to the possessor.
Vijnänesvara then takes up another interpretation which connects
v.24 with the preceding verse.43 Verse 23 stands contrary to the general
rule that when two contracts have been entered into successively the
later in date prevails. It declares that if the same asset has been offered
as a pledge, given, or sold successively to two people, it is the first contract
which is binding. In other words the asset should belong to him to whom
it was offered as a pledge, given, or sold in the first place. To this exception
the following verse, namely our v.24, would in turn provide an exception :
if he to whom the asset was pledged, given or sold in the second instance
41The same rule is expressed by Kät.. 317 and by När., I.91, both of which speak of
possession extending through three generations (tri-purusägata). However, the verse of
När. gives some little difficulty, because it provides that the possessor cannot be evicted
even if his possession has been irregular (anyäyenäpi). which is in contradiction with his
verse 87 which is cited above. Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., II.27) extricates himself from
the difficulty by relying on the word api (as do Väcaspati Misra and Medhätithi in the
examples cited above, and as he has already done on Yäj., II.21). This word api ('even')
should, he says, indicate that if a possessor cannot be evicted when his possession is irregular,
it follows a fortiori (and that would be the true sense of the line) that he cannot be evicted
if his possession is not tainted by any irregularity. We could also understand anyäyena
as simply meaning 'without title', vinägamam, which is what Asahäya actually does (on
När.. 1.91). On Brhaspati VH.73-74 see L. Rocher, Adyar Library Bulletin, XVIII, 3/4,
171-7. [trs.]
42Vijnänesvara presents the argument as an application of the principles of Nyäya:
that which is a means of proof (pramäna) cannot produce that which has to be proved
(prameya).
43This interpretation is to be found in the Vyavahära-mätrkä of Jimütavähana (Käne,
III, 324 n. 464). but the author is not actually named in the Mitäksarä (they seem to have
been roughly contemporary).

--- PAGE 184 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
163
had actually entered into possession and continued to possess it for
ten or twenty years in full knowledge of the first without any protest
on the latter's part, he would win the case. The loss (häni) would fall
upon the first lender who had required a pledge, or the first donee or
vendee. Vijnänesvara refutes this interpretation. He observes that it is
not allowed for one who has already disposed of his asset to dispose of
it again. The second transaction is thus void, and cannot affect the
rights of the first transferee. Further, if the dispute is about a gift, it
exposes both the donee and the donor to a heavy punishment (the
uttama-sähasä) (När., IV. 12).
Vijnänesvara encounters another interpretation (proposed in fact by
Visvarüpa, on Yäj., II.26, who is not actually named), founded on the
following text of Närada (ed. Sämb., 11.71): "Of him who shows indi-
fference (upeksä) or who stays silent (tüsnim-bhüta), when the time
prescribed [for suit] has elapsed, action is no longer allowed (vyavahäro
na sidhyati)." The words upeksä and tüsnim-bhüta correspond (so it
seems) to pasyatah and abruvatah in the Yäjfiavalkya-smrti. Thus v.24
would signify that after having left a third party to enjoy his asset in
his presence without protest for ten or twenty years, the true owner
has lost his right of action. Häni would be loss of judicial remedy. The
owner could not go to court to recover his asset, but he would not neces-
sarily have lost his right of property.
This loss of a judicial remedy does not necessarily produce the same
result as if the right of property itself had been extinguished. Devanna-
bhatta (Sm. cand., II. pp. 68-69), who supports this theory, contends in
effect that the only loss is that of proof in court by the human means
of proof (mänusa-pramänät) ; but the owner would be permitted to take
recourse to an ordeal. This opinion is supported by a passage of the
Samgraha-kära*4 where it is said that written proof or witnesses are
of no value when property is sought to be recovered from a possessor.
Aparärka, whose theory is closely similar, speaks only of the owner's
right to take recourse to an ordeal. But he considers that v.24 merely
states the presumption of ownership in a possessor's favour, a presump-
tion adequate to bar the action of the owner in a court of justice, but
such as a scrupulous possessor should hesitate to rely upon or exploit.
He who knows that the asset which he enjoys really belongs to another,
even though he cannot be evicted from it by legal means, can nevertheless
restore it to its rightful owner out of regard for sin which would otherwise
be incurred.
Thus the expiry of a period of ten or twenty years could well have the
effect of paralysing the proprietor's legal action, but it would not put
44Mys. edn. III/l (1914). 157. On this smrti which is often cited in the Sm. cand., see
Käne, I, 2 3 9 ^ 2 (and P, 541).

--- PAGE 185 [DIRECT] ---

164 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
an end to the ownership as such. The latter may still be recognised,
whether by the true owner's taking recourse to an ordeal, or through
the free consent of the third party who is in possession.
This theory is severely criticised by Vijnänesvara. First of all he
declares that inactivity (upeksä) or silence (tüsnlm-bhäva) on the part
of the true owner cannot be held by itself to be sufficient reason for his
loss of the right of action, for it could have been due to causes over which
he had no control. Thus texts of Manu (VIII. 148) and Närada (I.80)
provide that the owner who allows a stranger to enjoy his asset is not
deprived of his rights if he (the owner) is of unsound mind or a minor.
Now Medhätithi observes that the cases of unsoundness of mind (jadatva)
or of minority (pogandatva) are cited only as examples, and what is
really envisaged in those texts is the complete series of cases in which
a person is found incapable of undertaking litigation. So, according to
Vijftänesvara, Manu's and Närada's intention is not to make the loss
of a judicial remedy depend from the simple passivity of the true owner
or a simple default on his part in exercising his right, but from the absence
of causes which would explain or account for his passivity. When none
of those causes seems to exist, as for example, when the true owner is
neither a lunatic nor a minor, the possessor can defend an action for
ejectment in the following way: 'The plaintiff is neither of unsound
mind nor a minor. I have enjoyed his asset to his knowledge for twenty
years without interruption. If my possession commenced in an irregular
way why has he remained inactive and silent for so long a period? To
support what I say I can produce witnesses." In such a case it is likely
that the plaintiff would be unable to reply to this, and he would lose
his case. But after all the only problem there was one of fact, and if the
true owner has arguments to pursue to establish his right, there is no
reason to hinder his doing that. And Vijnänesvara recalls that it is the
duty of the king, when a case is before him, to decide according to the
merits of the action, without allowing himself to be distracted from that
task by chicanery (chala) (Yäj., II.19).
One could equally contend, continues Vijnänesvara, that v.24 intends
merely to induce the true owner not to be inactive, for if he does not
exert himself while his asset is in the hands of a stranger, he runs the
risk of seeing the latter pleading prolonged possession as a means of
keeping himself in that possession. This theory is taken up again later
by Väcaspati Misra (Vyav., tint., 467-469) who cites a text of Vyäsa in
support: "Just as a cow is lost to her owner when he does not take care
of her and lets her wander unguarded, so, at the end of a particular
period, land is lost when it is enjoyed by others under the eyes of its
true owner". In other words, the loss of his asset would be a sort of
punishment for the owner's negligence.

--- PAGE 186 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
165
Vijnänesvara refutes this theory too. He remarks that if the text of
Yajnavalkya ought to be interpreted as containing an injunction to the
owner not to remain inactive it would be impossible to find a plausible
explanation for the sanction attached to the period of ten or twenty
years. A possession for so short a period cannot raise any presumption
in favour of the possessor's proprietary right. The text of Vyäsa can
only be referred to on the hypothesis that it deals with immemorial
possession.
After refuting in this way, one after another, the different interpreta-
tions suggested before his time, Vijnänesvara concludes with his own.
For him the word häni in v.24 signifies the loss, not of the asset, nor of
the right of action, but of the produce or profits (phala, fruit) of the
asset. Thus if the true owner is to sue successfully he can expect nothing
but the asset itself: he cannot obtain from the trespasser whom he has
ejected the value of the profits obtained by the possessor during the
period of his possession. This loss of profits is due to his wrongly remaining
inactive throughout that period. Vijnänesvara remarks that, in any
case, it could happen that the asset itself would be lost to the owner:
this could well be the case if enjoyment of it (e.g. of an article of clothing)
actually implies using it up or wearing it out. It is only if the fruits or
profits can be detached from the source of those profits, as is the case
if the asset possessed is, for example, a jack-tree, that the true owner
can recover his asset.
Reading this long commentary, of which I have given only a summary,
a jurist is put in mind of the different solutions which an analogous
problem has called forth in Roman law and in the older and modern
common law. This deployment of arguments cannot be treated as a
mere joke. What we know of the personal standing of Vijnänesvara45
and above all the authority which his work has enjoyed leave us no
room for doubt that he wanted to give a solution of a rational character
to difficulties which arose out of the diversity of the texts which he had
before him. It is clear that he was profoundly hostile to acquisition by
prescription against the true owner and that in his eyes possession,
no matter how long, could not be a means of acquiring ownership.
It is this preconceived opinion which guides his steps through the maze
of texts, which induces him to align them one after another like land-
marks leading whither he knew he would arrive, and brings him finally
to reduce to a minimum the significance of the rule actually expressed
by his author, Yajnavalkya.
It is clear that if the reasoning had been directed otherwise it could
have arrived at a very different conclusion. Authors who. like Visvarüpa
45Vijnänesvara belonged to a celebrated Brahmin family. It is known that he wrote the
Mitäksarä at the request of Vikramäditya VI of the dynasty of the Cälukyas of Kalyäni.

--- PAGE 187 [DIRECT] ---

166 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
or Aparärka, give possession for ten or twenty years the status of a
means of defense, analogous to the praescriptio longi temporis of classical
Roman law.46 use arguments which render such a solution perfectly
valid. As for those who. taking v.24 literally, attribute an acquisitive
power to prolonged possession by the trespasser, their arguments do
not fail to support their opinion and to dispose of the texts followed by
Vijfiänesvara. They hold, for example, with Srikara47 that v.24 only
applies when the owner is present, while v.27 and analogous texts which
provide for possession for three generations only come into effect if
the possessor came into possession while the owner was absent or dwells
in another region. As for the verse of Närada (I.87) which says that he
who enjoys without title even for centuries should be punished by the
king, we could believe, with Raghunandana, that it applies only to
possession of an asset belonging to a woman (strl-dhana) or to the
king;48 or even, with Sülapäni, that this text is a rule of arthasästra
which cannot prevail against v.27 of Yäjnavalkya which expresses a
rule of dharma;49 or even, again, with Devanna-bhatta and others, that
it applies only when there is no doubt that the possessor has no title
to the asset.50 Finally for others v.24 has only an even more limited
application. It applies only between co-heirs where one of them has
obtained at the partition a portion smaller than that to which he was
entitled; or between two possessors in succession equally without title,
in which case the first, no matter how long he had possession, was evicted
by the second after twenty or ten years of peaceful possession; or even
in favour of a possessor whose title was affected by some flaw. Possession
for ten or twenty years without protest on the part of the true owner
would thus serve to cover the irregularity in the title, etc.
There is no occasion to be surprised that interpretation should terminate
in conclusions differing from writer to writer. Our own legal treatises
evince divergencies striking enough in their way. Given the abundance
and great diversity of the texts which constitute smrti, the commentators
and digest-writers had a good hand to play. But interpretation as such
46Sohm. op. cit., 319. D. NÖrr. Die Entstehung der longi temporis praescriptio (Cologne
and Opladen. 1969). [trs.]
47Cited in the Vyavahära-mätrkä (Käne. III. 324). Srikara. according to Käne (I, 268)
lived between 800 and 1060. His work is known to us only from quotations made by com-
mentators.
^To support this interpretation Raghunandana invokes När.. I.83. which provides that
the property of a woman or the king is never lost (to its owner) even if it has been in the
possession of another for centuries. Vyavahära-tattva. 53.
49Cited in the Vyavahära-tattva, ubi cit.
505m. cand.. II. 74.
?1Medhätithi (on A/.. VIII.148) reviews most of these interpretations. A. Thäkur. Hindu
Law of Evidence (Calcutta. 1933). 240-63. Käne. III. 320-5.

--- PAGE 188 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
167
played a larger part than did juridical theory as we know it. Whether
we are considering the work of Vijftänesvara or any other, there is no
reason whatever to doubt the good faith of the interpreters. Each of
them is convinced that the solution he proposes is the one which emerges
from the totality of the smrti, and which consequently expresses the rule
of dharma. One may well say that the Indian mentality is not so sensitive
to contradiction as we are, and conceives that there may be, in this
domain if not in many others, ways of looking at things which are diver-
gent but at the same time equally plausible. However that may be.
it is certain that each of the proposed solutions was an authority (I do
not say that it was necessarily received and adopted) at a particular
period and in a particular place. Thus if we wish to envisage a general
evolution of ideas—in default of an evolution of law, which remains
beyond our power to achieve—it is upon such solutions as these that
we must rely. So, to return to v.24 of Book II of the Yäfiavalkya-smrti,
A. Thäkur52 thinks it possible to conclude from the various interpreta-
tions to which the verse gave rise that originally the general opinion
of the writers was favourable to the priority of possession over title,
then placed title above possession, and then reverted, at a period which
Thäkur places a little before Väcaspati Misra, to the first solution which
gives plain effect to v.24. The uncertainty which surrounds the periods
at which some authors must have lived renders this kind of work far
from easy. Then we must take account of the fact that opinions differed
from place to place.53 So this example is only given here to illustrate
how idle it is, so far as the commentators are concerned during the
period when the law was being constructed and probably so far as the
previous epoch was concerned also, to keep close to the letter of the
sästras with the idea of forming a notion of what was the law actually
in force. In reality multiple solutions were derived from the texts, all
believed to be equally valid, proffered to different ages and different
milieux of Indian society in order that dharma might be realised.
They were so preoccupied with the task of extracting the rule of
dharma by the application of pure reasoning, and their taste for debate
was so lively, that it would be perverse to think that the interpreters
voluntarily forswore an attempt to write a book that would be useful.
The solutions they commended must have been those which, in their
eyes, had the greatest chance of passing into actual practice. If the texts
were capable of several different interpretations, that one should be
preferred (to their minds) which best fitted the needs of their times and
was nearest to current usage.54 A rule taken from smrti which is confirmed
52O/7. cit.. 
234.
5 3Mitra-misra (Hr., vyav.; 
Dh. k., 392-96) and Nllakantha (Vyav. 
may.. II. ii. pp. 5 6)
follow the opinion of Vijnänesvara and they wrote in the middle of the seventeenth century.
5 4Derrett. at Advar 
Library 
Bulletin 
3 1 - 2 (1967 8). 531-53; 33 (1969). 135 81.

--- PAGE 189 [DIRECT] ---

168 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
by practice acquires a particular force, for the religious sanction is
accompanied then by a social sanction: it becomes a juridical rule.
Usage would thus be a sort of test for interpretation.
There is a text of Yäjnavalkya (II.21) as taken by certain commentators,
which would support our point of view :
smrtyor virodhe nyäyas tu balavän vyavahäratah
Vijnänesvara connects vyavahäratah with nyäya and construes, "deter-
mined according to the practices of the past". Thus the text can be
translated, "In case of a conflict between two smrtis, reasoning (nyäya)
guided by the practices of the past has (more) force".55
It is presumed, therefore, that the usages practised by the men of the
past, that is to say from time immemorial, are conformable to the teaching
of the Sages. If those usages are corroborated by an interpretation of
smrti texts, then that is the interpretation which ought to be preferred.
Nilakantha has recourse to this criterion to fix the sense to be attributed
to Manu (IX.210) on the subject of a second partition of family property.
This text says that "when brothers, who were first separated, have
rejoined in a state of indivision and then proceed to a new partition,
the shares must be equal: there is no special share for the eldest". Certain
commentators (Aparärka, Mädhava, Kamaläkara and others) rely upon
the last phrase of the verse and contend that Manu only intends to
prohibit any inequality arising from the right of the eldest son56 but
not any inequality which might result from differences between the
values of the parts of the formerly joint family property which had
been put together to form a reunited stock. Nilakantha rejects this
opinion, first because he considers the last phrase as an arthaväda,
intended solely to emphasise the equality of partition ("even the eldest"
must renounce his preferential share) and because equality of partici-
pation is a rule confirmed by custom : "Because it is possible to construe
the text in a sense which conforms to usage, it would be incorrect to
suppose that the text could enunciate a solution contrary to it".57
Likewise one finds in smrti contradictory provisions regarding the
sapindi-karana to be done by a son for his dead mother. The son has a
choice amongst three solutions: but the practice of his family should
prevail if we follow Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., I.253-254).58
55This hardly seems a natural translation; but it is accepted by Käne. III. 866. Ghärpure
and Mandlik translate nyäya by 'equity', but see above. p.l61,n. 40. Commentators agree
in taking the word in the sense of rules of logic.
56Some smrtis, especially Manu (IX. 114-116) allow the eldest son a preferential share
(uddhära) when the paternal estate is being partitioned. Käne, III, 624-6. The question
was agitated as recently as the case of Siromani v. Hemkumar A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 1299. [trs.]
HVyav. may. IV.ix.2-3.
58Käne, IV. 524. Sapindi-karana is a sräddha which takes place in principle one year

--- PAGE 190 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
169
Another example where usage confirms the text is particularly interest-
ing. It is the interpretation presented by Mädhava of verses 172-173
of Book IX of Manu, which reprehend the marriage of a boy with his
maternal uncle's daughter or his paternal aunt's daughter (an exceedingly
common match amongst South Indians) and hold it to be a grave sin.
"He who has relations with the daughter of the sister of his father [who
is for him] a sister (bhagini), or with the daughter of the sister of his
mother, or with (the daughter) of his mother's brother [who is] äpta,
should observe the lunar penance (cändräyana)."59 "A wise man will
not take as his wife [any of] these three women; because of sapindaship
one must not marry them, for he who marries one of these falls into
hell."
Other dharma-sästras (Sätätapa, Paithinasi, Sumantu, Vyäsa) state
the same prohibition without qualification, emphasising solely the
closeness of sapinda relationship. What the rule really amounts to is
that one should not marry a sapinda girl. Now the uncle's or aunt's
daughter is a cousin through an ancestor found in the third degree.
However narrowly one may construe the rule as to the minimum number
of degrees required to be a sapinda no one can doubt that the marriage
falls within the scope of the prohibition.
Moreover the majority of interpreters agree that the text of Manu
has general application. Medhätithi (on A/., 11.18) knows very well
that marriage with the maternal uncle's daughter occurs in certain
regions, but he pronounces such usage adharma (non-dharmic, or even
anti-dharmic).
But Mädhava, who is a man of the South where such marriages have
not only been allowed for an immense period60 but are actually viewed
as desirable, evades the smrti texts. He first places in opposition to them
some Vedic passages which, in his view, refer to marriage with the
maternal uncle's daughter or the paternal aunt's daughter. Then he
shows, by applying Mimämsä # principles, that these passages must
indeed be understood as formulating an injunction (vidhi) and that
they are not simply descriptive (arthavädas).60* Mädhava could have
stopped there, given the rule that in case of conflict between sruti and
smrti the sruti rule must prevail. But he was evidently anxious to respect
after the death. The deceased thereafter ceases to be a preta (ghost) and is raised to the
status of pitr (one of the manes or departed ancestors).
59 
paitrsvaseyJm bhaginJm svasriyäm mätur eva ca
mätus ca bhrätur äptasya gantvä cändräyanam caret.
u{)Gaut.. XI.20. and Baudh.. 1.1.2. 3 cite marriage with the maternal uncle's daughter
as one of the special customs of the "South'.
t{)*Paräsara~Mädhav7ya I. 2. pp. 63-8. Mädhava's commentary is reproduced by Mandlik
in an appendix to his translation of the Vyaxahära-mayükha. 417-21. In Setlur's collection
it appears at pp. 550-3. Käne. II. 460-3.

--- PAGE 191 [DIRECT] ---

170 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Manu's authority, and he tries hard to show that his precepts merely
do not have so large an application as one might suspect.
For this purpose he relies on the words bhaginl and äpta in v.172
in order to contend that that verse applies only upon the hypothesis
that the father's sister or mother's sister or the mother herself were
married in an inferior form of marriage, say the gändharva, äsura, etc.
It is only in this case, he says, that the daughter of the paternal aunt
(paitr-svaseyi) or maternal aunt (svasnyä mätur) could be called bhaginl',
"sister", by her bridegroom! If the aunt is married in the Brahma,
Daiva or other approved form of marriage, she passes into the gotra
of the family of her husband, the sapindaship relation is broken with
her natal family, and the word bhaginl, "sister", cannot be employed.
Similarly, the mother's brother can only be called an äpta^ (i.e. a close
relation of his sister) if she has retained her relationship with her natal
family by marrying in one of the unapproved forms of marriage. Thus
the prohibition which Manu utters is not general. It does not apply
to the case where the daughter who has been married is the child of a
marriage contracted in one of the higher forms, i.e. the Brahma or
other approved forms.
It is true, Mädhava adds, that this reasoning would permit us equally
to recognise the validity of a marriage with the maternal aunt's daughter.
But such a union has always and everywhere been reprehended by the
sistas. This raises the presumption that there was a Vedic injunction
condemning such unions. On the other hand, although marriage with the
maternal uncle's daughter is rejected by the (majority of) the sistas of
Northern India it is admitted by those of the South. This usage on the
part of Southerners cannot be attributed to license, for it is practised
by pious people who are learned in the sacred texts. Further, since it is
corroborated by the interpretation given to texts, it must be recognised
as valid in the regions where it is an immemorial custom.62
In order to provide smrti rules applicable to a population with manners
and customs as varied as those of the vast subcontinent of India, the
interpreters were bound to use their ingenuity to justify varied solutions.
We have just seen that marriage with the maternal uncle's daughter
is dharma for Southerners but adharma for Northerners. No one can
doubt that Mädhava was orientated here in his reasoning by custom,
since in the end he expressly cites it as the criterion of his interpretation.
But we can hardly doubt that even in the many cases where our authors
make no allusion to custom at all and base themselves solely on logic
61 An äpta is so close a relation that his evidence cannot be tendered in litigation on
behalf of his kin. Medhätithi on A/.. VIII.64 illustrates the word äpta in that context by
paternal and maternal uncles.
62The same reasoning is followed by Devanna-bhatta. Sm. cand., I, 70 4.

--- PAGE 192 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
171
and a purely literal exegesis, they have been guided by a desire to validate
a practice which struck them as blameless. In the same way, the western
judge tries to use the texts—when they permit it—to arrive at a solution
which, on the facts of the case, seems to him most equitable or most
practical. Thus there were formed in India, according to the different
writers, different currents of interpretation responding to different
customs. A given group would find in a given author, in preference to
certain others, a formulation suitable to its usages. Different juridical
systems actually grew up, based on the same totality of texts and drawing
their authority from.nowhere else but the texts which they all held sacred.
To these juridical systems the British (Colebrooke was the first)
gave the name of "schools", the schools of Benares, Mithilä, Bengal,
and so on. The expression was justly criticised because it seemed to
give a regional basis to divergencies of opinion which were essentially
personal.62a Diversity of interpretation finds only a feeble echo in the
West. The Cour de Cassation (in France), the House of Lords (in Great
Britain) and the Supreme Court (in the United States and even more
so in India) have jurisdiction to secure the unity of the case-law and
so much of jurisprudence as is based squarely upon it. To understand
what happened in India as a result of this recognition of "schools"
we should take for comparison politically autonomous countries which
have adopted the same laws. France, Belgium, and Holland for example,
have what is virtually the same civil code. The very same article of the
code can be, and sometimes is, differently interpreted in each of the
three countries. In India where local populations have always had the
benefit of measures of autonomy, and where a great variety of tribunals
used to coexist, the real diversity of customs must have involved a
diversity of laws.
But I do not mean to say that commentators and digest-writers had
no object but to confirm or canonise customary rules. Such rules must
be able to find a point of contact with smrti, and there are some customs
which no amount of text-torturing could legitimise. A scope of conflict
thus makes its appearance which we shall make our special study in
the next chapter. Further the customary rule must present characteristics
which permit of a dharmic rule's being seen in it. In particular it must
not rest upon a "visible" motive, a worldly purpose. We have seen how
Mädhava does not fail to observe that the custom of marrying the
maternal uncle's daughter had the sanction of the sistas and those who
were learned in the sacred texts. The interpreters were thus brought to
make a choice between customs, rejecting some, amending others,
following, though perhaps in a different spirit, the slow work of i4äryani-
sation" which the authors of the dharma-scistra itself carried on. But
h 2 a K . V . R a r i g a s w ä m i A i y a r i g ä r , Räjudhanmi 
( M a d r a s , 1 9 4 1 ) , 
1 1 2 .

--- PAGE 193 [DIRECT] ---

172 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
above all, interpretation could only provide legal foundation for an
institution which was originally customary by deducing the principle
from the sästras. The interpreters constructed the institution from that
principle upwards, connecting by a logical thread the different precepts
which they contained. In other words, as we have already observed ä
propos of the commentary on v.24 of Book II of the Yäjhavalkya-smrti,
interpretation ends in a harmonisation of texts scattered in the smrti,
which is intended to gather them into a coherent system. It is rare for
customary rules relative to an institution of law to be met with in a
connected form, linked so rigorously. They are often imprecise and
incomplete. Interpretation offers them a framework which demands
adjustments and correctives in enunciation, at the same time as it allows
their gaps to be filled. It is true that the interpreter does not work upon
customary data, but he is inspired by them and makes for them, if not
actually with them, a system to which they are invited to adapt themselves.
We grasp thereby the influence which interpretation could exercise
upon custom, even when custom has not directed its choice.
A good example of the systematisation thus offered to customary
data is furnished by the celebrated divergence between doctrines of the
Däyabhäga and those of the Mitäksarä on the subject of the rights of
the son (and further male lineal descendants) in succession to ancestral
property.63
For Vijnänesvara the sons' right arises from their relationship as
sons. It is acquired by birth alone. From the moment of birth (or rather
conception in the case of a live birth) the sons have a right over the
ancestral estate, they are coproprietors with their father. For Jimüta-
vähana, the author of the Däyabhäga, on the other hand, the issue have
no right in the said estate during the lifetime of their father. Their right
arises only on his death (or on events assimilated to death, namely
exclusion from caste, and the adoption of the status of ascetic), where-
upon they become coheirs and coproprietors inter se.
We must pass over the long argumentation by which the two authors
play with the smrti texts and come to such violently opposed theses.64
What especially interest us are the consequences of a juridical character
which they have drawn from them. Each relied solely on the smrti and
refuted by reasoning the surface meaning of texts which seemed to be
in opposition to him. Those consequences which naturally differ on
each point can be summarised as follows :
1. In the Däyabhäga system a son cannot in the lifetime of his father
63Called paitämaha, i.e. assets received by the father from the grandfather (or other
lineal ascendant). G. Lakshminarasamma v. Rama Brahman Indian Law Reports 1950
Madras, 1084. [trs.]
<*Däy., I, 11-30; Mit., on Yäj., II.114. Käne, III, 552-4.

--- PAGE 194 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
173
obtain a partition of the ancestral property unless the father consents
to this. In principle the partition will not take effect until the death
(or civil death) of the father. Jimütavähana is even of the opinion that
it should not take place until the death of the mother, if she survives
him.65 In the Mitäksarä system, by contrast, the son has a right to demand
partition of the ancestral property, even against his father's will.66
2. In the Däyabhäga system the father possesses in principle the
same powers of alienation over the ancestral estate as he has over his
personal assets.67 In the Mitäksarä system he can dispose at his pleasure
of only his personal property. In respect of ancestral property his powers
are limited. Beyond acts which the law allows him he requires the consent
of his sons.68
3. On the death of the father, in the Däyabhäga system, there is a
real succession, a transfer of property, with the sons inheriting from
the father. If they remain undivided their shares remain fixed at the
proportion it was at the father's death. There is common possession,
but not common property: they are tenants-in-common, not joint
tenants. Each can dispose of his undivided share in the common estate.
If one dies succession opens and his estate, including his share in his
father's estate, passes to his heirs.69 In the Mitäksarä system there is
no succession on the father's death. The sons enter into possession of
the goods he leaves by right of "survivorship". Their portions have
received an accretion from the portion which was their father's. If they
remain undivided none of them can dispose of his share without the
consent of the others: they have a common possession and a common
property. They are mere joint tenants. If one of them dies there is no
question whatsoever of a succession. His interest accrues to those of
the others. The result is that each one's share, instead of being defined
once for all as in the Däyabhäga system, is capable of being enlarged
(by deaths) just as it is capable of being diminished by the birth of,
for example, a grandson.70
We must note that these provisions have not been presented in the
bSDäy.. 
I, 4 4 and II, 5.
**Mit., on Yäj., II.122.
^Dä\\, II, 22-4.
68 A///., on Yäj. II.114. This position was once more complicated than at present. Originally
the consent of adult male issue was required to validate even justified acts. But the position
in British India is now universally adopted, namely that major as well as minor issue are
bound by justified transfers entered into by their father. Derrett at (1965) 67 Bombay Law
Reporter, Journ., 96-8 (a criticism of Balmukand v. Kamla Wati All India Rep. 1964 S.C.
1385). Raghubanchmani v. Ambica A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 776; Rani v. Santa A.I.R. 1971 S.C.
1028; also App. 2 to Critique oj Modern Hindu Law (Bombay, Tripathi, 1970). [trs.]
69Z%., II, 28-31.
10Mit., on Yäj. II.114. For a more detailed comparison see Käne. III. 591-4. The Hindu
Succession Act, 1956, ss. 6 and 8, provides that where a coparcener dies leaving a mother.

--- PAGE 195 [DIRECT] ---

174 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
theoretical guise in which I have set them down here. They are accom-
panied by nuances imposed or justified by the texts. In the Däyabhäga
family, for example, the father is master of all the family property.
If however, he wishes to proceed in his lifetime to make a partition,
he can distribute at his will and pleasure only his personal wealth, whereas
in respect of ancestral property the partition between himself and his
sons must follow certain rules.71 Conversely in the Mitäksarä family
where the father is merely a coproprietor in the family property, his
powers of administration are much more extensive than those.which
are given to an ordinary co-owner appointed to the management of
property in co-ownership.72 But none the less the two systems are rigo-
rously worked out, and each can claim the authority of the smrti behind it.
These two systems correspond to two types of family : the one resembles
a patriarchal family in which the father is the sole master of the estate;
the other a joint family where the assets are the collective property of
the members. Debate continues on the question which is the more
ancient.73 But anyone who places himself in the period when these two
systems were worked out cannot doubt that both types of family involved
were co-existing, and that Vijnänesvara and Jimütavähana, in succession
to others, have simply tried to give a structure to them, offering thereby
a valid intellectual organisation of their family customs to different
social groups (which were, perhaps, very dispersed originally).
But it would be difficult to say to what degree the data and the construct
were ultimately combined in each of the systems. No one could take
them as simple expressions of customary rules (to which, in any case,
they make no reference, except in the vaguest terms).74 Yet they were
models which could not fail to have a normalising effect in course of
time. Further we note that the writers (and they are numerous) who
followed the Mitäksarä system in broad outline often introduced varia-
tions to Vijnänesvara's propositions, variations doubtless justified by
local peculiarities at least in part.
So despite their appearance as pure logicians, the interpreters have
achieved a useful work. Some of them gave life, or have regiven life,
a widow, a daughter, a daughter's son and certain other very close relations the undivided
interest shall not pass by survivorship (so as to enlarge the presumptive shares of other
coparceners), but it shall pass by testamentary or intestate succession. But in somewhat
rare cases (as where an unmarried and issueless male dies) survivorship may still operate,
[trs.]
71 Day., II, 35-79.
^Mit., on Yäj. II. 114. Käne, III, 592-3. Mayne, op. cit., 1 lth edn.. chh. viii and ix.
73On this see especially N.C. Sen-Gupta. The Evolution of Law. app. The Hindu Joint
Family' (Calcutta. 1926), 158-67. Käne, III, 557-60.
74This is well demonstrated by the opposition which the Anglo-Indian courts encountered
in the course of their attempts to apply Mitäksarä rules uniformly.

--- PAGE 196 [DIRECT] ---

INTERPRETATION 
175
to precepts in the sästras which were incapable of being employed without
the aid of a commentary. Placed as they were between the immutable
texts of smrti and the mobile traditions of custom, they facilitated the
passage from the one to the other, fixing the latter with the indispensable
aid of the former. We could say that they were the real organisers of
Hindu law. Their work, of course, remains theoretical in so far as it
has not been sanctioned by practical application. It is still an expression
of the human intellect: subject, as all such expressions are, to criticism
and amendment. But the weakness of interpretation is far from being
a defect. It calls forth a constant renewal of jurisprudence. It obviates
the immobility to which a purely imperative exegesis of the texts would
have led. It justifies in time and in space a variety of solutions to problems,
a variety in which India, the one and the many, recognises her own face.75
75This could not be illustrated better than in the difference of opinion between Hegde,
J., who took a progressive view, and the majority of his brother judges on the Supreme
Court bench (who took a conservative view), as to the meaning (for the present age) of the
ancient Mitäksarä texts relating to acquisition of joint family property through the invest-
ment or disposition of family funds: V.D. Dhanwatey v. Commr. ofl.-T., Madhva Pradesh
All India Rep. 1968 S.C., 683. Hegde, J., had his way (leaving the texts to one side) in
Shri Raj Kumar Singh v. C.I.T., M.P. (1970) 2 S.C.W.R. 674. [trs.]

--- PAGE 197 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER II
DHARMA AND CUSTOM
1. The Contrast between Law and Custom
THE PROBLEM of the relationship between law and custom arises in
Hindu law very differently from the manner in which it arises in western
law. For the jurist who is trained after the Roman style, both law and
custom rest finally on the consensus omnium (the consent of all), the
agreement, expressed in the first case and tacit in the second, of the
population which they both govern.1 Both are sources of law of the
same nature, distinguished only by the way in which they develop and
in their technical method of expression and promulgation. But they
apply at the same level of social activity.
But the law which is promulgated by the sästras differs from custom
both by object and by origin. As its intention is to teach dharma, it
prescribes duties and obligations of a religious character. It shows men
the conduct they should follow in order to acquire spiritual benefits.
To act in conformity with it is to secure merits which, according to the
law of karma, will produce fruits in the course of this life or after it.
The transgressor is a sinner. He is exposed to calamities which can
only be avoided by his performing certain penances.
By contrast, the rule of custom is in principle indifferent to the religious
consequences of an act. It could be in accord with the precepts of the
sästra\ it could equally be in conflict with them. Kätyäyana (37) defines
custom (under the name caritra) as "all that a person practises, whether
or not it conforms to dharma (dharmyam vädharmyam eva ea), simply
because that is the constant usage of the country".2
Again, the law which the sästras communicate to us does not arise
from the will of men. It rules the moral world just as a physical law
rules the phenomena of nature. The rules of conduct and the duties
which it enunciates are preconditions of the realisation of the social
order as it was intended by the Creator. These rules preexisted the
expression of them. They were not conceived by the authors of the
dharmasästra themselves, but were discovered in the texts where divine
will is expressed or in traditions in which it is manifested. The rules
govern the activity of men: they are not influenced by man.
lCf the celebrated text of Julian at Dig. 1.3.32 : . . . nam quid interest, suffragio 
populus
voluntatem suam declaret, an rebus ipsis et factis'l Facts may be as good an indication of
the popular will as the votes of an assembly.
2An analogous verse is attributed to Pitämaha (Dh. k., I, p. 105).
176

--- PAGE 198 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
177
Custom, on the other hand, is a purely human development in the
sense that it develops at the level of the human groups involved. However,
Hindus did not attribute it, as did the Roman jurisconsults of the classical
period, to an origin by way of convention* It is not born of a more or
less conscious agreement of the wills of those called upon to obey it.
Its origin eludes human memory, which confers upon it in Hindu eyes
an almost sacred character and gives it a force which it neither had nor
has in western civilisations. But the customary rule as such seems to be
a simple fact, a rule produced by conditions contingent upon time and
place without relation to the divine injunction which is at the root of
the sästric rule. As Kätyäyana puts it in the definition we have just
seen, it is observed simply because it has always been observed. It owes
its authority to its inveterate character.
Thus law and custom have in India entirely different natures. Custom
is a social phenomenon, while law has a transcendant character.
Apart from this, law's independence relative to custom flows directly
from the application of Mimämsä principles to the interpretation of
smrti texts. Sästric rules which rest upon a Vedic injunction cannot
have their source in human activity. Their reason escapes our means
of knowledge, and even their effects are hidden from us. The Veda is
not the composition of any human author.4
But we may ask whether this conception is really what flows from
the texts themselves. Would it not be possible to extract from them
a different conception, which would make a place for custom at the
genesis ofdharma? We limit our enquiry, for the present, to this question :
not whether the human authors of the smrtis were effectively inspired
by custom, but whether they really considered custom, as such, a source
of dharma. A widely spread theory, which tends to confuse the two
questions, pronouces an affirmative answer.
The value of such a discussion is far from being merely theoretical.
If law and custom are of the same nature, the one may act directly upon
the other. Consequently the legal rule is capable of being abrogated
by a custom to the contrary effect.5 If their natures are different, each
acts in its own sphere, and there can be no direct mutual interaction.
All that the dharmasästra authors could do was to put men who were
*But we must notice that conventional rules arrived at by members of professional
bodies amongst others, which can give rise to a particular viväda-pada (when they are
broken), are often designated by the same name as custom itself, viz. caritra.
4G. Jhä, Pürvamimämsä in its Sources (Benares, 1942), 126-7.
5In the passage in the Digest, cited above at p. 176, n. 1, Julian concludes that a legal
rule can be abrogated per desuetudinem, by a contrary custom. In Hindu law it is admitted
that certain sästric rules can become obsolete. Derrett, Religion, Law and the State in
India, 313. And the obsolescence of a custom can be proved from ancient texts to the same
effect! Siromani v. Hemkumar cited above at p. 168,n. 56. [trs.]

--- PAGE 199 [DIRECT] ---

178 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
concerned for their salvation on their guard against law-breaking.
In other words the very solution to the conflict of dharma with custom
depends on the answer to the questions we have just posed.
A.S. Altekar, who was one of the scholars most hostile to the orthodox
interpretation, argues from the first sütras of the Äpastamba-dharma-
sütra where it is said that the rules of dharma are sämayäcärika, an
expression which Haradatta glosses by pauruseyi vyavasthä, or "human
regulation", which Altekar renders "social conventions". He then
concludes that at the period of the dharma-sütras the rules of dharma
were founded upon custom, tradition, or convention accepted by the
public. His notion is that the rules of dharma, resulting from a meeting
of wills, must originally have varied according to the circumstances
which gave rise to their enunciation; they became fixed much later,
with the literature of the dharma-sästrasß
First of all we must note that the meaning attributed to sämayäcärika
seems very quaint in the mouth of Äpastamba who, as his teaching
shows, was a faithful mimämsaka. True enough, the word does evoke
a notion of usage or of practices sanctioned by conventions (samara,
gathering).7 But the text of Äpastamba continues, dharma-jha-samayah
pramänam vedas ca : "The authority (or criterion) [of these rules of
dharma] is the accord (or opinion) of those who know dharma and the
Vedas". Thus it is not because it is customary that this or that practice
is elevated into a rule of dharma but because it is held to be such by
those who know dharma, or because it is prescribed by the Veda. The
agreement or consensus of men only relates to the certification that it
does conform to one or the other of those conditions.8 The origin of
the rule itself escapes human will altogether. In other words Äpastamba
wants to say simply that the rules of dharma which he is about to explain
are the practices which the Sages agree to recognise because they are
connected either with a Vedic injunction or with Good Custom. By
"those who know dharma" Äpastamba clearly means the sistas, people
who are learned and virtuous. The text upon which so much unexpected
weight is placed means no more than an allusion to the two sources of
dharma recognised at the dharma-sütra period: the Veda and Good
Custom.
6 Altekar. Sources of Hindu Dharma, 12-3.
7Monier-Williams, s.v. sämayäcärika: 'relating to conventional practice or usage'.
Bühler translates, 'customs of the daily life as they have been settled by the agreement
(of those who know law)'. Käne. III. 825 translates simply by 'evolved from conventions
and practices'.
8As it recognises the Sages' mission to show men which are the rules of dharma. the
text of Äpastamba can be the origin of a subsequent theory which we shall refer to later,
according to which it was the Sages' task at the commencement of each Age to determine
the rules of dharma which it would no longer be possible to observe because of the (pro-
gressive) 'deterioriation of the Ages'.

--- PAGE 200 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
179
But does this merely defer the problem? Could we not see two parallel
sources, the Vedic texts on the one hand and Good Custom on the other,
the first alone having a transcendant origin, but the second having,
as its name suggests, a customary origin?
Manu sees (11.17-18) in Good Custom the primitive Aryan custom,
that which is perpetuated by tradition amongst the varnas and the
mixtures between them (antaräla) in Brahmävarta, "that land created
by the gods which extends between the two divine rivers, the Sarasvati
and the Drsadvati". There no doubt a territorial custom is envisaged,
but it is purely mythical, and the author of the Code of Manu invokes
it only to glorify Good Custom itself of which he is about to give the
outlines. Moreover the majority of the dharma-sästras define sadäcära
as the custom of the sistas, that is to say the rules of conduct observed
by those who are instructed in the Veda and are virtuous and "free from
all attachment" (a-kämätmä) as Vasistha puts it (1.6). He is not referring
to a localised custom, but to the usages of people whose lives can serve
as a model. And if their usages form an accessory source of dharma it
is because, being versed in the sacred texts and pure conduct, they pre-
sumably act in conformity with the teaching of the Sages to whom the
divine law was revealed. In any case this is only a presumption, for
such usages ought not to be followed, even when not opposed to the
precepts of smrti, if they hide an interested motive. This reservation
is expressly formulated by Vasistha (1.7) who, soon after his definition
of sista, adds : "only an act in which one cannot perceive a worldly
motive (a-grhyamäna-kärana) is considered dharma'\ which brings us
back to the Mimämsä conception of an act of dharma.9 So it is not in
its quality as custom that sadäcära is a source of dharma, and it is not
because it is practised by sistas that their act is dharma, but because of
its intrinsic qualities. Even the practices observed on the sacred soil of
Brahmävarta, where only virtuous people are born, says Medhätithi
(on A/., 11.18), are not to be followed in their entirety : some of them are
adharma.10 Dharma can then be inferred from the practice of the sistas :
its origin, or its cause, is not to be found there.
The real criterion is found in the disinterested character of the act,
accompanied by a belief on the part of those who do it that they only do,
in performing it, what obedience to the divine law requires. The sistas
are held to be Sages not simply because of their conduct but also because
they are learned in the Veda and scrupulously observe the rites prescribed
by the Vedic texts. Further, since the reasons for their actions elude us.
we may suppose that they obey some Vedic injunction which is unknown
yMimämsä influence is equally obvious in the analogous rules of Äpastamba, I.1.4, 8-9
and 4.12, 8-12.
10Aparärka on Yäj., 1.7 makes a similar observation ä propos of M., 11.18 and Vas., 1.10.

--- PAGE 201 [DIRECT] ---

180 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
to us but perpetuated through the memory of their family. The Veda is
definitively the deeper source, it is the true source of Good Custom,
and that which confers authority upon it.11
The sista, of course, can only be a learned Brahmin, a srotriya, and
in fact the varna of Brahmins was created precisely to instruct men in
their duties. That Good Custom is a source of dharma thus amounts
to saying that the conduct of everyone should be ruled by that of
Brahmins.12
Nevertheless the interpreters' way of putting this tends to suggest a
somewhat wider meaning. Commenting upon Manu II.6, Medhätithi
enumerates amongst the sources of dharma the practices of the sädhus
(äcärah sädhünäm), and the word sädhu is glossed by sista.n But the
examples which he gives of these practices—examples taken up again
by the majority of later commentators—refer to usages of secondary
importance which, he says, are extremely varied and differ according to
circumstances, places and individual disposition, such as the custom of
tying a bracelet after the ceremony of marriage, the worship paid by
the bride on her wedding day to certain trees, yaksas (demons), cross-
roads and other places, the custom of keeping a number of tufts on the
head, the precise manner of receiving guests, etc. We gather a propensity
on the part of interpreters to rank under Good Custom, and thus to
regard as acts of dharma, many sorts of practices whose connection
with sruti becomes quite artificial. Certain late writers, like Mitra-misra,
see nothing in sadäcära but the practices of good people, even when
they are not learned in the Veda; and they admit that even for Südras
the customs of their ancestors are a source of knowledge of their dharma
which are authoritatively binding upon the descendants.14 However,
even at that level of interpretation there is no confusion between ordinary
custom and the rule of dharma. In order to be counted as a rule of dharma
every custom must be not only immemorial but also free from all apparent
worldly motive, interest, or utilitarian consideration.
2. The Doctrine of Consensus
Whether it proceeds from inveterate usage or from convention, custom
is essentially variable and diverse. It varies not only according to milieu
but also according to period. A practice which was honored at one
11 As an echo of the Mimämsä doctrine Äpastamba says (1.4.12, 10) that the authority
of Good Custom rests upon the presumption that it originates in the sruti.
J2Cf Vas., 1.39-40 and M., 11.20: "(it is) from a Brahmin originating in this land (Brahmä-
varta) that all men on earth should learn their usages and customs."
13A/., II.6 : Vedo 'khilo dharma-mülam smrti-slle ca tad-vidäm, äcäras caiva sädhünäm
ätmanas tustir eva ca. Some commentators connect sädhünäm with ätmanas tusti: 'internal
consent' of virtuous people.
Wir., par., p. 9. Käne, III.875-6, 881.

--- PAGE 202 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
181
moment can, in the next period, fall into desuetude so that new practices
may arise and develop. By contrast, the rule of dharma, whether its
source is smrti or sadäcära, takes its origin and draws its authority from
that eternal Law which is the Veda and is, like it, immutable. Whatever
its expression over the course of time, it is always the same rule which
is being prescribed. Here we recognise the doctrine of consensus, accord-
ing to which a complete unity of opinion must be presumed as between
all authors of smrti. According to Jaimini and Sabara all recensions of
the Veda and of the brähmanas form a single body, so that a rite like
the agnihotra must be considered one and the same in all recensions,
even though certain details figure in many of them and are omitted in
others.15 The commentators and digest-writers have extended that
conception to smrti,16 so that it lies at the root of their system of inter-
pretation.
Modern scholars have found themselves in conflict with the orthodox
conception of dharma, above all. in finding fault with the doctrine of con-
sensus. Indeed if it could be established that dharma does not have in the
sästras that immutability which the interpreters attribute to it, but that it
represents a notion which has varied with the centuries, we should be led to
admit that without necessarily being confused with ordinary custom, it
must have some close relationship to it. The dogma of the unanimity of
texts of smrti would then seem like a fiction, perhaps useful for facilitating
flexibility of interpretation but foreign to the smrti itself and valueless
for the period of the dharma-sästras.11
Two kinds of argument have been presented against the doctrine of
consensus, one founded on a comparative examination of the dharma-
sästras' contents, the other upon certain texts of the dharma-sästras
themselves.
Arguments founded on an examination of the texts are certainly
the stronger.
The authors of the dharma-sästras are undoubtedly inspired in the
composition of their works largely by usages which they saw going on
before their eyes. Those which they present to us as constituting Good
Custom, whatever foundation might be attributed to them, must cor-
respond in great part to the rules of conduct effectively laid down for
15This is the maxim of sarva-säkhä-pratvava or säkhäntarädhikarana. Jai., 11.4.8-33.
Käne. IV. 453-5; V. 1273.
16Notably Visvarüpa and Vijnänesvara on Yäj., I.4-5; Medhätithi on A/., 11.29 and
XI.216; Aparärka on Yäj., III.243; Vijnänesvara on Yäj., III.325. The interpreters also
rely on the principle of syntactical unity of adjacent propositions, formulated by Jaimini
11.1.46 and expressed in the maxim of eka-väkyatä (texts must speak with one voice).
C. Sarikararäma Sästri. Fictions in the Development of the Hindu Law Texts (Madras. 1926).
170-4; G. Jhä, Pürvamfmämsä 
. . ., 189-191; Käne. III. 443 and V. 1297-8.
17Cf Sahkararäma Sästri, op. cit., ubi cit.

--- PAGE 203 [DIRECT] ---

182 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the dvijas. As for precepts concerning the hearing of cases, the com-
mentators themselves do not hesitate to admit their origin in custom.
Nilakantha (Vyav. may., IV.ix.3) does not hesitate to compare them
to rules of grammar in that they also are generally founded on usage.
A propos of the regulation of succession, Vijnänesvara (Mit., on. Yäj.,
M.I 18-119) remarks that the sästras hardly do more in this connection
than reproduce rules prevailing in the world. Mitra-misra (Vir., on Yäj.,
11.135-136) makes the same remark, and adds that all the authors of
digests agree in viewing the part of the dharma-sästras devoted to vyava-
hära as reproducing rules habitually followed by the public.
The influence of customary facts on the precepts of the dharma-
sästras appears plainly enough in the obvious contradictions in Manu.
Manu (III. 15-19), like Vasistha (1.27) and Yäjnavalkya (I.56), condemns
the marriage of a dvija with a Südra woman; however, he must recognise
the existence of such unions, because he fixes the share of the paternal
estate which will come to the son of a Brahmin, of a Ksatriya, or a
Vaisya born of a female Südra (M.r IX.153; cf Yäj., II.125). Similarly
he holds it a grave sin to eat meat (V.55, XI. 159) but he declares that
the snätaka should not refuse meat which is offered to him (IV.250),
and he places meat amongst the foods to be offered to Brahmins invited
to sräddha ceremonies (II1.227). Likewise he considers niyoga a bestial
practice (pasu-dharma) (IX.66), but he explains how it is done and
fixes the rights of the ksetraja (field-born) son in succession to his pater
(IX. 120-121). Similarly, according to him. a widow ought not to remarry
(V.I57, 162, IX.65), but he fixes the lengths of time she should wait in
case her husband is missing (IX.76) and regulates the rights of succession
of sons born of one mother by two different fathers (IX. 191).
It emerges frotti these texts that the author of the Code of Manu
was hostile to marriage between a dvija and a Südrä, to the act of meat-
eating, to niyoga, and to second marriages of widows, but he was con-
fronted by customs too deeply rooted for prohibition to be efficacious.
All he could do was to try to discredit them and to limit their practice
and their importance. Thus he gives the son of the Südra born to a
dvija male a clearly inferior position from the point of view of succession
(IX.153-155, Cf Yäj., II.125) and he places him in a very low caste
(X.8-10, Cf Yäj., I.91-92). He limits the application of niyoga to the
case (not necessarily rare) where the girl's betrothed bridegroom died
before the marriage could be consummated (IX.69-70) and submits the
actual implementation of niyoga to strict regulation (IX.59-63).
This way of proceeding on the part of the author of the dharma-sästra
reveals how he felt the force of custom. But it also shows that he did
not accept it uncritically. As we have shown in trying to extract the
image which one could obtain of Indian society from the dharma-sütras,

--- PAGE 204 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
183
the wwr//-writers' borrowings from custom are always selective. They
keep only what answers to their notion of morality. Even when they
believe they are only confirming it they necessarily import aspects of
precision which mere oral transmission could not have had. If it is
possible to admit, for example, that precepts belonging to the control
of litigation were for the most part taken from actual practice, it is
beyond doubt that they are presented in the dharma-sästras quite other-
wise than in their original form. Custom knows only brocards (maxims,
apothegms). It is true that some such are to be found in the dharma-
sästras. But the classifications, the distinctions, the subtle and complex
solutions which we find in the smrtis imply most clearly the intervention
of the author himself or even of a school. In short, we are confronted
by works which doubtless owe much to custom, but of which the least
one can say is that they are compositions. It would be hazardous to
imagine social reality through their precepts or to take their precepts
for rules of law in force in their times. One can only draw from a com-
parative examination of the texts indications about some currents of
opinion amongst the writers, currents which plausibly reflect changes of
ideas or of manners in the population. In default of a history of the
ancient law, i.e. of society properly so called, one might perhaps attempt
a history of social ideas, using the different and sometimes contradictory
views which we recognise when we compare the dharma-sästras with
each other. But the grave uncertainty of the chronology and the huge
gaps in our knowledge about the dharma-sästra literature leaves hardly
any solid ground for such an enterprise.
Nevertheless, even if the state of our texts makes it impossible for
the historian to profit from them, it is undeniable that the composer's
of the dharma-sästras have been influenced by their times and their
environments. To this extent, the criticisms directed against the doctrine
of consensus are justified. Given the very long period during which the
literature developed, it could not conceivably escape bearing traces of
the evolution of ideas and changes of manners undergone in the heart
of Indian society. But the question is whether the authors themselves
intended only to legislate for their own times, if their aim was really
to supply a new law. Now, at least at first sight, a negative reply seems
certain. Each writer presents his work as the expression of the eternal
Law which rules men's activities. Even the fact that he attributes the
exposition to a mythical person, to the dawn of time, shows that he had,
if not the convinction (who can tell?), at least the desire to produce
it as such.
However, now we come to the second class of arguments aimed to
demolish the theory of consensus: certain texts of dharma-sästra origin
seem themselves to contradict the idea that dharma is one immutable

--- PAGE 205 [DIRECT] ---

184 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
law, and to admit that, on the contrary, it changes from age to age.
The most important text in this respect is found in the first Book of
the Manu-smrti, where the celebrated theory of the yugas is set out.
According to Hindu cosmogony the world is subject to alternate periods
of creation and destruction called periods of Manu. Each of these periods
is subdivided into four ages (yugas) of which the first, the krta age,
is the age of Gold, and the last, the kali age, is our own. In the krta age
men were pure, virtuous, and lived 400 years. In the following ages
their virtues decreased like their lives, until the Kali Age is one of supreme
decadence. This is what Manu says in the first Book :
84. The duration of human life, as announced in the Veda, the benedictions (a si hi
(resulting) from sacrificial acts and the (supernatural) powers of corporeal beings bear
fruit amongst men according to the Age.
85. Distinct are the dharmas of the krta Age. distinct in the tretä and the dväpara Age,
distinct in the kali Age, because of the worsening of those Ages.
86. In the krta Age what is essential is austerity ftapas), in the tretä knowledge (jnänu),
in the dväpara sacrifice (yajna), in the kali Age. simply gift (däna).x*
After having reproduced verses 85-86 of Manu, the Paräsara-smrti
lays down that the rules of dharma have been proclaimed for the krta
Age by Manu, for the tretä Age by Gautama, for the dväpara Age by
Sankha-Likhita and for the kali Age by Paräsara himself (1.24).19
It has been thought possible to conclude from these texts that the
authors of the dharma-sästras were themselves well aware that the
concept of morality changed with the ages, and that that which was
held for good and meritorious in a given age could be adjudged in the
next to be immoral and wicked.20 Thus, in their eyes, dharma was not
the intangible law that orthodox doctrine supposed.
Verse 85 of Manu cannot but be held embarrassing, for it clearly
says (literally): "others are the dharmas" (anye dharmäh), according
to the Ages. However, the plural employed for dharma seems to suggest
that he is not talking here about dharma in general, but of the dharmas,
i.e. particular meritorious acts, which would change according to the
Ages, some being practised in preference to others. This is what the
next following verse confirms : "In the krta Age, the essential is austerity
. . .". Thus : in the krta Age the act of dharma par excellence is the practice
of austerities, while in the Ages that follow it is successively the study
of sacred texts, sacrificial acts, and gift (i.e. commended generosity).
18These verses are to be found also in the Mahäbhärata, Säntip., 232, 26-8. A verse
similar to v.86 is attributed to Brhaspati (Aiy., p. 231. 4); for the Kali Age it adds to gift
(däna) compassion (dayä) and self-control (dama) or, according to a variant reading,
long-suffering (ksama).
19 
krte tu mänavä dharmäs tretäyäm gautamäh smrtäh
dväpare sankha-likhitäh kalau päräsaräh smrtäh.
20Cf especially Altekar, op. cit., 40-1.

--- PAGE 206 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
185
But that does not mean that the practice of austerities has lost its value
in the tretä Age, or that in the next Age the study of sacred texts has
become fruitless. If the dharmas vary, it is "because of the worsening
of the Ages", i.e. because the progressive diminution of the length of
human life no longer allows men to be sufficiently instructed in their
duties, and because humanity has lost the innocence of the Golden
Age in the course of its ever-deepening corruption. Men therefore grasp
at the act of dharma which is the least troublesome or the easiest to
perform. It is interesting that the "dharmas" listed in v.86, from austerity
to gift, actually demand less and less effort on the part of those who
perform them, so that their succession really corresponds to the pro-
gressive deterioration of the Ages. That deterioration also tends to
decrease the efficacy of the act of dharma, because such an act is per-
formed by inadequately instructed men who are corrupted by sins.
Medhätithi says this neatly in his commentary on v.82 : "Since those
who officiate, who institute sacrifices, who make gifts, and who receive
them are all subject to the faults which this verse alludes to, the meri-
torious act is not performed as it should be, and as a result the fruit
which it ought to have procured is not attained".21
Medhätithi (no one knows why) denies all connection between verses
85 and 86 and interprets the first differently. He attributes to the word
dharma not the sense of sacrificial act or act prescribed by the Veda,
but that of "character" or quality (guna) of things in general. Philologi-
cally this is a possible translation. The verse would not mean that dharma,
the moral law, changes with the Ages, but that the characters or qualities
of things vary from Age to Age, like the duration of human life which
goes on decreasing, or the aspects of nature which change with the
seasons. The use of the plural for dharmas and the diversity of senses
of the word do authorise this possible interpretation, which is taken
up again by Mitra-misra. The latter also thinks, ä propos of Manu's
v.85, that the difference between the dharmas in question envisages
solely the modalities (prakäras) of the act and not its essential features.22
However, Medhätithi comes to an explanation close to ours in his
commentary on Manu's v.81! There figures in that verse the celebrated
picture of Dharma compared with a bull: he stands on four feet in the
krta Age, but he loses one foot successively in each of the following
Ages—a symbol of the diminution of the physical faculties and moral
sense of men in course of time. For Medhätithi (as for other commen-
tators on Manu, viz. Kullüka and Näräyana), the four feet of the bull
Dharma correspond to the four principal means of acquiring merit:
21 Verse 84 means the same.
22Vlr., pur., p. 47. The same interpretation is given again by Mädhava. on Pur., 1.22
reproducing M., 1.85.

--- PAGE 207 [DIRECT] ---

186 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the practice of austerities, knowledge of sacred texts, sacrifices, and
gifts, which Manu mentions in v.86 as being the virtues successively in
esteem in the four Ages of the world. In other words, if Dharma totters,
it is not because he has changed his nature but because, through men's
neglect or weakness, he has ceased to be held up. And Medhätithi observes,
on v.86 itself, that the practice of one or another of the four virtues
spoken of is not special to a particular yuga, but that they are prescribed,
all four of them, for all time. He means that the perfection of dharma
is not attained unless they are all esteemed equally.
Thus the yugas' rolling onwards affects only human capabilities.
It makes the accomplishment of the divine will more and more difficult,
but this divine will is always expressed within the timeless law that is
dharma. As that law has been proclaimed in smrti and can be known
by all, it behoves those who have the mission to instruct men in their
duties to develop it and render it accessible, in order to keep open the
way of virtue in spite of the corruption of the times. And it especially
behoves the king to secure conditions for his subjects through well-
advised policies, which will permit them to engage and to persevere in
that law. When he explains the king's function, Manu himself declares
that the king, by his conduct, is identified with the Ages of the world:
"Asleep he is the kali Age; awake he is the dväpara, ready for action
the tretä', and acting he is the krta Age". (M., IX.302). Thus, the passing
of the yugas can be made illusory by the support which the king brings
to dharma if he fulfills his duty.23 The Sage can, by trying to conform
to the precepts of the eternal law, escape from the kali Age. If he does
this he is not turning backwards through Time, he is submitting himself
simply to the order of things.
The text of Paräsara seem to be more difficult than Manu's to reconcile
with the doctrine of consensus, at least at first sight. In fact he specifies
at the beginning of his work that it contains exclusively precepts valid
for our Age. The famous v.24 of the first Book, taken literally, seems
to signify that each yuga has had its peculiar rules of dharma, enunciated
by Manu for the krta Age, Gautama for the tretä, Sankha-Likhita for
the dväpara, and lastly Paräsara for the kali Age. We need not notice
the singularity of this list, which places Manu before Gautama and
gives Sankha-Likhita an importance which the work passing under
that name appears not to have enjoyed.24 On the other hand, we cannot
23Medhätithi on A/., IX.301. observes that the yugas should not be taken here as it they
were historical periods. It is the king's methods which create conditions belonging to one
or other of them. Lingat. 'Dharma et temps'. J.A., 259 (1961). 487-95. available in English
as Time and the Dharma: on Manu I.85-6'. Contributions to Indian Sociology 6 (1962).
7-16.
24U.C. Sarkär. Epochs in Hindu Legal History (Hoshiarpur. 1958). 122-3. observes
that Manu here means the Mänava-dharma-sütra rather than the Manu-smrti which is

--- PAGE 208 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
187
evade the difficulties which this text presents by merely observing that
the author has declared his work made specially for our times in order
to attribute more authority to his book. This may well be true. But
the observation would imply nonetheless that the author, who knew
the theory of the yugas, had understood it in the same sense as the present-
day antagonist of the orthodox doctrine. He would have seen in verses
84-85 of Manu (which have become verses 22-23 of the first chapter
of the Paräsara-smrti) the expression of the changeableness of dharma.
Now if his intention really was to write especially for our Iron Age,
he apparently did not think it followed that the prescriptions offered
by the new smrti must supersede those which were designed for anterior
Ages. In fact he evinces a veritable veneration for Manu who is "the
sole (amongst the Sages) to know all the sästras" (IX.51).25 In many
places, he puts his own precepts under the authority of Manu (VI. 1,
VII.31-32, IX.26, XI.19, XII.38), where he does not actually reproduce
Manu's verses literally or almost literally. 'The Veda is without an
author", says he (1.21), "it is (simply) recalled (for the world of men)
by (the god) with four faces (Brahma); in the same way, at the commence-
ment of each kalpa, Manu puts (men) in mind of their duties (dharmas)".26
The preeminent place accorded to Manu shows that the author of the
Paräsara-smrti had no intention to substitute for the dharmas hallowed
by Manu other dharmas valid for our Age. His intention seems clear
from the verses which follow v.24, in which he explains how men's
conduct differs from Age to Age. The differences arise because little
by little men lose their primitive purity, and they become more and
more incapable of correctly performing the sacrificial acts. Thus while
during the krta Age no one would wish to live in a country where a
sinner was found, in the succeeding Ages, men were content to avoid
successively the village where he lived, then his family, and finally,
in the kali Age the sinner himself (1.25). In the krta Age, it was a sin
to speak with a sinner, while in the kali Age a man is degraded only
by acts which he himself commits (1.26). Rites lose their efficacy little
by little. While in the krta 'Age their effect was instantaneous, in the
following Ages it was only produced within ten days, then within a
month, and at last within the year of their being performed (1.27). Even
chanty, which remains the essential virtue of the kali Age, is no longer
certainly later than the dhurma-sütra of Gautama (M.. III. 16 in effect cites Gautama).
This hypothesis can hardly be accepted (apart from the absence of proof that such a sütra
ever existed) because of numerous references to the Manu-smrti which figure in the Paräsara-
smrti.
2? 
mcmunä caivam ekena sarva-sästräni jänatä.
2t) 
na kascid veda-kartä ca vedam smrtvä catur-mukhah
tathaiva dharmän smarati manuh kalpäntare 'ntare.

--- PAGE 209 [DIRECT] ---

l OÖ 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
practised as it should be, for men do not make gifts except to remunerate
services, which deprives the act of all merit (1.28-29).
Thus the author of the Paräsara-smrti shares the idea which illuminates
verses 84-85 of Manu, namely that it is the degeneration of humanity
which no longer permits men to perform their duties perfectly. His
scheme is thus to teach them the rules of conduct which it remains
possible for them to follow, and also the penances which are appropriate.
Basically, here is nothing new. Already we have found Gautama (1.3)
and Apastamba (II.6.13.7-8) recognising that what was permitted to
the ancient Sages because of their sanctity could not be permitted in
our Age of sin. The Good Custom proclaimed by the dharma-sästras
is an ideal of life which is available only to saints. It is in this sense only
that we can call it the morality of an age other than our own. It is im-
possible to demand that the generality of people observe it with rigour.
Certain practices, ill understood, ill applied, should actually be dis-
couraged. The Paräsara-smrti recommends him who is ill to try by
all possible means to recover health and, when he is physically capable
of it, to observe the precepts of dharma just once (VII.37). It places the
need for self-preservation before all religious duties (VII.36), and declares
that there is no need to care for rules of purity in a period of distress
(VII.38). Even if they are not put quite so crudely, such propositions
have their echo in other dharma-sästras.21
Paräsara's affirmation that his rules are valid for the kali Age can
be regarded as the germ of the theory of the kali-varjyas, which we shall
discuss later. But one must own that it had hardly any influence upon
the composition of his work, because in the rather restricted domain
which its author has chosen the Paräsara-smrti has nothing to distinguish
it specifically from other smrtis.
Thus neither the verses of the Paräsara-smrti nor those of the Code
of Manu permit us to conclude that the authors of the dharma-sästras
intended to legislate for their own days. Doubtless they felt the influence
of their milieux and the aspirations of their age, and this influence is
unquestionably to be seen in their works. But for them the Law which
they proclaimed, taking its ultimate source in the Veda, could only be,
like it, one and eternal.28 Likewise, the idea that Good and Evil are
relative terms, that the moral value of an act is susceptible to be appre-
ciated differently from epoch to epoch, is an idea of the modern world
which could not have come into our authors' heads. For them Dharma
27The Mimämsä itself (Jai.. VI.3, 1 cited by Mädhava on Par.. 1.22), ä propos of the
agnihotra and other obligatory rituals, concludes that the sacrificer is bound to perform
only those rites which it is within his power to perform. That self-preservation takes prece-
dence over all religious imperatives explains the immunity which the majority of the dharma-
sästras allow to the slayer of a Brahmin aggressor (ätatäyin).
is Mädhava's principal argument on Par., 1.22 (otherwise A/.. 1.85).

--- PAGE 210 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
189
is synonymous with Truth. Since however, they were conscious of the
occurrence of changes in ideas and morals, they had recourse to the
theory of the yugas. It is not the moral imperatives which vary according
to the Ages, but men's progressively weakening capacity to obey the
moral law. As for divergencies between the precepts of the smrtis, not
even they can be attributed to the influence of time. They only appear
divergent by reason of the weakness of human intelligence, which is
incapable of grasping truth under all her guises. It is up to the interpreter
to rediscover the underlying unanimity.
If the doctrine of consensus was only a fiction at the time of the com-
mentators—which is hardly likely—we must concede that it has rendered
a priceless service to interpretation. To consider all the dharma-sästras
and in a general sense all the works ranked within smrti as a single law
was to open the way to multiple solutions to problems. Interpretation
acquired a flexibility it could not have had if it were applied to only one
text, designated the most recent or the most complete. In a country
like India where customs are so diverse, diversity of interpretation is
the very condition of the birth of law.
3. Prohibitions proper to the Kali Age
The theory of the yugas (Ages) has led us little by little to the idea that,
although the rules of conduct prescribed by the sästras retain eternally
their redemptive quality, they are not always good to follow. Laid
down by Sages for the perfect man of the Golden Age, they cannot be
enjoined upon men of our days without discretion. The latter find,
as Manu says (IX.2-4), that the pursuit of interest or pleasure tends to
take precedence over the acquisition of spiritual merit. Human nature
is such that one cannot force it without destroying the effect desired.
Hence it would be better to dissuade men from, or even to prohibit
certain precepts of the sästras than to try to impose them without regard
for whether they will work.
A verse of Manu, which does not refer, at least explicitly, to the theory
of the yugas, brings some confirmation of this point of view. The verse
is placed in the part of Book'IV devoted to the duties of the snätaka,
or the Brahminical student during the last phase of his training when
he prepares himself to marry and found a family. But it unquestionably
applies also to a householder. After having enjoined him above all to
avoid wealth and pleasures which are repugnant to dharma, Manu adds
that he should refrain "also (from observing) dharma that has inauspicious
consequences (a-sukhodarkam) or which is reproved by the world
(lokchvikrustam)" (IV.176).29 Thus, according to Manu, there can be
29 
parityajed artha-kämau yau syätäm dharma-varjitau
dharmam cäpy asukhodarkam loka-vikrustam evu ca.

--- PAGE 211 [DIRECT] ---

190 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
two cases in which the dvija is not only allowed but even required not
to follow the precepts of the law. As an example of the first case, Medhä-
tithi cites the possibility that a head of the family might give away all
his property. Even though the gift might well be in itself a meritorious
act, such a donation should not be made because of the painful effects
it would have upon the donor and his family. The rule can be explained
further by the idea, expressed elsewhere by Manu (II.224), that the
ideal of the Sage, or rather of the respectable man, is to reconcile in .the
course of his conduct virtue with profit and pleasure, so that it might
be better to abstain from a meritorious act if the act would threaten
that equilibrium. Here we have a note with a modern sound to it, a
realistic one, to which Manu is not always a stranger.3** He does not
prevent considerations of profit or welfare being in some way measured
in the same scales with the authority which attaches to precepts of
dharma, and being thought capable of counterbalancing them.
The assault on dharma's authority is much more grave in the second
case proposed by Manu, in which the rule of conduct hallowed by texts
must still be avoided because it is "reproved by the world" (vikrusta,
literally "decried, despised"). Here we do not have an exception justified
by individual reasons to prevent the performance of an act which is
generally valid. We have an entire and definitive condemnation of
certain practices, a prohibition based on a reason related to public order,
namely the reaction of society which regards as blameworthy such
practices, though they are hallowed by the texts.
There is a verse of Yäjnavalkya (I.156) which corresponds to that
verse of Manu. He too declares ä propos of the duties of the snätaka,
"In act, thought, and speech he should practise dharma assiduously;
however he should not observe dharma [or kthat which is consistent
with dharma'] if it does not lead to heaven and/or is odious to the world
(loka-vidvistam)" } x
Although the expression "if it does not lead to heaven" (a-svargya)
may not have precisely the same sense as "having inauspicious conse-
quences",32 it seems that Yäjnavalkya, like Manu, understood by it
This principle has been evoked in the last thirty years in support of the movement to reform
by legislation the Hindu law of India, [trs.]
30We may compare with this verse that by which Manu recommends sons to proceed
to a partition of the paternal estate, for this is more meritorious (dharma-vrddhi 
results),
but still leaves them free to remain undivided if they think it more useful (A/.. I X.I 11.
identical with Gaut.. XXVIII.4).
31 
karmana manasä väcä yatnäd dharmam samäcaret
asvargyam loka-vidvistam dharmam apy äcaren na tu.
There are significant variations in the reading of the last quarter as transmitted by the
different commentators, but it is not necessary to dilate upon them here.
^asukhodarka. Mitra-misra. glossing asvargyam, applies it to ritual practices and gives
as an example recourse to abhicäras, magic spells done with evil intent. Visvarüpa evidences

--- PAGE 212 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
191
an obedience to the rule which would be an abuse, which would involve
more harm than good. But loka-vidvista ("odious to the world")32a
agrees plainly with the loka-vikrusta ("reproved by the world") of Manu.
There are commentators who rely expressly on these verses of Manu
and Yäjnavalkya to condemn practices hallowed by smrtL Thus Medhä-
tithi (on A/., IV. 176) reports that, following the opinion of older com-
mentators, it is no longer permitted to sacrifice a bull or to eat beef,
since such usages are "reproved by the world". Vijnänesvara (Mit., on
Yäj., II.117) prohibits the eldest son's being given a larger share at a
partition of ancestral property than any of his younger brothers, even
though such a preferential share is permitted by Manu and Yäjnavalkya.
"It is true", he says, "that unequal partitions are authorised by the
texts, but they should not be made, because they are rejected by the
world". And he adds that it would be the same as to sacrifice a barren
cow to Mitra and Varuna (enjoined in a Vedic text) and to offer a bull
or a goat to a learned Brahmin when he comes to the house as a guest
(an offering recommended by Yäjnavalkya at I.109).33
How are we to explain that popular aversion could justify in the
eyes of the smrti the prohibition of practices which it has itself laid
down? Doubtless we shall agree that certain rites, however obligatory,
will cease to be observed in the course of time. But, as Medhätithi remarks
(on A/., IX. 112) ä propos of sattras (sacrifices of long duration), if they
are no longer performed that could be explained by the fact that no
one in our days has the means to perform them, or desires the results
which performance of them procures, or even that faith in their efficacy
has vanished. But they do not any the less retain their validity, and they
are always capable of being performed. A rule of dharma cannot be
abrogated by dissuetude. By contrast what we have here are not rules
which have simply been abandoned or have fallen into dissuetude,
but practices which have been formally forbidden and treated as bad.
The old commentators to whom Medhätithi alludes (on A/., IV. 176)
present a really curious explanation for the prohibition of any sacrifice
of a bull. In their view, the great majority of men of our days, failing
to be sufficiently instructed in such matters, are unaware that such a
sacrifice is permitted in particular cases, and they therefore regard the
sacrificer in all cases as a reprobate who should be shunned. Rather
than scandalise the masses and provoke their indignation (even if un-
justified), it is better that people should abstain from that sacrifice
a reading asvantam (which ends ill), which recalls ManiTs asukhodarkum. Many commen-
tators, notably Vijnänesvara, simply relate asvargyam to loku-vidvistam.
^2 The same expression is found in Vis., LXXI.85 : loka-ridvisfum dharmam api (näcaret i.
•^Derrett, "Showing a big bull: a piece of hypocrisy in the Mitäksarä?', Annuls of the
Bhandarkar Or. Res. Insi. 48 9 (1968), 45 53.

--- PAGE 213 [DIRECT] ---

192 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
altogether. Such an explanation protects the validity of the sacrifice
itself, and of the texts which prescribe it! Abstention is recommended
to the intending sacrificer in order to spare him from the hostile reactions
of his environment. Here is a counsel of practical wisdom, analogous
to that which foresees that some acts will be "having inauspicious
consequences".
However, the prohibition of practices "odious to the world" is not
generally understood in this way. In putting on the same level the sacrifice
of a bull and unequal partition, Vijnänesvara certainly envisages those
practices, which were once permitted, as now completely reprehensible.
Devanna-bhatta (Sm. cand., II, p. 266) rightly remarks that the paral-
lelism between the sacrifice of a bull and unequal partition is unsure,
for the prohibition of sacrificing a bull has only a negative aspect. It
does not substitute another act contrary to the act prohibited, whereas
the prohibition of unequal partition implies a new form of partition
different from that which is taught in the smrti. In other words, Devanna-
bhatta seems disposed to accept that popular aversion suffices to justify
the condemnation of a practice; while on the other hand he will not
admit that a contrary custom can abrogate a rule laid down in the sästras.
This is a perfectly orthodox position. However it is only certain in a
case where the precepts of the sästras make no difficulty and do not
open the way to alternative interpretations. We have seen that, on this
hypothesis, usage should guide the interpreter towards the solution
which should be adopted, in the sense that conformity with usage guaran-
tees in some sense the correctness of that interpretation. We could
see in the rejection of acts "odious to the world" the counterpart to
this proposition. Amongst possible solutions, that which conflicts with
usage ought to be eliminated, not because of popular opposition to it
but because that hostility is the sign that it is incorrect. Such a way of
looking at the matter is by no means wanting amongst the commentators.34
It seems very difficult to agree that the swrr/-writers referred to popular
reaction to determine which of their precepts should not be obeyed.
In any case such a criterion is far from secure. Observe the divergence
of opinion on the subject of unequal partition. Vijnänesvara holds that
the public is hostile to it, while Devanna-bhatta and other commentators
believe that it is still held to be right to give a special share to the eldest
34When condemning unequal partitions. Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Ycij.. II.117) does not
stop at saying that they are 'odious to the world'. He regards it as desirable to show that
there is some disagreement between the precepts of Manu and Yäjnavalkya and those of
Äpastamba (11.6.14, 1 14) and even of the Veda: hence the meaning of the first two could
be open to debate. Mädhava. for his part, relies on Yäj.. I.156 to limit the bearing of his
interpretation of M., XI. 172. and to support the prohibition of marriage with the daughter
of the paternal aunt (see above). Yäjnavalkya's precept is thus, for him, a criterion of
interpretation.

--- PAGE 214 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
193
son when he particularly merits it.35 But above all how can the verdict
of people of low status, or the mere populace, who have no acquaintance
with the sacred texts, render a practice disreputable and so justify its
being condemned? Moreover, Mitra-misra holds that the word loka in
the phrase loka-vidvista really means yuga. It is not acts which are "odious
to the world" which Yajnavalkya intends to proscribe, but those which
have become odious in the yuga in which we are.
The theory of the yugas in effect offers the commentators a means,
no doubt more orthodox than recourse to popular aversion, to bring
the sästric precepts into touch with their times, ranging practices which
had become "odious" amongst those which are condemned in the
Kali Age. Condemnation of them rests, then, not only on the sentiments
of the population in regard to them, but also on the progressive worsening
of the Ages, since in the Kali Age men are no longer capable of accom-
plishing as they should all the acts hallowed by Good Custom. Conse-
quently, certain of these acts have lost their meritorious quality and
vitiated by evil inclinations, have even become acts of perdition. This
explains why the Sages have prohibited them.
The Sages then, and not human beings themselves, must tell which
practices have ceased to be salutary. The author of the Paräsara-smrti
already purports to legislate only for the Kali Age, but he omits to
lay down those prohibitions. Other smrtis, beginning from Brhaspati,36
specify the prohibited actions and begin to formulate, little by little,
a long list of kali-varjyas (acts prohibited in the Kali Age).37
During the period of the commentators, recourse to the theory of the
yugas to explain how certain practices hallowed by the texts were put
on the Index (and so banned) was in full vigour. AI Birüni, whose stay
in India occurred at the beginning of the eleventh century, testifies to
this effect. The Arab traveller reports that the Hindus had told him
there was once a time when it was permitted to eat cow's meat. There
were sacrifices in which cows were put to death, but later this was pro-
hibited "because of the weakness of men who had become too weak
to perform their duties".38 From the twelfth to the thirteenth century
this theory came into frequent use. The digests or commentaries cite a
long passage from a puräna which mentions fifty kali-varjyas*9 The end
of this passage says that, for the protection of the world, at the beginning
of the Kali Age. the said practices were censured by mutual consent
of the Sages, and the joint opinion of the good (samayah sädhünäm)
; ?Käne. III. 627 30. See above, p. 168, n. 56.
^Prohibition of killing a Brahmin agressor (Aiy., 
XXIII.4), disallowance of 
niyoga
( X X V . 1 2 . Aiy., X X V I . 5 8 ) a n d of secondary sons ( X X V . 1 4 , Aiy., X X V I . 1 8 ) .
•*
7Kane. Ill, 926 7.
•*M/ Binmi's 
India, 
trans. Sachau, II, 152.
u >Käne. III. gives the passage as an appendix, p. 1013, n. 1783.

--- PAGE 215 [DIRECT] ---

194 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
has the same authority as the Veda.40 We need only notice in this fable
how it conforms to orthodoxy : these practices have really been condemn-
ed in the interest of humanity, and the condemnations are believed to
have been pronounced once for all at the beginning of the Kali Age in
order to signify that they fall beyond the judgement of the men of the
Kali Age.
Käne, who gives a whole series of forbidden acts (III., pp. 930-968),
concludes by saying that the theory of the kali-varjyas furnishes a
"peremptory" argument against the still widespread prejudice of the
"Unchanging East". In India, as elsewhere, society has evolved. The
fiction of an agreement between the Sages to establish rules, which
should not be followed during the Kali Age is the means the writers
have used to register changes in religious practices and moral notions.
Käne says also that the Kali-varjya theory is a peremptory argument
against the idea that dharma is immutable and unchanging. Thanks
to it, the most solemn prescriptions of the Veda and the ancient Sagescan
be put to one side and considered as having no authority, because they
run counter to the prevailing notions of society.
The kali-varjya theory undoubtedly served to hallow changes that
took place in opinion and manners, and to justify that popular reaction
which Manu and Yajfiavalkya refer to without explaining. One must
admit that the theory often looks a bit artificial, and that the argument
it provided for our writers is seldom more than a formality. It is quite
probable that revulsion from certain practices, such as bloody sacrifices,
secondary sons, and niyoga, is due to a refinement of the moral sense
and a softening of manners, rather than to a "progressive worsening
of the Ages". But does this mean to say that in the eyes of the Hindus
themselves the kali-varjya theory was only a fiction intended to mask
the effect which time had been having upon the very concept of dharma!
We cannot affirm this without throwing overboard the beliefs upon
which rest both the teaching of smrti and the system of its interpretation.
Perhaps though it seems very specious to us. the explanation really
satisfied minds different from our own, penetrated as they were by the
notion that perfect wisdom existed only at the dawn of days. All that
we can say is that, in attaching a natural, cosmic cause, independent
of human will, to changes in ideas and manners, it turned into a general
rule prohibitions which, for want of such a foundation, would have
had a very limited significance. Consequently groups that continued to
4()Cf the text of Äpastamba, 1.1.1. 2-3, discussed above. The Sages have the authority
to fix the acts of dharma. to determine those which should be observed and those which
should be no longer because of the deterioration of the Ages, not to lay down new rules.
It would be going much too far to conclude from the passage referred to here that the
Sages' opinion could make law.

--- PAGE 216 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
195
observe the prohibited acts affirmed thereby their incapacity to break
away from sin and their moral inferiority relative to those who condemned
them. The prohibition amounted to a degradation.41 Thus what happened,
after the smrti period, was a movement to purify or refine custom, without
compromising (indeed perhaps rather reinforcing) the previously
established social hierarchy.
Yet we should note that, whatever the basis we give it, the kali-varjya
theory has only a negative aspect. It merely explains and legitimises the
disappearance of certain customs. Now it is one thing to hallow the
abrogation or desuetude of an institution, but another thing to install
a new law. If the disappearance of certain practices indicates a change
of manners or opinion, it does not imply, conversely, anything funda-
mentally new. Transformation of society is marked rather by the appear-
ance of new rules which not only abrogate the previous ones but substitute
something in their stead. This creative function has undeniably been
played in India by custom. If in certain limited domains the kali-varjya
theory has allowed a triumph of the resistance which custom offers to
sacred tradition, it would be going too far to attribute to it the birth
of new institutions.
Finally, that theory could only function in the face of practices
which were susceptible to a general application. It has no role when the
question is one of a strictly local usage or one restricted to a definite
social group, a family, a caste, a corporation, or the like. Yet it is precisely
with regard to these sorts of custom that conflict presents itself most
frequently.
4. Conflicts between D harm a and Custom
From a very early period, the rules and customs observed in the various
social groups, castes, corporations or guilds, families, etc., or in different
regions of India formed a sort of special law within the bosom of the
common law which the smrtis expounded. Manu (VIII.41), following
Vasistha (XIX.7) recommends the king to inform himself about the
usages42 of castes, countries, guilds, and families, and thus to fix everyone's
duty. Many of these customs are immaterial from the religious point
of view, and are sanctioned ultimately by human justice alone.43 Others
are thought to conform to the precepts of the sästra and see their authority
41Visvarüpa (on Yäj., I.69) already suggests that the texts relating to niyoga concerned
the Südras only. Käne, II, 604. However, when the prohibition of meat-eating was extended
even to those cases in which the sastras permitted it, meat-eaters became declassified,
degraded, relative to those who abstained. Käne, II, 772 82; III. 945; IV, 422 5.
42Here (as in corresponding passages) the term employed is dhurnui, taken in the sense
ot* a customary rule.
4?That seems to be the case with the majority of the examples furnished by the commen-
tators expounding this text.

--- PAGE 217 [DIRECT] ---

196 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
confirmed accordingly. But what are we to think of those which, tra-
ditionally followed in a given milieu, are in contradiction with the
precepts of the sacred texts?
The question arose very early. Baudhäyana (I.2.1-4) enumerates
aberrant practices peculiar to the Brahmins of the North and those
of the South. "There is", says he, "a difference between the South and
the North on five points. We shall describe the practices of the South :
to eat with a person not having received Brahminical initiation; to eat
with one's wife; to eat food prepared the previous day; to marry the
daughter of the maternal uncle or the paternal aunt. And for the North :
to sell wool; to drink spirits; to traffic in animals with two rows of teeth;
to take up the profession of arms; to make sea-voyages."
The orthodox point of view is known: a practice contrary to the
precepts of sruti or smrti cannot be good and he who observes it commits
a sin. Likewise Baudhäyana (I.1.2.5-8) reports that Gautama condemns
the particular practices with which he deals because they are contrary
to the traditions of the sis fas. But he does not share this opinion. He
believes that the Brahmin of the North or the South who.follows the
customs of his district cannot be blamed, for, he says, local usage merits
respect (tatra tatra desa-prämänyam eva syät); he admits, conversely,
that in any other locality than that in which they prevail, it would be
a sin to follow them.
We have already seen the special force enjoyed in India by custom
because of its immemorial origin. But usage cannot be erected into a
rule of conduct unless it is practised by sistas, the learned and the virtuous,
whose conduct may be presumed to rest upon the divine will. Baudhäyana
(1.1.5-6), who is faithful to the teaching of the MImämsä, is very strict
on what should be understood about a sista. Not only should the sista
have a profound knowledge of the Veda, but he should know how to
draw all the consequences which flow from the Vedic injunctions for
conduct to be followed. It is precisely because of his knowledge of the
sacred texts and his scrupulous observance of the precepts that it is
permitted to presume that he always acts in conformity with a Vedic
injunction, even if the latter cannot be verified in the texts now at our
disposal. Thus it can hardly be doubted that, for Baudhäyana as for
Gautama, usages contrary to the traditions of the sistas and a fortiori
those which are contrary to precepts of sruti or smrti are adharma.44
That is why he adds that it is not allowed to follow them anywhere else
than in the districts where they prevail. However he admits that the
force of usage is such that even adharma practices, such as these which
44Moreover, Baudh., 1.1.1-4 demonstrates the hierarchy between the three sources of
dharmtr. first the Veda, then smrti, and then only in the third rank (hence in default of
the first two) Good Custom <sistacära).

--- PAGE 218 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
197
he mentions, deserve respect,45 and consequently cannot be reprobated
after the time when they passed into custom. Does this mean that he
believes that the sin is wiped out? Let us confine ourselves for the present
to acknowledging that from the dharma-sütra period onwards the
question gave rise to controversy between the schools.
Other passages of smrti seem to allow certain customs an authority
large enough to counterbalance that of the säst ras. Thus Äpastamba
(1.7.2.6-7), agreeing that it is difficult to distinguish that which is dharma
from that which is not, advises that one should hold fast to the usages
of good people.46 Strictly speaking, one could see in this no more than
the application of the criterion of custom where the texts contradict
each other. Manu (IV. 178) in the same vein, recommends the snätaka to
"walk in the way of virtuous people which his father and ancestors have
trodden; in following that he will do no wrong". Family customs here
have for Manu the validity of rules of conduct.
The same Manu (VIII.46) counsels the king to cause to be observed
as law "all the practices of virtuous dvijas, attached to dharma, if they
are not contrary to the customs of countries, families, and castes",47
which seems indeed to imply that particular customs have more weight
than the custom of the Sages. What is intended there, however, is only
advice in the nature of political wisdom addressed to the king which
does not touch the bottom of the problem, for a dvija who is concerned
for his own salvation tries to conform his conduct to the precepts of the
sästras and consequently avoids following usages which are opposed to
them (Vas., 1.17, XIX.7; Gaut., XI.20). Yet if the text of the verse seems
clear to us, the commentators are divided in the interpretation which
they place upon it. Medhätithi (followed by Govindaräja) and Devanna-
bhatta (Sm. cand., I, p. 10) understand, on the contrary, that he recom-
mends the king not to allow to be observed as law in countries, families,
and castes any practices other than those conforming to the sacred texts.48
The most important text of Manu on the subject which now concerns
us is verse 108 of the first Book, because it has served as the basis of
45We note that Baudhäyana does not say that custom is dharmya (conformable to dharma)
but that it is prämänyu (from manu, opinion), worthy of respect, authoritative, without
any religious connotation.
4h'Dharma and Adharma do not show themselves to us in bodily form and say "here
we are". Nor do the gods, or the Gandharvas, or the mimes say, "this is dharma, that is
adharma". Consequently what good people approve of is dharma, and that which they
condemn is adharma.'
47 
sadbhir ücaritam vat svad dharmikais cu dvijätihhih
tad desa-kula-jätlnäm aviruddham prakalpayet.
A similar text attributed by the Sm. cand. to an anonymous smrti is reproduced by Jolly
in his edition of Brhaspati (XXVII.24) and by Aiyarigär (Additional Texts, p. 495).
•^Cf Biihler's note to his translation, and the translation which G. Jhä gives of it.

--- PAGE 219 [DIRECT] ---

198 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the Anglo-Indian case-law which has confirmed the primacy of custom
over the written law.49 This is the text :
äcärah paramo dharma h srutyuktah smart a ex a ca
tasmäd asmin sadä yukto nityam syäd ätmavän dvijah.
The British judges, following Sir William Jones, translated the first
line of this couplet (the second provides no difficulty) giving a disjunctive
value to the words eva ca. Then it would mean, "Custom is supreme Law,
as is that which is said in sruti and smrti. The twice-born concerned for
the good of his soul must always be attentive to it." Thus Manu would
acknowledge in custom the same value in affording a rule of dharma as
have the precepts of the Veda and the sästras. Now this construction
of the verse is far from settled.50 The majority of the commentators,
relating the words srutyuktah and smärta to the word äcära, understand
the verse of Manu to signify that the äcära, rules of conduct, as they
are propounded in sruti and smrti, are supreme dharma.51 In other
words Manu insisted upon practice of the rules of life prescribed by the
sacred texts, for it is not by simply knowing texts that the dvija acquires
spiritual merit (dharma), but by his application to their observation
in action. Thus äcära, the way of life, is the supreme source of merit
when it conforms to precepts. This second interpretation would reflect
the thought of Manu better than the first.52 This does not mean to say
that the first has not some support in texts throughout smrti (notably
some passages of the Mahäbhärata) and that it has been received as
correct by some commentators on Manu, viz. Govindaräja 
and
Nandana.53
Even with that view of Manu's verse, and with whatever extension
acquired in course of time by the notion of Good Custom, a customary
rule cannot replace a precept of the sacred texts except on condition
of presenting the characteristics of a rule of dharma, defined long ago
by the MImämsä. Custom could not prevail against a contrary precept
4yThe principal decision was that given in 1868 by the Privy Council in the Ramnad
Case, Collector of Madura v. Moottoo Ramalinga Sathupathy 12 Moore's Ind. Appeals. 397.
50Mayne, op. cit., 11th edn.. s. 33. p. 59 n. (d). Whatever the original meaning of the
verse, it is relevant only to topics within the concept of Good Custom. It is at best very
doubtful whether it applies to judicial questions, for the powers of the judge were in no
way limited by texts of this type.
51The translations of Bühler, Strehly and G. Jhä reveal that this was (in their view)
the sense.
52Cf M., IV. 155 8. At v.l55 the words sruti-smrtyudita, corresponding to srutyuktah
smärta in our verse, are connected with äcära. The importance of practical application
is neatly underlined in the precepts of Vas., VI. 1-7, of which the verses of Manu are an
echo (A/., IV. 156 in any case reproduces Vas., VI.7).
"Käne, III, 875.

--- PAGE 220 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
199
unless it does not appear to be visibly inspired by utilitarian or hedonistic
considerations. And we must add that interpreters faithful to orthodoxy
do not even approve that point of view. They hold that it is always a
sin to follow a particular usage, even if it is clear of all mundane motives,
should it be opposed to the written rule.
But here another consideration intervenes to which an allusion was
made earlier. The totality of rules posited in sruti and smrti can only
be observed entire by those whose sole concern is to deserve heaven.
Even some of them must be rejected today because of the worsening of
manners in the Age in which we live (the kali-varjya theory). A fortiori
we cannot ask an oridinary man to submit to all the obligations laid
down in the course of the four stages of life. This is an ideal to which
only saints may aspire. From the generality of men absorbed in their
daily task, such an effort cannot be demanded, for "virtue is not taught",
wisdom is an innate gift. It is not realistic to reproach him who does
not have that gift and who confines himself to following the rules of
the social group to which he belongs.
A group of precepts incontestably belonging to smrti tends to favour
recognition of a juridical value in custom whether or not it agrees with
the sacred texts. First of all we have the well-known verse of Yäjnavalkya
(1.342) which recommends that when the king has conquered a country,
he maintain intact the customs (äcära), the rules of procedure (or the
rules followed in transactions: vyavahära) and the usages of families
(kula-sthiti), just as they are observed there.54 A propos of this text,
Vijnänesvara insists that the king ought not to try to impose the usages
of his own country upon the population of a country which he has
conquered. Dealing with his own subjects, Yäjnavalkya (I1.192) counsels
the king to cause the observance of conventions entered into by members
of groups such as the naigarnas, päkhandis and so on. Närada (XI1I.2)
declares also that the king should cause usages and conventions (samaya)
to be observed which prevail in the päkhandi, naigama and other frater-
nities, whether in fortresses or in the provinces. According to Vijnänesvara
{Mit., on Yäj.,\lA92) 
and Nilakantha (Vyav. may., XII.1) päkhandi
means merchants and other groups of people who reject the authority
of the Veda, whilst naigama signifies merchants and other people who.
conversely, do accept the authority of the Veda. Similarly the king is
bound to respect, and to cause to be respected by others, the customs
of populations living on the frontiers or in the mountains (whose manners
could be very different—as they still are—from those of the Hindus)
and even those which are established by heretics. Medhätithi (on M.f
VIII.41) remarks on this subject that there is no anomaly on the king's
part if, installed to safeguard dharma, he applies to barbarians the
? 4 T h e s a m e rule a p p e a r s at Vis., 111.42 a n d A/., V I I . 2 0 3 .

--- PAGE 221 [DIRECT] ---

200 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
customs of their society even if they are repugnant to the sacred texts,
for to such people the concept of purity is meaningless.
But there can be no precise demarcation between the Aryan and
the non-Äryan worlds. Even in the heart of the Hindu community
there exist peoples too ignorant or too weak to observe completely
the precepts of the sästras. They do not conceive that they commit
any sin in following the customs of their ancestors. How could one
impose rules of the sästras to the letter on them, when heretics and
barbarians are legally authorised to practice customs repugnant to
the Veda?
This is the context in which it is fitting to read the verse of Brhaspati
(11.28): "Customs (dharmas) of countries, castes, families and other
(groups) must be maintained intact; otherwise the public would revolt,
the subjects would take an aversion to (their king), and the army and
the treasury would be destroyed."55
It would hardly be possible to show more neatly how the interests
of the state must prevail over the rule of dharma when one encounters
a custom firmly entrenched. But this is a principle of royal policy. The
king's mission is, above all, to make peace reign within the realm and
to protect his subjects against perils from abroad. Where strict observance
of the rules of dharma would lead to disorder he must abstain from
intervention and must allow his subjects to continue to observe their
customs.
Does this mean that a contrary custom abrogates the rule of dharma'?
It goes without saying that a person who observes the former cannot
be considered at fault by the members of group to which he belongs,
who are the sole judges of his conduct in practice. In other words, he
cannot be held socially culpable. But is it the same from the religious
point of view? He has violated dharma, unconsciously no doubt, but
unawareness is not a means of absolution from sin. Had custom, by
itself, a power of that kind?
The question is debated. We have seen that Baudhäyana seems to
admit that customs which he reports to us as belonging to Brahmins
of the North and the South were only adharma when practised in a
region where they were not traditionally followed. We have also seen
that according to Manu (IV. 178) he who follows the custom of his
ancestors does no wrong. But what should be understood by kkhe does
no wrong [to himself or to another] (na risyate)"1? Commenting on
this verse, Medhätithi says that it is not applicable except to ignorant
— Aiyarigär, 1.126b-127, following the citation in the Krtyukalputaru is a reduplication
of this verse and adds to the customs of countries, etc., those proper to people born of
irregular unions (pratiloma-prasilta) and those proper to inhabitants of strongholds
(durga-niväsin), which echoes Närada XIII.2.

--- PAGE 222 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
201
people who are incapable of consulting texts, for whom the best way
of knowing their duties is to act as their ancestors have done. Or even,
he adds, the verse's only object is to show, where there is an option
between several rules of conduct, that the rule to follow is that which
has been adopted in the past in the same environment. Still unresolved
is the question whether one is protected from all sin if one observes
family customs, whatever they might be.
But Brhaspati (11.31; Aiy., 1.130 cd), after listing a series of practices
which are aberrant but observed in certain regions of India,56 ends with
the line:
anena karmanä naite präyascitta-damärhakäh.
Literally translated this seems to mean, "for such practices these (people)
incur neither penance nor secular punishment". According to this text
a contrary custom would have the effect of paralysing the rule of dharma,
not to make an aberrant usage into an act of dharma carrying spiritual
benefits, but to abolish the religious sanction which accompanies the
violation of the rule, as much as to say that it is no longer sinful to act
in that way. Here, we must emphasise, is a set back of a much graver
character to the obligatory quality of the rule of dharma than was consti-
tuted by the prohibitions of the Kali Age. After all, those prohibitions
allowed the dharmic rule to stand for regenerate humanity. They were
founded on a general theme: the weakness of men of our present Age.
The abrogation effectuated by a contrary custom however, has no other
foundation than the particular traditions of a particular social group.
Even so a section of the interpreters refused to admit that the line
of Brhaspati had the sense and significance which we have just given to it.
"According to some authors", writes Nilakantha (Vyav. may., I.1.13),56"
"the reference to penances and secular punishments for the acts concerned
applies to countries not comprised in the text mentioned before. Others
who explain präyascitta-dama by präyascitta-rupo yo damah [secular
punishment taking the form of a penance] only allow exemption from
secular punishment in those cases, but hold that there is occasion for
punishment and penance at the same time in other cases". In other words,
according to these last writers, the immunity extends only to those
penalties which can be inflicted by way of penance; certain penances
5(rSome dvija.s, in the South, marry the daughter of their maternal uncle. In the central
regions artisans and manual workers eat cow's flesh. In the East fish is eaten and wives
practise adultery. In the North women drink alcohol and it is permitted to have intercourse
with them during their periods. The people of the Khasa country take to wife the widows
of their brothers/
5 h
0 Q ' p Y 
K ä n e a n d S . G . P a t w a r d h a n . The l ' y a v a h ü r a m a v u k l w of S i l a k a n t h a 
...
(Bombay. 1933). 7 8.

--- PAGE 223 [DIRECT] ---

202 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
indeed constitute veritable punishments. And no punishment can be
inflicted on those who have only followed the customs of their country.
The sin thus remains without immediate sanction, but it subsists none
the less. Mitra-misra,57 who shares this second opinion, observes for
his part that only judicial action is paralysed as against such customs,
because to reform them would risk upheavals amongst the subjects
(as is said in the passage of Brhaspati which we saw above). No penalty
can be inflicted by the king on those who practice them. But penance
eludes the judicial sphere. Its object is not to punish but to purify the
sinner in the interests of his afterlife. It may as a consequence be imposed
even where judicial action is not contemplated. Thus Mitra-misra
considers that there is always a sin in infringing the religious law, even
when the infringement, being protected by custom, cannot be redressed
by penal action.58 In sum this suggests that the rule of dharma and the
rule of custom has each its own level of application. If the rule of dharma
cannot abrogate the customary rule, the latter certainly cannot abrogate
the rule of dharma as such, that is to say as instrument of the law of
karma.
Moreover, in a hierarchical society such as is the Indian, it would
be very difficult to understand how people who practised usages con-
trary to Good Custom could be immunised against the degrading con-
sequences of their sin, and be considered as "pure" as the dvijas who
were faithful to the sästras' precepts. Like others in their group, they
would remain degraded in the eyes of the "pure" or the less "impure"
unless they expiated their sins. They would occupy an inferior place in
the social hierarchy. But they could none the less continue to live under
their customs, and the sästras even advised the king, for reasons of wise
policy, to take care that they are observed. These customs were not on
that account legitimated; they were only tolerated.
From the developments above-mentioned it is apparent that the rule
of dharma did not become a juridical rule until it entered into behaviour
and was accepted by the population as a customary rule. But how could
such a process take place if it was assumed that customary rules should
prevail over the rule of the sästras! Are not the two principles mutually
contradictory? Or should one conclude simply that only custom counts
in Hindu law, and that the sästras are only useful when they are in agree-
ment with custom? To these questions the following answers may be
attempted.
vvir. 
vyav., p. 22, quoted at Dh. k., p. 101. Käne, III, 861.
5«Devanna-bhatta (Sm. cand. I. 10) citing the verses of Brhaspati discussed above,
omits the last verse anena karmanä 
. . ., which makes one wonder whether it figured in
certain versions of the text of the 
Brhcispati-smrti.

--- PAGE 224 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
203
Because of the admitted predominance of the customary rule over
the rules of the sästras, custom certainly occupies an important place
in Hindu law, so important that some observers, including very well
informed men, have been able to believe and to write that India was
without written law. This is the opinion of the Jesuit Father Bouchet
who lived at Madura at the beginning of the eighteenth century, and of
Abbe Dubois at the beginning of the nineteenth so far as concerns Mysore
and the southern parts of the Madras Presidency. L. Sorg writes that
in the eighteenth century in the provinces governed by the East India
Company, justice as dispensed by the heads of the castes of the village
or by the panchayats had no other rule but immemorial custom. That
member of the French judiciary even writes that the authority of the
texts is the result of European influence, espousing thereby the theses of
Nelson.59 He is right—partially. But what we know of the way in which
justice was administered by the panchayats or the village courts leaves
us with a subtler impression. In delicate questions appeals were indeed
made to a Brahmin for advice, and recourse was made, if not to the
sästras themselves, at least to treatises which provided a local interpre-
tation of them.
Even where the sästras agreed with custom (and we have seen that
the interpreters frequently tried to establish that they did) the role of
the written law was far from negligible. It is thanks to the digest-writers
and the commentators that custom could be organised in a juridical
framework following a pre-established plan, which opened the way to
refinements and to a certain influence of technique upon the data them-
selves. In what concerns topics within vyavahära our authors managed
to extract a veritable common law, without which no juridical science
would have been possible.
But it would be wrong to confine the influence exercised by the dharma-
sästras and the commentaries to the areas in which they agreed, on
broad lines, with custom. Their influence has really been very much
wider than that. We must take account of the attraction which the
dharmic rule has exercised upon custom by virtue of its religious signi-
ficance and the veneration always attaching to the sacred books which
supply it.
Even when not followed, the rule of dharma always appears to the
Hindu as a model towards which one should tend, for it is a principle
of classification. A caste rises in the social hierarchy only as it approaches
the usages practised by the higher castes, i.e. those who most respect
the traditions set out in the smrti. Thus there will be a tendency, at least
amongst the elite, to remove from custom usages frankly contrary to
orthodoxy and to incline the group, or a part of the group, towards a
5gLeon Sorg, Introduction a I'etude du droh hindou (Pondicherry, 1895).

--- PAGE 225 [DIRECT] ---

204 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
mode of life regarded as more pure, or less impure. Now custom is
generally oral and is transmitted by being observed. It is essentially
unfixed. It is modified to keep pace with progress in manners and culture,
with the evolution of opinions. On the other hand the rule of dharma
is a written rule and presents all the advantages of a written law: it is
certain (except, naturally, for the divergencies due to interpretation, which
are nothing compared with the difficulties experienced when establishing
the existence, the bearing, or the meaning of a customary rule). Further,
it is immutable, fixed once for ever in the sacred books. It alone is the
object of a study, or rather of a science, since law is studied only as a
bonus, so to speak, where, and only where, it maintains and upholds
dharma. Thus there are many reasons why the original mobility of
custom should be retained with all its imprecision, and why it should
be kept ready to model itself on the rules of the säst ras.
Yet we should observe that if the interpreters of the Middle Ages
allow custom to prevail over the written law, they believe conversely
that a usage in contradiction with the law is not capable of extension,
i.e. it can be allowed only in the group where its existence is proved.60
Thus an unorthodox rule of custom has no chance of extending its
domain.61 It remains a particularity, a peculiarity. By contrast, the rule
of dharma has an unlimited power of radiation. It offers itself as a model
to every group. It fills the gaps in custom and tends to insinuate itself
into the customary structure. And once it is established there it is fixed
thereafter; it is and remains dharma, the group's law.
I cannot refrain from comparing this influence of dharma with that
which Roman law exercised in the Middle Ages upon the customs of
western Europe in the regions called the "lands of custom" (as opposed
to regions of book-law). In those regions germanic invasions had esta-
blished the supremacy of customs. With the renaissance of studies of
Roman law, the latter appeared to the jurists as a veritable revelation
of law, the ratio scripta, or "written reason". The authority which Roman
law then enjoyed as an expression of juridical science is of the same
nature as that of our dharma-sästras in India. It too was regarded as an
ideal legislation to which one should conform, not, surely, for any
reason of a religious character but because of the intrinsic merits which
were recognised to reside in it. As in India, that authority seemed fragile
enough, for the adage went: "custom exceeds law". But there too,
ftOCf Kane. III. 876-7.
61 It cannot be adopted by those to whom the book-law applies, and those whom it binds
may at any time abandon it for the book-law. These rules are accepted in Anglo-Indian
jurisprudence. Derrett. Introduction to Modem Hindu Law, s. 15; see also per Devadoss. J.,
at Mokka 
v. Ammakutti 
Indian Law Reports (1927) 51 Madras. 1 at p. 28 (a full bench
decision), a point of view confirmed by Krishnaswami Ayyangar, J., in 
Durgaprasada
v. Sudarsanaswami 
Indian Law Reports 1940 Madras, 653 at p. 665. [trs.]

--- PAGE 226 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND CUSTOM 
205
as in India, recourse was had to written law to fill the numerous gaps
in the customary wardrobe, to organise the customary mass into rational
frameworks, and to give it order and logic, so that the written law tended
to attract customary rules to itself, forming an ideal common law which
was preferable to the diversity of customs. And, as in India still, the
customary rule which was repugnant to written law found itself confined
to its actual territory. In the fourteenth century, two sorts of customs
were distinguished, those which were conformable to the written law
and on that account were considered to be common law, and the others,
"malignant law", which were held to be narrow and could not be extended
either by analogy or from one custom to another.62 Thus Roman law
could penetrate into customary French law, without dispelling it entirely
(far from that!), but making it a beneficiary of its technique.
The admission of Roman law in this guise into so many parts of
western Europe did not have an exact counterpart in England. But
from what we have seen no one will be surprised to learn that the ascen-
dancy of the true Common Law of England over the multitudes of local
customs was achieved more notably and more intimately by the systema-
tised reasoning of the Common Lawyers than by the operation of statute.63
It is not irrelevant to speak of the strict, even harsh tests to which the
Judges submitted customs before they were allowed to displace the
common law; nor of the phenomenon whereby mercantile customs were
admitted into English equity and became part of the law of the land.
Though nominally following the experience of the Common Law,
India, in her strict, if not harsh ascertainment and application of customs .
in derogation from the Hindu and Islamic law, and in her willingness
to allow oft-proved customs to pass into judicial knowledge, has actually
worked out to its logical conclusion the very procedure which I have
been describing.64 Custom may be used to throw light upon book law,
but it is much more common for the book law to illuminate and define
custom. The book law is the goal towards which those formerly governed
by customs are presumed to tend.65
In the vast subcontinent of India, where all levels of culture are re-
presented and where the most diverse human types coexist, customs
are of an infinite variety. And yet the moment that these peoples, the
62J. Declareuil, Histoire generate du droit franca is (Paris. 1925), 833.
63W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765), I, 74-9. [trs.]
64To the instances given in Derrett. s. 15 add the cases of Fateh Ali Shah v. Muhammad
Bakhsh Indian Law Reports (1927) 9 Lahore, 428 (prostitutes do not forfeit their property
by marrying); P. Latchamma v. M. Appalaswamy All India Reporter 1961 An. Prad. 55
(a woman does not forfeit wedding presents by remarrying); Sheikriyammada N. Koya
v. Adm., Laccadives 1967 Kerala Law Times 395 (a custom of inalienability is repugnant
to the right of property), [trs.]
65See Derrett cited above, p. 204, n. 61.

--- PAGE 227 [DIRECT] ---

206 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
most disparate inter se in the world, proclaim themselves to be Hindus,
they have all some point in common with Brahminical orthodoxy.
However low they may be in the social scale they are not barbarians,
mlecchas. They participate at least to a humble degree in the maintenance
of the eternal order, of dharma. They have their functions and duties
to perform. In performing them they expiate the faults of the past and
prepare themselves for higher births.66 Under the influence of Hindu
civilisation their customs tend to lose the aspects which are most shocking
in the eyes of more Hinduised groups and tend to assimilate the usages
of the latter. Though venerated everywhere, the rules of the dharma-
sästras are not obeyed as a whole except in the higher classes of society.
In the lower classes, their field of action diminishes as one descends,
and custom becomes more and more supreme. At the bottom, amongst
peoples who are hardly Hinduised at all, the domain of dharma is reduced
to practically nothing. Yet even in a population firmly rebellious against
all progress and totally void of ambition, once dharma is accepted on
one point, it begins little by little to be accepted on others 'also by a
kind of invisible radiation. That is where the authority of the written
law lies. Masson-Oursel put it very well. "That authority exists in the
substrata . . ., and not, as in the West, so to say on the surface, following
the territorial extension of the political power."67
However, such a formula leaves in the shadow or presupposes already
resolved the problem which is posed in India by the very existence of
that political power. If dharma is indeed a personal law which attaches
to a man to the degree that he can call himself a Hindu, the Hindu as an
individual is also the subject of a ruler to whom he owes obedience and
who possesses the means to compel obedience. The authority of the
written law is thus historically counterbalanced by that of the prince.
The law actually in force, at least for a specific period and in a limited
territory, is really the offspring of the solution to this new conflict between
the two sources of authority.
<>6According to A/.. IX.335 the Südra who fulfils his duties loyally obtains rebirth in
a higher caste.
antique et la civilisation indienne (Paris, 1933), 99.

--- PAGE 228 [DIRECT] ---

C H A P T E R III
DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE
1. The Function of the King
(a) Ksatra and Dharma
THE THEORY of the function of the king is absent from the dharma-sütras
which mention only some elements of it. It takes an important place
in the dharma-sästras, starting with the Code of Manu, who moreover
furnishes the most complete expression of it.1
Kingship2 is regarded as an institution necessary to the maintenance
of the social order established by the Creator for the good of creatures.
Only in the Golden Age could men dispense with a king, because all
of them had full knowledge of their duties and conformed to them natu-
rally. "There were no law-suits then, nor did hatred exist, nor greed"
(När., Intr., I.I). Consequent on the degeneration of humanity through
the Ages, men lost the inborn sense of their duties. Society was handed
over to disorder. The strong oppressed the weak. There was no longer
a barrier to contain appetites. There was no property and no family.
Here we meet one of the dogmas of Indian thought: A society without
a king (a-räjaka) is not viable. It is the "logic of the fish" (i.e. the law
of the jungle) which is law.3
Therefore the gods instituted the royal function, giving him who is
invested with power of command (ksatra) the mission to protect the
creatures4 and to give them, as Yajnavalkya says 1.323), the guarantee
'In this context, my interest does not extend beyond those aspects which illuminate the
nature and extent of the royal authority, in order to determine the basis of the royal activity
in the juridical domain. For a more complete account of the theory see Ghoshäl. 
History
of Indian Political Ideas (Oxford. 19*59), to which I owe no little inspiration.
2The dharma-sästras 
envisage no other form of government than monarchy.
^Mätsya-nyäya. 
The expression is found only in the epic (notably at 
Mahäbhärata,
Säntip., 15.30, 67.16) and in the works of arthasästra 
{Kaut., I.4. 13). But the metaphor
is ancient, for one finds it in the Flood passage in the Satapatha-brähmana 
(I.8.I. 1-10)
and it underlies several passages in the dharma-sästras 
(esp. A/., VI1.20; Nur., XVIII. 15).
It is odd that it turns up again in the mouth of the bishops of the province of Rheims,
assembled at Trosly in 909; 'Everywhere the powerful oppresses the weak, and men are
like fish in the sea which are devoured pell-mell by each other' (quoted by M. Bloch. La
Societe fe'odale, La formation des liens de dependance, Paris. 1939. 9). On the other hand
it is in frequent use in European political literature of the seventeenth century. C. Drekmeier,
Kingship and Community in Early India (Stanford. 1962). 249 n.d.
4The first duty of the Ksatriya is the protection of his people' (ksatriyasya pradhänam
karma 
prajänäm 
paripälanam 
: Yäj., 1.119).
207

--- PAGE 229 [DIRECT] ---

208 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of security (abhaya-däna). That mission and function is a dharma, a
religious duty, and since each man's performance of his own duty (sva-
dharma) depends on the protection secured by the king, it is perfectly
correct for the Mahäbhärata to declare (Säntip.63.25) that all dharmas
are comprised in the räja-dharma and that all have räja-dharma at their
head.
Certain verses in the dharma-sästras attribute a divine origin to the
king himself (M., VII.3-8; När. Sämb., XVIII.13,20). This conception
is foreign to the dharma-sütras. It doubtless originated in certain Vedic
texts which attribute a divine nature to the king because of his partici-
pation in rites which identify him with a god. But it is taken up again
primarily to give the king a halo of glory and to justify the respect due
to his person (cf.M., VII.8; När., XVIII.54-55), rather than being presen-
ted as the essential reason why his orders should be obeyed. The same
dharma-sästras (M., IX.303-311; När., XVIII.26-31) tell another tale
about the divine creation of royalty, which boils down to some analogies
between the royal function and the essential functions of certain deities.
The king rises to the status of a god and maintains this by applying himself
to the duties of his office.5 He is more than an ordinary mortal, but he
occupies the throne of Indra, as Vasistha says (XIX.48) and Manu
repeats (V.93). Thus it is only by exercising the royal function as it was
created by the gods that the king is assimilated to a deity.6 The dominant
idea of the dharmasästra writers seems to have been that it was not the
king who had a divine nature, but the royal function itself.7 That an
abstraction should be presented as a divinity cannot surprise us, since
punishment (danda) is also presented as a deity, a particularly powerful
deity which is issue of Brahma himself (M., VII. 14; Yäj., I.354).
The dharma-sästras take the arrival of the king for granted and do
not concern themselves with the manner in which he came to his throne.
The king is he who has been anointed (abhisikta), i.e. for whom the
sCf Kät., 7-9. När. Sämb., XVIII.13.
6Cf the verse of Sarikha cited in the Räjadharmakända, p. 85; 4the king gains heaven
not by vows, fasts, or various kinds of sacrifices, but by securing the protection of his
subjects' (na vratair nopaväsena na ca yajnaih prthag-vidhaih, räjä svargam aväpnoti pari-
pälanät), which puts the exercise of the royal function above the practice of austerities
and the performance of sacrificial rituals.
The question has been hotly debated (cf. U.N. Ghoshäl, op. cit., 546-7 and n. 20).
but common opinion seems today to favour the doctrine given above. Altekar, State and
Government in Ancient India (Benares. 1955). 86-7; B.K.. Sarkär. Political Institutions and
Theories of the Hindus (Leipzig. 1922). 179-80; A.K. Sen. Studies in Hindu Political Thought
(Calcutta. 1926). 57; K.V. Aiyahgär. Aspects of the Social and Political System of Manusmrti
(Lucknow. 1949). 175, and lastly L. and R. Rocher. 'La sacralite du Pouvoir dans l'lnde
ancienne d'apres les textes de Dharma', Annales du Centre deludes des Religions (Brussels,
1962), 123-37, and Drekmeier, op. cit., 250-2. According to Hopkins ('The divinity of
Kings', J.A.O.S., 51, 1931, 309-316) the same conclusion is to be drawn from the epic texts.

--- PAGE 230 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
209
coronation rites have been celebrated. All interpreters, save Candes-
vara,8 believe that the ceremony is necessary to invest the king with
supreme authority, but no rule lays down why or how a particular indi-
vidual is fit to qualify.9 Doubtless the dharma-sästras list the qualities
which the king should possess to be worthy of that title (cf.especially
Gaut., XI.2.4-6; M., VII.38-52; Yäj., I.309-311). But these qualities
are only put forward to serve as a model for the king. He is praised for
having them. He is presumed to have them, in order that he may actually
have them, following the current procedure of the authors of prasastis,
the official eulogies paid to a ruling king.10 We cannot see in them condi-
tions for accession to royalty, suggesting an election or even popular
approbation.
Basically, for the authors of the dharmasästra as for Voltaire, "The
first to be king was a jolly soldier". A soldier: it fits well enough that
the king should be a warrior, in order to secure the protection of his
subjects and the defense of his realm. And it is usual that he should be
a Ksatriya, for it was to the Ksatriya varna that Brahma reserved in
principle the right to bear arms and the duty to protect the lives and
properties of the creatures. Manu (VII.2) does not allow him to be other-
wise.11 If he envisages that a non-Ksatriya could be king it is only to
stigmatise him crudely (IV.85) and to forbid a brahmacärin to receive
any gift from him (IV.84). He is particularly hostile to the idea that a
Südra could be king (IV.61). Yajfiavalkya is less clear. He does not fail
to recall that the first duty of a Ksatriya is to protect the people (I.I 19).
But, when he enumerates the qualities which anarädhipa, a "protector
8After having cited the orthodox opinion on the necessity of a coronation. Cancjesvara
{Räj. rat., 2-3) rejects it, arguing that it does not take account of the authority of a conqueror
over territory won for him by his prowess.
9The interpreters are agreed, however, that his eldest son should succeed to the deceased
ruler. Rules regarding succession to the throne are very rare in the dharma-sästras. Manu
(IX.323) only alludes to the transmission of the throne to a son (putra), though during the
king's own lifetime. Candesvara(/?ö/. rat., p. 70) quotes a verse of BrhaspatiM/v., samskära,
516) according to which 'In the matter*of royalty, the order in which marriages take place,
and the performing of the sapindikarana (see above p. 168, n. 58) of the father, the eldest
is the one to whom the rights are given, even if his younger brothers are endowed with
good qualities', and a verse of Närada (not in the published text), 'The eldest is the liberator
from hell, the most honourable (amongst sons) in the world; thus he is called a jewel-
treasury (ratnäkara); only he is worthy of the throne (räjyärho jyesthah)\ 
which shows
that the rule of primogeniture was based on the religious quality of the first-born son.
10Cf G. Dumezil, Servius et la Fortune (Paris. 1943).
nbrähmam präptena samskäram ksatriyena yathävidhi, sarvasyäsya yathänyäyam karta-
vyam pariraksanam : i t is by a Ksatriya who has received the samskära prescribed by the
Veda that the protection of all shall be done according to rule.' It is remarkable that the
majority of the commentators upon Manu, including Medhätithi, understood the word
samskära as the ceremony of initiation (upanayana), or the series of sacraments prescribed
for a dvija; and that only Nandana saw it as meaning the coronation.

--- PAGE 231 [DIRECT] ---

210 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of the people", i.e. a king, should possess, he confines himself to requiring
that he should be a kullna, of good family, of high birth, as Vijnänesvara
understands the word (Mit., on Yäj., I.309). And it is to be noted that,
in the verse which corresponds to Manu (IV.84), it is not from a non-
Ksatriya king that gifts are to be refused, but from a king who is greedy
(lubdha) or who transgresses the precepts of the sästras (ucchästrä-
vartin) (1.140).
Certainly some commentators, notably Visvarüpa, Mädhäva, and
Nanda-pandita, influenced either by the Mimämsä doctrine12 or simply
by the fact that their patrons were or pretended to be Ksatriyas. insist
that the king should be a Ksatriya. But the majority neglect this require-
ment. Medhätithi does indeed say that the word Ksatriya in Manu VI1.2
indicates that only a Ksatriya has the right to kingship. But he adds
that in default of a Ksatriya a man of another varna can be substituted
for otherwise the realm, wanting a protector, will go to ruin. On verse
84 of Book IV he explains that the word räja in the text means whoever
exercises power in a territory, even if he is not a Ksatriya. He employs
very recherche arguments to deprive Manu IV.61 of all significance.
That verse forbids a dvija to live in a country of which a Südra is king.
For him everyone who assumes the duties of a Ksatriya has a right to
the title of king (on M., VIII.I).13 In the same way Kullüka (on M.,
VII. 1) declares that the word räja at VII. 1 includes anyone who has
been crowned (literally, anointed) and who secures the country's protec-
tion, irrespective of his varna. Candesvara (Räj. rat., p.2) approves
of this opinion. Mitra-misra (V\r., Räjarilti-prakäsa, pp.10-15), citing
the same verse, has a long discussion on the sense of the same word
and concludes, like Kullüka, that räja applies to another who assumes
the task of protecting the subjects.14 Yäjnavalkya's commentators,
Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., I.368, II.1). Aparärka (on Yäj., 1.366),
and Nllakantha (Vyav. may., 1.1.5, citing Yäj., II. 1) share the same opi-
nion. We can say that, in spite of Manu, the great majority of interpreters
do not require that the king should be a Ksatriya. Early on, no doubt
under the pressure of events, kingship ceased to be the prerogative of
the second varna. This must have indirectly affected the divinity of the
king himself, because it was by divine predestination that a Ksatriya
would be called to mount the throne. The kingship, then, belonged to
him who possessed ksatra de facto, the Imperium, "empire" in the broad
sense, i.e. the power to command, whatever might have been his birth
and whatever might have been the circumstances which brought him
to the throne.15
i^The maxim of the avesti, Jai. II.3, 3. Cf Käne. Ill, 38; Ghoshäl, op. cit., 324.
lvThere is a similar comment on M., 111.109; V.81, 92. etc.
«4Käne, III, 39.
l 5The concept of sovereignty, Imperium, seems to be better expressed by the word 
ksatra

--- PAGE 232 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
211
Ksatra, the foundation of all royalty, is associated in Indian doctrine
with räja-dharma, the totality of duties which constitute the king's mis-
sion, that which we have called the royal function, which is a divine
institution. There are two distinct entities here and we should distinguish
them.
Ksatra confers on the king independence, the right to act to suit himself
without depending upon anyone else. The king is independent of his
subjects, as is the spiritual preceptor of his pupils and the head of the
family of the members of his household (När., I.32-33 and Asahäya
thereon).16 Yäjnavalkya actually declares (1.334) that the king ought
to be a father to his subjects, but Mitra-misra glosses this text by adding
that he must be qualified (like a father with regard to the members of
his family) to secure their protection and control their actions and beha-
viour. It is true that the dharma-sästras and their interpreters recommend
the king not to take any decision without being supplied with counsels.
But he is never bound to follow the opinions of his counsellors. He alone
bears the responsibility for his actions (M., VII.57; Yäj., I.312).
By contrast, Dhanna is essentially a rule of interdependence, founded on
a hierarchy corresponding to the nature of things and necessary for the
maintenance of the social order. To break away from it is to violate
one's destiny and to expose oneself to the loss of one's salvation. The
peculiar dharma of the king is the protection of his subjects. If he is free
to act as he pleases without having to account to anyone for his acts,
he acquires merit only when acting in conformity with his dharma. "Kings
who remain faithful to their duties", says Kätyäyana (sloka 9) attain
the status of Indra; but those whose actions depart (from the path of
duty) will remain (after their deaths) in the hell called Avici". So finally
the destiny of the king depends on the way in which he has been able to
protect his subjects. His merits and sins, the balance between which
will determine his future, are measured by those of his subjects; it is
because of the protection that he has afforded to them that they have
been able to perform their duties, just as it is a fault on his part to have
been able to keep them to their duties when they have actually sinned.
The smrtis go so far as to calculate the portion of merits and sins passing
to the king. "A king who protects (his subjects) acquires the sixth of
than by any word derived from räjan. such as rajyam ('kingdom'). Räjä and räjyam evoke
in Hindu eyes, if we follow the etymology current at the time of the commentators (Brh.
Aiy., 1.66 and Renou's remark thereon) and recalled by Mitra-misra in the passage cited
above, the idea of splendor, magnificence, prestige attaching to the person of the king,
rather than his power of command and the idea of power or force. Thus there is no reason
for surprise that it was the word ksatriya which passed with the sense of king' into the
languages of certain South East Asian countries where the caste system was not in vogue.
lf)Cf När., 1.33 : asxatanträh 
prajäh svatantrah prthivipatih. 
On the subject see Derrett at
Recueils de la Societe Jean Bodin XXII, Gouverne's et Gouvernants (Brussels, 1969). 417 45.

--- PAGE 233 [DIRECT] ---

212 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the spiritual merit of each of them; conversely, he who fails to protect
them gains the sixth of their demerits" (A/., VIII.304. Cf.Gaut., XI.ll;
Vis., III.98).17 A sort of solidarity is thus established between the king
and his subjects. The king's happiness depends on his subjects, for he
suffers the consequences of their sins and profits from the merits they
acquire. Conversely, the happiness of his subjects depends on the king,
for if he protects them as he should he will prevent the rogues from
roguery and will permit the good to devote themselves to their duties.18
But "happiness" must be taken here, according to the point of view of
the dharmasästra writers, not in the sense of material happiness, but
in the sense of spiritual bliss. The real Indian formula to express that
solidarity between king and subjects can best be stated thus: the salvation
of the king depends on his subjects, just as the salvation of the subjects
depends on their king.19 That is how we show the relationship of inter-
dependence which the rule of dharma sets up, in opposition to pure power
which is ksatra.
Ksatra and dharma are equally opposed in another point of view.
Dharma is a universal rule in this sense, that every king is subject to it
and suffers its sanctions, whatever be the extent or situation of his king-
dom. Moreover it is a duty and an obligation of a personal character
which is incumbent on the king's conscience and obtains stability only
through his will.
Ksatra, however, is power of a territorial character, exercised within
a given territory and stopping at the frontiers of the realm. In addition,
it is conceived not as a sovereignty in the modern sense of that word,
but as a real right over territory. Of the same nature as property, it implies
a direct power over the soil. That is why the king is also called svämin,
a word which can be applied equally to a proprietor as to a husband
or a chief, and which denotes an immediate power over a thing or over
a person. Manu (IX.44) alludes to a version of the legend of Prthu,
according to which Prthu married the earth. This image of a marriage
between the king and his realm, which became a cliche in the epigraphical
literature, translates the tight relation between the king and the territory
17As the commentators remark, these rules serve simply to indicate the weight of merit
and sin accruing to the king without in any way diminishing the merits or sins of his subjects.
Yäjnavalkya (I.335, 337) retains the 'sixth' for merits, but enlarges the king's responsibility
for sins, raising the proportion to a half.
18Cf Vis. 111.98 : prajä-sukhe sukhl räjä tad-duhkhe yas ca duhkhitah.
19However the balance leans undoubtedly to the king's side, for his subjects cannot
fulfil meritorious acts unless the king secures their protection. He is the master of the time,
following the Mahäbhärata formula which Manu develops (IX.302). In other words,
the policies which he means to pursue determine the spiritual happiness of his subjects:
if he is just he participates in the merits they gain. But conversely his subjects do not parti-
cipate in merit gained by the king, for he. in protecting them does no more than his dharma,
and it is to that end that he enjoys the prerogatives appertaining to the function of royalty.

--- PAGE 234 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
213
of his realm. The king regards his kingdom as his property, although
it is agreed that other powers than his own could be exercised along with
his over actual parcels of soil. Thus to fill the almost total silence of the
sästras on the rules relating to succession to the throne, the interpreters
have not hesitated to apply to this subject, saving a few indispensable
corrections, precepts relating to the devolution of property at death.20
Two prerogatives are attached to the royal function: the right to tax
and the right to punish.
Numerous texts (Baudh., 1.10.1; M., VII.144,VIII.307,308; Yäj.,
1.337; När., XVIII.48) establish a strict correlation between the duty of
protection incumbent upon the king and his subjects' payment of taxes
to which they are assessed. Närada (XVIII.48) speaks of a tax (ball)
of a sixth on the produce of the land as if it were a salary (vetana) awarded
the king in return for his performing his duty. Certain authors conclude
that the king is paid by his subjects for fulfilling his task. The duty of
protection would be the consideration for the receipt of revenue, so that
there would exist between the king and his subjects relations of a con-
tractual nature or a quasi-contractual nature founded on the principle
of equity which we express by the maxim, ubi emolumentum ibi onus,
"the liability follows the consideration". But such a way of looking
at the matter would go counter to the notion which we have already for-
mulated of the absolute independence of the king vis-ä-vis his subjects.
To refute it, we need only note that if the duty of protection rested on
the obligation of the subjects to pay their taxes, the king would not be
held strictly to protect any subjects who did not pay tax. Now all inter-
preters are agreed in recognising that the duty of the king to protect
extends to all his subjects, not only those who are exempt because of
their status, but also those who are dispensed from payment because of
their age, their infirmities or their want of resources.21 In fact the right
to take revenue is only an adjunct to the royal function, intended to give
the king the means to secure his proper subsistence and to govern his
realm.22 True, the king who fails in his duty exposes himself to the danger
20This 'real' (i.e. proprietorial) character attributed to ksatra, 
parallel to the similar
concept of eminent domain developed by western feudal jurists, explains the controversy
which still goes on as to who has the ultimate ownership of the soil in India. Käne. Ill,
865-9, Ghoshäl, The Agrarian System in Ancient India (Calcutta, 1930). 81 103. History
of Indian Political Ideas, passim; R. Shama Sastry. Evolution of Indian Polity (Calcutta,
1930). 172-6; Y. Bongert, 'La notion de propriete dans Tlnde', Etudes de droit contemporain
23 (1962). 149-62; A.S. Nataraja Ayyar, The king's right in the soil\ Vyavahüra Nirnaya
(Delhi). 4 (1955). 25^*5; D.N. Jhä, Revenue System in Post-Maurya and Gupta Times
(Calcutta. 1967). c h . ii.
2 1Medhätithi. o n M., VII.2. 35. 4 0 . 8 0 ; KullQka on M., VIII.304; Visvarüpa on Yäj.,
11.38.
22Cf Medhätithi o n A/., VIII.1; Vijnänesvara. Mit., on Yäj., 1.119.

--- PAGE 235 [DIRECT] ---

214 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of losing his subjects' affection, and dharmasästra writers do not omit
to paint, in emphatic terms, the risks which he runs (A/., VII.111-112;
Yäj., I.341). But it is their way of reminding the king that it is in his own
interest to subserve his people's welfare. The real sanction against failure
to protect does not lie in the threats which apply to the king's present
life and which, in any case, might never be realised. It is in the inescapable
sanction which the king's violation of his dharma puts in motion in the
other world. The king is not bound to protect his subjects because he
takes taxes from them, but because that is where his own peculiar, duty
lies.23
The right to punish is another prerogative attached to the royal func-
tion. Only the king may use punishment to secure the execution of his
orders. It is remarkable that punishment is not presented as an accessory
of the royal function, as is the right to demand revenue, but as a divine
institution itself. Its origin is even more marvellous than that of royalty.
Since the royal function is only a source of obligations for the king, no
power of coercion could be produced from it; on the other hand, ksatra,
de facto power or unilateral will, could not find in itself any justification
for the use of punishment. Consequently, punishment was personified
under the name of danda (literally, "mace, sceptre") by the supreme god
in the king's interest and for the good of creatures (A/., VII.14; Yäj.,
1.354). But, above all, the exceptional importance of punishment in the
government of men raised it to the point of being thought a deity. In
celebrated verses (VII.20-25), Manu like Närada (XVIII.14-16) shows
forcefully the necessity of punishment, the only means of keeping men
on the path of duty (A/., VII.22).24 In effect, Danda is only pure force.
Its sole object is to enable the king to perform his function. Thus it is
identified with Dharma (A/., VII.17; Yäj., I.354), and, while protecting
the king when properly applied, it turns against him and brings his ruin
if inflicted unjustly (A/., VII.27-29; Yqj., 1.356-357).
None the less punishment places a redoubtable weapon in the king's
hands. Since the sanction is temporal, it immediately accompanies even
an unjust order, whereas the king cannot suffer for any such misdeeds
until the after-life. Several verses emphasise this absolute power of the
king founded upon punishment (A/., VII.9,12,13; När., XVIII.20,32)
and admit all the dangers of investing the king with such a power (A/.,
VII.28,30; Yäj.. I.355). But this is to admit that, because of punishment,
the king possesses an unlimited power on the temporal plane, and that
he can do whatever he wishes. "Whatever the king does," says Närada
23For a fuller discussion see Ghoshäl, History, 536-9, 564 n. 2.
24An evidently pessimistic view of human nature. But in reality Manu means this: the
fear of punishment will restrain the wicked, and thus permit the good to fulfil their duties
in peace.

--- PAGE 236 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
215
(XVIII.21), "is justified: such is the rule".25 In other words the king is
the sole judge of the means to be employed to accomplish his mission.
Complete liberty is allowed him. Only the result matters.
The king's activity is the more free for the fact that, in order that he
shall fulfill his mission, the sästras proclaim that while he is inflicting
punishment he can incur no impurity. "Kings, like those who are bound
by a vow or who perform a long sacrifice, commit no impurity, for they
are seated upon the throne of Indra". declare Vasistha (XIX.48) and
Manu (V.93) (cf.also Gaut.. XIV.45; Vis., XXII.48 and M., V.94,97,
VIII.311). There are many texts in which the position of the king is closely
compared to that of one who institutes a sacrifice. The exercise of the
royal function is equivalent to the celebration of a sacrifice of a long
duration (sattra), and that is why the king remains pure, whatever acts
he is led to commit, including condemnation to death or recourse to
treacherous means to bring a culprit to justice.
In sum, from the doctrine deduced by the interpreters from the totality
of smrti, the king appears to owe his authority neither to the divine will,
nor to his birth, nor to any social compact, but solely to the force at his
disposal.26 Certainly, kingship confers a great prestige upon him, but
if he is called räja, it is because "he pleases his subjects (rahjayate) be-
cause of his military might furnished with the Four Arms" (Brh.Aiy.,
1.66), that is to say because of the deployment of his force. His authority
is entirely temporal or secular. Punishment is the sole instrument of his
policies. But, like every mortal, he has his own dharma which the dharma-
sästra writers continually rehearse. This must always be present to his
mind, for the fulfilment of his dharma is the precondition of that of all
other men. Though he is an absolute sovereign, he is subject to the law
of karma which will play inescapably for him, or against him. That is
why it is said in the Brhad-äranyaka-upanisad (I.14), "Dharma is the
sovereignty of sovereignty (ksatrasya ksatram yad dharmah) ".
(b) Ksatra and Brahman
If the king is called to undergo,» like any sinner, the consequences of his
acts in the after-life, he is entirely free in his lifetime to act as he wishes
and as his conscience directs. The only bridle which the dharma-sästras
provide for his authority resides in the position given to the Brahmins
25yad eva kurute räjä tat pramänam iti sthitih. [Perhaps pramänam implies 'valid', 'authori-
tative', (trs.)]
26But if we follow Närada XVI11.25 it is to the merits which he acquired in previous
births that the king owes the power he now enjoys: tapah-krltäh prcijä rä/nä prahhur asit
tato nrpah, tasmät tad vacasi s the yam värtä cäsäm tad äsrayä. 'It is by austerities that the
king has purchased his subjects, and that is why he is their master. Thus what he says must
be observed, for their existence depends on him.' The proposition is isolated, and has a
Buddhistic sound, but none the less, within the bounds of orthodox opinion, it simply
restates the law of karma.

--- PAGE 237 [DIRECT] ---

216 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
and in the role which has devolved upon them. Here the swr/z-writers
have only taken up the Vedic doctrine on the relations between spiritual
power (brahman) and temporal power (ksatra), matching up with them
certain consequences of a juridical nature. This doctrine itself flows
from the division of functions between the first two varnas. The spiritual
power was attributed to the Brahmin so that he might instruct the others
in their duties. The temporal power was attributed to the Ksatriya because
he possessed the force necessary to obtain obedience. The one is thus
complementary to the other. As is said in a passage in the Satapatha-
brähmana (IV. 1.4.1), brahma is "he who conceives" (abhigantr) and
ksatra "he who does" (kartr), or again, brahma is intelligence and
ksatra will.27 Both of them aim to secure the reign of dharma. The Brahmin
only performs his role successfully if he personifies dharma in his teaching
and in his conduct. The Ksatriya invested with the royal function is
not successful in his role unless he too personifies dharma in his activity.
At bottom there is identity of function between them; but dharma cannot
be realised without their cooperation. This principle of the essential
cooperation of the two powers is one of the fundamental elements in
smrti's theory of kingship. For Gautama (VIII. 1-3,XI.27,31,32) the
Brahmins and the king sustain the divine order of the world (dhrta-
vrata), the Brahmins by their counsel, the king by punishment. Likewise
Närada {Sämb., XVI11.32) declares that temporal power, when asso-
ciated with the spiritual, is the foundation {müla, "root") of the protec-
tion of the people.28 So the Brahmins are born counsellors for the king.
The sästras insist that, expressly because of the power with which the
king is invested and which allows him to achieve anything, he cannot
take a decision without asking the advice of competent and enlightened
people, amongst the first of whom naturally are the Brahmins (M.,
VII.55-59; Yäj., I.312; Kät., 4-5). These have almost a vested right to
participate in the court of justice. Not only are they clearly assigned
the judicial function, but any learned Brahmin who is present when a
case is heard is allowed to make his opinion known on the matter at
issue (När., III.2, with Asahäya). It is even a duty to do so. As a result,
Vijnänesvara and Mitra-misra (on Yäj., II. 1-2) distinguish, amongst
the members of the court, the sabhyas who are specially chosen and
appointed (yukta) to this function by the king and the Brahmins who
come voluntarily to the hearing without any appointment (a-yukta).
On the other hand, when the king cannot preside in person (which must
be often), he must in principle see that his place is taken by a Brahmin
(A/., VIII.9; Yäj., II.3). Only in default of a Brahmin ready, willing.
by U.N. Ghoshäl, op. cit., 33.
^samyuktam 
bicihmanaih k sat ram mülam lokübhiraksane.

--- PAGE 238 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
217
and fit to be appointed may he designate a Ksatriya or a Vaisya (Kät.,
67) as his delegate or prädviväka (presiding judge).
It is not only in the administration of justice that the advice of Brahmins
is required, but in all affairs in which the interests of the state are at large.
"As for the most important questions concerning the six means (of
policy)29", says Manu (VIII.58-59), "he (the king) must discuss them
with a learned Brahmin, the most eminent of all these (counsellors).
Full of confidence (in him) he should always charge him with all his
affairs; after having deliberated with him, he should do what it is appro-
priate to do." Thus the king is bound to choose amongst the Brahmins
a purohita who will be his chief counsellor. Agreement between king
and purohita is regarded by Gautama (XI. 12-14) to be the very symbol of
harmony between the two powers. And Vasisjha (XIX.4) recalls that
it is written in the Veda, "A realm where a Brahmin is appointed purohita
flourishes". The role of the purohita is multiple, and the translation
"chaplain" poorly indicates what his different functions are. He is far
from being simply a priest with the duty to see that the king fulfils his
religious obligations. Elsewhere Manu (VII.78) and Yäjftavalkya (I.314)
distinguish him from officiating priests whose duty it was to celebrate
ritual ceremonies. Yäjftavalkya (I.312) demands of him knowledge of
astrology in order to know the influence of the planets and to be able
to neutralise their effects if they are sinister; he should also be versed
in the atharva and know the required spells to be cast, and magic prayers.30
The same verse requires him to be knowledgeable in the art of politics
(danda-niti). In reality the purohita is the brain of the king. As servant
of dharma he is a servant of the state. For the rest, he occupies a singular
position by reason of his functions. Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., I.353)
ranks him amongst the ministers (mantrin) and Manu (XII.46) classes
him, with kings and Ksatriyas, amongst those whose future destiny is
dominated by rajas ("energy", "passion").31
It would be vain to look in Indian tradition on the relations between
the two powers for an analogy with the Christian theory of the Two
Swords. True, the Brahmin is master when the question is one of ritual
and, as we shall see, of penance. But his scope extends in reality over
all the field of royal activity, as much on its political side as on its religious.
There are no two powers here each functioning in its proper sphere,
the sacred to one side, and the profane to the other. Secular power alone
2i)Scldgunya defined by Manu VII. 160 as by Kautilya : sandhi (alliance), vigraha (war),
ycimi (movement of troops), asana (encampment), dvaidhlbhciva (division of forces), and
sumsvaya (taking cover).
•M)Cf K.W. Kärambelkar, Brahman and Purohita in Atharvanic texts', I.H.Q. 26 (1950).
293 300.
MOn the three gunas, see above, p. 86.

--- PAGE 239 [DIRECT] ---

218 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
has the capacity to act, but it is a blind force which needs to be directed
before its application can be effectual. If the king were to disdain the
advice of his Brahmins he would not only fail in his duty, but even incur
the risk of governing badly.32
Furthermore, the authority of the king is balanced by the privileged
situation of the Brahmins. It is true that they have no other source of
revenue but the gifts of the faithful. But the donations made to them
procure for the donor a recompense in the after-life much greater than
that derived from gifts made to non-Brahmins (A/., VII.85). And there
are many texts which make it a duty on the king's part to show himself
generous towards Brahmins. He obtains for himself thereby, as Manu
(VII.82) and Yäjftavalkya (I.135) say, an "imperishable treasure" (aksayo
nidhi) of merits which will compensate for the sins which he might be
led to commit in the course of his government.33 A fortiori he must see
to it that no Brahmin suffers privation in his kingdom, and he must
even aid from his personal purse any who are found to be in need (A/.,
XI.22).
Through his birth in the first of the varnas, the Brahmin occupies the
first rank in the social hierarchy. Alluding to the famous hymn to Purusa
in the Rgveda, Manu (1.93,95,99) declares him to be by right the lord
of creation (dharmatah prabhu). (See also A/., IX.345, and the same
style at Yäj., I.199). Prajäpati has confided to him as to the king all
the created beings (A/.. IX.327). Manu recognises that he, like the king,
has a residual right to property in everything, for it is "thanks to his
benevolence that other men subsist" (IX. 100-101). Just as even a child-
king must never be despised, for he is a great divinity who resides within
a human form (A/., VII.8), even an ignorant Brahmin, even a Brahmin
addicted to low occupations, must always be honored, for he is the
highest divinity (daivatam paramam) (A/., IX.317-319). The parallelism
established by these verses between the attributes of the king and those
of the Brahmin marks the independence of the two powers; it is explained
by the identity of their functions. But the superiority of the spiritual
power over the temporal is affirmed afresh by Manu, who, taking up
a Vedic conception again, derives the temporal power from the spiritual:
"Fire comes from water [when sticks, dried, kindle], the Ksatriya from
the Brahmin, iron from stone; their power which penetrates everywhere
is powerless against (the element) from which they have issued" (IX.321).
Manu (IX.32) accords even to the Brahmin a might in fact greater than
that of the king, because of the power which his knowledge of the for-
mulas of curses gives him.
32Manu IX.67 reminds the king that Vena, the king created by the gods, perished because
he did not respect the varnu hierarchy.
^According to the Paräsarasmrti 
(VI.60) the sins or stains of sinners are washed away
by the water of sacramental formulas.

--- PAGE 240 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
219
Nothing shows better than the domain of penance how superior the
Brahmin is to the members of other varnas in the scale of social values,
superior particularly to the king, for the gravity of a sin is bound to
depend on considerations which are entirely spiritual. The person of
the Brahmin is sacred, and to lay a hand on him is sacrilege. The slaying
of a Brahmin (brahmahatyä) figures in the list of four mahä-pätakas
and is even the most grave of the four according to Manu, for "there
is not in the world a graver crime than the slaying of a Brahmin; even
the thought of such a crime should not graze the mind of the king" (VIII.
381). It is an inexpiable sin if done intentionally (Gaut., XXI.7; Baudh.,
11.1.6; A/., XI.90) or expiable only by hard penance (cf Käne, IV,pp.
88-94). One who threatens a Brahmin with death falls to hell for a hundred
years; he who strikes him, for a thousand years (A/.. XI.207). "As many
grains of dust as a Brahmin's blood coagulates, for so many years does
he who made (the blood flow) remain in hell" (A/., XI.208). The king,
however, is not viewed especially as king, but simply as a Ksatriya. The
murder of a Ksatriya is placed only amongst the upa-pätakas (A/., XI.67;
Yqj., III.236) and gives rise to a penance equal to a quarter fixed for the
slaying of a Brahmin according to Manu (XI. 127) and Yäjnavalkya
(111.267)34
This recognised superiority of the spiritual power gives the varna of
Brahmins a privileged position which confers on its members an almost
total independence with regard to the king's authority. "The king is
master of all," says Gautama (XI. 1), "with the exception of the Brah-
mins".35 A number of exceptional provisions attest this independence.
The Brahmin does not escape as completely from royal justice as
Gautama suggests (VIII. 13), but the sacred character of his person
prevents any corporal punishment being inflicted upon him. Banishment,
tonsure, a mark on the forehead and a shameful parade are the gravest
penalties with which he can be punished (Vis., V.2-3; A/., VIII.379-380;
Brh., XXVII.ll; När., XIV.10). By contrast Manu (XI.31) allows him
to dispense with the secular arm in order to obtain damages for offenses
committed against him: "his own power suffices for him to chastise
those who have done him wrong." The Brahmin is actually authorised
to have recourse to magic prayers, to charms and incantations to annihi-
late his enemies, although such proceedings on the part of others are
reprehended and are punished by a fine (A/.. IX.290) or even by banish-
ment (Brh., XXII.16).
uThe slaying of a Ksatriya or even of a Vaisya is assimilated to the slaying of a Brahmin
and involves the same penance if the victim was in the course of a sacrifice, according
to Vus., XX.34: if., XI.88. and Yüj., III.251. But, as Medhätithi remarks on M., XI.88,
the sacrificer at that time becomes a Brahmin.
-raja 
sarvasyeste 
brdhmanavarjam.

--- PAGE 241 [DIRECT] ---

220 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
The Brahmin is exempt from all tax. This fiscal immunity is provided
by numerous texts. Visnu (III.27) justifies it with the notion that the
Brahmins "pay tax under the form of religious merit" in which the king
has his share. Expressing the same idea, Vasistha (1.44-46) adds, "the
Brahmin cannot be a source of subsistence (for the king), for Soma is
his king", recalling the famous formula pronounced twice by the officiat-
ing priest during the coronation ceremony (räjasüya), by which the
independence of the Brahmin vis-ä-vis the king is affirmed. Brhaspati
(Aiy., äpad., 19-20) for his part, appeals to the residual right which the
Brahmin, along with the king, has in the property in the soil: "The Brah-
min who cultivates his ground holds it freely, at his pleasure, for he
is the lord of all. He need give nothing to anyone.350 Therefore it is right
that the Brahmin who cultivates his soil should pay no tax (bali) either
to the headman or to the king." The same idea is put forward by Manu
(VIII.37) to justify the right of the Brahmin to the whole of any treasure
he finds, while the king is bound to give the half of any such to Brahmins
(A/., VIII.38).
Like his person, the goods of the Brahmin are sacred. More terrible
than poison which destroys only one man, they kill not only him who
takes them but also his sons and grandsons (Vas., XVII.85-86; Baudh.,
1.5,16; Brh.Aiy., apad.43-46). Thus the king should never take the goods
of Brahmins, even when, as Brhaspati makes clear (Aiy., äpad., 42),
he finds himself at the end of his resources. By this we can explain that
law of succession peculiar to Brahmins, whereunder the goods left by
a Brahmin who dies without an heir should be given to other Brahmins,
instead of passing to the king as in a normal case of escheat (Gaut.,
XXVIII.41; Vas., 84; Vis., XVII.13-14; Baudh., 1.5.15-16; A/., IX.
188-189). Finally, like those of the king, the goods of Brahmins cannot
be acquired by prescription (A/., VIII.149; Yäj., II.25; Brh., IX.21,etc).
The whole of these provisions and the traditions by which they are
inspired give to Brahmins a prestige and an authority in the kingdom'
which suggest to the king not only that these men should be respected
but also that they should be humoured and induced to collaborate with
him. Any discontent on their part, says Manu (IX.313) involves the
annihilation of the king and his army. Recalling that the Ksatriyas are
born from Brahmins, he allows the latter the right to resist the king who
arouses their anger and to oblige him to submit (IX.320). It is clear that
for Manu the opinion of the Brahmins is the only counterbalance to
the king's authority.36 Certainly, their might would have been much
greater had they organised themselves into a body, capable of showing
a solid front to royal power. We know that nothing of the sort happened
35 Reading dadyät for Aiyahgär's erroneous vidyät. 
36Cf U.N. Ghoshäl, op. cit., 175,
n. 1, 551. For a modern comment see R.S. Betai at Vmesha Mishra Comm. Vol. (Allahabad,
1970), 279-98.

--- PAGE 242 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
221
and that the varna of Brahmins was divided into multiple castes and
sub-castes of very different status. If legend contains some memory of
conflicts between Ksatriyas and Brahmins, the quarrel was quite extinct
by the time of the dharma-sästras and their interpreters. We can not
even say that there must have been a victor, for both were destined to
complete each other mutually and not to oppose each other. Because
of the Brahmin's position in charge of sacrifices and religious teaching,
his superiority consisted, on a social plane, of his being bound more
strictly than members of the other varnas to the observance of rules of
purity. The task of the king is essentially political. It demands diplomacy,
compromises hardly compatible with the sacred character, and sometimes
acts frankly reprehensible in the generality of men. This is what explains
why, contrary to our system in which cedant arma togae (military com-
mand must give place to civil rule), the right to act and the responsibility
for action are given in the Hindu system to warriors. A king cannot
be a saint. But because of the great might he possesses, he needs disinterest-
ed counsellors, responsible to no one, who will guide him and represent
to him the consequences and possible outcomes of the actions he pro-
poses. Thus in glorifying the persons of Brahmins, the authors of the
dharmasästra tended to persuade the king that it is not simply his duty
but also in his best interests to have Brahmins by his side. The superiority
of the spiritual power is put forward specially in order to underline the
necessity of collaboration between the two powers.
In passing we may notice that the interpreters show a tendency in
general to reduce the practical significance of the exceptional provisions
about Brahmins. Manu's exaltation leaves them cold. For Medhätithi,
if Manu (1.100) declares that the Brahmin is the lord of all creation,
that simply means that one should approach him with humility and
follow his instructions in spiritual matters. When Manu (VIII.37) justifies
the Brahmin's right to the totality of buried treasure with the notion
that he is master of all, what appears there is an arthaväda without juridical
significance, and Medhätkhi almost submits the Brahmin to the genera)
law. That a Brahmin, learned or not. is a great deity (M., IX.317) signifies
that one should not despise one who is a Brahmin only in name and that
the gifts which are made to him are none the less valid. In the eyes of
Visvarüpa (on Yäj., I.199) and Aparärka (on Yäj., I.198) the superiority
of the Brahmins does not attach to their varna, i.e. to their birth, but
to the fact that they are devoted to the study of the Veda and therefore
qualified to instruct other people. They fill a need which they alone can
satisfy. The accent is placed here on the degree of learning of which the
Brahmin is capable. Thus the immunities from punishment are not
possessed uniformly by all Brahmins. Vijnänesvara {Mit., on Yäj.,
11.4) believes that total immunity belongs only to a Brahmin of excep-

--- PAGE 243 [DIRECT] ---

222 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
tional learning (bahu-sruta). Haradatta (on Gaut., VIII.12-13) observes
that even a learned Brahmin should not enjoy immunity unless he com-
mitted the offense without premeditation, in ignorance, or inadvertently.
And Aparärka remarks on the verse of Manu (VIII.380) which prohibits
inflicting the death penalty on Brahmins that the Brahmin is exposed
to equivalent penalties.37 However, an evolution, the reverse of what
happened with penal immunity, led to the respect due to the Brahmin's
person being pushed to the extreme. Contrary to the letter of the majority
of the smrtis (Vqs., III.15-18; Vis., V.189-190; A/.. VIII.350-351; Kät.,
801), the interpreters have attached the sin of brahma-hatyä to all slayirigs
of Brahmins, even if done in self-defense.38 While they translate the
sästric provisions relative to the legal status of Brahmins very prosaically,
the interpreters become lyrical when the subject is the sacred character
of their persons. Their privileges reduced to a more normal scale, the
Brahmins added others, because of their association with the celebration
of rituals, and because their membership in the first of the varnas sub-
jected them to special restrictions. There cannot be any doubt, and it
answers well in other respects to what the sästras teach, that many Brah-
mins at the courts of rulers were devoted to the interests of the state
and put their intelligence at the service of the king's policies. But it is
also beyond doubt that a king concerned to rule in peace had to take
careful notice of the only form of public opinion which could reveal
itself before him; he was under every inducement in the exercise of his
authority not to draw down upon himself the Brahmins' discontent.39
(c) Analysis of the functions of the king
The function of the king is fully expressed in the words prajänäm paripä-
lanam, ''protection of his subjects". This protection aims to remove
two sorts of danger, those which come from outside and those which
emerge inside his kingdom.
First of all, the king should protect his subjects against the aggressive
inclinations of neighbouring states, whether by maintaining peace with
37Visvarüpa on Yäj., II.281 cites a verse of Kätyäyana (s. 806) which recommends even
the death penalty for a Brahmin guilty of certain crimes. Yama (Käne. I. 234-5) provides
that a Brahmin may be sentenced to imprisonment and hard labour.
38On the problem of the Brahmin aggressor (ätatäyin) 
cf Käne, II, 148 51.
39One of the means possessed by Brahmins to express their dissatisfaction and put
pressure on the king who refuses to be corrected or to follow their counsel is to fast. Accord-
ing to Äpastamba (II.1O.25, 11) the king should not allow a Brahmin to suffer hunger
even intentionally (buddhi-pürvam). 
The Räjatarahginf 
(VI. 14) relates that in Kashmir
there was an official whose duty it was to search out anyone who was on hunger-strike
and to discover his purpose. The same chronicle relates several examples of 
präyopavesa
or ceremonial fasting to which groups of Brahmins had recourse in order to force the king
to remove a bad counsellor or to undertake a particular political act. J. Naudou. l/autorite
royale au Kasmir medieval et ses limitations', J.A.. 
1963. 217-227.

--- PAGE 244 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
223
them by adroit policies or by forestalling their attack by war and thus
subjecting them to his authority. This first object of the royal function
passes beyond the scope of this book. But we should not forget it. The
dharma-sästras devote to it a considerable number of verses, even though
their precepts relate to the interests of the state, to the arthasästra.40
What is dealt with there is the original task of the king. He is above all
a warrior whose most splendid end is to die in battle ( Vis., 111.44; Gaut.,
X.16; M., VII.87-89; Yäj.. I.322-323).
In the second place—and it is the only object of the royal function
which need retain our attention at present—the king should protect
his subjects against the perils that threaten them within the kingdom.
This "protection" has a fourfold aspect.
1. The most grave peril is disorder caused by forgetfulness or neglect
of the duties incumbent on men under the divine law. To what extent
can the king intervene to make his subjects respect the rules of conduct
prescribed in the sästrasl Here we find posed the question of the king's
legislative power.
2. The king must see to it that penances enjoined upon sinners to
expiate their sins are actually carried out, for this protects them against
the fatal consequences which their unexpiated sins would involve. He
must also warn his subjects against committing sins. This is the role
of the king in regard to penances.
3. The king is the subjects' surety for peace and order within the realm.
In order that they may be allowed to pursue peacefully the fulfilment
of their duties, he should try to eliminate those who are a cause of dis-
turbance by their reprehensible activities. This is the basis of the criminal
law properly so called.
4. Lastly the king is equally surety for peace between his subjects.
The sästras act as supreme arbitrator in their disputes. This is a parti-
cularly important task, for, if there were no judge with authority to put
an end to their quarrels, passions would break out afresh. It is the king's
duty, then to secure a good administration of justice.
We shall find that this quadruple aspect of the duty of protection
covers the whole scope of dharma, as the smrtis conceived it to be: äcära,
präyascitta, and vyavahära. It is true enough that räja-dharma presides
over all dharmas.
We must examine these various aspects of the royal function in succes-
sion, for the role of the king is not necessarily the same in each case.
The mode in which he exercises his powers, and their extents, can even
differ considerably.
40Cf especially the advice given to the king by Manu (VII.169ff.) on the attitude to be
maintained towards neighbouring kings: war is solely justified by the advantage which
may be drawn from it. and not by considerations of law or equity.

--- PAGE 245 [DIRECT] ---

224 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
2. The King's Legislative Power
Lively debate continues on the subject whether, and if at all to what
extent, the system of the sastras permits the king to pass laws, to legislate.41
In this connection we should remind ourselves that what is implied
by "legislative power" is a right attributed to a constitutionally competent
authority to pronounce rules having a general application and possessing,
in principle, a permanent character. Particular orders, for example,
would not be legislation within this definition.
Law must be distinguished from an order which is a command addres-
sed occasionally to an individual or a group of individuals.42 Even in
modern western states which are familiar with what are known as "pri-
vate statutes", it is evident that the effect of such commands is regarded,
jurisprudentially, as quite different from that of general .statutes—indeed
the copies of legislation printed for the use of the public and their advisers
frequently omit private statutes. In the sense of legislative power, the
enacting body is equally the author of the private and the general statute;
but it is only in a technical and narrow sense that private statutes can
be called "legislation". In the sense in which I use the word only statutes
of general application would be "legislation".420
It is evident that every order of the king, whatever its nature, should
be obeyed by the person or persons to whom it is addressed. The texts
recommend the king not to allow himself to be carried away by anger
or cupidity, nor by affection or partiality, nor to pass orders until he
has maturely reflected and sought the advice of his counsellors. But,
once an order has been given, it must be executed. Kätyäyana (670, the
same rule in Narada XVIII. 13) punishes by fine and corporal punishment
him who transgresses the royal order (lopayan räja-säsanam)** No one
could debate the king's order without putting the authority of the king
in question. That authority is necessary for the protection of the subjects;
To disturb it is to provoke disorder.44 If an order is unjust, the king may
well commit a sin, but that sin could be compensated for with the aid
of merits which he has acquired from elsewhere. The interests of the
41U.N. Ghoshäl, The authority of the king in Kautilya's political thought', I.H.Q.,
28 (1952). 307-11 and the subsequent controversy with K.A. Nilakanta Sästri in I.H.Q.,
29 ( 1953). 175-9 and 286-92. See also B.P. Sinha. The king in the Kautiliyan state', J.B.R.S.,
1954. 277-308. and Ghoshäl, History of Indian Political Ideas. 530-2. Derrett, Bharuci
on the royal regulative power in India', J.A.O.S.. 84 (1964), 392-5.
42Confusion can arise from the fact that räja-säsana can mean an order or an ordinance.
«2a[trsJ 
^
43A verse of the Brhat-paräsara-smrti, cited in the Räjanlti-prakäsa (of Mitra-misra's
Vlramitrodaya) (p. 23) goes so far as to prescribe the death penalty for disobedience to
the royal order. Ghoshäl. History. 313.
44This is actually the basis of obedience to the royal order according to Narada, XVI11.21 :
Because the protection of the world is confided to him ..., all that the king does is justified,
that is the rule.'

--- PAGE 246 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
225
state can demand recourse to acts which would be reprehensible in other
contexts.
Conversely, it is clear that the king cannot, in a definitive and general
way, substitute his will for the divine commandments touching rules
of conduct to be observed by the varnas at different stages of life, i.e. he
should not and cannot legislate in the domain of Good Custom, not
to speak of dharma in general. He should not, for it would be contrary
to his very mission, which is to facilitate his subjects' performance of
their duties; and he cannot because he lacks the necessary authority.
His "law" cannot be imposed except by force and would disappear as
soon as force ceased to uphold it.45 So, when Manu provides (VII. 13)
that "none should transgress the dharma which the king decrees in favour
of those he loves and (the orders) by which he inflicts penalties on those
he does not love", Medhätithi and other commentators understand
the word dharma as envisaging only occasional ordinances, and they
add that this verse by no means allows the king the power of modifying
precepts of a religious character.
If the king is allowed to interfere in this domain at all it is only to
reestablish a rule of dharma which a custom, or even an ill-advised or
perverse king has infringed. Närada (XVIII.9) made it a duty of the king
to reform the transactions of his predecessor which were unreasonable
(nyäyäpeta).46 And, still more generally. Kätyäyana (42) recommends
the king to abolish customs which turn out to be repugnant to reason
(viruddham nyäyatah).41 It is to be noted that both of these texts speak
of transactions or customs which are contrary to reason or to logic
(nyäya), which does not necessarily mean contrary to the precepts of
the sästras. Other texts which we have analysed above (especially Brh.
11.28) recommend the king, on the contrary, not to touch customary
rules, even when they are obviously opposed to the precepts of smrti,
for fear of causing his people's disaffection and thus threatening the
stability of the throne.
As between these two recommended solutions the choice would be
indicated to the king by his political wisdom. If the king is the support
of dharma he is also the surety of the public peace, and dharma cannot
prosper in disorder. If then he believes that the abrogation of a custom
which is contrary to smrti would be likely to provoke disorder, he will
45It is significant that when Kautilya himself lists (III.l, 43) the sources of positive law,
he omits räja-säsana (unless we are to translate nyäya as edict, which is improbable). Ghoshäl,
I.H.Q., 29(1953). 290.
4bnyäyäpetam yad anyena räj nä'jnäna-kr tarn ca vat. tad apy anyüya-vihitam punarnyäye
nivesayet. Dh. k.. 90. 104. 549. 586.
41 viruddham nyäya to yas tu car i tram kalpyate nrpaih, exam tatra nirasyeta car it ram tu
nrpäjnayä. An altogether different sense is extracted from this verse by Väcaspati Misra
(Vyav. tint. 718).

--- PAGE 247 [DIRECT] ---

226 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
prefer to leave his subjects alone, rather than seek to impose on them
a morality too high for them. That is doubtless why, at the beginning
of his chapter on räja-dharma, Yäjnavalkya (I.311) asks that the king
as well as his purohita (1.313) should be versed in the art of politics (danda-
niti). The resources of politics are indispensable for him to preserve
his kingdom from the excitements and catastrophes which an exclusive
preoccupation with religious precepts could not fail to produce. Only
when the rule introduced by usage or adopted by certain communities
appears, from its immoral or unjust character, to be likely to excite
stress and discontent amongst his subjects can the king usefully employ
his authority and abrogate it.
In fact such interventions by the king in dharmas domain seem to
have been very rare. The few historical examples which are cited emanate
from kings who were heterodox or whose orthodoxy is doubtful.48 The
Hindu king is before all a warrior charged to protect his subjects and
to secure the prosperity of the realm. Doubtless his protection extends
particularly to those who fulfill their duties.49 But it would not be his
duty to make proselytes, and the conception which would see in him
a reformer of public morals is certainly foreign to the smrti.50
The manner in which the king is called to intervene on the occasion
of agreements between members of certain local groups, such as villages,
481 have met only one historical example of the intervention of the king which has the
effect of reviving a rule of dharma. It is the abolition by Kumärapäla (second half of the
twelfth century) of the custom whereby the estate of a man who died without sons passed
to the crown. The Jain chronicles attribute this measure to the humanitarian influence
of Jainism. We may suspect, with other chroniclers, that the usage in question was abolished
because it was repugnant to the smrtis which called the king to the succession only in default
of all other heirs. But the edict or edicts attributed to the same king prohibited killing all
animals, eating meat, drinking spirits; and ordered that gaming-houses should be closed.
And these were certainly inspired by Jainism (A.K. Majumdär, Chaulukyas of Gujarat,
Bombay, 1956, 247, 315-6). The famous edicts of Asoka prohibit animal sacrifices (in
some places) (1st Rock Edict) or prohibit the killing of certain animals (5th Pillar Edict),
and these proceed from a mind influenced by Buddhism. This outlook is revealed in re-
ference to the conquest of Kaliriga. It is difficult to believe that a king under the sole influence
of his duties as a Ksatriya could feel pity for the sufferings caused in a victorious war.
It was a ruler favourable to Buddhism, Harsavardhana, who, according to Hiuan-Tsang.
ordered his subjects to abstain from meat-eating.
49According to Medhätithi and Kullüka (on A/., VII.35) the king incurs sin if he neglects
to protect those who are attached to their duties, but. conversely, it is not a fault on his
part if those who have abandoned their duties are oppressed by others. This implies that
only those whose conduct is beyond reproach are entitled to the king's protection.
50We recall that, according to M.. VII.203, the king should not change the laws in force
in countries he has conquered : pramänäni ca kurvlta tesäm dharmän yathoditän. The same
rule appears at Yqj., 1.343. who, instead of dharmän, uses the words äcära-kula-sthiti-
vyavahära : customs, usages of families, and rules observed in transactions (or procedure?).
Commenting upon A/., VI1.203, Medhätithi observes that in so acting the king will bind
the people to himself, which proves that the rule appertains to politics.

--- PAGE 248 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
227
guilds, corporations, artisans, or religious fraternities, constituting in
some sense their statutes or by-laws, reveals the essentially pragmatic
character of the royal policies. We know that the dharma-sästras attribute
a very large autonomy to those groups, and that the disputes which
can arise in that context are the object of a special title in the portion
devoted to private litigation, under the name of "violation of regulations
(or compacts)" (samvid-vyatikrama).
The king is bound to insist upon these conventions or regulations
being respected, even if, dealing with communities of heretics, for example,
the rules would be in contradiction with the precepts of the sästra ( Yäj.,
11.192; När.. XIII.2). According to Brhaspati (XVIII.7), the members'
agreement appears simply as a solemn form, or a written stipulation,
or the declaration of witnesses who are themselves strangers to the group.
But Kätyäyana is more demanding. He declares that the statutes (sthiti)
of the corporations of merchants, artisans, Brahmins, etc., cannot be
proved (in court) except by written documents, not by ordeals or by
witnesses. And the same writer (slokci 48) even prescribes that regulations
(vyavasthäs) established by the consent of the inhabitants of the same
region or of a country (desasyänumatena) should be consigned to writing
and sealed with the royal seal (mudritä räja-mudrayä).
In the South of India in particular, a number of these vyavasthäs
sanctioned by the king survive to this day. They are not confined to
conventions between the inhabitants of a locality or region, but also
include accords concerning colonies of Brahmins, guilds, or corpora-
tions of tradesmen, which show that the custom of having these compacts
confirmed by the king was very widespread. The majority are concerned
with the maintenance of a temple, the celebration of a cult, the division
of taxation amongst members, the making of a dam or a reservoir. But
we also find provisions dealing with the law of succession, the forms
of marriage, the legal status of children born out of regular marriage,
the penalties applicable in those guilty of certain crimes, which are
certainly within the domain o$ the sästras. Some of them only recall
or reinforce the sästric rules, but at times they establish what are clear
infractions of those rules.
J.D.M. Derrett sees in the king's intervention at least an indirect form
of legislative activity within the very domain of dhanna. Since the royal
sanction applies even to rules which are contrary to smrti, according
to his view the king must be understood to be de facto qualified to legislate
without being bound by the precepts of the sästras.51
We can hardly speak of "legislation" ä propos of the sanction which
51 Derrett. Hindu Law, Past and Present (Calcutta, 1957), 43; The criteria for distin-
guishing between legal and religious commands in the Dharmasästra\ All India Reporter,
Journ., 1953. 61; the whole article is to be seen, rewritten, at his Religion . . .. ch. 3.

--- PAGE 249 [DIRECT] ---

228 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
the king gave to the compacts or conventions referred to above. Such
regulations concerned only restricted circles in the population and had
not the general application which is required by our definition of "legis-
lation". Moreover they were not due ultimately to the king's own initia-
tive. They were simply submitted to him in order that their application
should be secured. The exercise of legislative power by the king, which
would authorise him to make ordinances proprio mo tu, on his own
initiative and at his pleasure, would be a very different matter.
In reality when the king accords his sanction, his attitude is determined
by considerations of opportunity. Similarly in the tenth title of the smrti
bearing his name, a title devoted to collective regulations, Närada descri-
bes clearly what points the king should supervise. After having said
that he should authorise the existence of various bodies, even if they
are composed of heretics, and cause their customs to be observed (X.
2.3), he adds that the king should prohibit those which are contrary
to his wishes (pratiküla), naturally perverse (prakrtyavamata)52 or
opposed to his interests (bädhakam arthänäm) (X.4). He should not
tolerate any which are formed amongst factious groups, nor the taking
up of arms with an object prejudicial to the state, nor such as would
provoke violence between them (X.5). Plainly the royal supervision
bears especially on any clauses of the said regulations which would be
likely to breed disorder or to be injurious to the interests of the state.
When he confirms any such regulations he apparently acts not as a
legislator but as an administrator concerned to keep the peace between
his subjects.
That, even when sanctioned by the king, such regulations do not have
a true legislative quality, results from the fact that the king himself is
not bound to respect them, if the needs of government so require. Accord-
ing to Närada (XVIII.24), "it is (only) for good order [or in the interests
of the institution] that the scope of application of customs has been
fixed by kings. (Thus) a royal order is held to have more weight than
his customs."53 Furthermore, Yajnavalkya explains (11.186) that "On
condition of not being contrary to his own dharma (nija-dharma) [i.e.
the duties peculiar to his caste, family, etc.], the dharma [i.e. the regula-
tion] established by common consent (sämayika) should be rigorously
5 2On perhaps rather 'blamed by the generality of the public', as Kane. III. 158. prefers.
^sthityartham prthivl-pälais caritra-visayäh krtäh, caritrebhyo 'sya tat prähur gariyo
räja-säsanam. Jolly's translation of caritra by 'law' gives the verse a different sense. The
example given by Aparärka in his commentary shows clearly enough that we should under-
stand by that word the 'statutes' of bodies whose scope of application (viz. the provisions)
have been sanctioned by the king. Let us suppose, says he, that an article of the statutes
of a colony of Brahmins forbids royal officials to enter into the Brahmins' houses or certain
other places. Those officials could still, at the king's order, make an entry into those houses
to arrest thieves, for example. Ghoshäl, op. cit., 414.

--- PAGE 250 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
229
observed by (everyone), the same as the dharma made [i.e. sanctioned]
by the king (räja-krta)." Which leads us to believe that even a member
of such a body is not bound to observe a regulation, even if it was sanc-
tioned by the king, if it is in contradiction with religious duties.54 Official
approbation of a regulation was apparently no more than a formality
especially useful to facilitate proof of its regularity, analogous to modern
registration of authentic deeds and other documents. The king only
supervised those clauses which could prejudice public order, and this
supervision did not extend to fundamental questions of validity. What
we have, therefore, was a system of making the regulations official:
they were turned into public muniments.55
Far from legislating in the sphere reserved for srotriyas, the kings
of history tried to enlighten their subjects and themselves upon their
duties, giving their patronage to commentators and digest-writers.
This was only one way in which they acquired renown as pious princes,
devoted to dharma. We have already seen how many interpreters whose
life is vaguely known to us filled important posts at court. Their labours
plainly had as their object to facilitate the king's task and that of his
ministers, offering them a reasoned interpretation of the rules of the säst ras.
Laksmldhara, the author of the Kalpataru, does not hesitate to declare
in the preliminary poem of the Räja-dharma-kända that it is thanks
to his counsels and his mantras that the king Govindacandra (whose
prime minister he was) managed to subjugate numerous kings and to
progress on the road of justice and generosity towards his subjects.
There is every reason to think that his monumental work is not a mere
display of his knowledge, but a work through which he intended to
carry out his task as counsellor. Certain kings themselves have lent their
names to the compositions of digests or commentaries, either by officially
patronising their authors, like Madanapäla, king of Kästhä (1360-1390)
and Virasiipha, king of Orccha (1605-1627), whose names figure in the
actual titles of works composed at their requests by Visvesvara and
Mitra-misra, or by presiding over the compilation or editing of the work
and publishing it in their own names, as did Pratäpa-rudra, king of
Orissa (beginning of the sixteenth century) for the Sarasvatl-viläsa.
54Kätyäyana (s. 669) formulates a similar rule: 'If a royal edict (or order, räja-säsanä)
is passed, not contrary to (precepts of) the dharmasästra, it should be observed before
everything, because of the authority of the king (nrpäjHayä)'. This does not refer to an
order addressed to an individual, for this would be in conflict with texts which forbid
resistance to an order from the king. Räja-säsana must mean, then, the act by which the
king sanctions a collective regulation. Therefore Käne was quite right to place this verse
in the section on 'breach of regulations' in his edition of the Kätyäyana-smrti.
55Kaut. (II.7, 2) seems to provide that the 'superintendent of accounts' should register
local statutes, professional regulations, and customs special to castes and families. Ghoshäl,
op. cit., 114.

--- PAGE 251 [DIRECT] ---

230 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
It is difficult to doubt that royal patronage assured the works a measure
of official status and consequently a certain authority. Mitra-misra
proclaims that his digest contains the sum of all dharma and makes it
superfluous to consult other works. Pratäpa-rudra declares that he has
composed the Sarasvathviläsa to spare judges, ministers, and ihepurohita
the trouble of harmonising the divergent opinions of earlier exegetes,
and that his work renders all preceding writings useless. It really seems
as if the king wished to confer an imperative character on the interpreta-
tion of the rules of the smrti which he presented. It seems as if we have
within the very framework of the sästras an act having the character
of positive law in the modern sense of the word, as Kane has observed
(I,p.412). Justinian, too, thought that the compilation of the Corpus
Juris Civilis sufficed the needs of jurists and he forbade all further corn-
men tatorial activity. But the king of Cuttack did not manage to fix
interpretation any more than did the Byzantine emperor. Interpretation
is a human achievement, thus subject to error, and only the texts of
smrti make up the law. The path must remain open for new interpreta-
tions. The Sarasvatl'Viläsa is certainly an authority in certain contexts
in Orissa, but it has been supplanted in others by the Mitäksarä which
is senior to it by five centuries.56 This shows plainly enough that the
king did not have the power to impose a general interpretation of texts
of smrti. He could favour certain enterprises in order to elucidate their
meaning so that his subjects and he himself could know their duties
better. But for all their bulk and elaboration the digests and commentaries
have no more value than an opinion, and no one, starting with the king
himself, could be held bound to follow the proposed solutions from the
moment when other solutions seemed better or more appropriate to
his circumstances.57
Because of the large sphere reserved for dharma the legislative activity
of the king was limited very seriously, but there did remain a vast field
in which it might operate. The majority of the topics which come within
what we would call administrative law fell under royal authority. The
dharma-sästras confine themselves to indicating, for example, the quali-
ties which ministers should have. But it fell to the king to divide amongst
them the tasks of administration, to define the scope and the powers
of each ministry. In Book 11, Kautilya presents a long list of rules for
the conduct to be followed by the different heads of the public services
56Mayne. Hindu Law and Usage, 1 lth edn., 90, n. 
(a).
57According to T.V. Mahälihgam, Administration and Social Life under Vijayanagara
(Madras, 1940), 107, the rules figuring in the Vyavahära-mädhava do not correspond to
practice during the reign of Bukka, especially so far as concerns judicial organisation.
Nevertheless it was probably at the request of that king, whose kula-guru and minister
he was. that Mädhava introduced that long digression into his commentary upon the
Paräsara-smrti.

--- PAGE 252 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
231
(adhyaksas), and such rules were clearly intended to be formulated in
the shape of edicts.58 For the organisation of local administration we
can hardly find in the dharma-sästras more than the most summary and
theoretical indications.59 Even though local groups enjoyed a substantial
autonomy, it was certainly needful to settle how the king's officers should
exercise control over the transactions of local bodies. Public finance
likewise presupposed a whole body of rules relative to the collection
of rates, taxes and customs duties to which the sästras allude, necessitat-
ing a large body of officials whose duties had to be defined and their
functions supervised. It seems impossible that every section of the ad-
ministrative machine could have functioned under the direct orders of
the king. The continuity of institutions must have demanded royal
instructions having the effect of laws. Even in judicial contexts, the king's
intervention must have given rise to actual legislation. First of all criminal
justice would have to be organised from top to bottom. It was his own
special department of justice. Although the dharma-sästras provide
lists of crimes the Suppression of which must be effectuated by the king,
they are silent on how criminal proceedings are to be organised. And
once again we find those elements in the arthasästra treatises. The applica-
tion of those rules lay wholly within the royal discretion.
Even in the sphere of private litigation, the dharma-sästras give their
attention indeed to formulating rules for the solution of disputes, but
rules dealing with judicial organisation and even legal procedure are
in need of completion. For example, appeal properly so called, i.e. the
right of the litigant who has lost his case to take the decision before a
court superior to that in which he was unsuccessful, is barely outlined in
the sästras, which do not specify the conditions, the periods, and the
effect of an appeal. Once again, the reason is that here we have to do with a
matter solely within the royal authority, pertaining to the means employed
to give true justice, of which the king is the sole judge. Finally in the
sphere of economics, if the dharma-sästras enable us to catch a glimpse
of the king's intervention in supervision of markets, prices, and wages,
it is only if we read arthasästra works that we can form an idea of that
encroaching quality which could regulate so many branches of human
activity. We could say that the royal edicts penetrated substantially
into the daily lives of individuals and communities.60
This royal legislation, which is foreign to dharma, remains largely
unknown to us. The commentators and digest-writers know by the name
räja-säsana only individual measures or occasional orders.61 These
-s«Ghoshäl, op. cit., 114-5.
5«Cf M., VII. 115-22.
o°B.P. Sinha, J.B.R.S., 1954. 277-308.
61 See the examples given by Medhätithi and other commentators on A/., VI1.13. Kautilya
too gives, as examples of räja-säsana, hardly any which are not occasional or individual
measures (11.10. 38-46).

--- PAGE 253 [DIRECT] ---

232 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
precepts had no other foundation or sanction than the will of the king,
nor other object than to secure the government of the realm. But, by
contrast, they belong to positive law, law-in-action, immediately appli-
cable to the subjects, sanctioned by the king's agents. Alongside the
rules of the sästras, though in an entirely different sphere, they fashioned
and controlled the social activity of the kingdoms of history.
Edicts, being only the expression of the royal will, could be supple-
mented, modified, or abrogated at the will of their author. They probably
became void at the end of the reign, unless they were continued in effect
by the new ruler. Only one text leads us to doubt this: Närada (XVI11.9)
prescribes that the king shall reform or amend the transactions of his
predecessor which might seem to be contrary to equity; from which
it might seem to follow that the unabrogated acts of a king continue
to have effect during the reign of his successor. But this would be to
attribute more meaning to the text than it deserves: it quite possibly
envisages only royal acts injurious to individuals, and not legislative
acts at all.
3. The King's Role relative to Penance
When his subjects have committed sins, the king is bound to see to it
that they observe the penances which are prescribed by the sästras. In
so doing he protects them from the consequences of their unexpiated
sins, which would inescapably affect their future destinies. As Medhätithi
remarks (on M., VIII. 1) the king should guarantee his subjects not only
against visible torments, such as those which the victim of robbery would
suffer, but also against invisible torments, that is to say those which
will await the robber himself because of the sin he committed in robbing
the victim. When the breach of religious duties is only a sin and does
not involve a penal sanction, the spiritual and temporal powers each
have its distinct role. The Brahmins must decide the penance, and the
king must secure that it is performed.
The procedure is clearly indicated by Äpastamba (II.5.10.12-16):
'The äcärya shall prescribe to those who, participating according to
the sästras (in the rights and duties of their caste), have left the right
path because of the weakness of their senses, to perform penances cor-
responding to their acts following the sacred precepts. If they transgress
the order of their äcärya he will conduct them before the king. The king
shall send them to his purohita versed in the dharma-sütra and the art
of government. He (the purohita) shall order them to perform their
penances if they are Brahmins. He shall reduce them to obedience by
the means of constraint, with the exception of corporal punishment
or reduction to slavery."
The king only intervenes for the sake of the performance of the penance

--- PAGE 254 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
233
fixed by the äcärya. Närada (XVIII.3), Kätyäyana (sl.949) and Brhaspati
(Aiy., XXIX. 13) expressly mention the non-performance of penance
amongst the matters which the king may take up suo motu, of his own
motion. Certain texts, notably Paräsara (VIII.28), require the permission
of the king before penance is performed, or at least prescribe that he
should be informed of the performance of the gravest penances. But
the king is strictly forbidden to decide upon the penance himself, and
if he exceeds the opinion of the Brahmins, the sin which is committed
is enlarged a hundredfold (Par., VIII.29). The question escapes the
king's jurisdiction and belongs exclusively to the spiritual power.62
When the penance to be observed is in doubt, the question should
be taken before a parisad. "If one asks what should be done when the
rule has not been specified (the reply is:) what the Brahmins (who are)
sistas shall decide will incontestably be dharma." Thus Manu (XII.108),
and Yäjiiavalkya likewise (IN.301): "He whose fault is known (vikhyäta-
dosa) shall perform the penance which has been approved by the
parisad" ß*
The composition of a parisad has been explained above.64 This gather-
ing consists in principle of at least three persons, but it can be reduced
to one: "Four (Brahmins) versed in the Vedas and the dharmasästra,
or knowing only three Vedas, form a parisad. What they declare is dharma,
or even what is declared by one alone, the best versed in knowledge of
the ätman (adhyätma-vittama)" (Yäj., 1.9).
The parisad to determine penance takes account of the country, the
time, the age and capacity of the offender, also the nature of the sin
(Yäj., III.294).
According to Vijflänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., III.301), in case of doubt
about the penance, recourse to a parisad is necessary, even if the sinner
is learned in the sästras. He should confer with its members and do only
what they have approved. Vijnänesvara cites on this subject a text of
Ahgiras which obliges the parisad to indicate the penance on pain of
incurring the same sin as had been committed by the man who came
to consult it. The same commentator also produces a sütra of Vasistha
(III.6) according to which "the sin of him whom fools, misled by darkness
62The same principle seems to flow from A/.. VI11.390 also. Until the merger of the States
of Travancore and Cochin with other territories to form the present State of Kerala in
the Indian Union, the Maharajas kept ministers specifically to attend to questions of
breach of Hindu caste discipline, whose powers were legally recognised without prejudice
to the rights of individual castes to excommunicate their members, [trs.]
63 A text of Arigiras, quoted by Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., III.301) prescribes the manner
in which the sinner should approach the parisad: fasting, straight from his bath, with
his garments still wet. He may complete his confession only after having paid the Brahmins
their honoraria (daksinä). Käne, IV, 84-5.
<"Pt. I, ch. 1, pp. 15ff.

--- PAGE 255 [DIRECT] ---

234 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
(tamonüdha) and ignorant of the sacred law, have (ill) instructed (in
his duty) rebounds multiplied a hundredfold on those who have explained
(his duty) to him" (the same text is in Baudh. ,1.1.11, and a closely similar
text in M., XII. 115 and Par., VIII.5). In other words, the sinner is purified
even when the penance which he has performed has been settled for
him by an ignorant parisad. This last text underlines the exclusive com-
petence of Brahmins in the matter of penance.
It often happens that the sin also constitutes a crime and that the
sinner is liable to a penalty that the king, as sole master of punishment,
is charged to have inflicted upon him. Given that certain penances are
already equivalent to veritable punishments, the question remains whether
the two sanctions are cumulative and, if not, which ought to supplant
the other.
The principle of the reply seems to be found in Vasistha (XIX.45),
which Manu (VIII.318) and Närada (paris.,48) reproduce. "Men who
have committed crimes and who have been punished by the king are
purified and go to heaven like those who have performed good deeds".65
Taken literally, this text excludes a cumulative situation and gives
priority to the penal sanction. But the commentators refuse to give it
so general a significance. For Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., III.359) it
applies only in the case where the sinner undergoes a capital punishment;
only sentence of death can have an expiatory effect. Medhätithi presented
a wider interpretation. The verse of Manu is always applicable when
the punishment inflicted is a corporal one. There is no occasion then
for penance. But both must be undergone when the culprit is only liable
to a fine. Medhätithi justifies this distinction in the following manner:
the fine is useful to the king, for it is a source of revenue for him; but a
corporal punishment, if it has any utility, is useful only to the criminal
himself. We should be inclined to say that it is useful as a measure of
"protection" (in the senses we have discussed above), whether for the
victim's sake, or because of its exemplary quality. But Medhätithi believes
that that would not suffice to justify recourse to corporal punishment.
In what concerns the convict himself, the utility of the punishment can
only be found in the purification of a culprit. Corporal punishment
produces an effect of an invisible nature in the person who undergoes
it, at the same time as it, in another way, serves the king's purposes
(namely the protection of his subjects); or, to put it in other words,
Medhätithi believed that punishment, when corporal, is a real chastise-
ment which is not a simple punishment: it wipes out the sin and purifies
the culprit.
It is difficult not to see in this text, so understood, a trespass on the
^-räjabhir dhrta-dandäs tu krtvä päpäni mänaväh. nirmaläh svargam äyänti santah
sukrtino vathä.

--- PAGE 256 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
235
part of the temporal power over the spiritual, for when the two sanctions
are called in to play, the king has either had the case brought before him
or he has taken the case up of his own motion. The king substitutes
himself for the Brahmin; by fixing the punishment he chastises the sinner
and so absolves him.
But why does punishment operate as a penance? Medhätithi speaks
of an invisible effect produced in the person of the convict by the applica-
tion of the punishment, and this is an effect analogous in its results to
the act of dharma. But this effect results from the execution of the sentence
pronounced by the king, and not from actions performed voluntarily
by the convict himself, as the case with penances usually is. Should we
attribute a purifying effect to chastisement (danda) when it personifies
dharma, i.e. when it is employed conformably to the precepts of smrtil
Or should we simply admit that the king here has a religious power which
permits him to wash away sins?
A text which we have already met in the dharma-sütras (Baudh., II.
1.16-17; Gaut., XII.43-45; Ap.f 1.9.25.4-5),^ would incline towards
the latter hypothesis. It concerns the crime committed by him who has
stolen a Brahmin's gold, and turns up again, with some variations, in
the majority of the dharma-sästras. Thus, Manu says (VIII.314-316):
'The thief should present himself before the king in all haste, his locks
untied, and confess the theft, saying, 'I have done this, punish me'. He
should carry on his shoulders a stake or a club of khadira wood or a
spear pointed at both ends, or a rod of iron. Punished or released the
thief is purged [of the sin] of the theft, but the king, in not punishing
him, takes the sin of theft upon himself." Likewise Yäjnavalkya (III.
257): "He who has stolen a Brahmin's gold shall present a stake to the
king, proclaiming his crime; killed or released, he shall be purified (hato
mukto 'pi vä sucih) ".61
It is clear that these rules had no practical interest for the commenta-
tors. But the importance which the authors of the dharma-sästras attached
to them, marked by the care they have taken to reproduce them makes
one think that they attributed a symbolic value to them. To steal a Brah-
min's gold was indeed a mahäpätaka, one of the four (later five) "great
sins" for which, if the weight of gold exceeded a certain quantity, the
penance prescribed was equivalent to a death-sentence (Käne, IV,p. 101).
Now, on this hypothesis, it appears that the king has the power to purify
the sinner, letting him go and taking the sin of the theft upon himself.
It is true that, if we follow a variant of the text provided by Närada
66See above, Pt. I, ch. 3, p. 68.
67Similar provisions appear in other smrtis. Käne, IV.73-4, Vasistha (XX.41) introduces
a variation : it is the king who presents the thief with a wooden club with which he should
kill himself. 'It is said in the Veda that he is purified by that death'.

--- PAGE 257 [DIRECT] ---

236 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
(pan's.,46-47), this would be because of his spontaneous admission
of his guilt that the thief is purified.68 But admission is expected of any
sinner who wishes to expiate his offence and who offers to undergo
penance. The special circumstances revealed by our texts are these: the
sinner's presenting himself directly before the king in the attitude of
a penitent; and the gesture of the king in touching him with the club
or letting him go. And these have the purifying effect. Medhätithi (on
A/., VIII.316) does indeed say that the thief who is released' must pay
the prescribed fine for the theft, but the penance is remitted. The explana-
tion which he had given for the expiatory quality of chastisment by
invisible effects of corporal punishment can hardly be applied here,
because the culprit undergoes no punishment at all. Even when the king
uses the club (he need strike only one blow according to the commenta-
tors), the culprit is purified, whether he is killed by the blow or only hurt.
How could an incomplete chastisement, incomplete through quite for-
tuitous circumstances, have the same value as a penance?
It seems that we cannot avoid admitting that the king appears here
endowed with a religious power, the penance no less than the punishment
emerging from his own unaided will. And one might think that the verse
of Manu (VIII.318), stating the principle that the punishment inflicted
by the king is equivalent to penance, was to be explained originally by
the same idea of a power proper to the king, and not, as Medhätithi
imagined, by the effect of the corporal chastisement.69
The rules relating to theft of a Brahmin's gold were perhaps vestiges
of a time when the royal power had not yet been fully "desacralised",
when the king still shared the nature of the magician. At the period of
the commentators they had only one reason for remaining consigned
to the smrti. They confirmed by an exceptional text, having undisputed
authority, the idea that at that point where the king dispensed chastise-
ment the spiritual power gave way to the temporal. It really mattered
that the king should be master of the sanction when the question was
of an infringement of Good Custom, an infringement which was not
^Following the text in Jolly's edn.: 'The thief shall approach the king with his hair
untied, running and proclaiming his crime: I have done such a deed, punish me! Acting
in this way he is purified by the fact that he has confessed his act. The king shall touch him
(with the sceptre), but he shall let him go, for he is freed from his crime' (räjä tutah sprsed
enarn utsrjet tu hy akilbisam). Or. in Sämbasiva's edition {prakirn. 105, p. 190): \ .. the
thief is purified by the fact that he has confessed his act; (it is) the king who is touched
by the sin. because he has allowed a culprit to go free' (räjänam tat sprsed ena utsrjantam
sakilbisam).
69Further we may note that M., VI 11.318 is only one verse away from the provisions
relative to the thief of gold, and that Närada {paris. 48, prakirn. 106). reproducing A/.,
VII1.318, both in the Nepalese ms. used by Jolly and in the text commented upon by Bha-
vasvämin, appears immediately after them.

--- PAGE 258 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
237
not only failure in respect of religious duty but also a breach of public
order. The interests of the state were at stake, and one could not leave
to Brahmins the care of fixing the penance, since their decision would
prejudge the punishment of the culprit without appeal. The king should
remain free to determine the entire chastisement which might be suitable.
He should be entitled to go so far as to release the culprit (taking his
sin upon himself) if the necessities of his policies demanded that he should
show clemency.
4. Criminal Justice
After having dealt successively with the eighteen types of litigation in
which private persons engage, Manu (IX.2521T.) ends his exposition
of duties of the king by enjoining him to "root out the thorns" (kantaka-
sodhana) of his realm. He means by this that the king should take care
to render harmless those of his subjects who are liable to compromise
public order by their action, or to prejudice his authority. Manu enume-
rates, in no special order, a certain number of reprehensible acts, more
or less grave, for which he provides varied punishments, and recommends
recourse to some unusual means of keeping himself informed. Yäjftavalk-
ya does the same in the last thirteen verses of Book II.
What is involved, as indeed the commentators on Yajnavalkya observe,
is the part of räja-dharma which is distinguished in other dharma-sästras
from cases in private law by the name praklrnaka. That word, which
means "scattered, diverse, thus miscellaneous (rules)", is misleading,
for the rules contained under that title are often regarded as a simple
supplement intended to complete those which relate to lawsuits between
individual litigants.70
In reality the scope of praklrnaka embraces topics quite distinct from
private litigation. It denotes a different aspect of the royal activity, in
which the king appears, not as a judge charged with the task of ending
a dispute between two litigants, but as a magistrate who seeks out wrong-
doers and applies chastisement to them in the name of the state. This
is what we call criminal law, even if, in certain aspects, praklrnaka resem-
bles rather the police activity of government than criminal justice as
we know it, in which the adversary aspect is usually maintained.
Matters falling within praklrnaka are characterised by the fact that
the king can take them up ex officio. By contrast, the king must abstain
from taking up a case appertaining to private disputes when no one
has addressed a plaint to him. "Neither the king nor any of his officers,"
says Manu (VIII.43) should ever take up a case by themselves, still less
70Both individual litigation and praklrnaka come within vyavahära as understood in
the sense of administration of justice in general. Moreover certain dharma-sastras present
praklrnaka as the last vyavahära-pada. See the table given by Käne at III, 249.

--- PAGE 259 [DIRECT] ---

238 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
should they stifle (nigiret) a case brought by another", and Kätyäyana
(si. 27): "The king should not, whether due to pressure (brought to bear
upon him), or through desire to obtain wealth [by way of fees and fines],
take upon himself to regulate differences between his subjects when
these do not wish to carry their disputes before him." This essential
difference is put clearly in relief by Brihaspati (XXVII. 1) who defines
prakirnaka, the procedure which depends from the king (nrpäsraya),
in opposition to that which is commenced by the litigants (vädi-krta)
and the object of which is the private dispute.71 In other words the king
is master of the case in a matter within prakirnaka: he acts when, and
only when, he thinks it appropriate.
The smrti texts provide different lists of matters suitable to fall within
prakirnaka. Närada (XVIII. 1-4) mentions the following offences: trans-
gressing the king's orders; causing misunderstandings between the
heads of cities (with their subordinates) or between elements constituting
the state;72 violating the regulations of corporate bodies and others;
differences between father and son; failure to perform penance; cheating
(Brahmins) of gifts due to them; annoying ascetics; creating a mixture
of varnas; infringement of the rules concerning their (permitted) means
of subsistence.
Kätyäyana provides a longer list (947-952). The crimes are divided
into three groups according to the king's role therein, those in the first
group constituting the ten aparädhas (offences).73 The same list, but
without division into three groups is found in Brhaspati (Aiy., XXIX.
12-14).74 It contains most of the offences mentioned by Närada, but
presents still more variety. Specially mentioned are: divulging secrets
concerning a war; abuses regarding the revenue or excise; misappro-
priating property which has escheated: crimes which could be considered
as prejudicing the interests of the state but also acts which are held to
be contrary to public morality or which are crimes against common
law, such as the fact of becoming rich suddenly, conspiring with thieves,
committing an attack on another man's wife, destroying crops, and so on.
Even longer lists are attributed by commentators to Pitämaha. A
llesa vädi-krtah prokto vyavahärah samäsatah, nrpäsrayam pravaksyämi vyavahäram
praklrnakam. The word nrpäsraya to qualify prakirnaka is found in Närada XVIII. 1 :
praklrnake punar jneyo vyavahäro nrpäsrayah.
72Here I follow the reading of Sämbasiva (prakirn. 2): pura-pradhäna-sambhedah prakrü-
näm tathaiva ca, instead ofthat of Jolly's edn.: purapradäna . . . which seems unsatisfactory.
73Two more lists of the ten aparädhas are attributed to Samvarta (5m. cand., II, 28)
and Närada (Quot., I, 11-12) respectively. Neither agrees fully with Kätyäyana's. The
'ten aparädhas', however, appear frequently in epigraphy as (collectively) crimes for which
fines may be collected. Käne, IV, 264-5.
74On the correspondence between the two lists see Renou, Etudes vediques et panine'ennes,
11 (Paris, 1963), 140-2.

--- PAGE 260 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
239
first list by this author gives 22 crimes, cognizance of which appertains
to the king (padäni nrpa-jheyäni), crimes as varied as those appearing
in the verses of Kätyäyana. passing from high treason and the destruction
of a constituent element of the state to the disembowelling of an animal
and causing beasts to give birth on another's field. A second list of 50
crimes called chalas (abuses) includes especially breaches of etiquette
in the king's presence, like blowing the nose before him or untying the
hair, but also acts injurious to the nation like destroying a cistern or
obstructing the public way.75
The extreme diversity of these crimes, the artificial nature of their
classification, which varies moreover with the authors, contrasts strongly
with the way in which litigation between individuals is handled. After
Manu's time rules governing such litigation were reduced to eighteen
titles (vyavahära-padas) following a classification, ordered and systema-
tical in its nature,76 to which not only the authors of later smrtis but
also the interpreters themselves generally adhere, so that matters which
do not correspond to one of these types are regulated only by way of
analogy. Here we are faced by an unorganised law. whose development
appears to have been quite late in smrti literature. The very name prakir-
naka gives us reason to suspect that the subject matter is one which the
dharmasästra writers only touched upon because the "uprooting of
thorns" is one of the king's duties, but which they have deliberately
neglected. Similarly none of the lists which have given us the crimes
appertaining to prakirnaka is exhaustive. Närada (XVIII.4) and Kätyä-
na (946) say that prakirnaka includes all that has been omitted in the
preceding chapters!77 Even if this were to be taken literally, it is not true,
since certain crimes actually listed under prakirnaka are to be traced
in the part devoted to private litigation.770 What is meant is that no
complete list can be furnished, for it is up to the king himself to decide
whether a particular act is or is not a misdeed punishable in the name
of the state. Guardian of the peace in his kingdom, he decides as he thinks
fit what shall be the means to safeguard it and to secure respect for his
persons and his powers. In other words the whole subject belongs not
to the science of dharma but to the science of artha, and it is to the authors
75For details of such classifications see Käne. III. 263-6.
76See above, Pt. I. ch. 4. p.
11Visnu XLII.l confines himself to defining prakirnaka as yad anuktam, 'what has not
already been said'.
77aThis duality of actions should surprise no one. In criminal matters we distinguish
between a civil action to which the victim is entitled (the action in tort) from the public
prosecution launched in the name of the state. All that we need say here is that the sästras
say nothing about the relationship between the two kinds of action, which a western jurist
would no doubt consider a serious omission.

--- PAGE 261 [DIRECT] ---

240 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
of artha-sästras that they left the responsibility for explaining the subject
to the king.78
Given that miscreants who have done acts within praklrnaka are
prosecuted under the order of the king, it is important that he should
be promptly informed of improper activities committed by his subjects
and that he should keep as strict a watch as possible on individuals who
are suspected of criminal inclinations. Therefore he has at his disposal
means of enquiry and investigation of which we can only say that its
justification must be its efficiency.
Since the question is of maintaining his authority, which is the founda-
tion of social peace, the king is free to take recourse to all useful expedients.
As for the "thorns", the duty of protection no longer exists. They can
be suppressed like external enemies, if necessary by tricks and bribery.
Every means is good to discover and to arrest them, even those means
which would only be used in completely exceptional cases between
private litigants.
Manu (VII. 16) alludes to two procedures for the application of chastise-
ment, differing according as the acts were prejudicial to the state or
delicts committed against individuals. The details of measures which
it is possible to employ in order to eradicate "thorns" belong to artha-
sästra works and elude dharmasästra authors. However, Manu devotes
to them several verses of Book IX (256-293) where he advises the king
to employ spies and even agents provocateurs™ Yäjnavalkya (1.338-
339) and Närada (paris.,61) give the same advice, though more concisely.
Kätyäyana (947-952) distributes crimes within praklrnaka in three
groups, according to the king's role. For those of the first group (the
ten aparädhas), he urges the king to conduct the enquiry himself; those
in the second are divulged to him by spies and he should take preventive
78Kautilya devotes an entire book (IV) to kantaka-sodhana and gives a long enumeration
of the crimes to be counted in this class in the course of several chapters. Käne, III, 252-7.
79Cf amongst others IX.256: 'Let the king who has spies for his eyes (cara-caksus)
discover the two sorts of thieves who take the property of others, both those who are manifest
and those who are hidden.' 261 : 'Having detected them (the malefactors) by means of
trustworthy persons who are disguised and follow the same occupations and by spies
passing under various disguises, he must cause them to be instigated (to commit offences)
and bring them under his power.' 267 : 'By means of clever reformed thieves who associate
with such (rogues), follow them and know their devices, he should discover them and
incite them (to commit offences).' 268: wUnder the pretext of (offering them) various
dainties, of introducing them to Brahmins, and on account of feats of strength, they (the
spies) must lead them into the presence (of the king's officials).' 269: 'Those among them
who do not come (to the rendezvous) and those who suspect the old (thieves in the king's
pay) should be attacked by the king by force and slain along with their friends, relations,
and close connexions.' See also A/., VII.122-4. recommending the use of spies to watch
officials and inform against them if they are corrupt. The similarity of this with Kautilya
(1.12, IV.4-5) is evident.

--- PAGE 262 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
241
measures; and as for the third group he should try to repress them by
means of the four expedients (upäyas) of royal policy.80 The distribution
of the crimes seems arbitrary enough. We can only deduce from it that
the procedure employed differed with the circumstances and envisaged,
according to the case in question, either repression or prevention.
The same author does not confine himself to alluding to the use of
spies within the scope of praklrnaka. He distinguishes two kinds of them:
the stobhaka, who is a part-time informer, and who is paid for his services,
and the sücaka, who is a functionary entrusted with police duties (Kät.,
33-34).
It is clear that the preparation of these kinds of cases should be in
different hands from those in which the settlement of private disputes
lay. For such an expeditious procedure, for such manoeuvres of a police
character, reliance must have been placed on people who placed the
security of the king's person and the interests of the state before every-
thing. For the decision that should be taken or the advice that should
be tendered to the king, it would be appropriate to rely on different
advisers than the ordinary judiciary, men more free in their way of judging
things. In other words there must have been a special service, quite
independent of the judicial administration properly so called.
No dharma-sästra takes the matter up, probably because it belongs
particularly to the science of art ha. The dharma-sästras confine them-
selves to insisting on the duty of the king to extirpate "thorns" but they
leave it to him to organise this kind of justice, hisjustice, or rather they
leave the arthasästra writers with the business of advising on this subject.
It is known that Kaujilya (IV. 1.1) distinguishes between two kinds
of tribunal. The dharma-sthlya is held to look into contentious matters,
cases between two litigants or where the question is how their dispute
shall be settled; the kantaka-sodhana is charged with the task of extripat-
ing "thorns", a jurisdiction which is virtually criminal or in which the
king acts of his own motion. In the dharma-sthlya, the inquiry is conducted
by the dharma-sthas, magistrates or officials of the judiciary versed in
the dharmasästra; while the kantaka-sodhana is entrusted to three func-
tionaries called pradestr, agents of the executive. The distinction is thus
very neatly set out.
It scarcely appears at all in epigraphy, doubtless because what is
covered there is essentially administrative machinery and thus merged
with other organs of the state. Moreover the decision, whether in a
kantaka-sodhana matter or in private litigation, was actually or nominally
taken by the king, an important factor which would mask the difference
in the powers which he exercised in each of those capacities.81
80The four expedients r conciliation, corruption, division and force are the classic methods
to be used towards external enemies. Käne, III. 172-5. and above. Pt. I, ch. 4, p. 82.
81 According to Brh., XXVI1.25, the two sorts of matters were adjudged by the king in

--- PAGE 263 [DIRECT] ---

242 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
In the matter of fixing penalties, it is hardly to be doubted that the
king enjoyed a great latitude in criminal matters. The dharma-sästras
prescribe fixed penalties for certain crimes, varying from one to another.
But often enough they give a choice for the same crime between penalties
of very different gravity, or even neglect to specify the amount of the
penalty.82 It is here that the sästras' recommendations on the correct
employment of danda come into their own. From that the arthasqstra
writers take a morsel of political wisdom: the king should not abuse
punishment lest he pass for a tyrant, nor should he show himself too
lax lest he lose all his authority (Kaut.. I.4.8-I0). Manu (VII.16, VIII.126)
and Yäjiiavalkya (I.387), for their part, recommend the king generally
to observe the motive, the period and location of the offense, also the
capacity of the culprit to endure the penalty, in particular his age and
gender. In other words the sentence is determined by the circumstances
of each case. It is extremely variable and depends in a large measure
upon the will of the king who must remain master of his own justice.
Manu (VIII.129), Yäjnavalkya (1.367) and Brhaspati (XVII.5) disting-
uish four sorts of penalties: simple reprimand, severe admonition, fine,
and corporal punishment. The two last can be awarded only by the king
(Brh., XXVII.8). The dharma-sästras furnish a rich arsenal of corporal
punishments.83 It is worthy of note that the penalty of imprisonment
(nirodha) is rarely provided for, though it was far from unknown (cf.
M.. VIII.310,375). Manu prescribes (IX.288) that the prisons (bandhana)
should be located at the side of a main road in order that the convicts
may be seen undergoing torture and disfigurement. It is not impossible
that what are spoken of were places where criminals were exposed.84
the course of the same audience. However C. Minäkshi, in Administration and Social Life
under the Pallavas (Madras, 1938), 59, thought she had found the distinction between
the two jurisdictions in inscriptions belonging to the later Pallavas or the earlier Colas
(end of the ninth and beginning of the tenth century): the dharmäsana referred to in the
inscriptions would correspond to the dharmasthlya of Kautilya, since the matters belonging
to that tribunal were matters of private law, while the adhikarana. which seems to have
exercised criminal jurisdiction, would correspond to the kantaka-sodhana. We may hazard
a guess that a closer examination of epigraphy in other states and periods might reveal this
distinction between the two types of jurisdiction, a distinction which in any case emerges
from the very nature of the matters in question.
^Cf, amongst others. A/., IX.275 : 'On those who rob the king's treasury and those who
persist in opposing (his orders), he shall inflict various kinds of capital punishment (or
'shall strike with various penalties', vividhair danda ih), likewise on those who conspire
with his enemies'. Kätyäyana (s. 956): Those who imitate the king in his appearance,
those who amuse themselves (when they should be working), those who extort excessive
revenue, and those who steal the king's wealth should be punished with various corporal
punishments (präpnuyur vividham vadham)'.
«Käne, III, 399^06.
84Moreover we should note that Visnu, V.71 lays down that the king should never release
from fetters one who has put out a person's eyes : yävajjivam bandhanän na muncet, which

--- PAGE 264 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
243
This liberty to fix the penalty marks the last difference between the
praklmaka and private litigation. This difference is easily explained.
In a case between litigants, following the analysis which our writers
make, the plaintiff addresses himself to the king either to obtain restitution
of what belongs to him or the payment of what is due to him, or to obtain
compensation for a wrong done to him (often in the guise of a fine).
There we have objective elements which, if the claim is properly proved,
leave little room for the judge's discretion. On the other hand when it
is a question of chastising a culprit, the fixing of the penalty, depending
on the circumstances and the gravity of the offence, must naturally be
much more flexible. It is even more flexible for the fact that there is no
precept of general application, analogous to our maxim nulla poena
sine lege (no penalty may be inflicted without authority of law), and
therefore, as contrasted with the laws of today, the powers of the judge
are much less restricted.
5. Private Litigation
By "private litigation" I mean the disputes capable of being brought
by individuals before a court. These are classified by Manu under eighteen
heads or titles generally called vyavahära-pada or viväda-pada. The names
given to these titles, such as recovery of debts, restitution of deposit,
sale by a non-proprietor, rules between associates (or partners), with-
holding of things donated, sound very much like jurisdictions. It would
be a mistake, however, to see in the enumeration a closed list of actions
viewed procedurally, within which the plaintiff must file his suit in order
to have access to a court. In reality Manu's enumeration, taken up by
the majority of writers with a few variations, aims at an analysis of the
subject-matter of litigation viewed objectively. These are different funda-
mental topics which can present themselves before a judge, not different
forms which an action can assume. There was nothing in common here
with the formulae of actions in the classical Roman law. In addition, even
though in modern times the law Has lost a great deal of its ancient forma-
lism, there was nothing comparable even with the procedural differences
which we still recognise, for example, between a real action and a personal
action in continental jurisprudence, or between a panchayat case and a
case in a civil court or between a civil cause and a revenue matter in
Indian law.84a Of course the dharma-sästras provide rules of procedure
(grouped usually under the name vyavahära-mätrkä), but with rare
exceptions they are rules of general application. Even in the exceptional
is equivalent to imprisonment for life. The next sütra allows the king the alternative of
imposing a retaliatory punishment. By contrast Kaut. (IV.9.22-7) has many rules on the
management of prisons.
8«a[trs.]

--- PAGE 265 [DIRECT] ---

244 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
cases we find no definition or limitation of the action. The plaintiff is
free to move the court as soon as his action fulfils the basic conditions
required to found a vyavahära.
Yäjnavalkya (II.5) defines a vyavahära-pada: "when a person, having
been injured (ädharsita) by others in a manner contrary to smrti or
äcära, submits a complaint to the king".85 This definition highlights
three elements: the violation of a rule prescribed by the sästras or by a
customary rule; the existence of injury or damage resulting from that
violation; and finally the victim's plaint.
Violation of a rule of dharma does not suffice by itself to constitute
a case. For this particular (or "special") damage must have ensued from
it. Likewise infractions of rules of conduct making up what we have
called Good Custom do not as a general rule damage anyone. The culprit
is bound to expiate his sin. which is another matter. He can be compelled
to do this by social pressures. The king, for his part, can intervene to
secure the performance of penance, and even add to a penal sanction
if he thinks it appropriate. On the other hand, every case presupposes
an injury unjustly suffered by the plaintiff. It may well be that the wrong
of which he complains is equally a sin on the culprit's part, and that
the latter is liable to penance. But this has nothing to do with the litigation,
which is brought before the court by the plaintiff with the sole motive
of being compensated for the damage he claims he has suffered. In other
words the plaintiff acts in his own interest to obtain satisfaction and
not in the interests of the social or moral order. To use the style of the
interpreters, the cause of the action started by the plaintiff is not the
invisible effect of the adharmic act complained of, but its visible effect.
The predominantly interest-orientated character of private litigation
equally distinguishes it from the matters which make up prakirnaka.
In the latter it is public order or the authority of the king which are thought
to be threatened or infringed, and not simply the interests of an indivi-
dual. That is why the king, invested as he is with the general duty of
protection, can take them up on his own initiative. It can happen that
an infringement of private rights can also be held to be an infringement
of public order, and that the king has already decided to punish it. There
we shall find the case instituted by the plaintiff joined by a proceeding
carried on in the name of the state and tending towards the application
of a penalty. But these two cases, though simultaneous, will remain
governed by their own rules. It is known that the general evolution of
criminal law tends to substitute crimes for torts, to take away the satis-
faction of vengeance from the victim in order to transfer that concern
to the state. Hindu law never followed out that evolution completely,
^smrtyäcära-vyapetena 
märgenädharsitah paraih, ävedayati ced räjne vyavahära-padam
hi tat.

--- PAGE 266 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
245
and the victim of a tort is often allowed to claim, personally, that penalties
should be imposed on the alleged tortfeasor. But the penalties are inflicted
by the state; when a fine is in question that passes, as a general rule, to
the king. On the other hand it is not rare for the tort, irrespective of the
sanctions relative to it in private law, to figure equally amongst the matters
which the king may take cognizance of on his own initiative. Instead
of the substitution of a crime for a tort—which would mark the end
of the evolution of the law—we are confronted by two parallel solutions,
not conceived of as cumulative. Here there are difficulties in matters
of detail into which we cannot enter. Probably they emerge from the
existence of rules belonging to very different periods within our sästras.
The injury for which the plaintiff demands reparation and which is
the real cause of the suit, can be of two kinds, depending upon whether
it affects the goods or the person of the plaintiff. Brhaspati (11.5) and
Kätyäyana (i/.3O) develop this distinction to divide private litigation
into two big categories: those whose object is to render to the plaintiff
what it his due, and those which aim to have a penalty inflicted. Some
have thought they could see in this the germ of the distinction which
modern law makes between civil and criminal cases.86 But, apart from
the fact that civil matters include other disputes as well, which do not
involve goods, one should not confuse the matters ranged in the second
class with our criminal causes, because the punishment of the culprit is
demanded by the victim himself by way of reparation for the evil, physical
or moral, which he has undergone. It is really a question of torts,87 a
class which has tended to be drastically reduced in modern laws, which
invest the state with large powers to suppress wrongs against the citizen.
However it must be agreed that the transitional law which the law of
the sästras really is does not always make a clear distinction, as between
private wrongs and public wrongs, and the elements of both tend to be
confused.88
86Käne, III, 258-9.
^Delits prive's. It will be recollected tlfat in common-law jurisdictions exemplary and
even punitive damages may be obtained in the case of certain torts. See, for an example,
Loudon v. Ryder All England Reports 1953, Vol. 1, 741 (Court of Appeal), and for the
principles Rookes v. Barnard All England Reports 1964, Vol. 1, 367 (House of Lords);
McCarey v. Associated Newspapers All England Reports 1964, Vol. 3,947 (Court of Appeal),
followed in India in R.K. Karanjia v. Krishnaraj (1969) 72 Bombay Law Reporter. 94;
and for the broader Australian view Australian Consolidated Press v. Uren All England
Reports 1967, Vol. 3, 523 (Privy Council). Cassell & Co. v. Broome All England Reports
1972, Vol. 1, 801 (House of Lords), [trs.]
88Taking in account texts which place in a special class certain types of cases because
of the gravity of the offenses in question, L. Rocher, 'Ancient Hindu Criminal Law', J.O.R.
24 (1955), 15-34, concludes that that distinction amounts to the one which we make between
criminal and civil cases. It seems natural that the gravity of the offense should have served
as a criterion for some dharmasästra writers to classify different types of cases. However,
we may note that such a criterion does not lead to a demarcation between the penal and

--- PAGE 267 [DIRECT] ---

246 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
It is the king's responsibility to secure to his subjects an equitable
solution of the disputes that arise between them. According to Närada
(Int.,1.1-2) the royal function was created in order that an end should
be made to quarrels caused by the liberation of passions, the king alone
having the power to punish (he is the danda-dhara). He is responsible
for the organisation of justice, and he should supervise its efficiency
throughout his kingdom.
Jurisdiction seems to have been largely decentralised and even dissemi-
nated amongst many elements in the population. Every body of persons
exercising a particular activity seems to have been invested with the
legal right to hear disputes between its members. "Cultivators, artisans,
artists, money-lenders, guilds of merchants, dancers, those who wear
the signs of a religious order, and thieves", says Brhaspati (1.26), "should
arrange their affairs following the rules of their profession".89 This
clearly refers to a competence limited to matters which call conventional
usages into play. But a more general competence is attributed to bodies
called kula, sreni, gana, or püga, on the composition of which the inter-
preters differ (Kane, III,pp.280-281). We are not better informed on
their powers, even if it appears that, as Brhaspati says (1.28), they cannot
decide cases involving serious crime (sähasa). These jurisdictions are
probably of customary origin, and the dharma-sästras only confirm
their existence, submitting them to the king's control. They do not ad-
minister justice by virtue of delegation from the king (though in some
historical instances he may have confirmed or defined their powers),
but by virtue of their own power which is organically attached to the
very existence of the body itself.90 On the other hand there is a hierarchy
the civil, for all litigation in Hindu law was then considered as resting upon damage suffered
by the plaintiff, indeed what we call a tort: to repudiate a debt or to refuse to return a
deposit (Käty. 28, 35) are torts, just as are misappropriating the goods of another or offering
violence to his person. By misusing our juridical categories we could liken the first two
examples to civil cases—wrongly, for they are in reality penal matters like the last two
examples. Proof of this lies in the penalty which falls upon the debtor or depositary against
whom the debt or the deposit's reality is established (A/., VIII. 139, 191-2). Yet certain
of these offences can only be tried at the suit of the victim, while others can be taken up
by the king ex officio. Vardhamäna (end of the fifteenth cent.) relies on this technical criterion
to delimit the scope of his treatise on 'criminal' law, the Dandaviveka. This author's outlook,
reported at the end of the article cited above, only reflects (in my view) an opinion which
was traditional during the period of the commentators.
89 A similar rule appears at Gautama XI.21 : 'Cultivators, merchants, shepherds, money-
lenders, and artisans (are authorised to lay down rules) for their respective bodies.'
90The question has been discussed ä propos of Yäjn., II.30a: nrpenädhikrtäh pugäh
srenayo 'tha kuläni ca. Some commentators relate nrpenädhikrtäh, 'appointed by the king',
to the following words and conclude that the pügas, srenis, etc., derive their judicial powers
from the king. But Vijnänesvara sees in the nrpenä- royal judicial officers, distinct from
the pügas, srenis, etc. This interpretation is corroborated by analogous texts of När., 1.7
(cited below) and Brh. 1.93.

--- PAGE 268 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
247
amongst them, the srenis having an authority superior to the kulas, and
the pügas (or ganas) to the srenis {Yäj., 11.30; När., Int.,1.7; Kät., 82).91
Further, Vijnänesvara (Mit., on Yäj., II.30) shows that there could
be an appeal from one to another, and this right seems expressly confirmed
by Brhaspati (1.29-30).
However, what Medhätithi says in his commentary on Manu VIII.2
(in the course of which he cites När., Int.,1.7) on the relations between
the three jurisdictions hardly corresponds to what we understand by
the word "appeal". For him kula means a family group. When the mem-
bers of the family have given judgment on a dispute submitted to them,
their decision (he says) must be observed precisely. But if there is reason
to fear that they might be partial towards one of the parties, perhaps
because they are more closely related to him than to the other, the case
should be submitted to the sreni (guild of persons exercising the same
profession). This group, says Medhätithi, has more authority than the
body of relations, for the latter, for fear of hurting family sentiments,
might hesitate to be severe with one who has left the right path. The
members of a sreni, however, have nothing to fear beyond being sum-
moned before the king, which would give royal officials an excuse to
interfere in their group's affairs. Thus they always take precautions to
secure the performance of their sentence before proceeding to look into
the dispute, precautions consisting in exacting surety from the parties
to pay a fine, should the decision which will be passed not be observed,
or to have it executed. This commentary by no means suggests a revision
by the sreni of a decision passed by a meeting of relations. What follows
seems to be no more than an estimate of the authority of a decision ren-
dered by a gana (which Medhätithi visualises as a body of builders or
temple-Brahmins), the superiority of that decision over that of a sreni
amounting to this, that the members ot&gana would always act collecti-
vely.
So it seems, at least in Medhätithi's opinion, that the kulas, srenis
and ganas form independent jurisdictions, each subject directly to the
sole control of the king.92 Apart from that, it is difficult to see what
jurisdictional relation there could be between gatherings of such different
compositions. It is probable, as Colebrooke thought,93 that their essential
task was to arbitrate between their members and that a body called
91 När., 1.7 ( — Kät., 82): kuläni srenayas caiva ganäs cädhikrto nrpah, pratisthä vyavahä-
ranäm gurv ebhyas tüttarotaram. 'The kulas, srenis,ganas, a person appointed (by the king),
and the king are invested with the power to hear cases; each following one is more important
than those that precede.'
^It is incumbent on the king, according to Yäj.. I.361, to watch and see that the kulas,
jätis, srenis, and ganas do not swerve from duties, and to punish them if they do swerve
from them. A fortiori this supervision must extend to their bodies' judicial functions.
93Miscellaneous Essays, I. 492.

--- PAGE 269 [DIRECT] ---

248 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
"superior" could take cognizance only when the parties agreed to commit
their dispute to its final award.
These jurisdictions of customary origin were linked with jurisdictions
created by the king himself by means of a method of review which we
can generally liken to an appeal. Following Kätyäyana (i/.496), "when
(a plaintiff) is not satisfied (samtosam na gat ah) with the decision, even
though it be passed by a kula or another (jurisdiction), the king should
reexamine the case and reform any error in the judgment". An analogous
text is attributed to Pitämaha (Dh. k., p. 62). The path was apparently
wide open, since it was sufficient that the appellant was not satisfied
with the decision that had been passed (whether for or against him).
Brhaspati (1.2-3), however, distinguishes four sorts of courts (sabhäs) :
those that are stationary (pratisthä) i.e. permanently established in
a town or village: those that are itinerant (a-pratisthä) : those which
are presided over by a judge entitled to use the royal seal (mudritä);
lastly those which are presided over by the king in person. The first seem
to correspond to the kulas* srenis, etc., which we have just considered.
The second seem to be special jurisdictions for populations living in
forests, for soldiers, and the complements of caravans (Brh., 1.25). The
last two refer to royal courts. Kulas and other analogous bodies are not
institutions specialising in the administration of justice. Their function
as judicial organs eludes us completely. We can only presume that they
played the role of an arbitrator and tried above all to bring the parties
to an arrangement. Failing to arrive at an agreement, the parties could
in any case move to the court of the king.
The king's court is the only court whose jurisdiction is dealt with
by the dharma-sästras, the only one for which their rules relative to the
composition of the tribunal, the procedure, or even the deciding of cases,
really apply. The king is indeed the supreme judge in his realm, and
is held as a matter of duty to protect his subjects and to warrant that
their disputes shall be settled justly. It is reasonable that he should be
guided and counselled by the srarf/-writers in the exercise of that impor-
tant part of the royal function for which, however, he alone must shoulder
the responsibility.
The king's court must have had a single jurisdiction throughout the
kingdom, but we are not prevented from supposing that the important
towns had officials to whom the king delegated his powers of judicature
by commission.94
94Perhaps this is what the mudritas of Brh., 1.2-3 are. And perhaps some allusion is
made to these provincial judges in Pitämaha (Dh. k., 62): gräme drstah puram yäyät pure
drstas tu räjani, *what has been decided in the village goes to the city, and what has been
decided in the city goes before the king', unless, of course, one sees in the city a court com-
posed of citizens (which remains quite hypothetical).

--- PAGE 270 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
249
The king's court is normally composed of the president (prädviväka,
adhyaksa) and three judges or assessors (sabhyas), all four appointed
by the king, the first being chosen preferably from amongst Brahmins,
and none from amongst Südras (M., VIII.9; Yäj., II.3; Kät., 67). In
principle, the king should be present at the hearings daily, for he alone
has the right to punish. When he takes his seat he should be accompanied
by the purohita, ministers and Brahmins (A/., VIII.1-2; Yäj., II.1). And
the Brahmins, even when they are not appointed by the king, have the
right to be present at the hearing and to express their opinions.
The king should never decide a case alone; he should always take
the opinions of his counsellors (Gaut., XII.48): i.e. he can only decide
a matter falling within the scope of private litigation when he is in open
court. According to Brhaspati (1.6), "the president pronounces [the
sentence], the king chastises, the judges look into the merits of the case".
And Närada (I.35) seems to say that the king must follow the opinion
of the president (prädviväka-mate sthitah).95 If the decision is unjust,
the fault, i.e. the sin, falls equally on the culprit who has been acquitted,
the witnesses, the judges, and the king (M., VIII.18). Moreover the duty
of the judges is to make the king resile from an opinion which they believe
to be wrong. When they have advised him in this sense, they are no longer
responsible for the decision he will take (Kät., 77).
Such rules show that if the king is really master in the judgment he
is morally bound in a very strict sense by the precepts of the smrti. Giving
justice is equivalent, say Manu (VIII.306) and Yäjnavalkya (I.359),
to performing a sacrifice capable of procuring the highest spiritual bene-
fits. Brhaspati repeats this formula on several occasions (1.5,11 ;II.42,
and Aiy., 1.55) and does not hesitate to identify a law-case (vyavahära)
as a sacrificial act (yajfia). "In the sacrifice Visnu is the object of worship,
in the case, it is the king. The plaintiff who wins his suit is (equal) to the
sacrificer (yajamäna) and he who loses is like the victim (pasu, sacrificial
animal). The plaint and the defense are (like) clarified butter, and the
grounds of the plaint (pratijnäj like a vegetable offering (havis). The
Vedas are here the sästras, the judges the priests who officiate (rtvij),
and the fine resembles the ritual fees (daksinä)" (Aiy., I.118-119). Just
as if he were performing a sacrifice, the king ought, then, scrupulously
to observe the rules laid down by the texts. He is bound by the terms
of the sästras like a sacrificer by the ritual-manual. "It excludes from
heaven; it ruins the country; it brings on danger from enemy armies;
it destroys the germ of life- so does the decision which kings take on
their own when a text exists [having a bearing on the case]" (Kät., 44).
When the king is hearing a case between two litigants the essential
95Gautama XI.25 also says that in a difficult case the king should consult the Brahmins
who are learned in the Vedas and follow their counsel.

--- PAGE 271 [DIRECT] ---

250 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
quality required of him is impartiality. "When the king is seated on the
justice-seat (dharmäsana), let him be devoid of passion, equal towards
all, performing the vow of Vivasvat (Yama, the god of the underworlds,
who fixes the destinies of the dead according to their past actions, good
and bad)", prescribes Närada (Int., 1.34). For his part, Yäjnavalkya
declares (II. 1), kThe king, free from anger and greed, should give justice
assisted by learned Brahmins, in conformity with the (precepts of) treatises
of dharma". And Vijnänesvara, commenting on the words "free from
anger and greed" remarks that this is a special injunction (ädarärtham)
and not a mere formality. Having the role of an arbiter between' his
subjects, the king no longer has the liberty of decision which he has in
other affairs of his kingdom where the interests of the state are involved.
This is in Medhätithi's mind when, commenting on the word dharmäsana
in Manu VIII.23, he writes "When he sits on the throne [i.e. when he
takes up affairs of state], the king considers art ha, contributing as it does
to the prosperity of the realm, as the most important element in preference
even to dharma; but if his function is to settle litigation it is dharma
which he regards as the most important thing".
However the king must always seek out the truth and make sure that
he does not come to a hasty judgment. Moreover no legal rule may be
applied until he has obtained complete familiarity with the matter.
"Having rejected all chicanery (chala), the king shall decide according
to the real state of the facts; for even a well-founded claim, if not properly
presented, can miscarry in the course of the hearing", says Yäjnavalkya
(11.19). Brhaspati (11.12) says more neatly: "A judgment should not
be passed in reliance upon the text of the sästras alone, for a trial [of
the case] without taking account of the circumstances of the case leads
to a loss of dharma [an injustice or a sin]".96 And Brhaspati, in the follow-
ing verse, alludes to the classic story of the hermit Mändavya {Mahäbh.,
Ädip., eh.116)—to which Närada also refers (Int.,1.42)—,who was
unjustly condemned for theft on the sole basis of a legal rule presuming
to be the thief him in whose possession stolen objects are found.
On the other hand, the plaintiff in private suits undertakes the action
only with the object of obtaining satisfaction from the other party. He
acts in his personal interests. Thus, in reality, the trial presents a complex
character, since the rules of the sästras are invoked to someone's profit.
If it puts in issue superior interests as well, such as those of the state
or of the throne, the conflict is no longer merely between a rule of dharma
and a rule of artha, but between two opposed orders of interest. One
can only imagine that the rule of dharma would remain in suspense.
96kevalam sästram äsritya na kartavyo vinimayah, yukti-hlne vieäre tu dharma-hänih
prajäyate. On the sense of yukti in this verse, see my 'Les quatre pieds du proems'. J.A..
1962. 502 n. 18.

--- PAGE 272 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
251
The texts on procedure dealing with the validity of the plaint have
the effect of limiting the exercise of judicial action in response to motives
of an entirely political character. According to Brhaspati (Aiy., 11.13,
32.43; the last two verses are attributed to Härita also), the action cannot
be started (anädeya) in three cases; firstly, when it is opposed (to the
interests) of a city, a village, or high personalities (pura-gräma-mahäjana-
virodhinj; secondly, when it is directed against the interests of the in-
habitants of a town, of all the realm, or of one of the constituent elements
of the state (paura-virodha-krd rästrasya vä samastasya 
prakrtinäm
tathaiva ca); finally, when it is barred by the king (räjnä apavarjita).
Kätyäyana (sl. 136) likewise prescribes that a plaint should be rejected
if it is opposed (to the interests of) the state (rästra-viruddha),91 or barred
by the king (räjnä vivarjita). Explaining this last case, Aparärka says
that there might be a royal order to the effect that "in my realm there
should be no dealings in rupees" (and a plaint assessed the damages
in rupees). Mitra-misra cites instances when the plaint refers to taxes
or other revenue which are the monopoly of the king. In other words
this cause of a plaint's being rejected would operate when it is contrary
to an order previously given by the king. This no doubt minimises the
significance of the expression.98 It really seems that the king is generally
able to bar from the courts any plaints which he thinks could interfere
with the peace or injure the interests of the state or even the mere prestige
of the administration.
Texts which are more or less ambiguous are found to introduce the
consideration of art ha, here understood in the sense of utility, what is
opportune, into the discussion of matters coming before the king's
court. First of all there is the enigmatic verse of Manu (VIII.24) where
it is said that the king "arthänarthäv ubhau buddhvä dharmädharmau ca
kevalau shall examine all the cases of the litigants according to the order
of varnas". The meaning of the first line, which I have left here untransla-
ted, is difficult. Three interpretations are offered by the commentators
according to the importance which they attach to the word kevalau
("alone", in the dual number).99
97There is a similar rule at När., Int., H.12.
98The interpretation adopted by the commentators at least eliminates the notion that
räjnä vivarjita could have meant a plea which the king had already considered and rejected,
i.e. res judicata.
"This difficulty is reflected in the diversity of the translations: 'Considering that which
is advantageous or noxious, and adhering principally to recognition of what is legal or
illegal ...' (Loiseleur-Deslongchamps's version rendered into English : Sir William Jones
had 'Understanding what is expedient or inexpedient, but considering only what is law
or not law ...'); 'Considering what is useful or not useful, and what is in itself right or
wrong ...' (Burnell and Hopkins); 'Knowing what is expedient or inexpedient, what is
pure justice or injustice . ..' (Bühler); 'Considerant ce qui est utile et ce qui ne Test pas,
et surtout ce qui est juste et injuste . ..' (Strehly); and 'Understanding both 'desirable'
and 'undesirable' to be only 'justice' or 'injustice' . . .' (Jhä).

--- PAGE 273 [DIRECT] ---

252 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
According to Räghavänanda it would be suitable to translate: "Know-
ing that dharma and a-dharma alone are artha or anarthd\ i.e. knowing
that dharma alone is desirable and adharma alone undesirable, the king,
etc
Kullüka thinks that the sense should be: knowing what is artha and
anartha and also what is dharma and adharma. i.e. understanding the
importance of dharma and the less importance of artha, or realising what
is advantageous and what is not, but giving attention to dharma alone,
since it alone can enable one to acquire spiritual merit, the king, etc...
These first two interpretations assume the priority of dharma over
artha. The king should know which solution would be advantageous
for the litigants, but he should always render his decision in conformity
with the precepts of the sästra.
But we are free to ask why Manu wishes the king to weigh up the
interests involved if at the end he is bound to conform himself to the
legal rules. Thus Medhätithi suggests a third interpretation which has
some subtlety. When a solution is highly desirable and opportune, but
contrary to the legal rules, if the element of a-dharma, i.e. failure to
observe the rules of smrti, could be regarded as of little importance,
then the king should hesitate to pass a decision which would be inoppor-
tune, for it is possible to make good the breach of the precepts of the
säst ras by means of charitable acts or expiatory rites. In other terms
a light sin, deliberately committed and which could easily be expiated,
can be useful in the administration of justice. The strict observance
of the texts could lead to an undesirable condemnation. This interpreta-
tion goes further than the verse of Brhaspati (11.12), analysed above,
which criticises a judgment founded on the literal sense of a text merely
because it has been given without a complete acquaintance with the
facts of the case. Here the case has been properly prepared and the text
has been deliberately set aside for reasons of mere convenience. This
makes us think of similarities with the texts of Manu himself (IV. 176)
and of Yäjnavalkya (I.156) who recommend setting aside precepts of
the sästras when these would be "odious to the world". Here, as there,
failure to observe the rules is due to the intervention of the notion of
artha. But, given the litigation, it is for the king to raise this question,
fluid if there ever was one and fit to justify the worst injustice, but also
fit to make equity triumph.
Närada (Int., 1.37) (a verse also attributed to Brh., Aiy., I.I 11) seems
to be even more categorical than Manu (if we follow Medhätithi's inter-
pretation) when he enjoins the king carefully to avoid transgressing
either the precepts of dharma or those of artha.100 But. two verses further
lQOdharmasästrärthasästräbhyäm avirodhena yatnatah, sampasyamäno nipunam vyavahära-
gatim nayet.

--- PAGE 274 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
253
(Int., 1.39) he requires the king, in case of conflict between the two kinds
of precepts, always to follow those of dharma, thus returning to the
orthodox doctrine (Yäj., II.21). Meanwhile Kätyäyana (32) also attri-
butes an equal role to dharma and artha in judging cases, when he declares
that "the science of dharma and that of artha are the two principal bran-
ches (skandha) of the trial, of which victory or defeat (of the parties)
are the fruit."101
Of the Brahmins who assist the king in the administration of justice
the same author (Kät., 57) requires not merely that they shall know the
meaning of the precepts of the sästras well (dharma-sästrärtha-kusala)
but also that they should be versed in the science of artha (artha-sästra-
visärada). They must join a sense of utility to juridical rigor. It is true
that Väcaspati Misra (Vyav. eint., 9.4) citing the verse of Kätyäyana,
observes that the precepts of artha should not be taken into consideration
unless they do not conflict with those of dharma. And Aparärka, comment-
ing on the word mantra-jna ("expert in giving counsel") by which Manu
(VIII.1) qualifies the Brahmin counsellors of the king, admits that the
word means artha-sästra-jna ("versed in the science of artha"). He adds,
however, that the Brahmin who is charged with the trial of cases should
not put into practice the resources of the science of artha beyond the
point where they cease to be compatible with the precepts of the science
of dharma.
To sum up: the ideal aimed at by these writers, as by judges of all
times, was to manage to reconcile the demands of justice with the concern
for equity (or expediency). Medhätithi, commenting on the same word
mantra-jna, gives an example of the kind of advice which the king could
expect from his Brahmins. Let us suppose, says he, that someone has
commenced a suit against a client of the prime minister and that it appears
to the trial court that he might well win his case. If the minister's protege
were not held to lose the case or were not compelled to comply with the
judgment the administration of justice would be faulty and the king's
subjects would not fail to accuse the king of either partiality or weakness.
On the other hand if the minister's dependant were cast, that would
grieve his patron and could provoke unrest in its turn. Under such condi-
tions, if those who are in charge of the hearing are really mantra-jna,
they would adjourn the decision on some pretext and would inform the
king of the situation, with the suggestion that he should urge the parties
to come to some compromise. Thereupon the king would tell the prime
minister that his man was on the point of losing his case, that a respite
had been arranged simply to save his (the minister's) prestige, and that
it was up to him to arrange matters so that his protege would escape
{Oldharmasästrärthasästre tu skandha-dvayam udährtam, jay as caiväsäyas ca dve phale
samudährte.

--- PAGE 275 [DIRECT] ---

254 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
judgment being given against him. The prime minister would of course
follow the king's advice, and thus both artha and dharma would be satis-
fied.
That Medhätithi finds it quite natural and even recommends such
an intervention on the king's part in the course of a trial gives food for
thought. One has no difficulty in imagining what abuses could flow from
the advice to try to reconcile dharma and artha, valid as that might seem
to be in principle.
Once the case has been heard the decision which puts an end to the
case should follow as a matter of course. According to Brhaspati (11.24)
there are two cases in which the king should decide himself, i.e. in which
the judges are bound to refer to him. The first is where adequate proof
is wanting (pramäna-rahita). The same case is foreseen by Pitämaha
(Dh.k., p.105): "In default of a document, possession and witnesses
and when recourse to an ordeal is not to be thought of, the king is the
authority, for all the doubtful points in a case are elucidated by him"
and by Vyäsa (Dh.k., p. 106) who, having enumerated the different sorts
of proof declares, "When they are wanting, the order of the king is the
mode of decision".102
The king is equally to be appealed to to cut the knot, according to Brhas-
pati (11.24) when "the [precepts of] sästra and the members of the tribunal
are in disagreement (sästra-sabhya-virodhe)". This formula begs some
discussion. Some commentators understand that the king should pass
the sentence when the court is of an opinion contrary to the texts. As
Mitra-misra observes (Vlr.vyav., cited at Dh.k., p.100), the judges are
then exposed to being punished by the king. Perhaps we should translate
the phrase by "in a case of a disagreement between the members of the
court or between the precepts of the sästras". The first hypothesis, in
which the members of the court are divided on the sentence which should
be passed, seems a suitable case for the king's intervention. As for the
second, it is accepted by Väcaspati Misra (Vyav.cint., 719,2-3), who
takes it, perhaps in a somewhat far-fetched manner, from a verse of
102 A verse of Brhaspati (XI11.6). placed under the heading of sale by a non-owner, repeats
the same rule, and provides that in the absence of proof the king should look into the
characters of the parties and give judgment himself on the basis of the degree of confidence
which might be reposed in their words (pramäna-hme väde tu purusäpeksayä nrpah, sama-
nyunädhikatvena svayam kuryäd vinirnayam). In his gloss on this verse Candesvara (Ratnä-
kara quoted by Jagannätha Tarkapancänana, Colebrooke's Digest, London, 1801. I, 507)
advises the king to have recourse to spies to find out the characters of the litigants. This
contamination of 'civil' procedure with forms appropriate to criminal procedure could
be explained by the hybrid character of this type of case : he who sells a thing which does
not belong to him risks the penalty for theft (A/.. VIII, 197-8). Manu himself (VIII. 182)
recommends the judges, in the absence of witnesses, to take the aid of spies to track down
a dishonest depositary of gold who refuses to restore a deposit. Cf p. 240, n. 79 sup.

--- PAGE 276 [DIRECT] ---

DHARMA AND ROYAL ORDINANCE 
255
Kätyäyana (i/.52) upon which he comments as follows: "In a case
where there is a contradiction between two principles or between two
texts, the matter should be settled by an order from the king".103 Thus
the king has the power to determine in the last resort, not only on ques-
tions of fact, but also on questions of law.104
A judgment is definitive as soon as the parties accept it. It is binding
on the king too who can not modify it on his authority alone. According
to Manu (IX.233), "when a case has been heard or a penalty inflicted
[the king] should consider that it has proceeded regularly and he should
never rehear [whatever has already been decided]".105 But it is possible
for a plaintiff or a defendant who has lost a case to obtain a fresh trial
if he thinks it has been decided unjustly (vidharmatah or vidharmanä),
on condition that, should he fail in his review, he will pay double the
fine (När., Int., 1.65; Yäj., II.306).l°6 The case should then be brought
before the king, who, if the appeal succeeds, will make the judges who
are guilty of having judged incorrectly pay the fine (När., Int., 1.66;
Yäj., II.3O5) or who will, according to Manu (IX.234), inflict a fine of
1,000 panas on them.
On the other hand, the king could probably order a fresh trial of his
own motion if he has reason to suspect the judges of having given a
decision vitiated by partiality, cupidity, or fear, in which case the matter
would naturally be submitted to him {Yäj., II.305).
Once the king has passed judgment, whether in the first resort or the
last, the judgment is not susceptible of any review. "That which [kings]
decide, false or true," says Närada (XVIII. 19), "is dharma for the liti-
gants"107 and Pitämaha : "That which has been considered by the king,
good or bad, cannot be put in question afterwards".108 The sentence
he has given establishes in an incontrovertible fashion the truth about
the litigation which came before him. The litigant who won has there-
after an irrefutable proof of his right to the thing he claimed or of the
reality of the damage which he claimed to have undergone. He has only
l0inyäyayoh sästrayor vä yatra virodhas*taträpi räjäjnayä vyavahära ity arthah.
104But we must recollect that, before coming to a decision, the king ought always to
take advice, and that certain texts, mentioned above {Gaut.. XI.25; När., I.35) make it
obligatory upon him to follow the opinion of the judge or of learned Brahmins.
l()5tJritam cänusistam ca yatra kvacana yad bhavet, krtam tad dharmato vidyän na tad
bhüyo nivartayet (Käne, III, 383). I have taken up the most generally accepted interpretation
of this. However, the majority of the commentators take the verse as applying to a judgment
passed by the king's court.
106There are other instances of revision (punarnyäya), especially where the action has
been brought by a person under a disability, or by an unauthorised person, or when the
sentence has been passed by a person incompetent to pass it, etc. (När.. I.45 and Quot.,
1.14), but it does not appear that the case must necessarily be brought before the king.
yad brüyur asat sad vä dharmo 
vyavahärinäm.
drstah kudrsto vä nästi tasya punarbhavah 
(Dh. k.. 62).

--- PAGE 277 [DIRECT] ---

256 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
to produce the king's order which has put an end to his case, that is to
say the judgment, to set aside all other possible means of proof by which
one might attempt to contest his right.109 This is in any case a normal
aspect of the recognised power of the king. All his orders must be obeyed,
not only, as says Brhaspati (1.32), because the intelligence of kings far
surpasses that of other mortals, but because to admit the possibility
of debating such an order would be contrary to the very principle of
the royal function. The force of the judgment rests upon a motive much
more imperious than that which we attribute to res judicata, which has
not, of course, any other foundation than the quite practical need to
put an end to litigation.
Conversely, the judgment is only an order. It could not fix the law!
It could not even serve as an illustration. The interpeters have understood
this well—they whose functions must often have called them actually to
administer justice—since they never cite any judgment given by any his-
torical king in support of their arguments.110 Following the interpretation
allowed by some commentators111 of the verse cited above (p. 225),
Närada even foresees the possibility of the king's revising a judgment
given by his predecessor if he believes it to be contrary to reason.
Although the intervention of the king in judicial matters may be deci-
sive, it brings no new element to interpretation. In settling disputes
between his subjects, the king merely does his duty, which is to secure
order and peace in his realm. This is the office of an administrator and
not a legislator.
Whether räja-säsana means edict or judgment, it is always merely
an expression of the royal policies, which could be inspired by considera-
tions of convenience, opportunism, or equity, of which the king is and
must remain the sole judge. Consequently, we may say that the king's
sentence cannot make any lines of authority.112 It is dharma only for
the two parties to the case (När., XVIII. 19). It cannot leave any trace
in the sphere of the law itself.
109In my view that is the sense and scope of Närada. Int., 1.10: dharmas ca vyavahäras
ca caritram räja-säsanam, catuspäd vyavahäro 'yam uttarah pürva-bädhakah. Cf kLes quatre
pieds . . .\ J.A., 1962, 489-503. For a contrary view, viz. that these four are sources of
law see Derrett, Religion .. ., 148-58.
n°Cf however the case reported by Asahäya on När.. IV.4 (S.B.E. XXXIII, pp. 43-4),
but, in any case, without any historical data and not as a precedent.
ulParticularly Vijnänesvara, Mit., on Yäj.. 11.306, and Väcaspati Misra, Vyav. cint., 17.
112Although we have no surviving examples of this it is not absolutely beyond the bounds
of possibility that decisions of kings known for their sense of justice or their ingenuity
in resolving difficult cases might have been collected and copied into handbooks to serve
as models for judges, if not as precedents in the true sense of that word. Such a possibility
is raised by what will be seen below (p. 271-2).

--- PAGE 278 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION
WESTERN JURIDICAL systems are based on the concept of legality. Whether
strictly speaking a written law or the common law, the law is understood
to express the will of all. Even in cases where it has done no more than
declare the customary law or case law in the form of codes, its imperative
force resides entirely in the popular will or constitutionally established
authority which has sanctioned it, and not in the power of the usage
or custom which lies behind, and has in a sense given birth to, that law.
What is just, within the meaning of those systems, is that which is legal,
i.e. that which conforms to law. What is unjust, and thus irregular and
reprehensible, is that which is illegal, i.e. contrary to law, i.e. to an actual
provision of a law. Law-in-action, which effectively governs relations
between people, is deduced directly from the law. Courts cannot pass
sentences or hand down judgments which are just unless they are also,
in that sense, legal. True enough, the statute or positive law is not the
only source of court-law. Case-law, legal doctrine, even jurisprudence,
which fix or attempt to fix the meaning and importance of statutory
provisions, all play creative roles to various degrees, and there are nume-
rous contexts, particularly in India, in which law is discovered from
custom. But primacy belongs always to the positive law and in particular
to statute. The other sources, even when by no means inconsiderable,
are only subsidiary to it.
This system is the product of a long evolution in the western world,
of which many parts of the "Third World" have inherited much, in
both form and substance, alongside their indigenous systems. It is a
system which fits an egalitarian and individualistic society. The rule
of law is established at the very level of the relations which it purports
to govern. It starts with individuals, and it is a manifestation of their
own picture of the social order.1 If we wanted to find a near counterpart
to this conception in the traditional system of India we should probably
find it in the regulations and "statutes" of corporate bodies and others
such as we have mentioned which, established by the interested parties
^ n the circumstances which led in Europe to the appearance in the fourteenth century
of this individualistic conception of law see M. Villey, Cours d'histoire de la philosophie
du droh, fasc. 2, 'La formation de la pensee juridique moderne' (Paris, 1963). It is impossible
to fail to observe how close to Indian tradition was the doctrine, until then the classical
doctrine, to which that conception is opposed.
257

--- PAGE 279 [DIRECT] ---

258 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
themselves or declaring their customs, fixed everyone's rights and obliga-
tions. No doubt there was positive law there, but it was not legislation
in the proper sense of that word.
The classical legal system of India substitutes the notion of authority
for that of legality.2 The precepts of smrti are an authority because in
them was seen the expression of a law in the sense in which that word
is used in the natural sciences, a law which rules human activity. Everyone
knows that no one can escape from that law. As a result, one must try
his utmost to conform to it. But it has no constraining power by itself.
It puts itself forward, it shows the way which one should follow, but
it does not impose that way.3 Society is thus organised on the model
of itself, with which it is presented, as if it had actually achieved it.
This conception would have ended in a complete divorce between
reality and law, had not the law revealed by the Sages been profoundly
based in the traditions and aspirations of the Hindu world. It is careful
to explain that wherever it cannot conquer custom remains queen. But
custom's triumph by no means diminishes the authority of the law.
It can only fetter the application of the latter, perhaps only for a time.
No rule is really legitimate and finally sanctified until it conforms to that
law.
Further, this conception would have involved or justified a strict
conservatism, incompatible even with the survival of legal realities.
But that law contained within itself a variety of solutions permitting
interpretation to diversify its effects according to plans and periods,
• even going so far as to limit and actually paralyse its application. But
this is also the reason why we can hardly get a grip upon the law-in-action,
for interpretation could not, any more than the law itself, go beyond
proposing itself: it could not be imposed.
The king might well have the right to impose his own decision, and
if it conforms to the law, as he is in duty bound to make it do, it could
be worthy of amounting in some sense to case-law. But to the extent
that it is interpretative—and its interest would have begun and ended
there—it cannot have more value (it indeed has less value) than the
2Autorite, auctoritas. The latter was the power which, added to the act made it perfect.
Cf auctoritas pat rum (the 'authority' of fathers) and, in ancient times, auctoritas tutor is
(the 'authority' of the guardian, as fictitious parent). A. Ernout and A. Meillet, Dictionnaire
e'tymologique, s.v. augeo and its derivatives, especially augur, 'he who gives omens, assuring
the development of an enterprise'.
3'Dharma is a code of conduct supported by the general conscience of the people. It is
not subjective in the sense that the conscience of the individual imposes it, nor external
in the sense that the law enforces it. Dharma does not force men into virtue, but trains
them for it. It is not a fixed code of mechanical rules, but a living spirit which grows and
moves in response to the development of society.' (S. Radhakrishnan, The Heart of Hinduism,
Madras, 1936, 17-18).

--- PAGE 280 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
259
opinion of a qualified interpreter. In reality the office of king is more
complex than the office of judge, because of the duties peculiar to the
ruler. Even though his judgments are really law-in-action, they remain
singular and unrelated, staccato, without any future.
The text of the law floats alone, incessantly worked upon, discussed,
orientated in diverse ways: all we can say of it is that it preserves all
its authority. It would be presumptuous and vain to attempt to draw
from it any picture of the law actually in force at any given period. This
would only be to add one more interpretation to those which have reached
us from the hands of men better placed than we are to evaluate the juridi-
cal solutions which suited each in his own day.
Such a system may well be imperfect in the eyes of a western jurist.
But it presented unquestionable advantages over our system for India,
a country with a population of such diversity. A system founded upon
legality, even assuming it could have found a climate fit to hatch it,
would have involved a veritable legislative chaos. Even if not, it could
only have been maintained by a tyranny which ignored popular reactions
completely. Profiting from maximum flexibility, the Hindu system
sustained the unity of the Indian world, thanks to the undisputed autho-
rity of the law. That unity was unrealisable at a lower level, but was
realised on the higher level in an ideal participation amongst all Hindus.
That ideal received the dynamic imparted to it by faith, by Hinduism
itself, with the result that custom and the written law were inextricably
woven together to give rise to law.
Some scholars feel that it was the need to affirm and to maintain that
faith, when menaced by Islam, which explains how the work of inter-
pretation went on without a break under the rule of the Sultans of Delhi
and the Mogul Emperors. Indeed it is a remarkable fact that, far from
stopping or even bridling the composition of digests or treatises, the
Muslim conquests seem on the contrary to have produced a renewal
of interest in this class of literature. However, it would be going too
far to attribute this renewal simply to the reactions of the orthodox
faithful. Even at the height of Muslim power independent Hindu states
always existed with an almost complete internal autonomy, as vassals
of the Emperor. Looking at works which originated in these states, one
can only wonder at their extraordinary diffusion throughout the whole
country, especially when we think of works like the Viramitrodaya of
Mitra-misra or the Bhagavanta-bhäskara of Nilakantha, written in each
case under the patronage of quite subordinate princelings. On the other
hand many digests, and not the least important of them, were written
in regions directly subject to Muslim rule! It is possible that the curiosity
or spirit of tolerance of a ruler like Akbar will explain how he could
prompt Todar Mai to compose a digest. But it is difficult to imagine

--- PAGE 281 [DIRECT] ---

260 
7 HE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
that he saw nothing in it beyond a literature inspired by the religious
zeal of his minister. In reality the flowering of treatises and digests during
the Muslim period seems to have been due to the need for a renewal
of that literature, or rather for a new effort on the part of interpretation
to adapt the law to the changes that must have come about in Hindu
opinion and manners as a result of the Muslim conquest.
According to K.L. Sarkär,4 if the author of the Mitäksarä adopted
a fully secular concept of proprietary right,5 a possible motive was to
facilitate the application of Hindu succession law by Muslim officials.
Apart from the fact that Vijnänesvara lived in a region and at a period
when Muslim rule was a very dimly apprehended possibility, this sug-
gestion is very debatable in itself. But the idea, taken abstractly, may
not be entirely lacking in relevance. The political ideas expressed by
Candeávara in the Räjaniti-ratnäkara could consist with impressions
produced in the author by the extension of the power of the Sultanate
of Delhi. Nflakantha's ideas on the ruler's property in the soil are thought
to reflect the new situation created by the appearance öf a nori-Hindu
ruler.50 When Muslim rule was consolidated the prolonged coexistence
on the soil of India of two communities each having its way of life must
obviously have led to movements of ideas in the bosom of each, actions
and reactions which must have affected their respective customs, if only
marginally. If it was the mission of Muslim rulers to maintain the presence
of Islam, those Hindus who were versed in the sastras must for their
part have been under obligation to propagate their teaching, not in a
spirit of rivalry or opposition which doubtless would not have been
tolerated, but in order to inform the Hindu population of what, in their
view, were strict duties incumbent upon it, with which no compromise
could be permitted.
Though the Muslim conquests aroused and maintained this renewal
of interpretation, marked by many works of different tendencies, the
very concept of law remained unchanged. The system which the invaders
imported was fundamentally similar to that of the Hindus/so that the
Hindu would firtd it quite natural that it should be applied to Muslims,
while the latter could raise no theoretical objection to the application
of India's classical law to the Hindus. In either case the authority of the
law rested not on the will of those who were governed by it, but on divine
revelation, on the one hand The Koran and the Sunna, and on the other
hand the Vedas and smrti. The Islamic law was applied only to the believ-
4The Mimânsâ Rules of Interpretation, 13.
5This view, endorsed by A.S. Nataräja Ayyar, is an exaggeration, for Vijñpnesvara
had no such intention in general, and in the passages under consideration he was anticipated
by Medhatithi. See Derrett, Religion ..., 141 n. 1 and see also Medhâtithi on Manu IV.226.

--- PAGE 282 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
261
ers, while the law of the sästras was not applicable in its plenitude except
to Hindus. In either system interpretation has the same importance,
and custom holds a significant (if not the same) role, even though in
principle it could not contradict a revealed text. Finally, in either system
the decisions of the courts are not a source of law, and juridical rules
are established by what we would call juridical doctrine.6
The general principles are the same and the two systems look as if
they were made in order to coexist. But still the Hindu system lacked,
over a greater and greater area of territory, an essential element required
in order that it might function properly—the king. In the Muslim system
as in the Hindu the king has no power of legislation. But this restriction
applied only in the sphere reserved for Koranic law. Apart from the
fact that this left him a wide margin, it did not concern the institutions
of conquered countries, which, in his eyes, had only the status of customs.
If Muslim rulers, for reasons of policy analogous to those that inspired
some rules of the sästras, generally respected the customs of their Hindu
subjects, they were certainly not bound to protect them in the same way
as a Hindu king, and they were indifferent to the religious significance
of their practices. The only means which the Indian population retained
whereby it might be reminded of its duties was the Brahmin who, despoi-
led of his privileges, had lost the preeminent place he had occupied in
the state.
But the void left by the removal of the Hindu king had consequences
of the gravest nature in the administration of justice. In both systems,
the mission to keep peace between subjects is the primary function of
the sovereign, and the Sultans, like the Emperors, usually tried zealously
to fulfil this duty. In fact, at least under the reigns of the great Emperors,
the administration seems to have attained a high degree of perfection
for the period. The judicial authority, represented by the Kädi, always
enjoyed in Isalm a great independence vis-ä-vis the administration and
the sovereign himself. But, and here we come to the Hindu system's
first failing, criminal justice which belonged to the sovereign's temporal
authority according to the sästras themselves, passed under the control
of Islam. The Hindus were submitted in criminal matters to the same
regime as the Muslims, like all subjects of the state; and if exception
was made in their favour in respect of crimes which only Muslims could
commit, the breaches made by Hindus, conversely, against Good Custom
ceased to be enquired into and punished in the highest quarter. On the
other hand the Sultans, like the Emperors, generally admitted that the
6On the life of Hindus under Muslim rule see M.B. Ahmad, The Administration of Justice
in Medieval India (Aligarh. 1941); Jadunäth Sarkär, Mughal Administration (4th edn.,
Calcutta, 1952); Ishtiaq Husain Qureshi. The Administration of the Sultanate of Delhi
(4th edn., Karachi, 1958).

--- PAGE 283 [DIRECT] ---

262 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Hindus should remain subject to their laws and customs in matters of
private law, such as family law, inheritance, partition, adoption, and
the like.
But the court of the Kädi, instituted to give justice as between believers,
could only judge according to the Islamic law. Following a practice
employed in Iran by the Abassids, Sultan Iltutmish decided in the thirte-
enth century that, for matters between Hindus (unable to settle their
differences amicably by arbitration), the Kädi should be assisted by
a pandit, to whom he should refer himself in questions of Hindu law,
just as he was assisted by a mufti for questions of Islamic law. But
although the Kädi, who was a professional judge, was versed in Islamic
law like the mufti, by whose advice (by the way) he was not absolutely
bound, he had no knowledge whatever of Hindu law and had no choice
but to rely on the opinion of the pandit. The system thus entailed serious
inconvenience. However it was not universal, and some regions, like
Bengal, seem never to have employed it. Especially in the Mogul period,
there were occasions when, if the dispute was between Hindu notables,
it was determined by the Emperor's own arbitration. But more often
the differences were submitted by the parties themselves to a Brahmin's
decision, or were referred to local jurisdictions. Early on, as internal
politics suggested, the Muslim authorities left local bodies a large measure
of autonomy, not different from that which they enjoyed under the
Hindu rulers. In judicial matters, the control of the central authorities
was only exercised gently, especially because litigants felt some em-
barrassment in appealing before a Kadi's court. As a result the bodies
which the sastras call kula, sreni, etc. took on a great importance, even
though their jurisdiction was reduced to what we may call civil matters
and to penal questions of minor importance. Village assemblies or caste
tribunals, under the name panchayat, became the ordinary courts for
Hindus, gradually usurping the attributes of the state courts and passing
judgments from which there was no appeal. Whether it was arbitration
by a Brahmin, the decision of a caste tribunal, or that of a panchayat,
the law applied was that of the local community, a law based above
all on tradition and precedent, attached more or less laxly to one or
other of the schools of interpretation. What occurred was a sort of locali-
sation, if not sclerosis, of law, an arrested development which was hence-
forth embedded in custom. The Hindu law was no longer that ocean
of texts, incessantly conned over and brewed over by the interpreters.
It was fragmented into a series of islands placed under the government,
direct or indirect, of a particular classical treatise or association of
?Cf U.C. Sarkär, Epochs in Hindu Legal History (Hoshiarpur, 1958), ch. 11 : The history
of village panchayats with special reference to the administration of Hindu law during
the Muslim period', 238-67.

--- PAGE 284 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
263
treatises. Against this legalisation, i.e. conversion into law, of the juridical
doctrine of the interpreter-jurists, which was so contrary to the whole
spirit of the Hindu law, the last of the interpreters protested with com-
mendable vigour.
Muslim rule injured the functioning of the classical system, but it
did not directly attack or subvert it. Thus the system emerged again,
or tended to emerge, as soon as historical circumstances permitted.8
By contrast, the British conquest (for, de facto, conquest it was),
entailed direct attacks upon the Hindu system. In 1772, however, Warren
Hastings had not the remotest intention of touching such fundamental
questions; he thought only of securing a better administration of justice.
At that time in his famous Plan, he laid the foundations for the civil
courts of the Dlwani of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa, which had been granted
to the East India company by the Emperor of Delhi. Hindus and Muslims
remained as in the past under their respective laws. Only the judicial
mechanism was changed, for thenceforward the judgment would be
passed by an English judge instead of by a Kadi. But although this change
was inoffensive to all appearances, it contained in itself, so far as Hindu
law was concerned, a threat to traditional concepts which later develop-
ments and improvements introduced into this system could only aggra-
vate. Whether the English judge followed the opinion of the pandit
in default of detailed knowledge of his own, or whether he had better
information about the juridical literature (e.g. from translations) and
had access to the texts, he could only make his judgment conform to
what he thought was the law. He was a foreigner in India. He was an
organ superimposed upon the living sources of law and exterior to them.
His principal concern was to search out the legal solution. In other words
in his court legality became substituted for authority, a concept which
did not and could not have any meaning for him; and in any case he had
no means of making it work, of giving it voice. His only possible course
was to determine the law as he found it. No doubt this conception, with
which we have become quite Familiar, had its advantages. After the
successive reforms to which judicial administration was subjected, viz.
the creation of the High Courts and the institution of a system of appeals
leading up to the Privy Council in London, the public subject to it received
a surety of certainty and objectivity which at present they could not
better. But these advantages could only be obtained at the price of the
ruin of the traditional system.
Whilst, in the classical system, the judgment had no other object or
effect but to put an end to a dispute brought before the judge, it now
began to constitute a precedent upon which the rule of stare decisis
8Cf the renaissance of Hindu institutions in the Maratha country under Shivaji. V.T.
Gune. The judicial system of the Marathas (Poona. 1953).

--- PAGE 285 [DIRECT] ---

264 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
conferred the status of a source of law. Thus law-in-action,vhich had
not existed except potentially in the sastras and treatises, he:eforward
became extracted and fixed in the case-law of these new curts. It is
beyond our present scope to evaluate that judge-made la in itself.
Very different estimates of its value have appeared.9 The Enjish judge,
grappling with multiple difficulties, could only confer authcity on the
diversity of customs which he found before him and refer, whe possible,
to rules given in a treatise which passed as an authority in the rdon where
he functioned. He could complete the gaps—or his own ignrance—of
the Hindu law with notions borrowed from the only law ith which
he was (in a measure) conversant, namely English law, as he fas in any
case authorised to do.10 What interest us here are the effectavhich the
introduction of the English judicial system was bound to ave upon
the classical system, whatever might be correctness or apprpriateness
of the decisions which emerged from the courts.
The judgment of a Hindu judge left the authority of the iw intact,
always available thereafter for new interpretations. However, íe English
judge called upon to define law, fixed interpretation once ad for all.
The judgment (even if that of a Full Bench), which was bacally only
one of the ways in which the law could be understood, becan at length
its sole valid expression. The commentaries and the digests we treated
as if they were the customals of the continent of Europe, eac of which
used to apply, before codification began, to a particular toitory; at
times they were allowed to exclude each other, and at other tnes it was
as if they complemented each other, although all of them weroriginally
nothing more than diverse forms of interpretation. The latter sill at once
dried up. Further development of law could take place oiy through
the cases. In the classical system the rule of the sacred law bcame the
rule of law-in-action only when it was hallowed by custom, lit custom
as such had no power to legitimate the rule. Opposed to that liv, custom
was external to the court-law and likewise to the judicial decism, which,
as a result, could maintain its susceptibility to change. The Brish courts
also agreed that custom prevailed over the written law, but, ose proved
—and admittedly proof was much more difficult than ha<been the
case previously—it remained a legal rule. It was imposed (1 suitable
^Derrett, Religion ..., ch. 9.
10In 1781, Impey, completing the formula approved by Warren Hastingsjecided that
in the absence of a legal rule the judge should decide according to justice, eqiy and good
conscience, which would be equivalent to leaving the judgment to the disction of the
judge, but the latter naturally was led to refer to the principles of the system n rest to him,
namely the common law. For the formula, 'justice equity, and good conscienc see Derrett
in J.N.D. Anderson, ed.. Changing Law in Developing Countries (London, 963), ch. 7.
For the important role of Impey see B.N. Pânçley, The Introduction of Engh Law into
India (London, 1967). [trs.]

--- PAGE 286 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
265
cases) upon the future, so that the written law ceased to exert any influence
upon it. Thus the reform instituted solely to ameliorate judicial adminis-
tration ended in subverting the traditional system. Intending to reduce
the judge to the status of an interpreter of scriptural law. Warren Hastings
and his successors turned him into a creator of court-law.
Legislation next appeared on the scene, introducing a new element
even more fatal to Hindu concepts. The British took this path only very
gradually. The first legislative measures were passed in the interests
of morality and seem as a whole like police measures: the abolition of
suttee in 1829, the abolition of slavery in 1843; the abolition in 1850
of loss of rights due to exclusion from caste and change of religion;
the validation of the remarriage of widows in 1856. However the British
were not slow to discover that the judicial system which they had impor-
ted could not function well unless an end was put to the uncertainty in
which the judge was often placed as to the law to be applied. The recourse
to codification was suggested early on. Already Warren Hastings himself
had recognised the need for "a well-digested code of laws compiled
agreeably to the laws and tenets of the Mahomedans and Gentoos".11
Sir William Jones and Colebrooke placed great faith in the digests which
they had caused to be produced and which, they imagined, would fix
the Hindu law. But this was to misconceive the power of the interpreter,
and they soon discovered that they had only added several more works
to that imposing literature without having in any way diminished its
authority. It was necessary to wait until the Charter Act of 1833 which,
having set up a single legislature for all India, enabled one to envisage
the utilisation of a parliamentary legislative power. However the British
hesitated for a long time to intervene in the sphere of the personal laws,
thinking that "the Hindoo law and the Mahomedan law derive their
authority respectively from the Hindoo and Mahomedan religion. It
follows that as a British legislature cannot make Mahomedan or Hindoo
religion so neither can it make Mahomedan or Hindoo law."12 It was
only after the government of India was taken over by the Crown in 1858
that, impelled by the Legislative Council, the movement for codification
came into play. The first codes to be issued—and long since revised—were
the Code of Civil Procedure (1859), the Penal Code (1860), and the Code
of Criminal Procedure (1861), dealing with matters relating to the sover-
eign authority and involving, from our present point of view, no innova-
tion.
The first texts touching the private law were called forth by the need
to regularise legal relations which the indigenous practice had not pro-
nSir G.C. Rankin, Background to Indian Law (Cambridge. 1946). 137.
l2Report of the Second Law Commission, 13 December 1855. quoted by Rankin, op. cit.,
158.

--- PAGE 287 [DIRECT] ---

266 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
vided for, such as the Succession Act of 1865, applicable to foreign
communities settled in India whose personal law was uncertain because
of the want of a lex loci, a territorial law. Statutes of 1866 and 1869
belonged to the same class: the first was the Native Converts Marriage
Dissolution Act, the scope of which is sufficiently indicated by its title,
and the second was the Indian Divorce Act, which was intended speci-
fically for Christians. The Hindu Wills Act of1870 only settled and arrang-
ed matters collateral to the practice of making testaments which antedated
the British. The Contract Act of 1872 was inspired above all by the needs
of commerce. The personal law of the Hindus was, as yet, scarcely tou-
ched. But the notion that a statute law, positive law, could be substituted
for the authority of the sastras had made its way into men's minds.
Especially after the First World War, more and more statutes interfered
with a sphere previously exempted, and undertook important reforms
especially in the fields of marriage and succession. Sometimes ahead
of public sentiment, this new legislation could not have managed to
become effectual unless it had had the support of the Hindu public.
In that reservation we find something of an echo of the traditional system.
With the inauguration of a purely Indian legislature, the Union Parlia-
ment which held itself qualified to express the will of the Hindu people,
a definitive change in the nature of statute law ensued. From being a
personal law, with the variability and flexibility which that purported
to ensure, it has become since 1955/6 a territorial law, applying with
few and relatively unimportant exceptions to all Hindus, whatever their
castes and places of origin. It thus responds to that need for uniformity
which all new nations feel if they are to become states in the full sense
of that word. It remains to be seen if this new set of laws, emanating
from an élite, will gain the fullest response from a society which still
lives within traditional frameworks, or whether it will live on outside
society, in the same way as the law of the sastras did but on a different
level, where the unity resolves itself into aspirations which are no longer
religious but political.13
We must turn, now, to Further India, and particularly towards the
Hinduised states of the former Indo-China, if we wish to watch a continu-
ous development of the classical Hindu system which relied for its renewal
upon no resources but its own. True, the ambience was new. It was
that of Hïnayâna Buddhism, the theraväda, of which the Mons or people
of Pegu were the zealous propagandists in South East Asia. In the lands
of Sanskrit culture, Cambodia and Champa, it seems that the Hindu
system was followed in its originial purity, even though it had to undergo
some modifications as a result of the difference of environment. But,
13Derrett, Critique of Modern Hindu Law (Bombay, Tripathl 1970).

--- PAGE 288 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
267
so far as we can discover from epigraphy, the official doctrine conformed
to Hindu orthodoxy.14
The appearance at the Pagan epoch in Burma of a literature composed
locally in Pali by Mon monks on the model of the dharma-sästras in
Sanskrit marks, on the other hand, the first stage of an evolution which
went on until it was exhausted.15 The dhammasattha, of which the Code
of Wägarü gives us an idea, in spite of the late date of the version which
has come down to us, has managed to hazard the introduction or perhaps
rather the conservation of the Hindu system in environments practically
cut off from India and entirely won for the Buddhist faith. That their
authors were inspired by Indian sästras is beyond doubt, for it is evidenced
by their classification of contentious matters into 18 types, corresponding
to the 18 titles of litigation in the smrtis. But, if they were content to
"de-Brahminise" their model and to adapt its rules to the manners and
customs of the public for whom they wrote, manners and customs very
different from those of Indian society which appears through the dharma-
sästras, they only ended by making customals or handbooks of law.
To give to them the authority which the dharma-sästras enjoyed, they
would have had to attach the rules to a supernatural source like the
Veda. The difficulty arose from the fact that the Buddhist religion, the
religion of "renouncers'\ did not contain any revelation on the social
order. The canonical legend of Mahäsammata, the world's first king,
chosen by his people to put an end to discord,16 alone offered elements
of a solution. It must have been tempting to attribute the precepts of
the dhammasatthas to Mahäsammata, who turned out to be a Bodhisattva. •
But Mahäsammata had to remain above all the model of the just king
and could only be the interpreter of the law. Thus our authors, seizing
upon the legend, completed it conveniently. They gave Mahäsammata
a counsellor, the hermit Manu, who plays in his court the role which
the prädviväka does in the dharma-sästras. They imagined that that
Sage was raised into the celestial regions and reached the cakkaväla,
the wall which surrounds the \vorld and which bears, carved in letters
high as a bull, the law which rules it. It is this very text of the law which,
rehearsed from memory by the hermit Manu, is set down in the dhamma-
satthas.
The fable seems to us naive enough. Yet. after all. it is not more so
14Lingat. 'L'influence juridique de rinde au Champä et au Cambodge d'apres Tepigraphie'.
JA., 1949.273-290.
15What follows is a brief resume of my article. La conception du droit dans Tlndochine
hinayäniste', B.E.F.E.O., 1951, 165-87. See also S.P. Khetarpal, 'Debt of Burmese jurists
to Hindu law', Jaipur Law J., 8 (1968), 6-25. [trs.]
16D7#/w Nikäya. XXVII. Aganna Suttanta (Rhys Davids. Dialogues of the Buddha
III. 77 94). On this legend and its relations with Indian traditions see L. Dumont. Kingship
in ancient India'. Contributions to Indian Sociology, 6 (The Hague) (1962). 61 4. J.W.
Spellman. Political Theory of Ancient India (Oxford, 1964), 22.

--- PAGE 289 [DIRECT] ---

268 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
than that which places the precepts of the dharma-sästras in the mouths
of mythical personages. It evidences at least as great an ingenuity as
theirs, for it achieves an exact transposition of the Hindu system to
Buddhist environments. It is clear that the hermit Manu has no more
than the name in common with the Manu of the smrti, even though some
dhammasatthas make out of him a son of Brahma, reincarnated in the
person of a hermit. But it is also evident that the name was not chosen
at random. For the Buddhists, the law of Manu is really the law of the
phenomenal world, that which governs laymen. It is thenceforward
cut from its religious roots, independent of the law which the Buddha
came to teach tó the world. It reveals to men the conditions of social
welfare, while the law of the Buddha reveals to them the conditions of
salvation. Despite this dichotomy, which has remained one of the chara-
cteristic traits of Hînayânist society, the law of the dhammasatthas,
like the law of the sastras, transcends the world which it rules. It also
is bound to the cosmic order and is therefore free from the will of men,
who will live in peace only so long as they obey its precepts. A king like
Mahäsammata himself could introduce no changes into it, and his role
is confined to insuring that it is respected.
Of course the authors of the dhammasatthas, like those of the dharma-
sästras, took a substantial number of the rules which they attributed
to Manu from the facts of contemporary custom. But thereby they
certified its authority. Likewise thereby they condemned or deprived
of all power of expansion those usages which they did not retain, thus
pursuing, though in a different spirit, the work of moral reform which
the dharmasästra writers undertook in Indian society. In environments
which were still corroded and bound down by their customs, they also
introduced a kind of ideal image of their society in which, through frame-
works borrowed from Indian learning, their legal life could be defined
and organised.
The Burmans were for a long time tributary to the Mons in the domain
of law as in the remainder of the cultural sphere. Thus the dhammasat-
thas appeared to them as the dharma-sästras did to the Hindus, as the
expression of a law which was universal so far as concerned the Buddhist
universe, and from which it was natural that they should profit. But
little by little the Mon or Pali dhammasatthas were melted, absorbed in a
prolix production, written most frequently in the vernacular, in which
local traditions held a greater and greater place, and where borrowings
from the Buddhist scriptures became more and more numerous. In
this new guise the dhammasatthas lost their original nature. All repeat
and embellish the story of the marvellous discovery of the text of the
law, and base their precepts on the revelation of the hermit Manu. This
literature is abundant. As in India, the genre has proliferated. There

--- PAGE 290 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
269
is a list enumerating a hundred dhammasatthas composed in Burma,
and forty of them still exist. Like the dharma-sästras, their chronological
succession is uncertain : they copy each other, and also complete and
differ from each other. It is from the totality of them that the rule of law
must be extracted. However, in contrast to the Indian position, the
commentaries are mixed with the texts and do not appear as independent
works until the modern period, when the form of doctrinal treatises
emerges. A "digest" has however been compiled at the request of the
British. But up to our own time the dhammasatthas have remained the
only written law on all questions relating to the personal law of Burmese
Buddhists, even though a project of codification has recently been mooted.
The Burman kings, like the British authorities, took care not to legislate
in the sphere of the law of Manu and confined themselves to their role
as judges. As in the Hindu system, the precepts of the dhammasatthas,
while certainly being authoritative, are not imperative in the manner
of the rules of our codes. They give way before a regularly proved custom.
After the British conquest, the rule of stare decisis has undermined
traditional concepts in attributing to the judicial decision the status
of a legal rule, but this injury has not had the significance which it had
in India.
The Indian conception was adapted by the Mon and Buddhist peoples
and lived on thereafter only upon its own resources. But in Siam it found
its limits. The collection of ancient laws of the Ayuthia period has come
down to us framed in a dhammasattha which provides it at once with
a preface and a table of contents. This dhammasattha, originally written
in Pali, purports to be of Mon origin. It seems to have been known to
the Thai peoples settled in the Menam basin before the foundation
of the Ayuthia kingdom (1350), and it is possible that within its surviving
version many works of the same type have been fused. However that
may be, it is in many respects very close to the Code of Wägarü. We
find there king Mahäsammata and his minister Manu (called Manosära),
and the text is given by rehearsal on Manu's part from what he read
on the wall which surrounds the world. But it marks an important piece
of progress in juridical technique by means of the new divisions and
distinctions which it introduces. For example, contentious matters,
instead of being reduced to the classical 18 titles of law, are classified
under 39 rubrics, 10 being rules of procedure and 29 rules of substantive
law.17 But the most important novelty is the appearance, beside these
fundamental rules (müla-attha), 
of a new source of law, constituted
by the "ramifications of litigation" (säkha-attha), 
i.e. rules derived
from the first. The fundamental rules are those which the hermit Manu
17This subdivision of litigation corresponds to the distinction made in certain Sanskrit
treatises between the mätrkä and the viväda-padas.

--- PAGE 291 [DIRECT] ---

270 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
(or Manosära) read on the cakkaväla and are found set out in the dham-
masaitha. They are the expression of the eternal law which should inspire
Mahäsammata and future kings when giving justice to their subjects.
As for the derivative rules, these resulted, in course of time, from the
application by Mahäsammata and his successors of the principles laid
down in the dhammasattha. They could not be actually enumerated,
although the fundamental rules are necessarily limited in number.
Thus the Siamese dhammasattha recognised in advance that there
may be a legal value in decisions passed by kings in conformity with
its precepts. A procedure is expressly provided for the transformation
of a royal decision into a rule of law. They must be stripped of the features
which gave rise to them, and reduced in abstract terms to the concise
form of the precepts of the law. They could then be added to the text
of the dhammasattha itself under the relevant rubric. It seems that such
a procedure was actually followed during the Ayuthia period at every
change in the reign, when it was entrusted to members of the High Court
of Justice, composed principally of Brahmins versed in the science of
law. The last corpus of the old Siamese laws that has come down to us
presents, therefore, a partially finished codification, in which the derivative
rules of law, forming as many articles, are classified under the various
rubrics of the dhammasattha, after a brief account of the fundamental
rules.
The passage from dharma to court-law is found to have been perfectly
realised. The Siamese code, in its dharmmasattha frame, expressed a
positive law which was applicable immediately. The royal will, in its
capacity as interpreter of the law, developed from the simple order
which it was into a true legislation, even though, at least in theory, the
king had no legislative power properly speaking. The law he laid down
had authority only when it conformed to the dhammasattha precepts,
but that authority was now furnished with coercive power which belonged
to none but the king. The fusion between the two constituent elements
of court-law was completed.
Truly speaking, this evolution of the Hindu system towards a system
having a legislative aspect was already suggested by the dharma-sästras
themselves, insistently warning the king that a judgment is not just
unless it is given in conformity with the precepts of the sastras. Certainly
in the course of the Muslim period, judicial precedents, in so far as
they expressed custom, played an important role in the local courts
(which does notlhean to say that they were always recorded).18 As for
the ancient period, only the Buddhist literature alludes to collections
of judgments intended to facilitate the work of the judiciary. In the
Tundila-jätaka (VI.2.3) and the Tesakuna-jätaka (XVIII. 1) the Bodhi-
I8Gune, op. cit., 68; U.C. Sarkär, op. cit., 251.

--- PAGE 292 [DIRECT] ---

CONCLUSION 
271
sattva compiles a collection of his judgments after the death of the king
of Benares and exhorts the subjects of the kingdom to consult it in the
disposal of their disputes. But one must note that these judgments were
not given by the king as an application of a preexisting law, but by the
Bodhisattva himself, guided by his innate sense of justice. The society
depicted is a society without written law, living solely under its customs,
in fact far removed in this respect from the picture of Indian society
which the smrtis give us. The stories which appear in the Mahä-Ummaga-
jätaka (XXII.9) of sentences passed by the future Buddha throw light
on the usefulness which one might expect of such compilations in a
real society, assuming that the jätakas (the ages of which are not known)
alluded to historical facts.
Mahosatha whilst still a child astonishes the world by his ability to
solve difficult cases. The king of Mithilä, before inviting him to visit,
submits to him a certain number of tests, from which he extricates himself
adroitly. If we leave aside the edifying character which their authors
attached above all to these stories, we find that their principal function
is to highlight the ingenuity of the Bodhisattva when faced with compli-
cated cases, in establishing the true facts, testing the veracity of the parties,
and confounding the culprit by unexpected tricks. In other words, they
aim to teach judges not how to apply the law, but the art, often difficult
enough, of discerning the true from the false and of obtaining an exact
knowledge of the facts of the case. In this way they assist and illustrate
the teaching of the smrtis which exhort the king not to judge lightly
(Yäj., II.19), and to pay careful attention to the presumptions of fact
(A/., VIII.44), not to speak of indirect methods which may be utilised
in criminal matters. But these are only the necessary qualities of per-
specacity which they seek to develop in the judge, qualities needful if
one is to try the case well. When at length the facts are established it
remains to find out under which rule of the sästras they will fall. Then
another intelligence is needed, that of the interpreter.19 There is every
reason to think that, if the Hindu« had ever effectively compiled collec-
tions of "judgments", it would have been the originality and subtlety
of the means employed to justify the decision which would have guided
their choice, and not the correctness of the juridical argumentation.
As a matter of fact the stories in the Jätaka have given rise to a literary
genre which is extremely widespread throughout Southeast Asia and
particularly in Burma, that of the law tale.20 In Burma, collections of
19This division of judicial work between the magistrate-inquisitor and the magistrate
who is the judge is clearly marked in the ancient Siamese procedure, of which it is one of
the most original characteristics. Lingat, 'La preuve dans Tancien droit siamois'. Recueils
de la Soeie'te Jean Bodin, XVIII. La Preuve (Brussels. 1964). 397-418.
20Maung Htin Aung. Burmese Law Tales (London. 1962).

--- PAGE 293 [DIRECT] ---

272 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
judgments (pyat-hton) attributed to various Bodhisattvas (the names
of Mahosatha, Vidhura, Mahätundila occur) or to legendary personages,
have been published to a great number (one lists puts them at 35). They
are evidently fictitious judgments in which the writers display their
imagination and their ingenuity. But there are some serious works
amongst these collections. They are inspired by the Buddhist faith and
effort is made to use the Pali scriptures to complete the law of Manu
or to show its conformity with the law of Buddha. This literature deve-
loped parallel to that of the dhammasatthas and certainly exerted some
influence on the later ones ofthat class. But these works were not a source
of law and can by no means be considered as if they were collections
of precedents. They are simply intended to teach the art of sound judge-
ment to the king, whence the name of räja-sattha is given to them. They
express the science of kingship par excellence, that which teaches the
king to pass equitable judgments. Further, the räja-satthas not only
complete, the dhammasatthas \ they also reinforce their authority by
appealing to Buddhist sources. With the coming of Buddhism, the king
is no longer the mere protector of his subjects. He is also and above
all the protector of the religion and the defender of morality. Let him
become, in turn, interpreter of the precepts of the dhammasattha, and
his judgments will have the double sanctity of the secular law and the
•religious law, and will serve as a model to the kings of the future. The
Manu Kyé, a compilation of Burmese dhammasatthas of the middle
of the eighteenth century, enjoins upon judges, as from the mouth of
Manu, to follow "the decisions of the ancient kings, embryos of Buddha,
and those which have been passed in our days in conformity with the
precepts of the dhammasattha".21 Thus, if the raja-sat tha continues
to lemain distinct from the dhammasattha, the Buddhist conception of
the royal function has led writers to formulae which contain the germ
of the legislative system of modern times whilst maintaining the essentials
of the Hindu system.
2 1D. Richardson, The Dama that or the Laws of Menoo (Rangoon, 1874), 151.

--- PAGE 294 [DIRECT] ---

APPENDIX BY THE TRANSLATOR
M. LINGAT rightly commented on the embarrassment we suffer because
we have so little contemporary information upon how the dharmasästra
was used. Very recently two extremely interesting inscriptions came to
light, which go a long way to resolve some, though not all our doubts.
Stone inscription No. 558 of 1904 of the South Indian epigraphical
collection, an inscription at Tiruvärür, Nägapattanam Täluk, Tanjore
district, which can be dated epigraphically in the twelfth century, and
No. 479 of 1908 at Uyyakon<^an Tirumalai in Trichinopoly district are
concerned with the same subject, namely the status and caste functions
of the Kammälas, who were admitted to correspond to the Sanskrit
designation Rathakäras. The problem, which stemmed from an ambiguity
in the texts of Yajftavalkya and other Vedic and smrti sources, was
submitted to two committees of Brahmins for their decision. The first
inscription has been published (No. 603 of South Indian Inscriptions,
vol. XVII [1964]) and we find that the sources are quoted in extenso,
in a few cases with a Tamil translation, and with a short commentary
giving their effect. A copy of No. 479 of 1908 was kindly provided by the
Chief Epigraphist, Archaeological Survey of India. It appears to belong
to A.D. 1118, and cites Kautilya, while several of the smrti sources used
in No. 558 of 1904 are quoted, so that the two inscriptions are to that
extent alike in style as well as subject-matter.
Amongst smrti sources Gautama, Närada and Yajftavalkya are
referred to. Sarikha is quoted, and so is Yajftavalkya in a form differing
from the well-known printed text. The commentator on Gautama called
Maskari is quoted in No. 558 (but under the name Maskara [sic]). An
unknown verse commentary on Gautama is quoted. The Brähma-
puräna is cited but not quoted. Amongst religious works there appear
the Pancarätra, at least one Vaikhänasa work, and the Bhima-samhitä.
Amongst Saiva architectural works (quoted in No. 558 alongside
Vaishnava treatises) there appear the ägamas known as Kärana, Yogaja
and Suprabheda. The Ägastya-västu-sästra is quoted, also a Västu-
vidyä differing from the printed text, and a Särasvatiya. The remaining
works quoted have not yet been identified : Prapaficottara-vidyä-sütra,
Laksana-pramäna. Prapaftca-tantra, Paiicarätra-käpifijala, and Parama-
purusa-samhitä. The Visvakarmiya, which also is quoted, is evidently a
leading text on architecture.
273

--- PAGE 295 [DIRECT] ---

274 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
The wealth of authority, certified separately by two groups of experts,
led comfortably to the satisfactory conclusion that of the two types of
Rathakäras, the anulomas, born of a respectable (hypergamic) mixture
of twice-born castes, were entitled to Vedic initiation, though without
all the consequences which followed in the three twice-born varnas;
whereas the pratiloma Rathakäras were assigned exclusively to menial
tasks.
The whole affair shows not merely that skilled artisans, obliged to
learn esoteric lore in order to function in the various branches of domestic
and public architecture, were wealthy and important enough to face
a challenge to their status and perhaps to challenge, themselves, the
status of Brahmins, but that at such a juncture they could count on
learned Brahmins to solve the problem with the aid of a mixture of
sästric, religious, and architectural written sources, upon which they
relied literally, but with a commentary of their own authentication.
Such instances dispose at once of the extreme notion, once commonly
heard, that sästric texts never played a practical role, or that if they did.
they did so only when it pleased some individuals to invoke them.1
•Derrett, Two inscriptions concerning the status of Kammälas and the application of
the dharmasastra', Prof. K.A. Nilakanta Sastri 80/A Birthday Felicitation Volume (Madras,
1971), 32-55. On Rathakäras see also U.N. Ghoshäl at Indian Culture, XIV (1947), 26-7.

--- PAGE 296 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY1
TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS
Dharmasütras
Äpastamba : ed. G. Bühler, Bombay Skt. Ser., 3rd ed., Poona, 1932;
with/the comm. of Haradatta : ed. A. Mahädeva Sästri and R.K.
Rangäcärya, Bibl. Sansk., Mysore, 1898; ed. A.C. and AR. Sästri,
Chowkh'ambä Sansk. Ser., Benares, 1932; trans. G. Bühler, S.B.E., II.
Oxford, 1897.
Baudhäyana : ed. E. Hultzsch, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1922; with the comm.
of Govindasvâmin : ed. L. Sriniväsäcärya, Bibl. Sansk., Mysore, 1907;
ed. A.C. Sästri, Chowkhambä Sansk. Ser., Benares, 1934; trans.
G. Bühler, S.B.E., XIV. Oxford, 1882.
Gautama : ed. A.F. Stenzler, London, 1876; with the comm. of Maska-
rin: ed. L. Sriniväsäcärya, Bibil. Sansk., Mysore, 1917; with the
comm. of Haradatta : ed. G. Sästri, Änandäsrama Skt. Ser., Poona,
1931; trans. G. Bühler, S.B.E.. IL 1897.
Sañkha-Likhita : fragments assembled by P.V. Käne, Annals Bhandarkar
Or. Res. Inst., Poona. 1926.
Sumantu : frag. ed. T.R. Chintamani, Journal of Oriental Research
(Madras) 8 (1934), 75-88.
Vaikänasa-dharma-prasna : ed. T. Ganapati Sästri, Trivandrum Sansk.
Ser.. 1913. See also Caland's text (1927) and trans. (1929) of the
Vaikhänasa-smärta-sutra in the Bibl. Ind. series.
Vasistha : ed. A.A. Führer, Bombay Skt. Ser. 3rd edn., Poona, 1930;
trans. G. Bühler, S.B.E., XIV, Oxford, 1882.
Visnu : ed. J. Jolly. Bibl. Ind., Calcutta, 1881; with the comm. of
Nandapandita : ed. V. Krisnamäcärya. Adyar Library Ser., Adyar.
1964; trans. J. Jolly, S.B.E., VII, Oxford, 1880.
Dharmasästras
Angiras : Ängirasa-smrü, collected and reconstructed from citations
in digests at Advar Library Bulletin, supplements to vols. XV-XVII
(1951-53).
Brhaspati : ed. K.V. Rangaswäml Aiyangär, Gaekwad's Or. Ser.,
Baroda, 1941; trans. J. Jolly, S.B.E., XXXIII, Oxford, 1889.
bibliography has been revised by the translator.
275

--- PAGE 297 [DIRECT] ---

276 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Caturvimsati-mata : with the comm. of Bhattoji Dïksita : ed. Devidatta
Paräjuli, Benares Skt. Ser., 1907-8.
Hârïta : ed. and trans, from citations in digests by J. Jolly at Abhand-
lungen der Königl. Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, philos.—
philol. Classe, 18 (1890), pt. 2, 505-24.
Kätyäyana : ed. and trans. P.V. Käne, Poona. 1933.
Manu : ed. V.N. Mandlik. Bombay, 1886; with the comm. of Kullüka :
ed. Jivänanda Vidyäsägara, Calcutta, 1874; ed. Väsudeva L. Pansïkar,
Bombay, 1920 (6th edn.); ed. Gopäla Sästri Nene, Benares, 1935;
with the comm. of Medhätithi: ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts
Ser., Bombay, 1920; ed. Gangänätha Jhä, Bibl. Ind., Calcutta 1932-9;
trans. A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, Paris, 1833; A.C. Burnell and
E.W. Hopkins, London, 1884; G. Bühler, S.B.E., XXV, Oxford, 1886;
G. Strehly, Paris, 1893; G. Jhä (with the comm. of Medhätithi),
Calcutta, 1920-9. Russian trans.: S.D. Elmanovich, St. Petersburg,
1913. Kullüka: ed. B. Goswami, Manusamhita I, II, Calcutta, 1915.
Närada : ed. J. Jolly (with the comm. of Asahäya), Bibl. Ind., Calcutta,
1885; ed. K. Sämbasiva Sästn (with the comm. of Bhavasvämin),
Trivandrum Skt. Ser., 1929; ed. Närayancandra Smrtitïrtha (with a
Bengali trans.), Sanskrit College Res. Ser. 38, Calcutta, 1966; trans.
J. Jolly, S.B.E., XXXIII, Oxford, 1889.
Paräsara : with the comm. of Mädhava : ed. C. Tarkälankära, Bibl.
Ind., Calcutta, 1890-9; ed. V.S. Islämpurkar, Bombay Skt. Ser.,
1893-1919; trans. Krisnakamal Bhattäcärya, Bibl. Ind., Calcutta, 1887.
Pitämaha : fragments ed. Manzini, Atti del Reale Istituto Véneto de
Scienze, Lettere, ed Arti, vol. 63, pt. 2;ed. K. Scriba, Leipzig, 1902.
Yäjnavalkya : ed. and trans. A.F. Stenzler, Berlin/London, 1849; ed.
and trans. V.N. Mandlik, Bombay, 1880; with the comm. of Aparärka :
ed. Hari Näräyan Äpte, Änandäsrama Skt. Ser., Poona, 1903-4;
with the comm. of Vijnänesvara : ed. W.L. Pansïkar, Nirnayasägara,
Bombay, 4th edn., 1936; ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Text Ser.,
Bombay, 1914; ed. N.S.K. Sähityäcärya, Chowkhambä Skt. Ser.,
Benares, 1930; with the comm. of Visvarüpa : ed. T. Ganapati Sästn,
Trivandrum Skt. Ser., 1922-4; with the comm. of Sülapäni : ed. J.R.
Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts Ser., Bombay, 1939; with the comm.
of Mitra-misra : ed. N.S. Khiste, Chowkhambä Skt. Ser., Benares,
1924-30; trans. J.R. Ghärpure (with the commentaries of Vijnänesvara,
Mitra-misra and Sülapäni), Hindu Law Texts, Bombay, 1936-44.
Commentaries on the Mitäksarä of Vijnänesvara : Bälambhatti, ed.
(Vyavahära section) Nityänand Pant Parvatîya, Chowkhambä Skt.
Ser., Benares, 1914; ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts, Bombay,
1914-24; ed. S.S. Setlur, Madras, 1912. Subodhini, ed. and trans.
J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts, Bombay, 1914 and 1930 [Mitäksarä

--- PAGE 298 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
277
alone, Bombay, 1920] ; ed. S.S. Setlur, Madras, 1912.G.C.Tarkälankär,
The Mitakshara (Calcutta, 1871) contains his trans, of the Loans
section and W.H. Macnaghten's trans, of the Administration of Justice
section of Vijnänesvara's Mitäksarä. The Vyavahära section, ed., with
Eng. and Bengali trans, and Mitäksarä, S. Ray, Calcutta, 1964.
Vyäsa : ed. Batakrishna Ghosh, Indian Culture (Calcutta) IX (1942-3),
65-98.
Collections of Various Smrtis : Dharmasästrasangraha : ed. Jïvânanda
Vidyäsägara, Sarasvatî Press, Calcutta, 1876. Contains : Atri (Vrddha
and Laghu), Visnu, Härita (Vrddha and Laghu), Yäjnavalkya; Usanas,
Añgiras, Yama, Äpastamba (smrti), Sarpvarta, Kätyäyana (Karma-
pradipa), Brhaspati (smrti), Paräsara (Brhat). Vyäsa, Sañkha (smrti),
Likhita (smrti), Daksa, Gautama, Sätätapa (Karmavipäka), and
Vasistha, Smrtinäm samuccaya, ed. V. Ganesa Äpte. Änandäsrama
Skt. Ser., Poona, 2nd edn., 1929. Contains : Añgiras, Atri, Äpastamba,
U sanas, Gobhila (Karmapradïpa). Daksa, Devala, Prajäpati, Yama
(also Brhat), Brhaspati (smrti), Visnu (Laghu), Sañkha (also Laghu),
Sätätapa (Vrddha), Härita (Brhat and Laghu), Äsvaläyana (Laghu),
Likhita (smrti), Vasistha, Vyäsa, Sañkha-Likhita, Sarpvarta, Bau-
dhäyana. ed. M.N. Dutt, The Dharma Sastras, Calcutta, 1906-8.
Contains (text and translation) : Yäjnavalkya, Härita, U sanas, Añgiras,
Yama, Atri, Samvarta, Kätyäyana, Brhaspati, Daksa, Sätätapa,
Likhita, Sañkha, Gautama, Äpastamba, Vasistha, Vyäsa, Paräsara,
Visnu, Manu.
Digests
Ananta-deva : Smrti-kaustubha, ed. V.L. Pansîkar, Nirnayasägara,
Bombay, 1909. Dattaka-didhiti, ed. Bharatcandra Siromani, Calcutta,
1867. Räjadharma-kaustubha, ed. K. Krsna Smrtitïrtha, Gaekwad's
Or. Ser., Baroda, 1935.
Candesvara : Viväda-ratnäkara, ed. Dinanätha Vidyäkankära, Bibl. Ind.,
Calcutta, 2nd edn., 1931;* trans. G.C. Sarkar and D. Chatterjee,
Calcutta, 1899. Räjaniti-ratnäkara, ed. K.P. Jayaswäl, Patna, 2nd
edn., 1936.
Dalapati : Nrsimha-prasäda, Vyavahära-sära, ed. V.S. Tillu, Sarasvatî
Bhavan Texts Ser., Benares, 1934.
Devanna-bhatta2 : Smrticandrikä, ed. L. Sriniväsäcärya, Bibl. Sansk.,
Mysore, 1914-21 ; ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts, Bombay, 1919;
trans. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu Law Texts, Bombay, 1946-50.
2The spelling 'Devanna' usual in MSS. would agree with Andhra provenance : M. Mayr-
hofer, 'Zum Namen Sáyana', Anzeiger der phil.-hist. Kl., Oesterreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, 108 (1971)^ 79ff., 81 n. 15.

--- PAGE 299 [DIRECT] ---

278 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Haläyudha : see L. Rocher, Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda)
III, no. 4 (1954), 328-44; IV, no. 1 (1954), 13-32.
Hemadri : Caturvarga-cintâmani, ed. Bharatcandra Siromani, P.N.
Tarkabhuçana, etc., Bibl. Ind., Calcutta, 1873-1911.
Jimütavähana : Däyabhäga, ed. Bharatcandra Siromani (with the
comm. of Raghunandana), Calcutta, 1863-4; éd. Jîvânanda Vidyäsä-
gara, Calcutta, 1893; trans. Colebrooke, Madras, 1864 (and earlier
editions of the Two Treatises). Vyavahâra-màtrkâ} ed. A. Mookerjee,
Calcutta, 1912. Käla-viveka, ed. Pramathanätha Tarkabhüsana, Bibl.
Ind., Calcutta, 1905.
Kamaläkara-bhatta : Nirnaya-sindhu, ed. Krsna-sästrin Navate, Nirna-
yasägara, Bombay, 2nd edn., 1905; ed. Gopäla Sästrin Nene, Chow-
khambä Sansk. Ser., Benares, 1930-56. Südra-kamaläkara, ed. Sävaji
Dädäji, Nirnayasägara, Bombay, 1880. Viväda-tändava, ed. Maniläla
Nabhubhâî Dvivedin, Laksmi Viläs Press, Baroda, 1901; ed. H.N.
Chattopadhyaya in Our Heritage, 7-13 (1959-65).
Käsinätha Upädhyaya : Dharma-sindhu, ed. Bäpu-sästrin Moghe, Nir-
nayasägara, Bombay, 6th edn., 1936; trans, in Melanges, Ann. Guimet
(1884), Iff., 150ff., 225ff.
Kubera : Dattaka-candrikä, ed. Yajñesvara Bhattäcärya (with the comm.
of Bharatacandra Siromani), Calcutta, 1885 (2nd edn.); trans. Suther-
land, Calcutta, 1821; G. Ôrianne, Paris, 1844.
Laksmana-sästri Joshï : Dharma-kosa^úy 
1937—41.
Laksmîdhara : Krtyakalpataru, ed. K.V. Rangasvâmî Aiyangâr, Gaek-
wad's Or. Ser., Baroda, 1941-53.
Madana-sirçiha : Madana-ratna-pradïpa : Vyavahâra-viveka-uddyota éd.
P.V. Kâne, Gangä Or. Ser., Bikaner (Anup Skt. Lib.), 1948.
Misaru-misra : Viväda-candra, ed. Priyanäth Mitra, Vidyâpati Press,
Calcutta, 1931 ; also Vidyâ Vîlâs Press, Patna, 1931.
Mitra-misra : Vïramitrodaya, éd. Jïvànanda Vidyâsâgara (Vyavahära-
prakâsa only), Calcutta, 1873; ed. V.P. Bhândârî, Chowkhambâ Skt.
Ser., Benares, 1932-7; ed. and trans, (in part), G.C. Sarkar Sâstrï,
Calcutta, 1879.
Nanda-pandita : Dattaka-mimämsä, ed. Yajñesvara Bhattäcärya (with
the comm. of Bharatachandra Siromani), Calcutta, 2nd edn., 1885;
ed. Sañkara Sästri Märulkar, Änandäsrama Skt. Ser., Poona, 1954;
trans. Sutherland, Calcutta, 1821.
Nilakantha-bhatta : Bhagavanta-bhäskara, ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu
Law Texts, Bombay, 1921-7. Vy avahar a-mayükha, ed. and trans.
V.N. Mandlik, Bombay, 1880; ed. P.V. Käne, Bombay Skt. Ser.,
Poona, 1926; trans. Borradaile, Surat, 1827; J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu
Law Texts, Bombay, 1921 ; P.V. Käne and S.G. Patawardhan, Bombay,
1933.
*See L. Rocher at Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda), III, no. 2 (1953), 134-46.

--- PAGE 300 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
279
Pratäpa-rudra : Sarasvatl-viläsa, ed. R. Shäma Shästry (Sästri) (Vyava-
hära-kända only), Bibl. Sansk., Mysore, 1927; ed. and trans. (Däya-
vibhäga portion), T. Foulkes, London, 1881.
Prthvïcandra : Prthvicandrodaya, Vyavahära-prakäsa, Pt. I, ed., J.H.
Dave, Bharatiya Vidyä Ser., Bombay, 1962.
Raghunandana : Smrti-tattva, ed., Jivänanda Vidyäsägara, Calcutta,
1895. Däya-tattva, ed. and trans. G.C. Sarkar, Calcutta, 1904. Udväha-
tattva, ed. H.N. Chatterjee, Skt. College Res. Ser., Calcutta, 1963.
Ratnäkara : Jayasimha-kalpadruma, ed. Harinäräyana Sarman, Bombay,
1903.
Sañkara-bhatta : Dharma-dvaita-nirnaya, ed., J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu
Law Texts, Bombay, 1943.
Sri Krsna Tarkälankära : Däyakrama-sangraha, ed. Nïlakamala Vidyä-
nidhi, Calcutta, 1930; trans., P.M. Wynch, Calcutta, 1818; G. Orianne,
Pondicherry, 1843.
Sülapäni : Präyascitta-viveka, ed., Jivänanda Vidyäsägara, 1893. Sam-
bandha-viveka, ed. J.B. Chaudhuri, Calcutta, 1942. Sräddha-viveka,
ed., Sri Cärukrsna Darsanäcärya, Calcutta, 1939.
Todar Mal : Todaränanda, ed., P.L. Vaidya, Gangä Or. Ser., Bikaner,
1948.
Väcaspati Misra : Viväda-cintämani, ed. R.C. Vidyävägisa, Calcutta,
1837; ed. L. Jhä, Patna, 1937; trans. P.K. Tagore, Calcutta, 1863;
G. Jhä, Gaekwad's Or. Ser., Baroda, 1942. Vy avahar a-cintämani, ed.
and trans. L. Rocher, Ghent, 1956.
Vaidyanätha Diksita : Smrti-muktäphala, ed. J.R. Ghärpure, Hindu
Law Texts, Bombay, 1937-40.
Varadaräja : Vyavahära-nirnaya, ed., K.V. Rangaswämi Aiyangär and
A.N. Krishna Aiyangär, Adyar, 1942; trans. (Däyabhäga portion only)
A.C. Burnell, Mangalore, 1872.
Visvesvara-bhatta : Madana-pärijäta, ed. Madhusüdana Smrtiratna,
Bibl. Ind., Calcutta, 1893. .
Collections of Hindu Law Books
I. For copious extracts in the original Sanskrit see J.C. Ghose, Principles
of Hindu Law (3rd edn., below).
II. For entire texts translated see :
Stokes, W : Hindu Law Books, Madras, 1865. It contains: Vyavahära-
mayùkha, trans. Borradaile; Däyabhäga, trans. Colebrooke; Mitäksarä,
Inheritance portion trans. Colebrooke; Däyakrama-sangraha, trans.
Wynch; Dattaka-mimämsä and Dattaka-candrikä, trans. Sutherland.
Dutt, Manmatha Nath : The Dharma Sastra or the Hindu Law Codes
Calcutta, 1908 (3 vols. 1500 pp.).

--- PAGE 301 [DIRECT] ---

280 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Setlur, S : Hindu Law Books on Inheritance, Madras, 1911. It contains :
Vol. 1 : Mitäksarä, 
Vy avahar a-mayükha, Sarasvati-viläsa, Smrti-
candrikä, Vyavahara-mayukha, Dattaka-mimämsä, 
Dattaka-candrikä.
Vol. 2 : Däyabhäga, Däyakrama-sangraha, Viväda-ratnäkara, Viväda-
cintämani, Vlramitrodaya, Däyatattva, 
Madana-pärijäta, with an
appendix containing extracts on sapinçiaship from the following works :
Mitäksarä, Smrti-muktäphala, Paräsara-mädhavTya, Dharma-sindhu,
Samskära-kaustubha, Samskär a-mayükha, Samskär a-bhäskar a, Mada-
na-pärijäta.
SECONDARY WORKS
General Works
Aiyangar, K.V. Rangaswami, Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity
(Madras, 1935);
Räjadharma (Adyar, 1941);
Aspects of the Social and Political System ofManusmrti(Lucknow,
1949);
Indian Cameralism (Adyar, 1949);
Some Aspects of the Hindu View of Life according to Dharmasästra
(Baroda, 1952).
Altekar, A.S., Sources of Hindu Dharma (Sholapur, 1952);
State and Government in Ancient India, 3rd edn. (Benares, 1958).
Ayyar, A.S. Nataraja, Mlmämsä Jurisprudence (The Sources of Hindu
Law) (Allahabad, 1952).
Bandyopadhyaya, N.C., Development of Hindu Polity and Political
Theories (Calcutta, 1927-8).
Bandyopadhyaya, S.C., Smrti-sästre Bängäli (Calcutta, 1962).
Banerjee, P.N., Public Administration in Ancient India (London, 1916).
Bhandarkar, D.R., Some Aspects of Ancient Hindu Polity (Madras, 1940).
Cunha Gonçalves, Luís da., Direito hindú e mahometano (Coimbra, 1924).
Das, Babu Bhagavan, The Science of Social Organization, or the Laws
of Manu, 2nd edn. (Madras, 1935).
Derrett, J.D.M., Hindu Law, Past and Present (Calcutta, 1957);
Religion, Law and the State in India (London, 1968).
Dikshitar, V.R. Ramachandra, Hindu Administrative Institutions (Madras,
1929).
Drekmeier, Ch., Kingship and Community in Early India (Stanford, 1962).
Dutt, B.N., Studies in Indian Social Polity (Calcutta, 1944).
Ghosh, B.K., Hindu Ideal of Life (Calcutta, 1947).
Ghoshal, U.N., A History of Hindu Political Theories (Oxford, 1959).
Gupta, R.K., Political Thought in the Smrti Literature (University of
Allahabad, [?c. 1961]).
Jayaswal, K.P., Manu and Yäjnavalkya, a Basic History of Hindu Law
(Calcutta, 1930);

--- PAGE 302 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
281
Hindu Polity, 3rd edn. (Bangalore, 1955).
Jolly, J., Recht und Sitte (Strasburg, 1896);
Hindu Law and Custom (a trans, of the above) (Calcutta, 1928).
Käne, P.V., History of Dharmasästra (Poona, 1930-62 : 2nd ed., I/I, 1968).
Law, N.N., Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity (Oxford, 1921).
Majumdar, R.C., Corporate Life in Ancient India, 2nd. edn. (Calcutta,
1922).
Mazzarella, G., Etnología analítica dello antico diritto indiano (Catania,
1913-38).
Mees, G.H., Dharma and Society (The Hague, 1935).
Mookerji, R.K., Local Government in Ancient India, 2nd edn. (Oxford,
1920).
Motwani, K., Manu: a Study in Hindu Social Theory (Madras, 1934).
Pargiter, F.E., Ancient Indian Historical Tradition (London, 1922).
Prabhu, P.N., Hindu Social Organization, 2nd edn. (Bombay, 1954).
Prasad, Beni, Theory of Government in Ancient India (Post Vedic)
(Allahabad, 1927);
The State in Ancient India (Allahabad, 1928).
Rankin, Sir G.C., Background to Indian Law (Cambridge, 1946).
Raychaudhury, H.C., Political History of Ancient India, 5th edn. (Calcutta,
1950).
Ruben, W., Die gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im alten Indien. II. Die
Entwicklung von Staat und Recht (Berlin, 1968).
Sankararama Sastri, C, Fictions in the Development of the Hindu Law
Texts (Madras, 1926).
Sarkar, B.K., Political Institutions and Theories of the Hindus (Leipzig,
1922).
Sarkar, U.C., Epochs in Hindu Legal History (Hoshiarpur, 1958).
Sarkar, Kishori Lai, Mimänsä Rules of Interpretation (Calcutta, 1909).
Scharfe, H., Untersuchungen zur Staatsrechtslehre des Kautalya (Wies-
baden, 1968).
Sen, AK., Studies in Hindu Political Thought (Calcutta, 1926).
Sen, P.N., The General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence (Calcutta, 1918).
Sen-Gupta, N.C., Sources of Law and Society in Ancient India (Calcutta,
1914);
The Evolution of Law (Calcutta, 1926);
Evolution of Ancient Indian Law (Calcutta/Londori, 1953).
Sharma, R.S., Aspects of Political Ideas and Institutions in Ancient India
(Delhi, 1959);
Südras in Ancient India (Delhi, 1958).
Shastry, R.S., Evolution of Indian Polity (Calcutta, 1930).
Sinha, H.N., Sovereignty in Ancient Indian Polity (London, 1938).
Spellman, J.W., Political Theory of Ancient India (Oxford, 1964).

--- PAGE 303 [DIRECT] ---

282 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
Trautmann, T.R., Kautilya and the Arthasästra (Leiden, Brill, 1971).
Varádachariar, Sir S., The Hindu Judicial System (Lucknow, 1946).
Treatises and Textbooks of Law
Bhattacharya, J., Commentaries on the Hindu Law (Calcutta, 1909).
C o w e l l , H . , The Hindu 
Law ... the Law Administered 
... in 
India
(Calcutta, 1870-1).
Derrett, J.D.M., Introduction to Modern Hindu Law (Bombay, 1963);
Critique of Modern Hindu Law (Bombay, 1970).
Diagou, Gnanou, Principes de droit hindou (Pondicherry, 1929-32).
Ghärpure, J.R., Hindu Law, 4th edn. (Bombay, 1931).
Ghose, J.C., The Principles of Hindu Law, 3rd edn. (Calcutta, 1917-19).
Gupte, S.V., Hindu Law in British India (Bombay, 1947, with supplement,
1955).
Heramba, Chatterjee Sastri, The Law of Debt in Ancient India (Calcutta,
1971) (a work of exceptional interest).
Jha, Sir Ganganatha, Hindu Law in its Sources (Allahabad, 1930-1)
(this work concentrates on the ancient source-material with an occa-
sional glance at the current law then moving towards codification).
Macnaghten, F.W., Considerations on the Hindoo Law as it is Current
in Bengal (Serampore, 1824) (this curious work is the first textbook on
the subject).
Mayne, J.D., Treatise on Hindu Law and Usage, 1 lth edn., by N. Chandra-
sekhara Aiyar (Madras, 1953).
Mulla, D.F., Principles of Hindu Law, 13th edn., by S.T. Desai (Bombay,
1966).
Raghavachariar, N.R., Hindu Law, Principles and Precedents, 5th edn.
(Madras, 1965).
Sarkar Sastri, G.C., A Treatise on Hindu Law, 7th edn. (Calcutta, 1933).
Sorg, L., Introduction a l'étude du droit hindou (Pondicherry, 1895);
Traité théorique et pratique de droit hindou (Pondicherry, 1897).
Strange, Sir T., Hindu Law, 4th edn., by J.D. Mayne (Madras, 1864).
Trevelyan, Sir E.J., Hindu Law, 3rd edn. (Calcutta, 1929).
West, Sir R., and Bühler, G., A Digest of the Hindu Law of Inheritance
..., 3rd, and best, edn. (Bombay, 1884).
Note
Many more bibliographical details, especially with reference to the
secondary literature on the ancient periods and the modern law and its
problems, may be found in J. Gilissen, ed., Bibliographical Introduction
to Legal History and Ethnology (Brussels), the following sections :
Rocher, Ludo, Section E/6, Droit Hindou Ancien (1965).
Derrett, J.D.M., Section E/8, The Indian Subcontinent under European
Influence (1970).

--- PAGE 304 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY
äcara : custom, especially religious usage, synonymous with sadäcära,
äcärya : Head of a Vedic school, spiritual preceptor.
adharma (when referred to an action) : opposed to the rule of dharma.
àranyaka : a work of religious instruction, of an esoteric character,
belonging to Revelation.
arthaväda : phrases or sentences accessory to a Vedic injunctive formula.
äsrama : stage or phase of life.
bhäsya : commentary, of a fully exegetical type.
brahmacärin : Brahminical student, belonging to the first stage of life.
brahman : spiritual power, an attribute of the Brahmin.
brähmana : a Vedic ceremonial treatise.
car ana : Vedic school.
caritra : customs or usage, particularly of a secular character.
danda : chastisement, the right to punish.
dandanlti : the art of punishment, political science, synonymous with
arthasästra.
dattaka : adoptive child (normally a son).
dvija : ktwice-born\ a member of the three higher varnas who has
undergone Vedic initiation.
gana : body of persons having the same profession in the same locality.
grhastha : householder, the second stage of life.
grhyasütra : domestic ritual manual.
guru : spiritual teacher.
jäti : caste or sub-caste.
kalivarjya : practices forbidden in the Kali Age.
kalpasütra : totality of ritual precepts in manual form.
kända : section.
kantaka : lthorn\ fomenter of discord or disorder.
karma (the law of) : effects of actions upon the actor's destiny.
ksatra : warlike force, the attribute of the Ksatriya.
ksatriya : a member of the second varna.
ksetraja : a child born of the union called niyoga.
kula : family, family group or unit.
mahâpâtaka : grave sin (four or five in all).
mantra : formula recited during a Vedic sacrifice.
mlmämsaka : scholar versed in the Mïmâmsâ.
283

--- PAGE 305 [DIRECT] ---

284 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
mleccha : barbarian, non-Hindu.
nibandha : a literary work, especially a digest.
niyoga : procreation by one other than the husband when there is no
son of the marriage.
nyâya : maxim taken from the Mîmâmsâ; reasoning, logic.
pinda : rice-ball offered during the sräddha ceremony.
prädviväka : presiding judge in the royal court.
praklrnaka : (in effect) criminal justice.
püga : assembly of members of a locality; cf. gana,
puräna : texts inspired by religion, containing legends, attached to smrti.
räja, räjyam : king, kingdom.
räjadharma : duties of the king, the royal function.
räjasäsana : royal order, ordinance.
rsi : inspired bard, mythical sage.
sadäcära : Good Custom (the customs of the good), a source of dharma.
samhitä : collection of (liturgical) texts.
samnyäsin : ascetic, the fourth stage of life.
samskära : purificatory ceremony, sacrament.
sastra : science; an authoritative treatise in a science.
satl : suicide of a widow on the pyre of her husband or by fire alone
(from satl, ka good (wife)').
sista : an instructed person, devoted to the application of the rules.
sistäcära : custom of the sista(s), synonymous with sadäcära.
sloka : a stanza formed of two lines, each having two groups of eight
feet.
smrt i : tradition, a source of dharma; a work in which Tradition is
communicated.
smrtikära : the author of a smrti.
snätaka : a Brahminical student who has completed his studentship.
soma : the juice of a (hallucinating) plant used in certain Vedic sacrifices.
sräddha : ceremony in commemoration of the dead, in ancestor-worship,
figuring also in connection with funerals.
srautasütra : manual for Vedic sacrifices.
sreni : corporation or guild.
srotriya : learned Brahmin performing the duties prescribed in dharma.
sruti : Revelation, the Vedic texts.
südra : a member of the fourth varna.
sütra : an instructive phrase cast into an aphoristic style.
sütrakära : an author of works in the sütra style.
tfkä : a commentary (of a more literal type), often upon a commentary.
upanayana : Brahminical initiation, the thread ceremony.
upanisad : a didactic work of a speculative character, belonging to
Revelation.

--- PAGE 306 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 
285
vaisya : a member of the third varna.
vidhi : a Vedic injunction.
vivada : a dispute, in litigation, especially private litigation.
vivädapada : a little, or type, of legal dispute, a juridical division of the
subject-matter of disputes in general.
vy avahar a : administration of justice, the judicial process, especially
judicial procedure (viewed practically).
vyavahärapada : a class of litigation or trial, synonymous with viväda-
pada.
yuga : an Age of the world.

--- PAGE 307 [DIRECT] ---

AN AID TO THE PRONUNCIATION OF
SANSKRIT WORDS
All letters are sounded. The accent usually falls on the penultimate
syllable unless this is short and is preceded by a long vowel : thus para-
mánanda, äranyaka, but äcarya. Vowels marked long are pronounced as
in Italian, ä is the a in father; ü is the oo in pool, a is the u in butter•; u is
the oo in foot ; /is the i in sit, but 7 is the ee in feet, r is counted as a vowel,
and sounds very like the re in pretty, ai is a diphthong and is the ie in pie.
c is the ch in church, g is always hard as in gate; h is always sounded
as a full aspirate; when it follows a consonant that consonant is aspirated,
so that ph is not an f sound but as in drop him spoken quickly with the
aspirate sounded ; h is the sign for a light aspirant, but many pronounce
it as if it repeated the previous vowel, e.g. pâdah is pronounced pâdahà.
j is the j in joke, m nasalises the preceding vowel, but at the end of a
word (not the final word of the phrase) it is equivalent to m. ñ is pro-
nounced as in Spanish, s is like the ssi in passion; s is the sh in push,
t and d are dental consonants, with the tongue close to the teeth ; / and d,
on the other hand are retroflex, with the tongue in the roof of the mouth,
giving a nasal and tapping quality to the sound ; both are rather a nuisance
as English t and d are produced with the tongue in a position midway
between the two.
The names of modern Indians are often hard to pronounce without
help, and the deviations, both in North and in South India, from Sanskritic
patterns can be disconcerting. In many cases the translator has added
diacritical marks to assist in pronunciation, but consistency has not been
sought; and where error in pronunciation would not be too embarrassing,
modern names have been left as their owners spelt them.
286

--- PAGE 308 [DIRECT] ---

ROBERT LINGAT
Life
Born at Charleville (Ardennes) in 1892.
Diplome of the École des Langues Orientales Vivantes, Paris, 1919.
Doctorate in Law (with the Paul Deschanel Prize), Paris, 1932.
Legal Adviser, Bangkok, 1924-1940.
Lecturer in the History of Siamese Law at the University of Moral and
Political Sciences, Bangkok, 1935-1939.
Professor in the Faculty of Law of Indo-China. 1941-1955.
'Conseiller légiste' (Law Member) to the Government of Cambodia, 1945.
'Directeur d'études' (Professor) at the École Pratique des Hautes Études
(Section 6), Sorbonne, Paris, 1961—
Died at Paris, 7 May, 1972.
Works
1. Buddhism
La vie religieuse du roi Mongkut, 7.5.5., 20 (1926), 129-48.
History of Wat Saket, J.S.S., 23 (1930), 125-34.
History of Wat Mahädhätu, 7.S.5., 24 (1930), 1-27.
History of Wat Pavaraniveça, JS.S., 26 (1933), 73-102.
Le culte du Bouddha d'éreraude, 7.5.5., 27 (1934), 9-38.
La double crise de l'Église bouddhique au Siam (1767-1851), Cahiers
d'histoire mondiale, 4/2 (Neuchatel) (1958), 402-425.
Le Wat Räjapratistha, Artibus Asiae, Felicitation Volume, 24 (Ascona,
1961), 314-23.
Les suicides religieux au Siam, Felicitation Volumes of Southeast-Asian
Studies, I (Bangkok, 1965), 71-5.
Encore ayäya sambodhim, à propos de l'inscription gréco-araméenne
d'Asoka, 7 A., 255 (1968), 195-8.
2. History of Siam
Chronique du Siam. Cent cinquantième anniversaire de Bangkok,
B.E.F.E.O., 333 (1933), 536-48.
Les trois Bangkok Recorders, 7.5.5., 28 (1935), 203-13.
Une lettre de Véret sur la Révolution siamoise de 1688, T'oung Pao,
31 (1935), 330-362.
287

--- PAGE 309 [DIRECT] ---

288 
THE CLASSICAL LAW OF INDIA
3. Siamese Law
Note sur la revision des lois siamoises en 1805, J.S.S., 23 (1929), 1-9.
L'esclavage privé dans le vieux droit siamois, xi, 395 pp. (Paris, 1931).
La succession des Bhikku (in Siamese), Pramuon k'adi (Bangkok) (1932),
633-52.
La responsabilité collective au Siam, Rev. hist, de droit français et étranger,
1936, 523-39.
Histoire du droit siamois (droit privé) (in Siamese), 3 vols., 102, 253,
and 139 pp. (Bangkok, 1935-40).
Code du 1er règne [de la dynastie de Bangkok], C.S. 1166,3 vols. (University
of Moral and Political Sciences, Bangkok, 1938-39).
Effect de la pabbajjâ sur le mariage (in Siamese). 29 pp. (Bangkok, 1939).
Le régime des biens entre époux en Thaïlande, Rev. Indochinoise juridique
et économique (Hanoi), 1943, 63 pp.
Les Ordalies au Siam, L'Éducation (Saigon), 1949, 19 pp.
Les origines du prêt à intérêt au Siam, Rev. hist, de droit français et
étranger, 1950, 213-35.
La condition des étrangers au Siam au XVIIe siècle, Recueils de la Société
Jean Bodin, IX, L'Étranger (Brussels, 1958), 255-66.
Le statut de la femme au Siam, Recueils de la Société Jean Bodin, XI,
La Femme (Brussels, 1959), 275-92.
Le délit de voisinage maléfique dans le vieux droit siamois, J.A., 249
(1961), 63-84.
La preuve dans l'ancien droit siamois, Recueils de la Société Jean Bodin,
XVIII, La Preuve (Brussels, 1964), 397^18.
Siam (Thaïlande). In J. Gilisseri, ed., Introduction Bibliographique a
l'histoire du droit et à l'ethnologie juridique (Bibliographical Introduction
to Legal History and Ethnology), Sec. E/9 (Brussels, 1965), 17 pp.
4. Indochinese Law
Vinaya et droit laïque, B.E.F.E.O., 37 (1937), 415-76.
Evolution of the conception of Law in Burma and Siam, J.S.S.. 38
(1950), 8-31.
La conception du droit dans l'Indochine hînayâniste, B.E.F.E.O., 44
(1951), 163-87.
Les régimes matrimoniaux du Sud-Est de l'Asie. Essai de droit comparé
Indochinois. ^Jorne I. Les régimes traditionnels 176 pp. (Paris, 1952);
Tome II. Les droits codifiés. 195 pp. (Paris, 1965).
Pour un droit comparé Indochinois. 14 pp. (Saigon, 1955).
5. Hindu Law
L'influence hindoue dans l'ancien droit siamois. In R. Lingat and Denise
Paulme; Conférences1936. Études de sociologie et d'ethnologie juridiques,

--- PAGE 310 [DIRECT] ---

ROBERT LINGAT, CURRICULUM VITAE 
289
pub. sous la direction de René Maunier.. .25 (Paris, 1937), 1-29.
L'influence juridique de l'Inde au Champa et au Cambodge d'après
l'épigraphie, J.A., 237 (1949), 273-90.
The Buddhist Manu or the Propagation of Hindu law in Hinayanist
Indochina, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 30
(1949) (appeared in 1950), 284^-97.
Dharma et temps, à propos de Manu, 1.85-86, J.A., 249 (1961), 487-95;
in English under the title Time and the Dharma', Contributions to
Indian Sociology, 6 (The Hague) (1962), 7-16.
Les quatre pieds du procès, J.A., 250 (1962), 489-503.
Les Sources du Droit dans le Système Traditionnel de l'Inde, 323 pp.
(The Hague, 1967).
6. Book Reviews
Reviews appeared in J.S.S., B.E.F.E.O.J.A., Rev. hist, de droit, T'oung
Pao, Recueil de jurisprudence Penant, and Artibus Asiae.

--- PAGE 311 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 312 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX*
acara : see Custom, Good.
accessories : 55.
adharma : 4, 55, 197 n.46, 244.
adoption: 24, 60-1, 84, 129; mimämsä rules applied: 152, 154-5, 159-60.
advice, the role of the jurist : 71-2, 248.
age, gulden: 15.
ages of the world: 79, 184-7, 193.
agents provocateurs : 240.
agriculture: 31, 40, 71.
Ahmad, M.B. : 261 n.6.
Aiyangar, K.V. Rangaswami: 46 n.21, 104, 105, 123, 126 nn., 127 and n.12, 128 n.14,
129 n.16, 130, 132 n.18, 146 n.4, 171 n., 197 n. 47, 208 n.7.
AlBïrunî:48, 193.
Altekar, A.S. : 17 n.16, 106 n.16, 124, 178, 184 n.20, 208 n.7.
ambiguous smrti, illustrated : 251-2.
Anantadeva, author of Smrtikaustubha : 120; see Räjadharma-kaustubha.
ancestors, walking in their ways : 197.
Ändhras, 22.
Añgiras (smrti): 106, 233 and n.63.
Aparärka, commentator on Yäjnavalkya: 113, 124 n.4, 129, 145, 146 n.5, 166, 168, 179
n.10, 181 n.16, 210, 221, 228 n.53, 251,-253, 276.
Äpastamba (dharma-sütra): 20-23, 41, 124 n.4, 129, 194 n.40, 178;
1.1.1.1-2 : 16, 178 
1.10.29.6 : 31 n.5. 
II.9.23.3-12 : 49-50.
1.1.1.4-5: 30. 
II.2.4.14: 52. 
II.10.27.4: 61.
1.1.4.8: 16. 
II.5.10.11 : 65. 
II.10.27.6-7 : 61.
1.1.14.25 : 31. 
II.5.10.12-16 : 232. 
11.10.27.15 : 40.
1.6.18.14:41. 
11.5.12.4:59. 
11.11.28.1:71.
1.7.2.6-7: 197. 
11.6.13.7:61. 
11.11.28.13:66.
1.9.24.15: 63. 
II.9.21.10: 47.
appeals : from one court to another : 247; before the king : 248; from judgment passed in
the king's court : 255.
Arrian: 33 n.8, 51 n.33.
*[It is well known that French scholarly books are, on the whole, less well supplied with
indexes than their counterparts in the English-speaking world. M. Lingat, by contrast,
supplied an index which dealt faithfully with leading concepts and with proper names.
It was still far from sufficient, and this present index attempts to rectify the chief deficiencies.
But M. Lingat's decisions have been respected in two respects: a complete index to all
references to the sütra and smrti writers would have been meaningless, or, if filled out
with complete indications, impossible. Therefore these writers have been indexed, if their
works survive in continuous published form, only if M. Lingat actually quotes them, even
though the distinction between a quotation and a substantial summary or citation is an
artificial one. Secondly, no systematic attempt has been made to index the Bibliography,
which is, to a large extent, self-indexing.] [trs.]
291

--- PAGE 313 [DIRECT] ---

292 
INDEX
artha, interest, profit, one of the motives of human conduct : 5; see also artha-sästra, trivarga.
artha-sästra, a science : definition of, 145; part of the knowledge required of an exegete :
145-7; value of a rule founded on artha : 156-7; inspired some dharmasästra rules:
145-6, 207 n.3, 223 and n., 241.
Asahäya. commentator on Närada : 100andn.7,103,114,161, 162 n.41, 211, 216, 256n.llO.
ascetic, fourth stage of life: 46-7; leaves worldly morality: 5; the jurists' reservations
about : 50-1 ; competing with Brahmins : 50.
Asian handling of 'precept' : xiii n.2.
Asoka : 226 n.48.
Atharvaveda : 7.
Atri (dharma-sütra) : 24.
authority of a rule of dharma : superior to that of a rule based on artha : 5, 157; based on
its origin in a Vedic injunction : 7, 149; and its religious implications : 3-4, 135, 176,
203-4; and not on custom: 177-8; but it yields to custom: 196-7, 200; varies with
the levels of society: 203-4; disappears in the domain of politics: 200, 225-6, 250;
see also dharma.
authority, not legality, the key to the system : 258.
Ayyar, A.S.N. : 150 n.12, 213 n.20, 260 n.5.
Bälambhatta: 113.
Bandyopadhyaya, S.C., see Banerji.
Banerji, S.C. : 22 n.3, 24 n.4, 29 n.2, 89 n.7, 280.
Barth, A.: 51 n.32, 63 and n., 102, 125, 139^2.
bath, ritual : 46, 47.
battle, death in : 223.
Baudhäyana (dharma-sütra) : 18, 20-1, 22;
1.1.9-10: 15. 
II.1.17: 68.
1.1.11 : 233-4: 
H.2.3.14: 61 n.
1.2.1-4: 196. 
II.2.3.34-5: 61.
1.3.5:45. 
II.3.45: 57.
1.11.20.12:60. 
II.6.11.34: 50, 51.
1.11.20.13-15: 59. 
11.17.16: 46.
1.11.20.16:59. 
111.3.13-14:46.
1.11.21.1:59. 
IV.5.31: 56.
1.11.21.2-3: 59.
1.18.2-5: 30.
Beaman, G.B. : 81 n. 4a.
Betai, R.S. : 220 n.36.
Bhagavad-gïtâ : 4, 26, 77.
Bhagavanta-bhäskara : 117, 259.
Bhandarkar, R.G. : 99, 124.
Bharuci, commentator on Manu: 94 and n., 111-12, 143, 146 n.5.
Bhattacharya, B. : 120 n.25, 124 n.3.
Bhattacharya, J.N. : 150 n. 12.
Bhavasvämin, commentator on Närada: 100 and nn.6,7, 101 n.9, 103, 126 n.ll.
Bhavisya-puräna : 92, 161 n.40.
Bhrgu : 78-9, 87, 91, 93, 100, 105.
Blackstone, Sir W. : 205 n.63.
Bloch, M. : 207 n.3.
blood-money : 64.
Bongert, Y.: 213 n.20.
brähmana, meaning of : 7.

--- PAGE 314 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
293
Brahmin, member of the first varna : function and status of : 31 ; born counsellor of the king :
216; superiority over other varnas: 31, 218; privileges, penal immunities: 67, 219ff.;
fiscal immunities: 219; slaying of a : 55 and n.37, 56, 63, 160, 219, 222; the king's
concern to be generous to : 218; and to cope with : 220-1, 222 n.39; sacrificer becomes :
219 n.34.
Brhadäranyaka-upanisad: 15, 97, 215.
Brhaspati, mythical person : 104.
Brhaspati (smrti) : 104-5, 129, 201, 202 n.58, 256;
1.6:249. 
Aiy. 1.66:215.
1.26:246. 
I.I 11: 252 and n.
11.12: 250, 252. 
1.118-9:249.
11.24:254. 
samsk.13: 158.
11.28: 200. 
228: 158.
11.31 : 201, 202 n.58. 
526: 209 n.9.
XIII.6 : 254 n.102. 
äpad. 19-20 : 220.
XXVII. 1: 238andn.71.
XXVII.24: 197n.47.
Brhat-paräsara-smrti : 224 n.43.
British, see conquest by.
Bühler, G.: 16 n.15, 18, 21-7, 49, 64 n.50, 75, 77-8, 81, 88-90, 94-5, 112, 114, 115 n.12,
123, 126 n.10, 178 n.7, 197 n.48, 198 n.51, 251 n.99.
Buddhism, Buddhists: 18, 20, 25, 47, 123, 215 n.26, 226 n.48, 266ff., 272.
Burma: 267fT.,271f.
Burnell, A.C. : 55, 77, 94, 100 n.6, 116, 124, 138 and n.
Cälukyas: 94, 113.
Candesvara : 166 and n.16; see also Räjaniti-ratnäkara.
case-law, cited: 50 n.31, 51, 150 n.ll, 168 n.56, 172 n.63, 173 n.68, 175 n.75, 177 n.5, 198
n.49, 204 n.61, 205 n.64, 245 n.87.
caste : the four varnas \ 29fF. ; theory of mixture of: 33; Senart criticized : 34-6; bases and
advantages of the theory : 38-40; system of in the dharma-sütras : 39ff.; and modern
facts: 40, 44-5; outlook of dharma-sütrakäras on, 44; excommunication and the
position of one expelled from : 53-4; readmission to : 54; mixed, and privileges : 273-4.
Caturvimsati-mata : 106, 276.
Chakravarti, M. : 116 n.15, 119 n.22.
Champa: 96, 101, 266.
Chändogya-upanisad : 15, 47.
charm and incantation : 218-9.
Chatterjee (Chattopadhyaya), H. Sästri : 278, 282.
chronology and Hindu scriptures: xiv-xv, 123-32.
Coedès, G.: 96 n.ll.
Colebrooke, HT. : 108, 110, 113, 121, 149, 171, 247, 265.
commentaries and digests : period in which they appeared : 107; general characteristics of:
108-9; authority of: 110; the principal commentaries: 11 Iff.; digests: 115ff. See
interpretation,
common law : 205.
confession : 86.
conflicts of texts : 157ff.; to be resolved preferably by reasoning : 159; can produce different
but equally valid solutions: 166-7; preference to be given to solutions hallowed by
custom: 167-8; multiple juridical systems or 'schools': 171.
conquest by the British: 263ff.; consequences for Hindu law of the introduction of the
English legal system : 136ff., 263, 269; and of the concept of legislation : 265.

--- PAGE 315 [DIRECT] ---

294 
INDEX
conquest by the Muslims : effects of on Hindu law : 259ff.
consensus: 13; doctrine of: 180f.; contrary arguments: 181-3; orthodox opinion: 185-9;
importance of for exegesis : 144, 189.
conventions between members of local, professional, and craft groups : 226-9; do not have
the quality of legislative acts : 228; the nature and effect of royal sanction on : 228-9.
coronation ceremony : 220.
corporal punishment : 242.
courts, composition of: 216, 241, 246-9.
cow, products of : 56.
creation : 78-9.
Creator, will of: 176.
Cunha Gonçalves, L.da : vii, 121.
custom: essential difference from dharma: 176; influence of on the composition of the
dharma-sästras: 180; capable of counterbalancing the authority of dharma: 196;
prevails over its rules in the interests of peace : 200, 225; but cannot abolish the reli-
gious sanction of it: 200-1; force of: 177, 202; inferior to the rule of dharma : 204.
Custom, Good: 180 and n.ll, 196 n.44, 236, 244; source of dharma: 6, 14ff.; contains
precepts of a juridical character: 57; draws its authority from the Veda, not usage :
16, 179; extension of the term : 15, 179, 198; a norm of life unattainable by the average
person: 188-9, 199; archaic features of, ibid.
custom in Bombay : 137.
Dalpati, author of the Nrsimha-prasäda : 120.
damages: 244-5,251.
danda, a deity : 208, 214, 235.
Dandaviveka of Vardhamana : 245 n.88.
Dareste, R. : 102.
Dattaka-candrikä: 117 and n.19, 152, 155.
Dattaka-mîmâmsà of Nanda-pandita : 114, 117, 155.
Däyabhäga, part of the Dharma-ratna of Jimütavähana : 119, 151, 172-4.
Däya-krama-sahgraha : 119.
debts: 50,51,83.
Declareuil, J. : 205 n.62.
Derrett, J.D.M. : 34 n.9, 58 n.45, 62 n.47, 94 n.9, 117 n.19, 121 n.29, 128 n.15, 138 n.2a,
141 n.10, 144 n.2, 167 n.54, 173 n.68, 177 n.5, 191 n.33, 204 n.61, 211 n.16, 224 n.41,
227 and n., 256 n.109, 260 n.5, 264 nn.
Deussen, P. : 47.
Devala (smrti) : 124 n.4, 126.
Devanna- (Devanna-) bhatta : 115, 277 n.2; see Smrti-candrikä.
dhammasatthas : introduce the Indian concept of law into Buddhist areas of S.E. Asia : 267;
Burmese dhammasatthas : 267-9; Siamese: 269-70; assist the passage of dharma into
law : 270.
dharma : different senses of the word : 3,4 and n.5, 195 n.42, 225, 226 nn., 228-9; a religious
rule with a social object : 4; sources of: 6; is characterised by the absence of 'visible'
motive : 155, 180; is immutable : 180-1 ; is not to be observed when it becomes hateful
to the people : 189-93; does not become law until it enters into actual behaviour : 202;
influence of upoji custom: 203; comparison with Roman law: 204; the king's inter-
vention in the domain of: 225-6; see consensus, Kali (Age).
Dharma-kosa : 121-2.
Dharma-ratna of Jimütavähana : 119. See Däyabhäga, Vyavahära-mätrkä.
dharmasästra (science): 5, 145; must prevail over rules based on the arthasästra: 157;
actual use of : 273-4.
dharma-sästras (treatises) : 12 ; differences of from dharma-sütras : 73 ; origins of : 74-7 ;

--- PAGE 316 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
295
the principal : 77ff.; a critique of their chronology : 123ff.
dharma-sütras: 12-13, 19ff.; their period: 20; general character of: 28; contents of: 52;
juridical rules in, deriving from Good Custom : 57; authors' outlook : 57, 58-9, 71-2;
the king's duties : 64; elements of administrative law in : 66—7; and of penal law : 67-8;
and of procedure : 68, 69; and of civil law : 70-1 ; commentaries on : 114f.
Diksita, Vaidyanätha, author of Smrti-muktäphala \ 120.
disapproval of practices : 60, 61.
distress (time of) : in the dharma-sütras : 39-40.
divine nature of kings : 208.
divine origin of laws : 74, 86.
Drekmeier, C. : 207 n.3, 208 n.7.
Dumézil, G. : 36-7, 209 n.lO.
Dumont, L. : xv and n., 5 n.8, 15 n.14, 267 n.16.
enemies, foreign : the prime duty to keep peace : 66, 222-3 ; policies towards neighbouring
lands: 82, 241 n.80; towards conquered countries: 82, 199-200, 226 n.50; see war
(laws of).
epigraphy: xiii n.3, 101, 138 n.3, 267, 273-4.
escheat : 58', 62, 226 n.48, 238.
evaluation of rules : 59.
evolution and chronology of texts : 128-9.
excommunication : 53-4.
exegesis, see interpretation.
expediency : 253.
facultative rules : 49.
fasting : 46, 55.
females, and inheritance : 62.
Finot, L. : 101 n.8.
flexibility: 175, 259.
force : 214.
function, see Brahmin, king.
Furer-Haimendorf, C.von : 43 n.20.
gambling : 84.
Gautama (dharma-sütra) : 19f., 273;
V.35-6: 52.
VIII.12-13: 67.
X.39-42:71.
XI.l : 219.
XI.20: 38.
XI.21 : 246 n.89.
XII.4-6: 40.
XII.7: 40.
XII.37-8: 71.
XII.44-5 : 68.
gäyatri : 45, 56.
Gerhardsson, B. : 75 n.2.
Ghârpure, J.R. : 113, 120, 168 n.55.
Ghose, B.K. : 22 n.3.
Ghose, J.C. : 98, 279.
Ghoshäl, U.N. : 146 n.4, 147 n., 207 n.l, 208 n.7, 213 n.20, 214 n.23, 216 n.27, 220 n.36,
224 nn., 228 n.53, 229 n.55, 231 n.58, 280.
Gobhila-smrti: 159.
Gopal, L. : 146 n.3.
gotras: 31, 57.
Govindaraja, commentator on Manu: 112, 197, 198.

--- PAGE 317 [DIRECT] ---

296 
INDEX
Govindasvämin, commentator on Baudhäyana and Vasistha: 23, 115.
Greeks, known in India : 20, 33, 48, 94, 99, 125.
Gujarat : xiii n.3.
gunas, the three: 86, 217.
Gune, V.T. : 263 n.8, 270 n.
guru : 45, 56, 230 n.57.
gymnosophists : 48.
Haläyudha : 277.
Halhed, N.B. : 121.
Haradatta, commentator on Äpastamba: 4 n.2, 16, 49, 114, 178, 222.
Härita (dharma-sütra) : 24, 129; smrti: 106, 144, 251.
Hastings, W. : 121, 136, 263, 264 n.10, 265.
Hazra, R.C. : 146 n.5.
heads of religious sects : 17 n.17.
Hemädri: 115, 277.
hermit : third stage of life : 46.
heterodox circles : xiv.
'Hindu law', various meanings of: vii-viii.
Hindu scholarship : 36.
Hindus and non-Hindus : 33-4.
Hiranyakesin (dharma-sütra) : 21, 23, 75.
historical method, false, employed by scholars : 130.
Hopkins, E.W. : 22, 77, 90, 95, 208 n.7, 251 n.99.
horse sacrifice : 56.
hospitality : 52.
householder, the second stage of life : 46; held to be the most important : 49, 79-80.
Htin Aung, Maung : 271 n.20.
hunger-strike : 222 n.39.
Hüttner : 78.
Hutton, J.H. : 43 n.20.
hypergamy : 42.
impartibility : 250.
Impey, Sir E. : 264 n. 10.
impure occupations and trades: 39; impurity: 52, 202.
India, modern legal problems of: vii-ix; modern law in : 243; see also statute law.
individualistic society : 257.
initiation : 11, 45.
injunction, Vedic: different forms of: 153; distinguished from arthävädas: 8-9, 154, 160;
criterion derived from motive : 155.
Innes, Mr. Justice: 139 n.4.
inscriptions, see epigraphy,
interest, rates of: 58.
interpretation: 143ff.; authority of: 109-10, 230; the interpreter's task: 144; limits of his
domain : 144-5; method of: 148; reaction of upon custom : 171—2; see also Mimämsä.
Jäbäla-upanisad: 47 n.25.
Jagannätha, see Tarakapañcanana.
Jaimini, author of the Mimämsä-sütra : 9, 149, 154, 181.
Jätakas, 270-1.
jäti : 32 and n., 38.
Jayaswal, K.P.: viii, 116 n.16, 124, 280.

--- PAGE 318 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
297
Jewish law, early : 75 n.2.
Jhä, D.N.:213n.2O.
Jhâ, G. : 77, 78, 112, 149 nn., 177 n.4, 181 n.16, 198 n.51, 251 n.99.
Jimütavähana, author of the Dharma-ratna : 118 ; see Däyabhäga, Vyavahära-mätrkä.
Jolly, J.: 18, 24, 26, 78, 83 and n., 91, 97, 100, 105, 114 and nn., 118, 120, 123, 128, 129,
228 n.53, 236 n.69, 238 n.72.
Jones, Sir W. : 77, 94, 108 n.l, 110, 121, 139, 140, 198, 251 n.99, 265.
judgment: the king can decide only in court: 249-50; when the judge must refer to the
king: 254; if the parties accept it the king must abide by it: 255; appeal before the
king: 255; revision ordered by the king: 255; of the king is unappealable: 255-6;
is final proof of the litigants' rights: 256 n.109; but is no more than an order: 256;
collections of precedents in the Jätakas : 270-1.
juridical significance of smrti rules : the dilemma of the Anglo-Indian courts : vii ; reactions
t6 their case-law : 263-4; lessons to be drawn from the controversy : 264-6.
jurisdictions, customary: 246; various kinds of courts: 247-8; in caste problems: 273-4.
justice, administration of, an essential element of the royal function : 66, 68, 246; compo-
sition of the king's court : 249; a legal case is like a sacrifice : 249; duty of impartiality :
249-50; duty to search out the truth : 250; see lawsuits, private; sentence.
justice, criminal, in the dharma-sùtras : 66-8 ; in Manu : 84-5 ; distinguished from private
disputes : 237; cases listed : 238; methods open to the king : 240; officials distinct from
civil administration : 240-1 ; latitude in determination of penalty : 242; king's discretion
provides flexibility : 243.
Kali Age, prohibitions of: 104, 189ff.; laid down by the Sages: 193; the theory of limited
significance : 194-5.
Kalpataru: 109, 115, 132 n., 200 n., 208 n.6, 229.
käma (delight, pleasure), one of the three motives of human activity : see trivarga.
Kamalâkara-bhatta : 117, 168.
Kämandaka, author of the Nuisära : 146 n.3.
Kammälas : 273.
Kâne, P.V. : ix, xv, 17 n.17, 20, 24, 25, 26, 89 n., 94 n.9, 95, 98, 100, 103-4, 105, 106, 112,
114, 119, 120, 123, 126-30, 151 n., 153 nn., 154 n.22, 155 n.25, 156 n.28, 158 nn., 166
n.47, 168 nn., 173 n.70, 174 nn., 180 n.14, 193 nn., 194, 201 n.56a, 202 n.57, 204 n.60,
222 nn.1,2, 228 n.52, 233 n.63, 239 n.75, 240 n.78, 241 n.80, 242 n.83, 245 n.86, 246,
255 n.105.
Kärambelkar, K.W. : 217 n.30.
karma : 32.
Karma-pradlpa : 105, 159.
Käsinätha, author of the Dharma-sindhu : 121.
Käsyapa (dharma-sütra) : 24, 59.
Kätyäyana (smrti): 105, 126;
9: 211. 
37: 176. 
496: 248.
27 : 238. 
42 : 225. 
669 : 229 n.54.
32 : 253. 
44 : 249. 
956 : 242 n.82.
35: 156. 
82: 247n.91.
Kautilya (Kautalya), author of the Arthasästra : 146 and nn.1,5, 207 n.3, 217 n.29, 224 n.41,
225 n.45, 229 n.55, 230-1, 231 n.61, 240 nn., 241 n.81, 242 n.84.
Keith, A.B.: 74 n.l, 150 n.l2.
Khasa : 201 n.56.
Khetarpal, S.P. : 267 n.l5.
king: indispensable for social order: 207; necessity of coronation : 209; succession to the
throne: 209 n.9; must have an army, but need not be a Ksatriya: 210; independent

--- PAGE 319 [DIRECT] ---

298 
INDEX
of his subjects in temporal matters : 211 ; sole judge of the means to do his duty : 214;
in punishing incurs no impurity; 215; duty to consult his counsellors: 217; interest
of in coping with Brahmins: 218, 220, 222 and n.39; techniques in dealing with a
repugnant custom : 225; not to proselytise for any custom or law : 226 and n.50.
king's function: 207ff.; divine institution legitimises temporal power: 214-15; establishes
a spiritual solidarity between the king and his subjects: 212 and nn.; imposes on him
the duty of protection : 213; assimilated to the celebration of a sacrifice : 215; see also
justice, administration of; justice, criminal; penance; power, temporal; protection;
punishment.
Krishan, Y. : 51 n.34.
Ksatriya: 4, 30, 33, 36, 39, 43 n.19, 65, 209ff.
Kullüka, commentator on Manu: 14,17,112,155n.26,159,185, 210, 213 n.21,226n.49,252.
Kumaon: 120.
Kumârila, commentator on Sabara: 13, 149 n.10, 155 and n.24, 158.
Laksmana-bhatta : 158 n.31.
Laksmïdhara: 115, 229, 278; see Kalpataru.
law, meaning of : xii, 256, 257.
lawsuits, private: in the dharma-sütras: 67-8, 70-1; in Manu: 82-4; definition of: 243-4;
necessity of injury against the plaintiff: 244; double action possible: 244; distinction
between injury to the person and to property : 245; complex character of the action :
251; cases that will not lie because of public policy: 251; artha concepts may arise
during the hearing : 251-4.
lawsuits, types of: 82, 101, 244.
Laszlo, F. : 92 n.
legal instruments, want of in Indian legal history : xiii.
legislation, royal : cannot modify the sästra's rules : 225 ; abrogation of a custom repugnant
to dharma: 225-6; the meaning of patronage awarded to jurists: 229-30; scope of
the royal legislation' : 230; its nature and significance : 231-2.
Lekhapaddhati : xiii n.3.
Lingat, R. : x-xi, 287-9; articles of referred to : 161 n.40, 186 n.23, 250 n., 256 n.109, 267
nn.14,15, 271 n.19.
liquor-drinking : 55, 84.
litigation, heads of: 82-3, 243.
Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, A. : 78, 94, 251 n.99.
Macnaghten, W.H. : 113,277.
Mädhava, commentator on Parasara : 103, 114, 168, 169-71, 185 n.22, 188 n.28, 192 n.,
210, 230 n.57, 276.
Mahäbhärata: its relation with Manu: 90, 91, 92, 95; miscellaneous references: 3 n.2,
10, 61 n., 91, 97, 103, 115, 146, 184 n.18, 198, 207 n.3, 208, 212 n.19, 250.
Mahälingam, T.V. : 230 n.57.
Mahäsammata : 267.
Maity, S.K. : 124 n.2.
Majumdar, A.K. : 226 n.48.
Mänava-dharma-sütra, hypothetical prototype of the Manu-smrlj: 88-91, 186 n.24.
Mandlik, V.N. : 112 n>, 117, 158 n.31, 168 n.55, 169 n.60a.
mantras : 30, 44, 55.
Manu, mythical person: 9, 62, 78-9, 87, 100; hermit: 267-8.
Manu (smrti): 77ff.; analysis: 73-87; origins: 87-92; successive versions: 91, 101; older
than other smrtis : 92-3; date : 95, 126-7, 130; contradictions : 182; commentaries on :
111-12; and the Bhavisya-puräna : 92 n.

--- PAGE 320 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX
299
1.3: 78.
1.84-6: 184.
1.108: 197-8.
11.2-4:5.
II.6: 180n.l3.
11.10: 158.
11.12: 6.
11.14: 158.
11.20: 180n.l2.
11.135: 31.
11.224: 190.
III.75-6: 3 n.4.
III.101 : 52.
IV.176: 189, 191.
IV.178: 197.
V.93:215.
V.I48: 80.
V.I52: 80.
V.I59-60: 80.
VII.2: 209, 210.
VII.13: 225.
VII.198: 82.
VII.199: 82.
VII.203: 226 n.50.
VII.208 :82.
VIII. 15: 4.
VIII.24: 251.
VIII.43: 237-8.
VIII.46: 197.
VIII.58-9: 217.
VIII.304: 211-2.
VIII.314-16: 235.
VIII.318: 68, 234.
VIII.381 : 219.
IX.3 : 57.
IX.100-1 : 218.
IX.lll : 190n.30.
IX. 172-3: 169.
IX.210: 168.
IX.213: 151.
IX.233 : 255.
IX.256: 240 n.79.
IX.261 : 240 n.79.
IX.267-9: 240 n.79.
IX.275: 242 n.82.
IX.302: 186.
IX.321 : 218.
IX.334: 85.
XI.208 : 219.
XI.229-30: 86.
XII.99: 3 n.4.
XII. 106: 159.
XII. 108 :233.
XII.113-14: 15-16.
XII.123:86.
XII.125:86.
Manu kyè : 272.
Manvartha-vivrtti 
: 111 n.2.
marriage: 11, 41, 57; by purchase: 59; the endogamic principle: 42-4; validity of: 57;
forms of: 59; interpretation of the grounds of validity : 156; with the maternal uncle's
daughter: 169-72, 201 n.56; fire: 11.
Maskarin, commentator on Gautama: 114, 273.
Masson-Oursel, P. : 3 n.3, 206.
màtsya-nyàya ('logic of the fish') : 207.
Mayne, J.D. : 121, 139 n., 150, 155 n.23, 230 n.56.
Mazzarella, G. : ix, 128.
meat-eating: 80, 195 n.41, 226 n.48.
Medhätithi, commentator on Manu: 17, 94, 95, 106, 112 n.3, 113, 114, 126, 129, 143, 146
n.5, 155 n.26, 158 n.31, 159, 160, 161 n.51, 170 n.61, 179, 181 n.16, 185, 186 n.23,
191, 197, 199, 200, 234, 213 nn.21, 22, 219 n.34, 221, 225, 226 nn.49, 50, 231 n.61,
234-6, 247, 252, 253-4.
Megasthenes, Greek traveller: 33, 48, 141.
Meyer, J.J. : ix, 22 n.3, 128, 146 n.4.
M'imämsä: 149, 158 n.32, 169, 179 n.9, 180 n.ll, 188 n.27, 198; use in exegesis of smrti
texts: 7, 149-51; examples of the use of its maxims: 151-3; rules identifying an in-
junction: 154; model of reasoning for the interpreter: 158ff.; see injunction, Vedic.
Minakshi, C. : 241 n.81.
Mitäksarä, commentary on Yajñavalkya : 5, 27, 98, 108, 113, 117, 119, 124 n.4, 126 n.6,
129, 146 n.5, 151, 155, 156, 158, 160, n.38, 161-2, 162 nn., 163, 164, 165, 167 n.53, 168,
172-4, 181 n.16, 182, 191, 192 n.34, 199, 210, 213 n.22, 217, 221, 230, 233 and n.63,
234, 246 n.90, 247, 250, 256 n.lll, 260.
Mitra-misra: 114, 118, 230, 259; see Viramitrodaya.
monarchy, sole form of government envisaged : 207 n.2.
money-lending: 31, 58.
Monier-Willidms, Sir M. : 94, 178 n.7.
monogamy : 44.

--- PAGE 321 [DIRECT] ---

300 
INDEX
Müller, F. Max : 7, 88, 89, 90.
Muslims in Sindh: 124; in India: 259-62.
Naerssen, F.H. Van: 111 n.2.
Nandana, commentator on Manu: 112, 209 n.ll.
Nanda-pandita : 114, 117, 278; see Dattaka-m'imämsä.
Närada, mythical person : 78, 100.
Närada (smrti): 91-2, 95, 10O-3, 209, 273, 276; date: 103, 128, 129, 130; commentaries
on: 114;
Int.AA : 207. 
XVIII.1-4: 238 and n.71.
I.10:256n.l09. 
XVIII.9: 225.
1.34:250. 
XVIII. 19 : 255.
1.37: 252 and n. 
XVIII.21 : 214-5, 224 n.44.
(See.) 1.7 : 246 n.90, 247 n.91. 
XVIII.24 : 228.
1.33:211 n.16. 
XVIII.25 : 215 n.26.
1.40 : 161 n.40. 
paris.46-7 : 235-6.
1.81-2 : 160. 
paris.48 : 234.
1.87 : 161-2. 
Sämb.,II.71 : 163.
Sämb.,XVIII.32: 216.
Näräyana, commentator on Manu: 111 n.2, 112, 185.
Naudou, J. : 222 n.39.
Nelson, J.H.: 138-9, 141,203.
Nîlakantha, author of the Bhagavanta-bhäskara : 117,147, 259, 278; see Vyavahàra-mayùkha.
Nirnaya-sindhu of Kamalâkara : 117, 160, 278.
Nïtisàra of Kämandaka : 146 n.3.
niyoga : 4 n.6, 61, 84, 182, 193 n.36.
Nörr, D. : 166 n.46.
nyâya: 161 n.40, 168 and n., 225 n.45.
O'Malley, L.S. : 48 n.28.
option: allowed where similar texts conflict: 158; the less attractive solution: 158 n.31.
ordeals: 105; in dharma-sütras: 69; in dharma-sästras: 83, 92, 99, 102, 129; as a chrono-
logical indication : 129.
Orianne, G. : 113 n.6, 119.
Pancarätra : 273.
Pandey, B.N. : 264 n.10.
Pänini: 22, 25, 75, 125, 152 n.18.
Parasara (smrti): 103, 117, 129, 184, 186-8, 218 n.33, 233, 276, 277;
1.21 : 187.
1.24:184,186.
Paräsara-mädhaviya, commentary on Parasara: 114; see Mädhava.
Paribhäsä-prakäsa, part of the Viramitrodaya digest by Mitra-misra : 160 n.37, 180 n.14,
185andn.22.
parisad: composition^ of : 15, 233; role of in working out rules of dhárma: 15-16; and
penances : 233.
partition (in succession): 50, 61-2, 84; rules in the dharma-sùtras: 57f., 62; in Manu: 84;
an example of the use of a mlmämsä maxim : 151 ; unequal, blamed : 191-2, 192 n.34.
penance: 50; in the dharma-sütras: 54-5; comparison with penal sanctions: 63-5; in
Manu: 84-6; the king's role: 66, 232ff.; cases where offenses are merely sins: 232;
where the sinner is also liable to penal sanction : 233-4; see punishment,
perjury : 69.

--- PAGE 322 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
301
Pitâmaha (smrti): 105, 126, 127, 129, 158, 176 n.2, 238, 248 n.94, 254, 255, 276.
Portuguese India: vii, 121.
possession, acquisition by long: 71, 135, 160-5.
power, spiritual: relation with temporal power: 215; superiority of: 218-9; difference
between the two : 220-1 ; see Brahmin.
power, temporal: de facto: 211; secures the king's independence of the subjects: 211;
territorial character: 212; see king; power, spiritual.
primogeniture : 209 n.9.
Prthu:212.
Prabhu, P.N. : 29 n.3.
prakirnaka : 237-41, 243, 244.
Pratäpa-rudra : 116; see Sarasvatî-vilasa.
pratiloma unions : 42, 200 n.55, 274.
pràyiscitta : 54; see penance.
precision, Nârada and : 102.
Privy Council : ix, 150, 198 n.49.
Prthvicandra : 279.
protection, duty of: the essence of the royal function: 207-8, 222; independent of the
right to levy taxes: 212-13; scope: 222-3; justifies obedience to the king's orders:
224 n.44; ceases towards subjects who have abandoned their duties': 226 ñi49.-•'"«.••.
public opinion : 189-91, 252; an insecure test : 192. 
,
punishment : the right of, a royal privilege : 66-7,213-14; divine institution of: 214; confers
an unlimited power on the king : 214-15; in practice limited by respect due to Brahmins :
67, 219; is effective as a penance : 68, 234; the case of the thief of gold : 68, 235-6.
purohita: 12, 66; agreement between and the king: 217; functions of: 217-18.
Qureshi, I.H. : 261 n.6.
Radhakrishnan, Sir S. : 86 n.6, 258 n.3.
Räghavänanda, commentator on Manu: 121, 252.
Raghunandana, author of the Smrti-tattva : 120, 279; see Vy avahar a-tattva.
räja-dharma : 208, 223.
Rájadharma-kánda : see Kalpataru.
Räjadharma-kaustubha of Anantadeva : 120, 147.
Räjariiti-prakäsa, part of the Vïramitrodaya digest: 147, 210, 224 n.3.
Räjariiti-ratnäkara of Candesvara : 116, 147, 209 nn.8, 9, 210, 260.
râja-sattha, collection of judgments : 272.
Räjatarangim : 222 n.39.
Rankin, Sir G.C. : 265 nn.
rape, marriage by : 60.
Rathakaras : 273-4.
Ratnäkara, author of the Jayasimha-kalpadruma : 121.
reasoning: importance of in interpretation: 6-7, 159; processes of: 160 and n.38.
retrial : 255.
religion in the development of a jurist's task: 28-9, 68, 87, 135.
Renou, L. : 7 n.10, 10 n., 25 n., 89 n., 98 n.2, 104 n., 132 n., 238 n.74.
Zgveda : 7, 9, 22, 23, 30, 34, 47, 50, 87.
Richardson, D. : 272 n.21.
Rocher, L. : 116 n.17, 145 n.2a, 161 n.40, 162 n.41, 208 n.7, 245 n.88, 277, 278 n.3, 279.
Roman law: ix, 102, 109, 131, 143, 159, 176, 177 n.5, 205, 230, 243.
Rose, H.A. : 43 n.20.
Ross, Sir D. : 34 n.9.
Ruben, W. : ix-x, 34 n.l 1,281.

--- PAGE 323 [DIRECT] ---

302 
INDEX
Sabara-svämin, commentator on Jaimini: 13, 149 and n.10, 155 and n.26, 181.
sacrifice^): 3, 10-11, 30, 44, 47, 51, 52, 150, 154, 219 n.34, 249.
sadäcära: 14, 16.
Sadäsivaiah, H.M. : 17 n.17.
Saivites : 48, 273.
Sámaveda: 7, 19, 55.
Sämavidhäna : 55.
Sämbasiva Sästri, K. : 100, 238 n.72; see Närada (smrti).
Samgraha- (Sahgraha-) kära: 163.
samskäras: 11, 209 n.ll.
Samvarta (smrti) : 105, 238 n.73.
Sankararäma Sästri, C. : 181 nn. 16,17.
Sanskrit, vocabulary: xii; grammar: 152 n.17; culture: 266; learning: 139.
Sañkha-Likhita (dharma-sütra): 24, 129; (smrti): 105, 127, 186, 208 n.6.
sapindaship : 156.
Sarasvathviläsa of Pratäparudra : 116, 144 n., 230, 278.
Sarkär, B.K. : 208 n.7.
Sarkar Sästri, G.C. : 120.
Sarkär, J. : 261 n.6.
Sarkär, K.L.: 150 n. 12, 260.
Sarkär, U.C. : 53 n.34a, 186 n.24, 262 n., 270 n., 281.
Sarvädhikäri, R. : 118, 138 n.4.
Sastri, K.A.N.:224n.41.
sästrls : 136.
Satapatha-brähmana : 97, 207 n.3.
satï (suttee) : 120, 129.
sátiras: 191.
Saunaka : 152.
scepticism : 28.
schools, juridical: 171, 172-4.
schools, Vedic : 7, 12.
security, gift of: 207-8.
sel£-acquired property : 62, 173.
self-defense : 55 n.37, 160, 222.
Sen, A.K.: 208 n.7, 281.
Sen, P.N.: 281.
Senart, E. : 34, 36-8, 40, 48.
Sen-Gupta, N.C. : 76, 174 n.73, 281.
sentence : see judgment.
share, special, of eldest son : 62, 168 n.56, 191, 192-3.
Sharmä, R.S. : 34 n.ll, 281.
Shastry, R. Shama : 213 n.20.
Siam : 269-70.
Sicé: 115.
Sinha,B.P. :2^n.41,231n.60.
sins : 212, 218 n.33, 219, 224, 232, 249; classification of in the dharma-sütras; 53; in Manu
85-6.
slaves, slavery: 102, 232.
smrti: 9, 13; interpolations in smrtis: 125-6.
Smrticandrikä of Devanna-bhatta : 115, 132 n., 152 n.18, 163, 170 n.62, 192, 197 and n.47
202 n.58, 238 n.72.
Smrti-sahgraha : 106.

--- PAGE 324 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
303
Smrti-viveka of Sülapäni : 119.
snâtaka: 46, 190.
Sohm, R. : 159 n.34, 166 n.46.
soma : 35, 220.
sons, different sorts of: 60-1; father reborn: 49-50, 61.
Sorg, L.:vii, 138 n.2, 203.
South, the : 53, 55.
Southeast Asia : 96, 111, 210 n. 15, 266ff.
Spellman,J.W.:267n.l6.
spies: 240-1.
spiritual benefit : 4, 41, 211-12.
'Spurious' smrtis : 106, 131.
sfâddha : 12, 53, 61, 80, 168 n.58.
Srîkara : 166 and n.47.
sruti: 7, 13;see,Veda.
stages of life : 45ff. ; a critique of theory : 48-51.
statute law of India : 41, 173 n.70, 265-6.
Stenzler, A.F. : 97, 99, 124.
Sternbach, L. : 146 n.3.
Strehly, G. : 78, 198 n.51, 251 n.99.
student, Brahminical, the first stage of life : 11, 45.
succession, to property: rules in the dharma-sütras: 57-8, 60; in Manu: 84; the rights of
daughter and widow: 62, 129; the Dâyabhaga and Mitäksarä systems: 173-4; dis-
qualifications from: 54; to the throne: 213. See partition; share.
Südras: 30-2, 40-2, 51, 64, 69, 85, 109, 180, 182, 206 n.66, 210.
Éukranïti: 146 n.3.
Sülapäni : 114, 119 and n.24, 166.
Sumantu : 275.
sùtra, meaning of: 10.
svämin : 212.
'system' in the sütras : 49.
Taittirïya-samhitâ : 9, 157.
Tarkälankära, Sri Krsna : 119.
Tarkapancänana, Jagannätha : 108 n., 121, 254 n.
taxes: 81, 213-14, 220, 227.
teaching, monopoly of : 31.
territory, concept of sacred : 15, 179.
Thakur,A.: 166n.51.
theft : 67, 70.
thief of gold, see punishment,
'thorns': 85, 241.
T<x}ar Mai, author of the Todaränanda : 120, 259.
tofts : 244-5.
tradition, as a source of dharma : 9ff.; the two senses ofsmrti: 13; authority of: 14, 156-7.
treasure, buried : 220, 221.
irivarga: the triple motivation of human activity: 5; the supreme authority of dharma:
5-6, 156; the sage's ideal is the balance of the three : 5.
Ujjvalâ, commentary on Äpastamba: 4 n.5, 114.
unchanging East, fallacy of: 194
untouchability : 41.

--- PAGE 325 [DIRECT] ---

304 
INDEX
upanayana . 11.
upäyas, the four : 82, 241.
Usanas (dharma-sOtra) : 24; author of a treatise on arthasästra : 146 and n.5.
usefulness, and the work of exegetes : 167.
Väcaspati Miara: 116. See Vy avahara-cintämani.
Vaikhänasa (dharma-sütra): 25, 53, 273; the word: 25, 46 n.22.
Vaisnavite influence : 25-7.
Vaiáya:31-2,33,36,39.
validity, of royal acts : 214-15.
variant readings : 108.
Vasistha (dharma-sütra) : 23-4,90, 129;
1.6:179. 
XIV. 11:41-2.
1.7:179. 
XV.3:154.
1.25-27:42. 
XVI.30:69.
1.39-40: 180 n. 12. 
XVII.73 : 60.
1.44-46:220. 
XVIII.18:42.
11.44:58. 
XIX.4:217.
III.6: 233-4. 
XIX.7: 38.
V.3 : 57. 
XIX.9: 67.
VIII.15:49. 
XIX.45:234.
XIII.61: 52. 
XIX.48:215.
Veda, scholars in the : 15, 75-6; source oïdharma : 6-7; totality of knowledge : 7; authority
of : 8; conflicts of texts: 158; see injunction, Vedic.
Vena, wicked king : 218 n.32..
vidhis, classes of: 153.
Vijñanesvara, commentator on Yájñavalkya: 113, 165, 167 n.53; see Mitäksarä.
Villey, M.:257n.l.
Viramitrodaya, commentary on Yájñavalkya: 114, 182, 190 n.32, 193, 211, 216, 251.
Viramitrodaya, digest by Mitra-misra : 118, 259; see Paribhäsä-, Räjaniti-, and Vyahära-
prakâsa.
visible and invisible motives : 156.
Visnu (smrti): 25-7, 124; commentaries: 114;
111.98 : 212 n.18. 
XLII.l : 239 n.77.
V.71: 242 n.84. 
LXXI.85 : 191 n.32.
XV.40: 58 n.44. 
XCIV. 1-2: 46.
Visvariipa, commentator on Yájñavalkya : 24, 99, 106, 112-13, 146 n.5, 163, 165-6, 181
n.16, 190 n.32, 195 n.41, 210, 213 n.21, 221, 222 n.37.
Viávedevas: 41.
Viáveávara: 113, 118, 229, 279.
Vivàda-bhangàrnava by Jagannâtha : 121.
Viväda-cintämani of Väcaspati Miara : 116, 279.
Viväda-ratnäkara of Candeávara : 116.
Vivädärnava-setu : 121.
Vivóla-tándava of Kaîhalâkara : 117, 278.
Vyâ 
mythical person : 103.
Vyâ 
(smrti): 105, 125, 126, 129, 131 n., 164, 169, 254, 277.
Vyavahära-cintämani of Väcaspati Miara: 116, 132 n., 152, 156, 160, 161 n., 164, 225 n.47,
254-5, 256 n.l 11.
Vyavahära-mädhava : 114, 230 n.57.
Vyavahära-mätrkä of Jimutavähana : 119, 162 n.43, 166 n.47.
Vyavahâra-mayùkha of Nïlakantha : 118, 155, 167 n.53, 168, 182, 199, 201, 210, 278.

--- PAGE 326 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
305
Vyavahära-nirnaya of Varadaräja : 105 n., 116, 279.
Vyavahära-prakäsa of Mitra-misra : 167 n.53, 202 n.57, 254.
Vyavahâra-sangraha 
: 115.
Vyavahära-tattva of Raghunandana : 166 nn.
vyavasthäs : 227.
Wägarü, Code of: 267, 269.
war, laws of: in the dharma-sütras: 65; in Manu: 81-2; influence of arthasästra: 223;
justification for war : 223 n.40.
widow : 62 ; see also sail
wife, legal position of : 84.
Wintesnitz, M. : 95.
witnesses : 69.
written documents as proof : 24.
written sources, and the origin of law in India : xii; in the time of the Greeks : 141 ; in the
time of Bouchet and Dubois : 203.
Wynch, P.M.: 119.
Yájñavalkya, mythical person : 97.
Yájñavalkya (smrti): 97ff., 273; date: 100; commentaries: 112f.;
1.9:233. 
11.21:157,168.
1.119: 207 n.4. 
11.24:161-2.
1.156:190. 
11.30: 246 n.90.
11.1:250. 
11.186:228-9.
II.5 : 244. 
III.257: 235.
11.19:250. 
111.301:233.
Yajurveda : 7, 9, 20 n., 61, 88, 98.
Yama, mythical person : 250.
Yama (smrti) : 105, 222 n.37.
