# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1976-rajani-background-srivijaya-part4-tambralinga.pdf
# Total Pages: 49
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
REVIEW ARTICLES 
BACKGROUND TO THE SRI VIJAYA STORY-PART IV, 
Senarat Paranavitana, Ceylon and Malaysia, (Lake House, 1966), and 
other sources of interlinear writing (see list in section 21) 
16. VIJAYABAHU I, PARAKRAMABAHU I 
AND NISSAMKAMALLA 
This part, in fifty pages, deals with the history of Ceylon from the 
Accession of Vijayabahu the Great in 1073 to the coming of the Portuguese 
in 1505, a period of over four centuries. 
Nobody can accuse me of not 
bringing down the cost of 1i ving. 
But the aim is not to tell the history 
of Ceylon as such, but to give that history within the pattern of a history 
of Sri Vijaya. 
The story is based on the accepted sources with the 
addition of two Ceylonese inscriptions recently published; while Parana-
vitana's sources of interlinear writing will only be used sparingly as 
connecting links in the overall story. 
The two 'new inscriptions' are 
the Panusvasnuvara Pillar Inscription of the 9th century where the topo-
nym Yavaju-Kalingubimhi appears; and the Madirigiri Slab Inscription 
of the 11th century with the name Samara Vijayottunga. 
These 
inscriptions comprise two of four irrefutable pieces of evidence, three of 
which have already been mentioned in the third part of this paper, 
while the fourth will be submitted in Section 17 below. 
With all this 
new evidence. the story of this four hundred years' period produced by 
historians of Sri Lanka must be looked at again from an entirely new 
angle. Irrespective of whether the Kalinga in the story was in Orissa-
India, as the Simhalese historians have thought, or it was in Southeast 
Asia, as the evidence now shows, it seems curious that these historians 
have never asked themselves the reasons why the Kalinga princes who 
became kings of Ceylon, such as Nissamkamalla and Magba, ever inva-
ded the island in the first place. It is difficult to see Ceylon as a worth-
while prize considering the enormous risks involved in the whole enter-
prise of an oversea invasion across such vast distances. I hope it is still 
not too late to ask this question though my study can only be superficial 
for lack of space and knowledge of the subject. But the main object is 
to extract a little history of Sri Vijaya from the confusion.

--- PAGE 2 ---
276 
REVIEW AllTICLE 
The orthodox history of Ceylon, based mainly on the Culawamsa, 
does not mention King Mahendra VI, the cousin, son-in-law and ally of 
Maharaja Samara Vijayottunga. 
Vijayabahu I is given sole credit for 
liberating the island from the Chola yoke after long years of struggle. 
In this way the international character of the story is changed to an 
insular one. 
The reason of course is that the authors of the Culawamsa 
were of the faction that supported Vijayabahu, who in this way became 
the national hero of Ceylon in the same way that Airlangga was the 
national Javanese hero. The story of Vijayabahu in its economic aspects 
also differs somewhat from its political aspects. 
When Rajaraja invaded Ceylon in 993, he was satisfied to sack 
Anuradhapura and move the capital to Polonnaruva because it com-
manded all the crossings of the defended river line in North Ceylon. 
Mahinda V escaped to the south where he was left to rule in Ruhuna. 
We are not told whether the king became a guerrilla, but certainly his 
people would have been. 
Ceylon's wealth, or rather its lack, did not 
justify Rajaraja's sending men into such guerilla territory. Even today 
Ceylon cannot grow enough food to feed herself, and there was no reason 
for Rajaraja to occupy such barren land. It is true that Ceylon produced 
pearls and precious stones, but it is to be doubted that Rajaraja would 
be prepared to turn his soldiers into miners and deep-sea divers. Today 
Ceylon is famous for her tea, but I wonder if the ancient Indians drank 
tea to any great extent. And of course Ceylon was, and still is, a 
stronghold of Buddhism. This no doubt attracted pilgrims and tourists 
to the island, but Rajaraja's religion was Hinduism and be would hardly 
have been interested in Buddhist shrines. So be bad no reason to conquer 
the whole of Ceylon. 
However Ceylon was on the route between the Middle and Far 
East, and her real wealth lay in her ports. Ships plying between the 
Middle East and India would go to ports on the west coast of India, such 
as Karachi· and Bombay; while those plying between China and India 
would go to ports on the east coast of India, such as Cal<;utta and 
Madras; but long distance ships plying the whole route would go to 
Ceylon and not to Indian ports. It was possible, using the rhythm of

--- PAGE 3 ---
REVIEW Al\TICLE 
277 
the monsoons, for ships to sail from the Middle East to Ceylon, from 
Ceylon straight across the Ten Degree Channel to a port on the west 
coast of the Malay Peninsula, slip down tbe Malacca Straits to a port on 
the east coast, and from there on to China. When the monsoon changed 
the ships could return and be horne within a year. 
The same applied to 
ships sailing the other way. 
But to go off the route to any extent, such 
as to a port on either coast of India or below the equator, could mean 
losing a whole season. In this way, the ports of Ceylon became important 
entrepots where Indian goods and merchandise were collected for this 
long distance trade. 
All this Rajaraja did not know until he sent an embassy to China 
in about 1014. The embassy returned just before or just after the king's 
death, and the report brought back in 1016 impressed the new king, 
Rajendra. It opened his eyes as to the possibilities of this traffic, and he 
decided to wrestle the trade from Sri Vijaya-why, who knows be might 
even be able to conquer China itself! But to subdue Sri Vijaya he first 
had to have complete control of the ports of Ceylon. So he invaded the 
southern part of the island in 1017, captured King Mahinda V and took 
him to India. 
Then in 1025 he successfully invaded Sri Vijaya, sent an 
embassy to China in 1033, and visited the Malay Peninsula in 1044, 
possibly to see what prospects there were of invading China itself. 
Unfortunately he got into trouble with a young girl and was assassinated. 
In this way the Chinese Empire was saved from Chola invasion. This 
is a good story even if I only bring it in as a joke. 
However the Sejarah 
Melayu has something like it (from page 10 of C.C. Brown's translation, 
Oxford 1970), although the story is too long to give in detail. 
When Raja Shulan (Rajendra I of Chola India) died, he was 
succeeded by his grandson, Raja Chulan (Kulottuoga I). The new king 
decided to invade China and arrived at Temasek (Singapore) with his 
forces. 
When the Raja of China heard the news there was consternation, 
but the Chinese produced a thoroughly Chinese ruse to put him off, and 
Raja Chulan returned home to India. The episodes of Rajendra's con-
quest of the Peninsula and Kulottunga's visit to China seemed to .have 
been well entrenched in the minds of the local people, but as the stories

--- PAGE 4 ---
280 
REVJEW ARTICLE 
the fighting in Anuradhapura; and Vijayabahu had himself crowned 
king in that city. 
According to Parnavitana, Vijayabahu usurped the 
throne, but as he was already Mabadipada, it could be that he was only 
acting in his own rights in taking the kingdom. 
Vijayabahu moved his 
capital to Polonnaruva, and this begins the period of that name in 
Ceylonese history, which lasted a century and a half. 
Meanwhile, many years before, when Prince Kitti, future King 
Vijayababu, was still a young boy and the land was under Cbola occupa-
tion, many guerilla chiefs carne into their own. 
One of these was a 
general named P. Buddha (Lord Budai of Sitnarubim.) 
He protected 
Prince Kitti and groomed him for kingship of the whole island. The 
general served the king until his retirement and the king expressed his 
heartfelt gratitude to the general in an assembly of nobles, and his words 
were indited on a copperplate which the general took with him into his 
retirement in the country. The inscription has .come to light and I quote 
a passage from page 183 of Glimpses of Ceylon's Past: 
"At the time we were remaining concealed in the mountainous 
wilderness, having been deprived of our own kingdom in conse-
quence of the calamity caused by the Soli Tamils, Lord Budai 
of Sitnarubirn, Constable of Ruhuna, protected, with the aid of 
his retinue, the entire royal family, including our father, His 
Majesty King Mugalan, the Great Lord; be brought us up in our 
tender age; he nurtured us with the sustenance of edible roots 
and green herbs from the jungle, be concealed us from our enemies 
who were prowling about seeking us wherever we went; engaging 
himself in this place and that place, he made the Province of 
Rubuna once again loyal to us, took us out of the mountainous 
wilderness and established us in our own kingdom." 
This expression of heartfelt gratitude from a monarch of Sri Lanka 
to his benefactor in a copperplate found at Panakaduva, reminds one of 
another inscription from Madirigiri set up by King Mahendra VI some 
two decades earlier, when be expressed the same sentiments of heartfelt 
gratefulness to the Maharaja Samara Vijayottunga (see section 14 
above):

--- PAGE 5 ---
HEVIEW AH'l'ICLE 
281 
"enacted in order to commemorate Samara Maharaja who 
drove away the Colas that remained spread over the entire Island 
of Lanka.... The village of Mehendibapiti, which is belonging 
to King Samara, shall be given to the tenants; it shall be made to 
remember that at the present time, we have been liberated by this 
king; it shall also be made to remember that at the present time, 
our villages and land have been liberated by this king; it shall also 
be made to remember that however much of the village one 
possessed, how many houses and gardens one possessed, the houses 
and gardens will remain without officers of the palace breaking 
into them and confiscating them." 
I will make only one short comment on these two inscriptions. 
Vijayabahu stated that the Colas (Soli Tamils) chased him all over the 
island; while Mahendra stated that Maharaja Samara chased the Colas 
from the same island. Such is the epigraphic evidence. 
It would be as 
well if Simbalese scholars would go through these two records again 
without interference from the chronicular Culawamsa or Paranavitana's 
interlinear sources, and decide who it really was who drove the Colas 
out of Ceylon. In this way perhaps the discrepancy of Kassapa VII 
being the predecessor of Vijayabahu could be ironed out. 
To return to the Sri Vijaya story as told by Paranavitana. This 
concerned Suryanarayana, the third of that name to appear in the records 
(Chapter IV of his book, Ceylon and Malaysia, The Relations Between 
Sri Vijaya and Ceylon from Vijayabahu I to Magha, pp. 59-73.) When 
King Mahinda IV died in 972 his queen Sundari, the damsel in distress 
of Appendix I, returned to the Malay Peninsula and lived with a prince 
of Java named Purandara. 
This prince was the younger brother of 
Suryanarayana to whom the princess had been betrothed before she became 
Mabinda's queen. The union produced a son who was called Suryana-
rayana, and the son in turn produced a son who was also called 
Suryanarayana. 
Suryanarayana 3 was in Ceylon when King Mahendra VI was on 
the throne, and he held the office of Admiral of the Fleet (Danda-nayaka), 
an office that his grandfather Purandart~ bad held under Mahinda IV,

--- PAGE 6 ---
282 
Rb:VJEW ARTICLE 
The events after Vijayabab's accession are not very clear, but 
Suryanarayana then fought with Vijayababu and was defeated. He 
retired to Sri Vijaya, where be was given the same high office of Admiral 
of the Fleet. After that, probably when Samara Vijaya died and his son 
Manabharana became Maharaja, Suryanarayana again went to Ceylon. 
Vijayabahu made him Admiral of the Fleet. Then Suryanarayana again 
returned to Sri Vijaya, perhaps when Manabharana died. 
Soon after 
he became Maharaja (Suryanarayana I.) 
Vijayabahu sent a messenger 
to congratulate him on his attainment of the 'overlordship of all the 
Kataba kingdoms', and Suryanarayana sent his own daughter, Tiloka-
sundari, to become Vijayabahu's queen. She was the 'charming young 
princess of the Kalinga family' of the history of Ceylon; and she became 
the mother of Vikramabahu I (1111-32) and Ratnavali, who in turn was 
the mother of Parakramabahu the Great {1153-86). 
The story is told 
on pages 63-5 of Paranavitana's book under review. 
Genealogical Table VI 
Suryanaraya na 3 (f) 
TilokaLndari 
Vijayabahu I ( 1073-111 0) 
I 
Vikramabahu I (1111-32) 
I 
Gajabahu II (1132-53) 
Ratnavali (m. Manabbarana) 
I 
Parakramabahu T (1153-86) 
So there was goodwill between Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka. 
The 
trade route between the Middle and Far East was kept open, and 
Vijayabahu was able to rehabilitate the land and brought peace in a long 
reign of 37 years. He was followed by two reigns each of twenty years 
(Vikamabahu I and Gajabahu II), but there was trouble and the island 
was not unified. Then came, in the words of the History of Ceylon, "The 
emergence of Parakramabahu the Greatt wbvP the islan9 came under 
one n,1ler once more,

--- PAGE 7 ---
1\EVm\V AHTICLE 
283 
Parakramabahu reigned for over thirty years, and again there was 
good-will between Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka. The trade route was kept 
open, and Parakramabahu was able to carry out a tremendous building 
programme, and tremendous also were the tanks he dug. At the same 
time be invaded India and Burma. All these activities would indicate 
that he bad what would today be called 'foreign aid' (it bears repeating 
that Ceylon is only a small island.) That aid came from Sri Vijaya, 
especially naval aid. 
In that period the Pagan dynasty bad come to 
power in Burma. 
Its policy was expansionist. They had already taken 
Thaton in Lower Burma, the religious capital of the Moo, and this 
brought them to the doorstep of Suvarnnakudya, one of the City States 
of Sri Vijaya. So it was in tbe Maharaja's interest to support 
Parakramababu in his enterprise to stop further expansion of Pagan. 
Parakramabahu's expedition would appear to have been successful on 
this count, though this is not the story given in Simbalese sources. 
In 
any case the 'invasion' could only have consisted of raids on the ports 
and sea coasts. 
Parakramabahu was followed by Vijayababu II, a son of one of 
his sisters, who came from Suvarnnakudya in Kalinga (Sri Vijaya-in 
this period the two names were synonymous), but he was soon put away, 
and Nissamkamalla, a prince from Simbalapura (Singora) in Kalinga 
followed him. Nissamkamalla was a nephew, or son-in-law, or both, 
of Parakramabahu, and he followed the same policy of pacifying the land 
to keep the trade route open. He carried out the same programme of 
public works; he toured the island and set up edicts and hospitals; he 
remitted taxes; and he invaded India. 
Historians tend to take 
Nissamkamalla's inscriptions as boastful. The reason is because they 
thought he came from Kalinga-India. 
From new evidence, he came from 
Kalinga-Peninsula, wbere he had the support of the Maharaja, so his 
statements may not have been as exaggerated as would appear at first 
sight

--- PAGE 8 ---
284 
tmvmw AllTJC.LE 
Genealogical Table VI 
Suryanarayana I (Sri Vijaya) 
I 
Jayagopta (Sri Vijaya) 
Parakramabahu I (Ceylon) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Pralambasta (Sri Vijaya) Nissamkamalla (Ceylon) = Subhadra 
I 
I 
d . 
Suryaoarayana II (Sri Vijaya) = 
Sarvanga Sun an 
I 
I 
Jayagopa (Sri Vijaya) Magba (Ceylon) 
Pancandi (Pundra) 
I 
I 
Gandagopala or Chandrabanu III (?) 
The story of Chandrabanu, the third of that name to appear in the 
records, will be told in Section 18, while that of Gandagopala in Section 
19. It should be understood that the Kalinga princes who invaded Ceylon, 
Nissamkamalla, Sahasamalla, Lokissa, Magha, Chandrabanu and others, 
did so on the order of the Mabaruja of Sri Vijaya. The only reason for 
undertaking these dangerous expeditions over sucb vast distances was 
obviously not to colonise Ceylon, if I may put it like that, but to hold 
the ports so that the trade route between the Middle and Far East could 
be kept open. 
In short, the reason was not political but economic. 
17. FROM NISSAMKAMALLA TO MAGHA 
Nissamkamalla, the last king of a unified Ceylon until the advent 
of Parakramabahu VI over two centuries later, died after a reign of 
nine years ( 1187-96), and trouble started at once. 
In the period of 
nearly twenty years before the advent of Magha in 1215, the island had 
as many as eleven rulers, of whom the sixth or middle name was 
Dbarmasoka. The Pandya and Sri Vijaya factions fou,ght for control 
of the island, and the Colas also took a band in the proceedings. It 
might make the confused history of Ceylon in this period a little easier 
to understand if it is remembered that Cola and Sri Vijaya bad been on 
good terms since the Maharaja put Kulottunga I on the Cola throne in 
1070, that is, the Indian policy did not envisage any more overseas 
expansion, so there was no cause for conflict. In fact, Cola mercenaries 
were readily available to the Sri Vijaya faction. 
Meanwhile in Ceylon,

--- PAGE 9 ---
HEVIEW AHTICLE 
285 
king-and queen-makers rose to the fore. 
Of these, one was a General 
Kitti, who put Queen Lilavati, the Pandyan widow of Parakrarnabahu 
I on the throne for the first of the three times that she was ruler. The 
general had to defend the island against three Cola invasions during the 
queen's short reign of three years. 
Another king-maker was Abo (also 
called Elata Abo, Ati and Ayasmanta) who supported Sahasamalla, 
Queen Kalyanavati and Dharmasoka, all of the Kalinga clan. 
Sabasamalla, a step-brother of Nissamkamalla, was invited to 
come to Ceylon from Kalinga by Abo. On the way be stopped off in 
Cola India for two years while the land was made safe for him; and he 
was consecrated on August 23, 1200. After that Abo deposed him and 
put Queen Kalyanavati, widow of Nissamkamalla, on the throne. Then 
in 1208 he placed Dbarmasoka, a five months old prince, on the throne. 
After that, one Anikanga, called a Mahadipada (heir apparent), invaded 
the island with a force of Cola troops, killed Abo and the infant king, 
and ascended the throne. One of the chronicles stated that Anikanga 
was the father of Dharmasoka. This is sheer nonsense. Nobody is going 
to put a five months old baby on any throne unless be is the Dalai Lama, 
and in any case, if Anikanga was Dharmasoka's father, be would hardly 
have bad his own son killed. 
Here is where the history of Ceylon can 
benefit a great deal from a little guessing on my part. Dharmasoka was 
not a five months old prince, but what the story means is that be ruled 
for five months. I will return to this subject later. 
Anikanga lasted only seventeen days when the Pandya faction 
placed Queen Lilavati on the throne for the second time, then a third 
time after a short reign of Lokissa, a Kailnga king. After that, in 1214, 
a Kalinga prince named Magba landed at the bead of a Malala army of 
24,000 men. 
He was consecrated at Polonnaruva in 1215, and ruled for 
twenty-one years (to 1236, or for forty years according to ·another 
Ceylonese source, that is, to 1255.) 
Magha's policy was to use the iron fist, and the Culawamsa 
(Geiger's translation, page 132), moaned: 
"But since in consequence of the enormously accumulated 
various evil deeds of the dwellers in Lanka, the devatas who were

--- PAGE 10 ---
286 
IIEV!E\V AIITICLE 
everywhere entrusted with the protection of Lanka failed to carry 
out this protection, there landed a man who held to a false creed, 
whose heart rejoiced in bad statesmanship, who was a forest-fire 
burJlng down the bushes in the forest of the good-that is generosity 
and the like-who was a sun whose actions closed the rows of night 
lotus flowers- that is the good doctrine- and a moon destroying 
the grace of the groups of the day lotuses-that is of peace-
( a man) by name Magha, an unjust king sprung from the Kalinga 
line, in whom reflection was fooled by his great delusion, landed 
as leader of four and twenty thousand warriors from the Kalinga 
Country and conquered the Island of Lanka. 
The great scorching 
fire-King Magha-commanded his countless flames of fire-his 
warriors to harass the great forest--the kingdom of Lanka." 
The Culawamsa was written by the Mahavihara Sect, which 
supported the Pandyan faction, so the account is distorted. Other 
records, such as the Nikaya-sangraha and the Saddharmaratanakara, give 
an entirely different picture and it is said that the calamities that befell 
the land happened before the arrival of Magha. The History of Ceylon, 
page 245, adds: 
"The Minipe inscription, referring to the Tamil invasion 
four years before Magha, says that the invaders destroyed the 
entire social structure and the religious organisation, a succinct 
description of the very thing which the Culawamsa, in many words, 
attributes to Magha." 
Magha's main concern would seem to have been defence against 
invasion from India. He set up forts on the northwest and northeast 
coasts of the island, which would not only prevent invasion but at the 
same keep time open the trade route to the Malay Peninsula, though in 
the unsettled conditions prevailing at the time, it is to be doubted whether 
very much local produce could be picked up at the ports. The Simhalese 
under Parakramabahu II were left to their own device at Dambadeniya 
(Jambuddoni) on the southwest coast of the island. This was a fatal 
mistake. In. 1236 the Simhalese, probably in conjunction with the 
Pandyas, took him by surprise and Magba \vas driven from Polonnaruva. 
Apparently his soldiers fell into an ambush laid by the Simhalese. The 
Culawamsa gloated"(page 150):

--- PAGE 11 ---
HEVIE\X-
AHTICLE 
287 
"They took all their elephants and horses, as well as their 
pearls and costly stones, the royal diadems and all the beauties of 
the harem, all ornaments, cloths, mantles, baskets and every kind 
of valuables with them in their fear and began to leave the town. 
But owing to the action of the King's merit they mistook the regions 
of the heavens. They thought it was the eastern gate and marched 
out through the western gate and came to Kalavapi where the 
army of the Sihalas had set up an entrenched camp. With all 
their goods they had alas! also to sacrifice their life by each giving 
his to the Sihala warriors, thus carrying out themselves what the 
King had only thought. And all the Sihalas taking from them their 
accumulated treasures, became from this time onward rich people, 
as in ancient times all the dwellers in Mithila who gained the 
wealth which the kings, a hundred in number, bad through fear 
flung away." 
With Magha's defeat the Dambadeniya period in Ceylonese history 
started, I will leave the story at this date ( 1236) and come back to it 
later. It might be mentioned that another Ceylonese source, the 
Pujavaliya, gives Magha a reign of forty years instead of the twenty one 
years given by the Culawamsa, that is, from 1215-55. This discrepancy 
in the two records will by considered later. Meanwhile two points need 
to be mentioned to tighten up the whole story. 
In 1225, after Magha had been on the throne for a decade, Chau-
ju-kua, the Chinese writer, stated that there were fifteen dependencies 
ofSan-fo-tsi (Sri Vijaya.) The fifteenth was Si-lan (Ceylon.) Elsewhere 
Chau-ju-kua stated that Ceylon was under the Nanpi (Malabar.) These 
two records, though seemingly contradictory, when taken together 
comprise the fourth of the four irrefutable pieces of evidence in the 
story. During the period of twenty years from the death of Nissamkamalla 
in 1196 to the advent of Magha in 1215, the island was under the 
Kalinga clan for slightly over twelve years, and under the Pandyas for 
over seven years. So when the Pandyas were rulers, Chau-ju-kua stated 
that the island was under the Nan pi, and when it was under the Kalingas, 
as it surely was in 1225, he stated that Si-lan was a dependency of San-
fo-tsi,

--- PAGE 12 ---
288 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
But 'dependencies of San-fo-tsi' does not seem correct to me, and 
I think it should be 'the fifteen City States of Sri Vijaya.' Of 
these States, Ceylon was a very important unit because it was on the 
trade route between the Middle and Far East, and Sri Vijaya wanted to 
keep this route open at all costs. 
This concept of the United City States 
of Sri Vijaya can be supported by other evidence. 
In Tang times, the 
New Tang History, 2228, 5a, stated that Shih-li-/o-shih had fourteen 
cities and was divided into two parts. The western part is called Lang-
po-ku-sau. 
The two parts were the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. The 
names of the cities are not given, but they would not include Ceylon. 
Then in 1025 Rajendra I invaded the Peninsula. First he took Kadaram 
(Kedah), then Sri Vijaya (Chaiya), followed by eleven other states, whose 
names appear in the South Indian Tanjore inscription. These perhaps 
did not include Suvarnnakudya, which according to Paranavitana had 
already gone over to the Cbolas before the invasion (see Section 14above), 
and Ceylon. 
The names in the two lists are: 
Tanjore Inscription 
Kadar am 
Sri Vijaya 
Pannai 
Malaiyur 
Mayirudingam 
Ilangasoka 
Mappapalam 
Mevilimbangam 
Valaippanduru 
Talaittakkolam 
Tambralinga 
Ilamuridesam 
Nakkavaram 
(Suvarnnakudya ?) 
(Ceylon) 
Chao-ju-kua 
Pong-fong 
Tong-ya-nong 
Ling-ya-si-kia 
Kilantan 
Fo-lo-an 
Ji-lo-ting 
Tsien-mai 
Pa-t a 
Tan-rna-ling 
Kia-lo-hi 
Pa-lin-fong 
Sin-to 
Kien-pi 
Lan-wu-Ii 
Si-lan 
The evidence for these United City States may not be very 
strong because the names in the two lists cannot be equated without 
playin,g a combined Sino-lndian word-~ame, nor can they be equated

--- PAGE 13 ---
HEVJEW AHTICLE 
289 
with modern locations without a great deal of guessing. 
But the fact of 
the cities in the three lists numbering the same seems very significant. 
I will leave this problem to future students. 
The second point to tie up concerns Dharmasoka, the five months 
old baby who was put on the throne of Lanka in 1208. This is an 
impossible story. I will anticipate the evidence of the next section by 
stating that Dharmasokaraja, or Phya Sri Thammasokaraja as he was 
called in the Thai chronicles, was the title of the first king of Nakorn Sri 
Thammaraj (Tambralinga.) Sometimes be was also the Maharaja of Sri 
Vijaya. The name first appeared in an inscription dated 1167, or some 
four decades before this first mention in the Simhalese chronicles. The 
story of the five months old baby, then, should be interpreted that the 
Maharaja Sri Tbammasoka went on an inspection trip to Ceylon to see 
the chaotic conditions for himself. He stayed five months to wait for 
a change of winds and then returned. With this interpretation, the 
pattern of the history of Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka in the Polonnaruva 
Period becomes clear. 
During the reigns of Vijayabahu I and Parakramabahu I, there 
was co-operation between Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka. The trade route 
was kept open, and there was prosperity on both sides. After Parakra-
mababu, Nissamkamalla was sent with orders to follow Parakramabahu's 
policy of pacifying the land and to keep the trade route open. After 
Nissamkamalla's death, Sahasamalla was sent, but after two years he 
was deposed by Abo, who raised Queen Kalyanavati, the Kalinga widow 
of Nissamkamalla, to the throne. She had a comparattvely long reign 
of six years considering the troubled times. Then, probably when she 
died, the Maharaja crossed the seas on an inspection trip, and on his 
return he sent Anikanga, called a Mabadipada, who killed Abo and 
ascended the throne. But he was soon deposed by the Pandya faction, 
and the Maharaja then sent Lokissa (or Lokesvara), who was in turn 
deposed after nine months. The Maharaja theri sent Magha with orders 
to use force, bring the land under control and keep the trade route open. 
Magha carried out his instructions so well that the Culawamsa (pp. 
1~3-4) ~roaneo;

--- PAGE 14 ---
290 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
"The monarch forced the people to adopt false views and 
brought confusion into the four unmixed castes. 
Villages and 
fields, houses and gardens, slaves, cattle, buffaloes and whatever 
else belonged to the Sibalas he had delivered to the Keralas. The 
viharas, the parivenas and many sanctuaries be made over 
to one or the other of his warriors as dwelling. 
The treasures 
which belonged to the Buddha and were the property of the holy 
Order he seized and thus committed a number of sins in order to 
go to hell. In this fashion, committing deeds of violence, the Ruler 
Magha held sway in Lanka for twenty-one years." 
The story of Magha to 1236 when he was driven from Polonnaruva 
bas already been told and there is no need to repeat it. 
We will now 
go to the Malay Peninsula and look at the evidence from that side. 
18. 
PHYA SRI THAMMASOKARAJA AND CHANDRABANU 
Some time in the century be ween about 1070 A.D. when Kulottunga 
I and Vijayabahu I came to the thrones of Chola India and Ceylon 
respectively, and 1167, there was a change of dynasties in the Sri Vijaya 
country. 
As the Thai understand it, the new dynasty was the 
Padmawamsa (the Lotus Line). 
Alternatively it might have been the 
Pancandawamsa (Line of Pancandi or Pancali ). 
The two names appear 
only once, in the inscription set up by Chandrabanu at Nakorn Sri 
Thammaraj in 1230. 
According to Paranavitana, Pancandi was Chan-
drabanu's mother, and in that case the Pancandawamsa started and 
ended with Cbandrabanu (his sons and grandsons not being relevant to 
the Sri Vijaya story in the Malay Peninsula), whereas the Padmawamsa 
(as opposed to the Sailendrawamsa) might have started when Suryanara-
yana became Maharaja, but the evidence is rather meagre. The Lotus 
Line of course might merely mean that the dynasty was Buddhist 
because the Lotus is one of the symbols of the Lord. 
In this case the 
Buddhist Sailendras would have been of the Lotus Line too. 
I will use 
both names and start with the safe and neutral date of 1156 for this 
clilange of dynasties when Se-li-ma-ha-la-cha of San-fo-tsi (Sri Maharaja 
of Sri Vijaya) sent an embassy to China. This is only a decade before 
tb~ fi.rst evi9enc~ on tpe P~dma d~nast~. Here ts 
tb~ evidep.ce in

--- PAGE 15 ---
llEVJtW AliTICLt 
291 
chronological order. 
I should add that in the first part of this paper I 
accepted the opinion of the experts, Sastri included, that Chandrabanu 
was killed in Ceylon in 1270 or 71. 
But it now seems that Chandra-
banu's second invasion (as given in the Culawamsa) was made in about 
1260. 
1167 A.D. Inscription from Dong Mae Nang Mueng, Nakorn 
• Sawan province: The text, written in the Khom script and language, 
states that the Maharajadhiraja (king of kings), also named Asokama-
haraja and Sri Thamrnasoka, issued an edict to King Sunata of 
Dhanayapura to detach certain paddy land for the upkeep of the (stupa 
containing the) ashes of Kamarateng Chakata Sri Thammasoka. One 
Maha Senapati (high official) nemed Sri Bhuvanatitya Indradvipa bore 
the decree to King Sunata in the year corresponding to 1167 A.D. 
This epigraph is 
interesting for the appearance of two Sri 
Thammasokarajas, one of whom, Kamarateng Chakata, was dead and 
the other was known as Maharajadhiraja. The name Thammasokaraja 
appears in many parts and many periods-to mention but a few, Sukhothai, 
Sri Sajnalai and Kampaeng Bejr in the north; in some legends of Patalung, 
in some doggerel at Chaiya and, of course, at Nakorn in the south. 
The two Thammasokarajas in this inscription are generally accepted to 
have been father and son and they were kings of Nakorn Sri Tbammaraj. 
It will be seen later that this was the title of the first king of Nakorn. 
There have been marty conjectures about this inscription. The best 
suggestion is probably that the dead Thammasoka had taken a lady of 
Nakorn Sawan to wife, perhaps even as his queen. When the old king 
died and was cremated, she returned home, taking back with her some 
of her husband's ashes (sariradhatu), which she had interred in a stupa. 
The new king, Maharajadhiraja, who was her son, lent his good offices 
by sending orders to King Sunata of Dhanayapura to see that everything 
was carried out according to the old lady's wishes. In this way King 
Sunata would be a relative of the old lady and of the Maharaja of 
Nakorn himself. This conjecture, put forward by a southern scholar, is 
based on the present name of the locality where the inscription was

--- PAGE 16 ---
292 
HEV!EW Aln'ICLE 
found-Dong Mae Nang Mueng. 
Mae Nang Mueng is a southern 
expression, and it means the Great Queen, or what we would call the 
Queen Mother today, or even the Old Matriarch (cf. Sala Mae Nang 
Sundari in section 13.) 
1178 A.D. Chinese chronicles and Ma Tuan Lin: San-fo-tsi sent 
an embassy in this year. 
Ma Tuan Lin stated that the embassy told the 
emperor that their king had succeeded his father in 1069. As there is 
a difference of only two years between this record and the inscription 
above, the new king was probably the Maharajadhiraja. 
118 3 A.D. Inscription on the base of a bronze image (Buddha under 
Naga, cast in three pieces) from Chaiya: A king named Kamarateng 
an Maharaja Srimat Trailokyaraja Maulibhusana Varrnadeva issued a 
decree to the governor of Grahi, Maha Senapati Glanai, to invite (the 
artist) Marateog Sri Yano to make this (Buddha) image for the people 
to adore. Trailokyaraja was king of Chaiya where the image was found 
(one of tbe city states of Sri Vijaya); while Grahi was probably Kraburi 
or Krabi (more likely Kraburi, in present-day Chumporn Province). I 
would not be surprised if the image contained a high percentage of tin, 
because both Kraburi and Krabi were centres for the production of this 
metal. I should add also that this king should not be confused with the 
kings of Malayu named Maharaja Srimat Tribhuvanaraja Mauli 
Varmadeva (1286 and 1347.) Not only are the names different but the 
dates differ also. 
Circa 1200 A.D. Chronicles of Nakorn Sri Thammaraj: Two Sri 
Tbammasokarajas and two Chandrabanus appear in this source. 
Pbra Chao Sri Thammasokaraja, the king of Nakorn Sri Thammaraj, 
was an old man and a very pious person. Tao U-Thong of Ayodhia 
(not to be confused with the Phra Chao U-Thong who founded Ayudia 
and took on the title of Ramatipati) moved down south with his army, 
and Sri Thammasoka, who preferred peace to war, met him in Bang 
Sapan in presentday Prachuab Kirikband province. 
Tao U-Thong 
pointed to a sila (stone, boulder, hill or mountain) and said that south 
of this sila should be the territory of Phra Chao Sri Thammasokaraja, 
and north of this stone should. be the territory of T~o U- fhong. 
Tbe 
forests then separated of their own accord.

--- PAGE 17 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE 
293 
Tao U-Thong and Phya Sri Thammasokaraja then poured (lustral) 
water into the ground and swore eternal friendship as blood brothers. 
Phya Sri Thammasokaraj asked Tao U-Thong, in the case of his death, 
to look after his wife and two younger brothers, Chandrabanu and 
Pongse Suraha. After suitable conversation the two kings departed for 
their respective cities. 
On his return home, Phya Sri Thammasoka hurried the building 
(or repair) of the Phra Boroma Dhatu stupa; and when the work of 
gilding was complete, he conscripted the Twelve Naksat Cities to make 
images for the Verandah. After that he had a big vihara built, which 
was called Pihara Luang; and he sent word to Tao U-Thong, presenting 
him with the merit he had gained. Tao U-thong in return sent gold 
(for the gilding of the stupa) and some salt. 
In due course Phya Sri Thammasokaraja died and was succeeded 
by his younger brother, Chandrabanu, who sent the news of his brother's 
death to Tao 0-Thong, who, in return, sent presents to help in the 
cremation ceremomies. 
Chandrabanu took on the name of Sri 
Thammasoka and his younger brother, Pongse Suraha, became Chandra-
banu (second king) in his stead; and in due course when tbe elder 
Chandrabanu died, he was succeeded by the younger. 
In this way Bang Sapan became the dividing line between Central 
and Peninsula Siam. Even today some people who travel to the south 
say that the trees on one side of the sila that Tao U-Thong pointed to 
as demarcation line lean one way, while the trees on the other side of 
the sf/a lean the other way. 
The two important points in this source are: first, the Central 
Plain of Siam (Ayodhia) bad entered into the affairs of the Peninsula. 
Ayodhia was followed by Sukotbai before the end of the century, and 
Ayudbia in turn followed Sukothai after its foundation in 1350 A.D. 
The second point is that Sri Thamroasokaraja was the title of the first 
king of Nakorn Sri Thammaraja, while Chandrabanu was the title of 
the second king or uparaja. Both names appear in several other sources. 
Two Sri Thammasokarajas also appear in the legends of Patalung 
(written down in 1629 towards the end of the Ayudbia period) and in a 
Ceylonese reference dated 1751 ( 16 years before the fall of Ayudbia in

--- PAGE 18 ---
294 
REVIEW AllTlCLE 
1767). The first story cannot be dated and need not concern us, while 
the second was written by one Vilbagedara Naide, one of the leaders of 
a religious mission sent to Ayudhia by Kirti Sri Rajasimha of Kandy in 
1750. 
On the return journey 'the party was nearly shipwrecked but 
managed to wade ashore at Nakorn Sri Thammaraj (Muan Lakon and 
Pataliputra in the text.) 
The following translation by Dr. P.E.E. 
Fernando is quoted from page 137 of Paranavitana's book, Ceylon and 
Malaysia: 
"On Tuesday, the thirteenth day of the bright half of the 
same month (December 17, 1751), when they were about to reach 
Muan Lakon, a territory that belonged to Siam, the ship sank in 
the mud. But no one was injured, and all on board landed in the 
district called Muan Lakon. 
In this district is a large city called 
Pataliputra with ramparts around it. In the centre of the city is a 
stupa as large as the Ruvanali Stupa at Polonnaruva in Cey Ion. 
This bad been constructed by King Dharmasoka who had enshrined 
relics of the Buddha there. 
From the spire down. to the triple 
berm, this stupa still glitters like a newly made sheet of gold with-
out a blemish. Around this stupa are three hundred images, seated, 
recumbent and standing, and two hundred stupas, some nine 
carpenter's cubits and others eleven carpenter's cubits in height. 
There is also a bodhi tree here which had been taken from 
Anuradhapura at the request of King Dbarmasoka the Younger, 
who became king of that city in later times." 
The younger Dharmasoka in this text was the same as the first 
Cbandrabanu of the Nakorn chronicles, who succeeded his elder brother, 
while his younger brother, Pongse Suraha, became Chandrabanu in his 
stead. The name Pataliputra (Nakorn) also appears in one or two local 
chronicles and in a poem written in the Dhonburi period, between 20 and 
30 years after the mention of this name in the Ceylonese source. 
1230 A.D. Tambralinga Inscription of Chandrabanu: Chandrabanu, 
the third of that name to appear in the records, set up an inscription at 
Nakorn Sri Thammarj in 1230. This is No. 
24 in Professor Coedes' 
Receuil Il, and he said that it came from Wat Hua Wieng, Cbaiya. Such

--- PAGE 19 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE 
295 
is not the case. According to the official records, it came from Nakorn. 
The place of provenance is n;t given ,but it was probably from the newly 
repaired Wat Phra Dhatu. The inscription starts with four lines of 
verse followed by prose. 
The following translation by Professor Sastri 
was made from a translation into French by Professor Coedes: 
"Fortune ! There was a king Chandrabhanu-resembling 
Cupid in his beautiful form, and called Sri Dharmaraja, Lord of 
Tambralinga, who gave great felicity to the religion of the Buddha ... 
having for origin this lamp which is the family of those who 
engender the Family of the Lotus, as expert in policy as Dharma-
soka and Lord of the Pancandawamsa. (verse) 
"Fortune! Happiness! There was a king, support of the 
Family of the Lotus, Lord of Tambralinga, of powerful arms ... 
by strength of his good works relating to all men, (possessing?) in 
some sort the power of the sun and the moon ... Chandrabhanu, 
the bearer of world wide fame, the king of Sri Dbarmaraja. In 
Kaliyuga 4332 ... " (prose, the date corresponds to 1230 A'D.) 
Coedes' mistake in mislocating this stele has led to a great deal of 
conjectures. The most charming I have read is by Dato Sir Roland 
Braddell (Journal of the Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. 
XXIH, pt. 3). 
He equated Tambralinga with Tembelling in Malaya, 
and thought that Chandrabanu was an upstart chieftain who somehow 
managed to gain control of the Malay Peninsula. Chandrabanu then 
overreached himself when he invaded Ceylon (twice) and was heavily 
defeated, losing his life in the second attempt. Sir Roland's thesis is not 
generally accepted, but later writers quote it all the time-in a rather 
negative way. I presume Professor Coedes' charming classic on his Sri 
Vijaya Empire will be quoted and discarded by future writers in the 
same negative way. 
Thai scholars on the other band, who knew all along that the 
Tambralinga inscription was set up at Nakorn and not at Cbaiya, and 
that Chandrabanu was not a name, but the title of the second king of 
Nakorn Sri Thammaraj, have never accepted any of the conjectures. 
I~ 
9io P.Ot s~em lo~ical t9 tpepl tpfl.t <;::han9rab~nll wbo1 as q.tl~r of Sn

--- PAGE 20 ---
296 
REVIEW AHTlCLE 
Vijaya with 15 dependencies under him, including Ceylon (Chau-ju-kua, 
1225 A.D.), would be a wealthy potentate,~hould risk all the power he 
had in the Peninsula to invade Ceylon. Also, if he had really invaded 
Ceylon, why should be have taken his court ladies and treasures with 
him (see below under 1260)? It is more logical to think that he had 
rights in Ceylon through family connections with the royal house, which 
rights he defended. 
Unfortunately there was no evidence to support this 
theory. But now, Paranavitana has found new evidence on the subject, 
which confirms this belief. 
On the whole the Tambralinga inscription is most unsatisfactory. 
As Paranavitana has pointed out, it does not 'say anything.' The stone 
is a large one, but we are not told whether the record was set up to 
commemorate the founding of a wat or a stupa, or to record some grant 
to a temple. All that emerges is the name Chandrabanu, who was 
called Sri Dharmaraja and was Lord of Tambralinga, also he was of the 
Padmawamsa (Lotus family) and Pancandawamsa (family of Pancandi). 
All this in bad Sanskrit. A date also appears at the end, corresponding 
to the year 1230 A.D. I will give Paranavitana's story in detail, though 
his major conclusion cannot be accepted with confidence. 
On page 78 
of his Ceylon and Malaysia, Paranavitana writes: 
"The Cbandrabhanu of the Jaiya (Chaiya) inscription is 
described as the 'Lord of Tambralinga.' 
This agrees with the 
Hatthavanagalla-vihara-wamsa which states that Candrabhanu came 
from the Tambalinga country. Candrabhanu is described in this 
work as 'a lion in prowess unto the rutting elephants who are the 
kings of many other countries, whose impetuosity could not be 
resisted by any one, who had deluded the whole world by a show 
of service to the world and the religion, who possessed an abundant 
military train, who was determined on taking possession of the 
sovereignty of Lanka, who came from the Tambalinga country and 
was accompanied by feudatory kings'. 
"This description, particularly the reference to feudatory 
rulers, would call to one's mind a potentate like the Maharaja of 
~aba~, whose mi~ht anQ. wealth !lave l;l~ell extolled by the Arab

--- PAGE 21 ---
HEVIE\V AH'I'IC:LE 
297 
geographers, rather than a local ruler of obscure origin who had 
but recently shaken off his allegiance to his suzerain of Sri Vijaya, 
as Candrabhanu is generally held to have been by historians." 
Chapter V of Paranavitan's book, called Candrabhanu and Magha, 
deals with the evidence on Chandrabanu as it was known when be wrote. 
The second half of the chapter puts forward philological proofs that 
Magha, the Kalinga king of Ceylon (also known as S. Kalinga 
Vijayababu), was a king from the Malay Peninsula. 
After he had 
written his book, he was able to decipher more evidence, and this 
evidence is expounded shortly in the Preface to his book. In short, 
Magha was the father of Chandrabanu. 
The following is from pages vi 
and vii of his book: 
"It is due to the reason that the Culawamsa does not enligh-
ten us with regard to the origin of Candrabhanu, that the close 
relations which Ceylon bad with Sri Vijaya have remained 
unrecognized for so long. In a document called the Magharajavrt-
tanta, which Parakramababu VI caused to be indited in between 
the lines of the original inscriptions on several stones, it is stated 
that Magha came from Suvarnnapura to the Pundra country 
(Malabar) and married the daughter, named Pancandi (Pancali), 
of the king of that country. Candrabhanu was the son of this 
Malayalee princess; following the matrilineal system of descent, 
he is referred to as of the Pancandawamsa. 
Magha, it is said in 
this document, captured Polonnaru with the help of forces supplied 
by his father-in-law, the Pundra king. In the course of his reign, 
be led an expedition to Tambralinga, and established his son 
Candrabhanu in independent authority over that territory. Later, 
he went to Suvarnnapura and had Candrabhanu installed as the 
Maharaja." 
Paranavitana also has some new evidence on Cbandrabanu's 
inscription of Tambralinga. He thought, following Coedes, that it came 
from Jaiya (Cbaiya), whereas of course Nakorn was its place ofprovenence. 
The inscription contains four lines of verse followed by some prose 
(translated into English by Sastri from the French of Coedes.) On pages 
vii and viii of his Preface, Paranavitana gives two versions of tbe quatrain

--- PAGE 22 ---
298 
HEVIEW Al\TICLE 
in Sanslcnt, which I will call Versions A and B, while Coedes' reading I 
will call Version C. The first and fourth lines in all three versions are 
almost the same, the second and third lines of Versions A and Care 
similar, while those of Version B differ from the other two versions. Dr. 
Indu Sbekar has been kind enough to render a literal, line-for-line transla-
tion of the texts. 
In the following quotation from the Preface of 
Paranavitana's book, I will substitute these translations for the Sanskrit 
texts, and at the same time give Sastri's translation of the whole quatrain 
of Version C for comparison: 
"Parakramabahu VI bas also recorded some startling facts 
about the Jaiya inscription of Chandrabanu. 
He gives the text of 
the Sanskrit stanza as it was on the stone in his time. 
This reading, 
which tallies closely with that given by Coedes, except for a few 
minor details, is given (in translation) below: 
Line by line translation by Dr. Shekar of Version A 
1. 
Illustrious, foremost in the auspicious Buddhist order, who is 
the Lord of Tambralinga 
2. 
As if living in the beautiful abode (heaven), creater of the 
Padmawamsa, a source of light for his family 
3. 
In physical form, indeed, Chandrabhanu resembles Cupid, called 
Shri Dharmaraja 
4. 
Proficient in statecraft like Dharma-Asoka, lord of the Pan-
cauda family. 
Stanza translation by Professor Sastri of Version C. 
"There was a king Candrabhanu-resembling Cupid in his beautiful 
form, and called Sri Dharmaraja, Lord of Tambralinga, who gave great 
felicity to the religion of the Buddha .•. having for origin this lamp 
which is the family of those who engender the Family of the Lotus, as 
expert in policy as Dharmasoka and Lord of the Pancandawamsa." 
(from page 134 of the History of Sri Vijaya.) 
"As the scholar who had dealt with this inscription in the 
fifteenth century bas pointed out, the Sanskrit of the second and 
third padas of t4is stanza is ver~ inaccurate1 in coptr~st to thilt of

--- PAGE 23 ---
REVIEW AHTICLE 
299 
lines one and four, which is on the whole satisfactory. 
The 
stanza, as now found on the stone, does not give a coherent 
meaning. The Sanskrit of the prose passage is even more barba-
rous than that of the second and third padas of the verse. Neither 
the verse nor prose passage states the purpose for which the record 
was set up. This unsatisfactory state of the inscription, we are 
told, is due to the reason that we do not now have, on the stone, 
the record as it was originally set up. A wilful attempt was, made 
to erase the inscription, it is said, by none other than Candrabhanu 
himself. 
After the failure of his second expedition to Ceylon, he 
returned to Sri Vijaya through Tambralinga. He was bitter 
against the Sinhalese for having invited Sundara Pandya to take 
the field against him. He therefore ordered to destroy all documents 
which referred to his connection with tbe Ceylon royal house, 
and this record was one of them. After the record bad been 
almost totally erased, the abbot of the monastery intervened 
and begged him to stop the vandalism. But the damage bad 
already been done. Subsequently, the inscription has been engra-
ved on the stone again, but the text was prepared by a person 
who had a very meagre knowledge of Sanskrit, and no clear idea 
of the contents of the original record. 
"A copy of the original inscription had fortunately been 
preserved among the archives of Sri Vijaya, and a copy of this 
came to the hands of Parakramabahu. He had this copy indited 
on a number of stones, together with the inscription as it was 
found in his time and the information briefly summarised above. 
The original text of the stanza, as recorded on a slab at Apuradha-
pura, (Ep. Zey. Vol. I, Plate 10), is (translated) as follows: 
Line by line translation by Dr. Sbekar of Version B. 
(Tbe first and fourth lines of this version are the same as in Versions 
A and C.) 
2. Son of King Magha, vanquisher of the brave, who was titled 
Candrabhanu

--- PAGE 24 ---
300 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
3. 
He reached his own regions and (was) in Patalipura; be also 
(arrived) on the bridge of the route. 
Paranavitana's story of Chandrabanu being the son of Magba is 
plausible in view of the unsatisfactory inscription, but it cannot be 
accepted unless the date is moved from 1230 to I 250 or even 1260. 
The 
only evidence of Magha being the father of Chandrabanu is based on the 
Tambralinga inscription which Chandrabanu himself is supposed to 
have tried to erase. 
The stele is now kept in Bangkok, and there is no 
sign whatever of any vandalism. Of course it might have been repolished 
and new writing in very bad Sanskrit put on. Then again, if Chandrabanu 
was the Second King of Nakorn, why should he also be called Lord of 
Tambralinga? This would seem to support Paranavitana's story, namely 
the inscription was first put up when the author was Chandrabanu, then 
it was erased and rewritten when Cbandrabanu III had become Sri 
Dbarrnasoka. But the date will not fit. The first part of the inscription 
is very clear, the second part is weather worn, while the third part is 
illegible. The date appears in the clear part. I wondered if the 
epigraphists could have made a miscalculation in arriving at 1230 as the 
date of the inscription, and asked Dr. Prasert na Nakorn, a mathema-
tician, to check. Dr. Prasert confirms that 1230 is correst. So we can 
come to a few conclusions. 
1. 
Irrespective of whether the inscription is as it was originally 
set up, or it was rewritten with the old date retained, Magha could not 
have been the father of the author (Cbandrabanu III.) 
2. 
Magha might have been the father of Cbandrabanu IV who 
invaded Ceylon in 1247 and 1260, but as in the hierarchy of Sri Vijaya, 
Chandrabanu was a higher ranking prince than Magha, the chances are 
that he was not. 
3. 
The Maharajas in the story were probably Suryanarayana II 
and his son Jayagopa, the last recorded Maharaja of Sri Vijaya. 
In the story that follows the dates given in the Sinhalese chronicles 
are conflicting, but the story fits into a clear pattern. As it is necessary 
to have one or two dates as anchors to hold the evidence together, the 
dates in the inscriptions are to be preferred to those in the Ceylonese

--- PAGE 25 ---
HEVIEW ARTJC:LE 
301 
chronicles. These are 1230, the date of Chandrabanu's Tambralinga 
inscription of Nakorn Sri Thammaraj, and 1264, the date of Vira 
Pandya's Kudumiyamalai inscription of South India. 
The dates in the 
chronicles should be adjusted to these two inscriptions, but this is 
something I will leave to future students. 
Meanwhile we return to 1236, 
when the Dambadeniya period in Ceylonese history started, 
19. PARAKRAMABAHU II OF DAMBADENIYA 
When Magba was driven from the throne of Polonaruva in 1236, 
Parakramubahu II, son of Vijayabaha III, the first king of Dambadeniya 
on the west coast, became king. In 1258 he was afflicted by an incura-
ble disease and control of state affairs was entrusted to a minister. In 
1262, the king's eldest son, the future Vijayabahu IV, was made virtual 
ruler. Another prince, Virabahu, who was a son of the king's sister, 
Svarnnamanikya, also had an important part to play in the story. 
1247 A.D. Chandrabanu's first invasion of Ceylon: According to 
the Culawamsa, as translated by Geiger and quoted on page 74 of Para-
navitana's book: 
"When the eleventh year of the reign of this king bad 
arrived, a king of the Javaka known by the name of Candabhanu 
landed with a terrible Javaka army under the treacherous pretext 
that they were also followers of the Buddha. All these wicked 
Javaka soldiers who invaded every landing place and who with 
their poison arrows, like to terrible snakes, without ceasing 
harassed the people whomever they caught sight of, laid waste, 
raging in their fury, all Lanka. Just as flashes of lightning with 
floods of water (visit) a place destroyed by lightning with flames 
of fire, so Lanka, which had been harassed by Magha and others, 
was ravaged anew by the Javakas. Then the king sent forth his 
sister's son, the heroic prince Virabahu, with soldiers to fight the 
Javakas. The fearful Rahu, namely Virabahu, with his terrible 
appearance completely destroyed (the moonlight, namely) Can-
drabhanu in tbe fields of heaven, namely in the battle. He placed 
his heroic Sihala soldiers here and there and began to open fight 
with the Javaka warriors. 
The good Sihala warriors, sure in aim,

--- PAGE 26 ---
302 
IIEVIEW AHTICLE 
the archers, shattered in pieces with their sharply pointed arrows, 
in the battle the countless number of arrows whizzing against 
them with their poison tips which were shot swiftly one after 
the other by the Javaka soldiers from a machine. 
Going forth to 
the combat like Rama, Prince Virabahu slew numbers of the 
Javakas, as Rama (slew) the Rakkhasas. The Verama wind, 
namely Virabahu, possessed of great vehemence, shattered again 
and again the forest wilderness, namely the Javaka foes. After 
thus putting to flight the Javakas in combat, he freed the whole 
region of Lanka from the foe. . . Thereupon be returned and came 
to the town Jamboddoni, he sought out Parakramababu, and be 
was overjoyed." 
1257 A.D. Thai Chronicles: Sri Intaratit became king of Sukho-
thai (about 1800 B. E.) 
He was the first of the Phra Ruang Dynasty, and 
the local chronicles call him, in Pali, Rangaraja and Rocaraja. The 
following trans Ia tion from the Jinakanmalipakorn is from pages 77-8 of 
Paranavitana's book. lt differs slightly from the other sources, but is 
adequate for this study. Siridhammanagara in the text meant Nakorn 
Sri Thammaraj, and Siridhammaraja was its king. 
"Thereafter, when eighteen hundred years had elapsed from 
the passing a way of the Buddha, in the year 618 of tbe Sakaraja 
era, a certain Rocaraja reigned at Sukhodaya in Syamadesa in the 
south-eastern part of Jambudipa ... One day Rocaraja, desirous of 
seeing the great ocean, went, accompanied by an innumerable 
multitude of warriors, down the course of the river Nan and reached 
the city of Siridbammangara where King Siridhamma was reigning. 
Having heard of the arrival of Rocaraja, King Siridhamma came 
forward to meet him, and after treating him with due honour, told 
Rocaraja of the wonderful account of the Sihala image as he had 
heard it. 
Having listened to this account, Rocaraja asked, •will 
it be possible for us to go there?' Siridhammaraja answered, 'Not 
possible, because four powerful divinities, namely, Sumanadevaraja, 
Ram a, Lakkhana, and Khattagama, protected the island of Lanka.' 
Thereafter, the two kings sent a. joint envoy (to the Sihala

--- PAGE 27 ---
1\IWIE\\ AH'I'!CLE 
303 
monarch), and Rocaraja returned to the city of Sukhodaya. The 
royal envoy went to the island of the Sihalas, and delivered his 
message to the Sihala king who gave the image to the messenger 
after having paid homage to it for seven nights and days. 
"The royal messenger bringing the Sibala image returned in 
a ship which, being caught in a storm, struck against a reef and 
was wrecked. The Sihala image rested on a board which, after 
three days, arrived at Siridbammanagara, through the power of the 
Naga kings. The king of Siridhamma, having come to know of the 
arrival of the Sibala image by means of a dream which the devas 
sent him during the night, despatched boats in various directions. 
Having boarded a vessel himself, he searched for the Sihala image 
and by the indication of the king of the Devas, he came across the 
plank on which the image rested, brought it into the city and paid 
homage to it. Thereafter, Siridhammaraja sent a message to 
Rocaraja announcing the arrival of the Sibala image. Having 
beard it, Rocaraja came to Siridhammanagara and conveyed the 
image to the city of Sukhodaya where be paid homage to it." 
1255 A.D. According to the Ceylonese chronicle, the Pu}avaliya, 
Magha was king for forty years (1215-55.) The Culawamsa gives him a 
reign of twenty one years (to 1236). 
1258 A.D. 
South Indian sources: King Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya subjugated Ceylon. 
"But," remarked Professor Sastri on page 
94 of his History of Sri Vijaya, "of all this Culawamsa says nothing." In 
this same year King Parakramabahu II became afflicted with an incurable 
disease and his son Vijayabahu became virtual ruler. 
Ab.out 1260 A.D. (between 1258 and 1262) Cbandrabanu's second 
invasion of Ceylon: According to the Culawamsa (pp. 187 of Geiger's 
translation): 
"At that time the Lord of men Chandrabhanu, formerly 
beaten after hard fighting, having collected from the countries of 
the Pandyas and Colas and elsewhere many Damita soldiers, 
representing a great force, landed with his Javaka army in Maba-
titthfl. After the Kin~ bad brou~ht ove).' to his sic,ie the Sihalas

--- PAGE 28 ---
304 
HEVJEW AHTJCLE 
dwelling in Pali, Kurunda and other districts, he marched to 
Subbagiri. 
He set up there an armed camp and sent forth 
messengers with the message: 'I shall take Tisihala; I shall not 
leave it to thee. 
Yield up to me therefore together with the Tooth 
Relic of the Sage, the Bowl Relic and the royal dominion. If thou 
wilt not, then fight.' 
Thereupon Vijayabbu summoned the Ruler 
Virabahu, took council with him, had a strong force equipped for 
him and spoke: 'Hurrah, today both of us shall see the strength of 
our arms.' Then the two set forth, surrounded the great army of 
Chandrabhanu on all sides and fought a great battle, terrible as a 
combat of Rama. Then were the hostile warriors subdued in battle 
and weaponless the soldiers of the foe wandered around, prayed 
and implored, tortured by fear, were benumbed, trembled, begged 
for mercy in the fight, whined and grieved in the fight. 
In their 
distress, certain of the foe fled to the forest, others to the sea, 
others again to the mountains. After Vijayabahu had thus fought 
and slain many soldiers, he sent the Lord of men Candrabhanu 
flying defenceless. But the loveliest women of his court and all the 
elephants and horses, the swords and many other weapons, the 
entire treasure, the trumpets of victory, the umbrella of victory, 
the drum of victory, the banner of victory- all these he sent to his 
father." 
1262 A.D. Consecration of Parakramabahu II: The king had been 
on the throne of Dambadeni since 1236, but he had not been consecrated. 
This he wanted done in Polonnaruva. 
So Vijayabahu and Virababu 
rehabilitated the land, and the king was brought in state where a 
coronation festival was held amidst great rejcioing. After thtlt Vijaya-
bahu escorted his father back to Dambadeniya, and on his return to 
Polonnaruva brought back with him the Tooth Relic which was installed 
in its ancient temple. 
1264 A.D. South Indian sources: King Jatavarman Vira Pandya 
invaded Ceylon in 1263, and in 1264 set up an inscription recording his 
victory. 
The invasion was made on the appeal of a Ceylonese minister, 
and after its success, a Javakaraja was set up on the throne of Ceylon 
t4at had previously been held by his father.

--- PAGE 29 ---
HEVIEW AHTICLE 
305 
The following quotation is from page 135 of Professor Sastri's 
History of Sri Vijaya. 
(Pandya Tamil on Candrabbanu.) 
Summary: "Account of Ceylon expedition expedition opens 
with an appeal from the Ceylonese minister to the Pandya, and the 
defeat and death of one Ceylonese king and capture of his parapher-
nalia, the setting up of the flag of victory on the Konamalai and 
the Trikutagiri, and the subjugation of another king, and finally 
comes reference to Savakanmaindan, his initial contumacy, later 
submission, the rewards he received, the procession on an elephant 
and his restoration to the kingdom of Ceylon once ruled by his 
father." 
The events recorded between 1255 and 1264 would appear to be 
episodes in the same continuous story. 
Paranavitana accepted 1255 as 
the year that Magha was driven from the throne, that is, he accepted 
the evidence of the Pujavaliya rather than that of the Culawamsa. 
It 
would appear that the Simhalese and Pandya combined to drive Magba 
from Polannaruva, and when Chandrabanu invaded Ceylon for the 
second time, he was defeated by the same combination. Both factions 
claimed sole credit for the victories. 
According to the contemporary 
Ceylonese chronicle, the Hatthavanagallaviharavamsa, 
Chandrabanu 
apparently lost his life in this second invasion. Then Vira Pandya turned 
on the Sinhalese and put Magha's son on the throne. 
According to 
Paranavitana, Gandagopala was the Javaka prince (Magha's son) put on 
the throne by Vira Pandya, who justified his action by stating in his 
Kudumiyamalai inscription that "it is just that Ilam, ruled by the father, 
should be obtained by the son." 
But again, according to Paranavitana, this time from an interlinear 
source, Magha, after his defeat, returned to Suvarnnapura (Chaiya) and 
made· a full report to the Maharaja, who then realised that he was fighting 
the Pandya at cross purposes. 
Pandya wanted political control of the 
island, while Sri Vijaya wanted control of the ports to keep the trade 
route between the Middle and Far East open. 
So peace was made, 
whereby the kingdom of Anuradhapura was conceded to Sundara Pandya, 
while Sri Vijaya retained the northern ports, which presumably included

--- PAGE 30 ---
306 
HEVIEW AHTICLE 
Trincomalee, one of the finest natural harbours in the world. The story 
is told in Paranavitana's interlinear source (Princess Ulakudaya's 
Wedding, University of Ceylon Review pp. 103-137, Peradeniya, October 
1963). 
I will quote a short passage from page 120. 
"It is said that Magha, who came from Suvarnnapura (Sri 
Vijaya), enjoyed a long period of success, in which he was engaged 
in works of religious merit. 
He was at last defeated by the 
combined efforts of Parakramababu (the second, of Dambadeni) 
and Sundara Pandya. Magba went to Suvarnnapura and gave the 
tidings of these events to the Maharaja, who made peace with 
Sundara Pandya by conceding to him the kingdom of Anuradbapura. 
Magha, thereupon, returned to Ceylon, installed his son Gandagopa-
la-dena on the throne of Subbapattana (Jaffna), went back to 
Suvarnnapura and entered the monastic order. Gandagopala was 
thus the first king of Jaffna. It is be who is referred to in the 
Kudumiyamalai inscription of Vira Pandya as the Javaka's son" 
This brought the Sri Vijaya story in Southeast Asia to an end. 
Though Paranavitana still bas more evidence, this concerned only Ceylon. 
Other sources show that the Peninsula and Sumatra had become 
separated, and while the city states continued to send embassies to 
China, which the Chinese recorded as coming from San-fo-tsi, control of 
the Malacca Straits was no more. 
To continue with the story in Ceylon, from the same interlinear 
source (Princess Ulakudaya's Wedding), Paranavitana gives a list of the 
Ja vaka kings of Jaffna: Gandagopala, son of Magha; Chandrabanu, son 
of Gandagopala; Suryanarayana, Vijayabahu V and Parakramababu, 
three sons of Chandrabanu, the fifth of the name to appear in the 
records. 
Paranavitana equates this Chandrabanu with Marco Polo's 
Sendeman: the dates fit, and certainly the sound of Sendeman ·is closer 
to Chandrabanu than it is to Vijayababu, Parakramababu and Bhuva-
naikabahu, the other names in the story at that period. 
About 1270 A.D. Death of King Parakramabahu II: Vijayababu 
succeeded his father, but was soon assassinated by a general named 
Mitta. His broth~r Bhuvanaikababu mana~ed to escape and Cfl!ll~ to

--- PAGE 31 ---
HEVIEW ART!CLI~ 
"307 
the throne after Mitta had been killed. Bhuvanaika I reigned for twelve 
years and after him there was an interregnum. 
By this time the trade route bet ween the Middle East and Far East 
had been cut, both at Ceylon and in the Peninsula. Bhuvanaikabahu I 
made an attempt to open the Middle East-Ceylon section again, and the 
History of Ceylo11, pp. 288-9, stated: 
"He was interested in establishing trade relations with the 
Arab power which controlled the sea lanes at that time; an embassy 
despatched by him to the Sultan of Egypt was received at Cairo in 
April, 1283. In his letters to the Egyptian court, Bhuvanaikababu 
stated that the pearl-fishery was in his dominions and he possessed 
numerous vessels . . . But nothing resulted from this mission, and 
Bhuvanaikabahu died in or about 1284 in the twelfth year of his 
reign ... 
"The tradition among the Tamils of Jaffna speaks of a king 
of tbe northern realm waging war with a Bbuvanaikabahu over the 
pearl fishery, and gaining a decisive victory as a result of which 
the northern potentate's authority extended over the whole Island. 
The Pandya king intervened and the territories conquered were 
restored to Parakramabahu, the successor of Bhuvanaikababu, the 
Pandya guaranteeing the paying of tribute by the Sinhalese ruler to 
the Jaffna king.'• 
The pearl-fishery of Ceylon, compared to the enormous feast that 
accrued from control of the trade route in the previous centuries, must 
indeed have been small bone. 
Yet we have two kings (Bhuvanaikabahu 
I and Chandrabanu V), or perhaps I might even say two dogs, fighting 
over the bone, so to speak, until Kulasekhara, the Pandya king, who had 
tlle controlling power over the Island at that time, stepped in and stopped 
tbe quarrel. 
Meanwhile the dreary and wearying history of Ceylon drags on 
and on, with one king coming to the throne and being deposed almost 
imt:ijediately. 
I will skip a century or so and come to the long reign of 
Parakramabahu VI (1412-67). 
He was the first king of a unified island 
since Nissamkamalla over two centuries earlier.

--- PAGE 32 ---
308 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
20. 
PARAKRAMABAHU VI OF KOTTE 
The descent of Parakramabahu, based on Paranavitana's Princess 
Ulakudya 's Wedding (University of Ceylon Review, 1963) is as follows. 
I 
Genealogical Table VIII 
Chandrabanu V (son of Gandgopala) 
···~-----·-1 
Savulu Vijayabahu V 
Parakramabahu 
I 
Parakramabahu V 
. 
I 
SagaraJasekbara 
I 
I 
Pararaja sekhara 
l 
I 
I 
I 
Dharmasoka Pararajasekhara Sagarajasekbara 
I 
I 
Svarnnamanikya = Jayamala 
Sundara Pandya 
I 
I 
Sunetra Mahadevi 
Jayamala 
I 
Parakramabahu VI (Chandrababu VI) 
All were of the Javaka race (Savulu, Kalinga), and a literary source 
written early in Parakramabahu's reign, the Saddharmaratanakara, called 
him by the title Chandrabanu. This means that at one time he was 
second king of Nakorn Sri Tbammaraj, but at the time of the story be 
was at Suvarnnapura (Chaiya.) 
This would indicate that he was not the 
Maharaja, but who the Maharaja was is not indicated. 
At that late 
period the Thai had become firmly entrenched in the Peninsula and 
perhaps Parakramababu was their Governor-General. 
This would 
explain the story that follows, namely why he left the Peninsula to 
become Maharaja of Ceylon. 
He preferred to be the first king of a 
small island rather than second king of a dead-end, as Chaiya must 
surely have become in that late period. 
Cheng-Tsu, also known as Yung-lo, the third Ming Emperor of 
China, came to the throne in 1402. At that time the trade route between 
the Middle and Far East had dried up. 
Thirty years before, according 
to Professor Mjumdar in his Suvarnnadvipa, Vol. l, page 201, Sri Vijaya 
had broken up into three parts.

--- PAGE 33 ---
HEVIEW ARTICLE 
309 
"By the year 1373, San-fo-tsi was divided into three states 
and their rulers, named Tam-ma-sa-na-ho, Ma-na-ha-pau-lin-pang 
and Seng-ka-liet-yu-lan sent envoys in 1373, 1374 and 1375 respec-
tively." 
In this period Nissamka Alakesvara, or Alakesvara Ill, or Alagak-
konara (A-lie-ku-nai-eul in Chinese) was the most powerful personage 
in Ceylon. 
He was called Sri Lankadhisvara, the Lord of Sri Lanka, 
and he died sometime between 1382 and 1392. I do not know how to 
play the Chinese wordgame, in fact I do not even know what the rules 
of the game are, whether one uses the Tang pronounciation, or the Ming, 
or modern pronounciations of the Chinese names that crop up so blithely 
in the English texts. For all that I venture to submit the following 
identifications of the three names above: 
Tam-ma-sa-na-ho = Dbarmasoka (Chaiya or Nakorn) 
Ma-na-ha-pau-lin-pang =Something of Palembang 
Seng-ka-liet-yu-lan = Nissamka Alakesvara (Rayigama) 
If these suggestions are in any way plausible, than the three parts 
that San-fo-tsi broke into were the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra and Ceylon. 
This was not conducive to any very strong control of the trade route 
through the Malacca straits. 
So the Emperor Yung-lo decided to do something about it. First 
an embassy under Yin Ching was sent to the Malay Peninsula in 1403. 
Yin Ching arrived at Malacca, which at the time was trying to set itself 
up as an independent state. The local chieftain, Paramesvara, took the 
opportunity to ask for Chinese protection, which was given, and in a 
very short period the Chinese built up Malacca into the most important 
entrepot in Southeast Asia, taking the place of Kedah and Muara Takus, 
the two control points of the Malacca Straits in the heyday of Sri Vijaya. 
In short, the Straits was now controlled from one place, a place located 
in the middle of the Straits instead of from the top and bottom as in 
former times. 
Then the Emperor had a fleet of sixty two vessels built which he 
put under the command of Cheng Ho, a Muslim eunuch. Over a period 
of thirty years, Cheng Ho, or rather the fleet, made seven expeditions

--- PAGE 34 ---
310 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
(some of which were without Cheng Ho) and got as far as Arabia. 
Cheng Ho's perigrinations in Southeast Asia and Arabia need not be 
recounted, and only his exploits in Ceylon mentioned. 
On Cheng Ho's first trip between 1405 and 1407, he landed in 
Ceylon. The local king, Vira Alakesvara, was hostile, so Cheng Ho 
withdrew. On his second trip be again landed in 1411. The king was 
even more hostile, so Cheng Ho broke into his palace, captured the king 
and took him back to China. 
The Emperor ordered the Ceylonese 
present at his court to choose the most worthy member of their tribe to 
become king. 
The choice fell on Yeh-pa-nai-na, which Pranavitana 
takes to be Apana meaning Prince. Cheng Ho again set sail and put the 
prince on the throne as Pu-la-ko-ma-pa-su-la-cha (Parakramabahuraja or 
Parakrarnabahu VI.). 
The year was 1414, which differs from the History 
of Ceylon by a few years. 
The whole story has been well recorded in both the Chinese and 
Simhalese sources, but somehow the two do not fit as well as they might. 
For instance, ·parakramabahu, to judge by his name, was of the line that 
ruled at Gampala, while Vira Alakesvara was of the line that ruled at 
Rayigama. The two factions were deadly enemies. Parakramabahu 
would rather have been seen dead than show his face in Rayigama, or 
rather, if be had shown his face in Rayigama, he would have been dead. 
So be could not have been captured at the same time as Vira Alakesvara 
and taken to China, as some have conjectured. 
But once again Parana vitana, from his wondrous source of interlinear 
writing (Princess Ulakudaya's Wedding, page 134), has supplied a 
connecting story that cements the two sources so well that the whole 
story becomes more logical than the two component parts on their own 
viz. Cheng Ho picked up Parakramabahu from the Malay Peninsula, 
took him to Ceylon and put him on the throne. 
"Hail! The great king Parakramabahu, having been at 
Suvarnnapura, was established in the sovereignty of Lanka by the 
Emperor of China, and arrived in Ceylon together with the Imperial 
Chinese convoy. He waged war with Parakramababu Adipada

--- PAGE 35 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE 
311 
(apa) and obtained the kingdom. Having remained for sometime 
at Rayagramapura (Rayigama), he came to reside at Jayavardbana-
pura (Kotte.)" 
So the trade route, which had been the responsibility of Sri Vijaya 
to keep open in past centuries, was again opened by the Chinese. Two 
major ports were used instead of three or four as previously, and this 
shortened the overall sailing time considerably. From the Middle East 
the ships sailed to Kotte on the west coast ef Ceylon (instead of 
rounding the island to a port on the northeast coast); from Kotte across 
tbe Ten Degree Channel to Malacca inside the Straits (by-passing Kedah 
on the west coast of the Peninsula); and from Malacca, rounding 
Singapore, straight to China (by-passing Muara Takus and a port on 
the east coast.) 
In one of Cheng Ho's trips, he left a port in China and 
arrived in Ceylon in 97 days; while the return trip was even faster, 
being accomplished in 92 days. 
Historians have asked what were the practical results of Cheng 
Ho's seven voyages? And the reply they give to their own question is 
'absolutely none'. 
This is looking at eastern history with western 
imperialist eyes even before the Europeans arrived in Asia. The 
Chinese Emperor was not interested in overseas expansion. Nor was 
be interested in showing the flag to some half naked rulers of Southeast 
Asia. The Emperor was interested in trade, as many Chinese gentlemen 
of today who become shop-keepers, who open noodle eateries, who take 
in laundry, still are. The trade route was probably kept open till the 
end of Parakramabahu VI's long reign; and perhaps for another half 
century till the Portugese arrived in Ceylon in 1505, and at Malacca 
in 1511. 
Historians also take the view that the Arabs were the successors 
of Sri Vijaya after its fall. 
There does not seem to be very much 
evidence to support this. The carrying trade and controlling the ports 
where dues are collected are two entirely different enterprises. There 
is no evidence that the Arabs controlled any ports in Southeast Asia in 
the way the Europeans did later. Ming pottery has been found scattered 
Qv~r wige arQas 9f Southeast Asia, S\,lrely the Chinese could have

--- PAGE 36 ---
312 
HEVIEW AHTICLE 
carried this trade as well as the Arabs. And there is no reason to think 
that the natives of Southeast Asia were not concerned in this trade 
either, because we know from I-ching's evidence that the king of Sri 
Vijaya had ships of his own in the 7th century. 
There is also archaeological evidence to support Paranavitana's 
story. At Chaiya and its environs, there are about a dozen large Buddha 
images made of red sandstone (three at Wat Phra Dhatu, four beads at 
Wat Champa and six images at Wat Pradu, at Kanjanadit, including the 
main image which is said to have been taken from a wat by the Cbaiya 
railway station.) Students are agreed that there was a local school of 
art at Cbaiya in the early Ayudhia period, that is, after Ayudbia had 
been founded (in 1350), but no explanation could be fouud for this school 
because Chaiya was supposed to have dropped out of history since the 
9th century. But now from Paranavitana•s story, we can say that 
Parakramababu Vl or his immediate predecessors made these images. 
This would give Chaiya, or Suvarnnapura, a history of 1700 years. 
According to Paranavitana, Suvarnnapura was founded by a Mauriyan 
prince named Sumitra, who went to Lanka in the suite of the Emperor 
Asoka's daughter, the Theri Sanghamitta, when she took the sapling of 
the bodhi tree under which the Buddha found Enlightenment to 
Anuradhapura. The whole story bas to be tightened up a great deal, and 
historians of Southeast Asia should start using a screw driver on it. 
Epilogue 
The story of Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka from Paranavitana's sources 
that I have submitted started with the romance of King Mahinda IV 
and Princess Sundari in the middle of the lOth century. 
It would be as 
well to end with another romance five hundred years later. This story 
is told in Princess Ulakudaya's Wedding. 
Ceylon 
Parakramabahu VI 
I 
Princess Candravati 
(Ulakudaya) 
Pandya 
Sundara Pandya X 
I 
Sundara Pandya XI 
Suvarnnapura 
Sundara Pandya 
I 
Princess Sundari

--- PAGE 37 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE 
313 
To make the story easier to tell, I will call Sundara Pandya of 
Suvarnnapura 'Sundara Sri Vijaya'. 
In this period, about eighty years before the accession of Parakra-
mabahu, the Indian Vijayanagara Empire in the Deccan bad come into 
being. In the words of Professor Sastri, in his History of South India, 
page 253, that great empire, "by resisting the onslaughts of Islam, 
championed the cause of Hindu civilization and culture in the South for 
close upon three centuries and thus preserved the ancient tradition of 
the country in its polity, its learning and its arts. 
The history of 
Vijayanagara is the last glorious chapter in the history of independent 
Hindu South India." 
Within a few decades, Vijayanagara expanded southwards to 
include the ancient Cola, Pandya and Cere kingdoms. Madbura, the 
capital of Pandya, was conquered from a Muslim Sultan in 1371. This 
brought Vijayanagara to the sea bordering Ceylon. 
During the reigns of Parakramabahu VI of Ceylon (1415-67) and 
Devaraya II of Vijayanagara ( 1.422-46), there are miscellaneous records 
of Ceylon paying tribute to Vijayanagara. Meanwhile Parakramabahu 
had wed Princess Svarnnamanikya, and in 1432 the union produced a 
daughter, Princess Candravati or Ulakudaya. 
When the princess was grown up, Sundara Pandya X is said to 
have given support to the Emperor of Vijayanagara, and Parakrama-
bahu's counter-stroke was to arrange for the wedding between his 
daughter and Sundara Pandya XI. 
But at that time the prince was on 
a visit to Suvarnnapura, where be bad become engaged to Princess 
Sundari, the daughter of Sundara Sri Vijaya. 
Parakramabahu sent a 
message to Sundara Sri Vijaya to demand that Sundara Pandya XI be 
sent back to his own country; and Sundara Pandya X also sent a message 
to his son to break off the engagement. Both refused, so Parakramabahu, 
accompanied by his daughter, set sail across ·the ocean. His suite 
probably included a prince of Java named Purandara. 
On arrival in the Peninsula a message was again sent to Sundara 
Sfi. Vijaya1 who a~ain refu&ec;l. Thereupon Parakn:unabahu waged war 
Property of tne 
Siam Society's Library 
BANGKOK

--- PAGE 38 ---
314 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
with Sundara Sri Vijaya, who was defeated. In the peace terms dictated 
to Sundara Sri Vijaya, the latter was to enter the monastic order at the 
Abhayagiri Vihara at Anuradhapura. 
Meantime, Sundara Pandya XI had seen Princess Candravati. He 
fell in love with her at first sight; and Princess Sundari, having seen 
Prince Purandara, fell in love with him at first sight too. So the old engage-
ments were mutually broken and new ones put in train. This is the sort of 
story that Shakespeare might have thought up, except that he hadn't 
been born at that time. King Parakramabahu then returned to Ceylon 
with his daughter and her catch, and the wedding was celebrated at 
Anuradhapura on Wednesday, April 10, 1448. 
The above story is based mainly on Paranavitana's Princess 
Ulakudaya's Wedding. 
In the source a Sanskrit verse, referring to the 
romance of King Mahinda IV and Princess Sundari with which I started 
this story, is repeated several times: 
Sa Suvarnnaparam prapya Vijayasriyam arahat 
Sundarim Srimarasutam samudhe svarnnamalaya. 
(He arrived in Suvarnnapura and obtained for himself the Goddess 
of Victory. He also wedded, by means of a golden necklace, Sundari, 
the daughter of Srimara.) 
At the wedding tbe pedigrees of the bride and groom were recited, 
and the word Svasti is repeated as a sort of subdued chorus. Here is 
Paranavitana's description of the scene (page 130). 
"From the manner in which these pedigrees, tbe poem and 
the word Svasti have been written on the slab from Bolana, one 
can visualise the scene of the royal wedding. From a brief 
historical account of the reign of Parakramabahu written on one of 
the above mentioned slabs, we learn that the wedding of Candra-
vati took place in a pavilion specially constructed for the purpose 
near the Bodhi tree (Bodbi-manda) at Anuradhapura. 
The decora-
tions, the pomp, the show of military might, music, etc, usual on 
such occasions, must of course have been there. The dignitaries of 
state, the relatives of the royal family, royalty from friendly states, 
an<;i other persons !J.o~o\]re<;l witll 
ipvit~tiops for tj:le 
oc<;:~~iQn

--- PAGE 39 ---
ltEVIEW Al\T!C:Lt 
having taken their appointed seats, the parents of the bridegroom 
having occupied their special seats, and the king and queen being 
seated on their thrones, the prince and princess come to the dais 
and stand holding each other's hands. 
Then the purobita comes 
forward and, facing the assembly, recites the pedigrees, preceded 
or followed by the announcement that Candravati stands holding 
the hand of Sundara Pandya or vice versa. The sonorous Sanskrit 
words and phrases with their alliterative repetitions, recited in the 
stentorian voice of the purohita, would have exercised a magical 
effect on the assembled multitude, who all the time were muttering 
the word Svasti (May it be well). 
The attendant priests seated 
on either side of the purohita would be chanting in a low 
voice the Sanskrit poem referred to above, while the purohHa 
recited the pedigrees. At the close of the recital of the pedigrees, 
the purohita announces the names of the bride and bridegrom, each 
followed by the word Svasti. The whole of the audience would 
have responded to the purohita by uttering Svasti, not in low tones 
as before, but in a loud chorus. In the meantime, the attendant 
priests who were chanting in a low voice the poem about Sundari 
would have so timed it as to recite the two last verses which they 
repeated several times. 
While the pavilion was reverberating with 
the word Sundarim Srimara-sutam samudhe svarnnarnalaya, the 
bridegroom, who bad all this time been standing motionless holding 
the hand of the bride, would have been handed the necklace, which 
be tied on the neck of the bride. 
And the prince and princess 
would be acclaimed by peals of music and other manifestations of 
rejoicing usual on such occasions." 
I will quote one final paragraph from Paranavitana's source (page 
136) though I doubt whether the story can stand up against the other 
evidence of the period. That evidence will be submitted in the next part 
of this paper. 
"By this victory, Parakramabahu became master of what was then 
left of the once mighty empire. of Sri Vijaya. The son of the 
king of Java, married to the daughter of the deposed Sundara 
Pandya, was appointed to govern Sri Vijaya as a vassal of Para-

--- PAGE 40 ---
316 
lmVIEW ARTICLE 
kramabahu. 
In the year 1459, envoys sent by the ruler of Ceylon 
arrived at the Chinese Court, and the name of their sovereign given 
by them, has been rendered in Chinese characters as Ko-li-sheng-
hsia-la-chi-li-pa-chiao-la-jo. There was no other ruler in Ceylon 
on this date but Parakramabahu, and the name thus rendered in 
Chinese characters appears to have been Kalinga-Simhala-Sri-
Vijaya-raja. This title thus appears to have been assumed by 
Parakramabahu after his conquest of Sri Vijaya, before the marriage 
of his daughter." 
21. PARANAVITANA'S SOURCES OF INTERLINEAR WRITING 
Before leaving the story in Ceylon for the Peninsula, I will say 
something about Paranavitana's new sources. In chronological order, 
tlie books and papers he produced based on these sources are: 
1. 
1963: Princess Ulakudaya's Wedding, University of Ceylon 
Review. Vol. XXI, pp. 103-37. Tells the story of the wedding of King 
Parakramabahu VI's daughter, where the genealogies of the bride and 
groom are given in Sanskrit and translated (see Section 20 above.) 
2. 
1964: Linguistic Studies in Ceylon and Sri Vijaya, TUCLS, 
pp. 79-100. 
3. 
1965: 
Appendix to the Giritale stone-seat Inscription 
Epigraphia Zeylanica Vol.V, Part 3, pp. 440-3. 
4. 
1966: Ceylon and Sri Vijaya, Artibus Asiae, Vol. 1, pp. 
205-212, Switzerland. Recounts the Romance of King Mahinda IV and 
Princess· Sundari (see section 13 above.) 
Here Dr. Paranavitana 
translates his own Sanskrit text of Appendix I, which should be interes-
ting to compare with the translation made by Dr. Shekar. 
5, 
1966: 
Ceylon and Malaysia, Lake House, pp. 234, including 
three Appendices in Sanskrit, plates. Subject of Part III of this article. 
6. 
1967: Newly Discovered Historical Documents Relating to 
Ceylon, India and Southeast Asia, Buddhist Yearly, pp. 26-58, Buddhist 
Centre Halle, Germany. Gist of the various sources. This paper was 
prepared in 1964, but published much later. 
7. 
1967: 
Sinha/ayo, Lake House, pp. 61, reprinted 1970, Bird's-
eyeview of Ceylonese history.

--- PAGE 41 ---
HEVIEW AH'I'IGLE 
317 
8. 
1971: 
The Greeks and the Mauriyas, Lake House, pp. 188 
including nearly 50 pp. Sanskrit texts, pia tes. 
9. 
197 2: 
The Story of Stgiri, Lake House, pp. 152 excluding pp. 
127 Sanskrit texts, plates. 
The list is not complete. There were some short papers printed in the 
Mahabodhi, Calculta, one of which, the Designer of Barabudur, I have 
used in Part II of this paper; there were also papers written in the 
Sinhalese language which were read at learned institutions; and there 
were papers tba t might be called 'preliminary skirmishing' when 
Paranavitana introduced his new theories without saying that he had 
'new sources' (Ceylon and Malaysia in Medieval Times, in the Journal of 
the Ceylon Branch of the Roypl Asiatic Society (JCBRAS), Vol. Vll, pt. 1, 
1960, pp. 1-43; and The Arya Kingdom in North Ceylon, JCBRAS, Vol. 
VII, pt. 2 1961, pp. 174-224). The first drew a review by Professor 
Nilakanta Sastri (Ceylon and Sri Vijaya, JCBRAS, Vol. VIII, Pt. 1, 1962, 
pp, 125-140) to which Paranavitana made effective reply (Ceylon and 
Malaysia: a Rejoinder to K.A. Nilakhanta Sastri, JC BRAS, Vol. VIII, pt, 
2, 1963, pp. 330-337). 
At that time, after retiring from the Archaeological Department 
in 1956, be was at Peradeniya, University of Sri Lanka, where be was 
Research Professor of Archaeology till he retired in 1965. While at 
Peradeniya, Paranavitana edited Volume I of the University's History of 
Ceylon (from earliest times to the arrival of the Portugese, in two 
parts), of which he himself wrote more than half; with its by-product, a 
Concise History of Ceylon, which was published in 1961. 
Also while at 
Peradeniya, he deciphered his new sources. or 'documents' as be called 
them, and when he returned to Colombo after his retirement, Lake 
House became his publisher. They produced his last five books (the fifth 
being Art of the Ancient Sinhalese in 1971 ), with the final book, Story of 
Sigiri, being distributed posthumously. At the time of his death, 
Paranavitana was working on another book for Lake House. 
The following information bas been extracted from the books and 
papers mentioned above. Apparently there were three major works: the 
Suvarnnapurawamsa (the Chronicle of Suvarnnapura or Sri Vijaya), the

--- PAGE 42 ---
318 
ltEVIEW ARTICLE 
Rajawamsapustaka (the Book of Royal Dynasties), and the Parampar· 
apustaka (the Book of Traditions.) 
The Suvarnnapurawamsa was first completed in 300 A.D. when 
King Mahasena was on the throne of Cey Ion. The chronicle was brought 
up to date and enlarged in the 11th century by Maharaja Manabharana, 
son of Maharaja Samara Vijayottunga (see Section 14). 
The original 
was written in the Malay language of that time, but it was translated 
into Sanskrit and several other languages. 
The Rajavamsapustaka was started in the last year of King Mahasena 
and finished in the reign of his successor, Sri Meghavarnna, by Maha 
Buddbaraksitasthavira, a monk of the Abhayagiri Vihara Sect. The 
work was written in the Simhalese language of that time, and there was 
a Sanskrit version which also was said to have been written by the same 
monk, Then in the twelfth century the great scholar, Buddbapriya-
sthavira, wrote a number of historical essays based on the Rajavam-
sapustaka. The monk was born at Suvarnnapura of a Simhalese farber 
and a Malayan mother, and at one time was at Nagapattana in South 
India, where he was Lord-abbot at Cudamanivarmavihara which the 
Sailendra king Culamani had built early in the 11th century. From 
Nagapattana, Buddbapriya came to Polonnaruva, where be presumably 
died. The Rajawamsapustaka and the later chapter, Yavana-rajya-vrilanta, 
were the main sources for The Greeks and the Mauriyas. 
The third document, Paramparapustaka, was written in the reign 
of Vikramabahu (1111-1132) by Bhadra-sthavira, who bad been the 
disciple of Suvarnnapura-sthavira (he;d of the Sangha of Sri Vijaya). 
According to Paranavitana (The Greeks and the Mauriyas, page 10): 
"Bbadra-sthavira's approach to history is biographical He 
bas selected a number of outstanding historical personages of 
different times and climes, and narrated their life stories, referring 
in the process to historical events with which they were connected. 
Most of the heroes whose lives are narrated are from Ceylon, 
India and the conutries in which Indian culture still prevails, or has 
prevailed in the past, but famous personage's of Gt•eek, Persian and

--- PAGE 43 ---
HEVIF.W AH'l'ICLE 
319 
Roman history are the subjects of some chapters. 
Alexander the 
Great, Julius Caesar and the Emperor Angustus have each been 
given a chapter in the Paramparapustaka . ... 
"The author of the Paramparapustaka was acquainted with 
the Rajavamsapustaka and the redaction of the Suvarnnapura-vamsa, 
but there are many instances in which the Paramparapustaka bas 
given an account of a historical personage or event differing in 
important details from those in the earlier works. The case of 
Candragupta is a case in point ... On some stones have been 
recorded a list of contents of the chapters of the Paramparapustaka ,· 
from this it is seen that Bhadra's work was voluminous, and 
consisted of over two hundred chapters." 
Another author that might be mentioned is Buddhamitra of 
Suvarnnapura. He came to Ceylon in the latter part of the reign of 
King Parakramababu VI (1412-1467) and acted as adviser to that king. 
In due course, he became ordained, not in the Abhayagiri Sect as were 
the other writers mentioned, but in the Theravada Nikaya, and was 
known as Ananda-sthavira. He was a great historian and archaeologist, 
who researched in the old texts and wrote the Story of Sigiri. Lake 
House's blurp about this book says: 
"This book gives the results of researches into the history 
which centred round Sigiri carried out by Buddhamitra (of Suvarn-
napura), a scholar of the fifteenth century, who unlike the 'scientific 
historians' of present-day Ceylon, studied history in depth ... The 
result of the researches of this great historian and archaeologist, 
given in Sanskrit, were incised in tiny characters on a dozen or 
more of earlier Sinhalese inscriptions on the order of that liberal 
and enlightened monarch, Parakramabahu VI, who was a scion of 
the Kalinga (Srivijaya) branch of the Sinhalese royal family." 
The Mahavihara church of Ceylon, who considered themselves 
orthodox, were wont to destroy the writings of the Abhayagiri Sect. 
Even historical writing they destroyed, and the history that they them-
selves wrote, the Mahawamsa and Culawamsa, was biased to the faction 
they supported, . All 
tbt~ t]le 
l.(alin~a kin¥s, who supporteci 
tb~

--- PAGE 44 ---
320 
UEVIEW ARTICLE 
Abhayagiri Sect and were villians to the Mabavihara, knew, and some 
of them, principally Magha and Parakramababu VI, had the story that 
the Abhayagiri Sect wrote incised in minute characters on earlier 
inscriptions. But not all the Abhayagiri writings were put on stone, 
and Paranavitana says (page 12, The Greeks and the Mauriyas): 
"The chapters of the Rajavamsa-pustaka, relating to the 
Greek kingdoms, whether in the original Simbalese or in the 
Sanskrit translation, have not been met with in any of the inscrip-
tions so far examined for the interlinear writings." 
The story seems clear enough, namely that Paranavitana had 
documents and inscriptions, and he deciphered the documents while be 
was at Peradeniya. He said as much in a mimeographed paper dated 
1964, a year before he retired. 
Meanwhile Paranavitana produced his Ceylon and Malaysia in 
1966, which drew a couple of critical reviews, both by historians from 
Peradeniya. The arguments on both sides are too philological for me to 
follow, but the gist of the argument is, one, Paranavitana and no one 
else can read these interlinear writings, so they do not exist and 
Paranavitana invented the whole thing himself; and, two, the main 
location of Paranavitana's story was Kalinga, and there was no place 
with such a name in Southeast Asia. 
Kalinga was in India, where the 
conservative historians have located all mentions of the name in the 
Cu/awamsa. The second argument can now be brushed aside. The 
name Kalinga has appeared in an inscription date 893 (the Panuvasnu-
vara Pillar Inscription, see Section 12 above), and this Kalinga was 
certainly in Southeast Asia. So from this date to the reign of Parakra-
mabahu VI in the 15th century, every mention of Kalinga in the 
Culawamsa and Paranavitana's sources refers to Southeast Asia, ar more 
specifically to the Malay Peninsula in most cases. Also it is ridiculous 
to say that Paranavitana invented the whole story, since be produced 
out of his interlinear writing three different versions complete with 
Sanskrit texts of the stories of Chandragupta in The Greeks and the 
Mauriyas, and three of Dhatus~na in The Storr of Siqirf.

--- PAGE 45 ---
REVIE\\ ARTICLE 
321 
As for the visibility of the interlinear writing, the whole thing 
reminds one of a bus journey in up-country Ceylon. The buses had 
rails to which those standing can hold. Then some small boys got on. 
They could not reach the rails, in fact some of them were so small that 
they could not even see the rails. So all those small boys said was, 
"There ain't no such thing as rails on this omnibus, pal." 
Paranavitana's reply was to produce his The Greeks and the 
Mauryas and The Story of Sigiri, when he flooded his critics with 
hundreds of pages of Sanskrit text. But all the time, the professor had 
his supporters, mainly epigraphists and, of course, my ubiquitous friend, 
Mr. Alexander B. Griswold, who is mentioned in the Preface to 
The Story of Sigiri as supplying 600 dollars worth of photographic 
material to the Archaeological Department on Paranavitana's behalf; 
as well as a good typewriter and a stock of paper to facilitate the work. 
There were short, very favourable reviews, but the epigraphists kept 
quiet. 
So the situation degenerated further. 
Paranavitana was the 
greatest scholar Ceylon produced in recent years, with an international 
reputation to boot, yet his integrity has now been questioned. When he 
edits an orthodox inscription, i.e. a non-interlinear one, such as the 
Panuvasnuvara Pillar Inscription mentioned above, where the name 
Kalinga appears, or the Madirigiri Slab Inscription, where the name 
Maharaja Samara Vijayottunga appears (see Section 14 above) the doctors 
of methodology suspect that be either invented the whole inscription or 
misread certain parts so as to find support for his new theories. This 
sounds like desecration of a great scholar to me, 
As it happened, while I was writing this paper for publication in 
the Journal of the Siam Society in instalments, the Ford Foundation was 
kind enough to give me a research grant which enabled me to travel in 
South Siam and Malaya, and to spend a month in Ceylon and another 
month in Java. 
While in Ceylon, Mr. H. Amarasinghe, Publishing 
Manager of Lake House Investments Ltd., who published Paranavitana's 
last few books, took me under his wing. He introduced me to Simbalese 
scholars, both those who supported Paranavitana and those who were 
against his t4<;orjes,

--- PAGE 46 ---
322 
REVIEW ARTICLE 
Dr. C.E. Godakumbura, who succeeded Dr. Paranavitana as 
Archaeological Commissioner when the latter retired, but has now retired 
himself, took me to the Library, the Museum and the Archaeological 
Service in Colombo. I was shown some inscriptions, estampages and 
photographs with interlinear writing. There is no doubt that there are 
interlinear writing, even if nobody but Paranavitana could read them. 
But the numerous texts that the professor produced could not possibly 
have all been written on the stones, so in reply to one or two questions, 
Dr. 
Godakumbura stated that Paranavitana definitely had documents 
which he bad not divulged, probably at the linsistance of the man who 
supplied them. They might have come into his hands illicitly. Dr. 
Godakumbura then explained that when Paranavitana got stuck on a 
passage, he would ask for estampages of that particular part and not of 
the whole inscription, so that be could check passages in his reading. 
There is confirmation of this from Peradeniya. 
While the professor was 
at that Campus, be did not go prancing all over the island looking at 
inscriptions, but worked quietly in his room. 
As it happened, before 
leaving Peradeniya, the professor made public, or rather strongly hinted 
at, the existance of decuments, but to get the full significance of his 
remarks it is necessary to read carefully between the lines. I will give 
just one example, from the last paragraph of a paper mimeographed in 
1964 and subsequently published in 1967 (see above.) 
"In the case of some (documents), the fact that they have 
been recorded on stone is taken from statements made to that 
effect, incised on stones other than those on which they have been 
written. Of the documents of historical importance, too, only a 
small fraction bas been fully deciphered, though that will be 
enough, when properly edited, translated and annotated, to form 
a large volume." 
Professor Paranavitana died suddenly, with another book commis-
sioned by Lake House still unfinished. 
He had made a will leaving his 
estate to the Public Trustee, who was to sell the property and set up a 
fund to help needy scholars who were researching on the subjects be 
was interested in. 
The only thing to do was to see the Public Trustee, 
so an appointment was made, an~ w~ went. The .party consist~q of Mr,

--- PAGE 47 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE 
323 
Perera, Librarian of the Archaeological Department; the afore-mentioned 
Mr. Amaraingbe of Lake House; Dr. Liyanagamage, a Senior Lecturer 
in the History Department of the University of Sri Lanka Vidyalankara 
Campus; and myself. 
At the Public Trustee's office we were shown some palmleaf 
manuscripts, but they were about Buddhist teachings and medicine. Then 
we went to the professor's bouse where we found a great deal in 
his own handwriting. If I understand the situation correctly, the last 
chapter of the Paramparapustaka that Paranavitana used was 84; and 
we found that his draft had got to chapter 88. 
We did not have much 
time to do a thorough search, so we left, intending to go again. Unfor-
tunately I could not extend my stay in Ceylon and bad to leave before 
another appointment with the Public Trustee could be made, so that is 
all I know, but as the Public Trustee will in due course publish 
Paranavitana's correspondence, as well as some other unpublished 
material, we shall no doubt know more about these interlinear sources 
than we do at present. 
It is my guess that these documents were supplied from abroad 
and not found in Ceylon itself, otherwise there would have been no need 
for all this secrecy. 
An example of an ancient document found recently 
in a Western library might be cited. Mr. John Black, 
Corresponding 
Member of the Journal oftbe Siam Society, discovered some 'Marco Polo 
Documents' in the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., and be bad 
the maps printed in one of the Volumes of JSS, 7th November 1965, w~th 
the texts to follow. 
In the case of the documents under discussion, they 
might have been obtained from some Western library in the same way, 
perhaps illicitly or even surreptiously, so Paranavitana was asked not to 
divulge his source. 
This must have been mental torture to a scholar of 
Paranavitana's calibre having to use some source which be could not 
divulge. 
lf my guess is correct, I wish whoever supplied the documents 
would make them public as soon as possible. That person should 
understand that they could change a great deal of the histories of Ceylon, 
South fndia and Southeast Asia.

--- PAGE 48 ---
324 
llEVIEW ARTICLE 
Two Ceylonese inscriptions recently published i~ 1973 (Epigraphia 
Zeylanica Vol. VI, part 1), give two or three names that change the 
histories of Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka. The inscriptions are No. 3 
Panduvasnuvara Pillar Inscription of the Reign of Udaya II, dated 893, 
pp. 12-20, which mentions a Sangha Radun, who was a princess of 
Palambanpura Suvanvaraya (Palembang the Harbour of Gold) in the land 
of Yavaju Kalingubimi (Javadvipa-Kalinga); and No. 8 Madirigiri Slab 
Inscription of Mahinda VI, dated circa 1060, pp. 39-58, in which Maharaja 
Samara was said to have driven away the Colas that remained spread 
over the entire Island of Lanka. 
Both inscriptions were edited by 
Paranavitana, but they were not from his interlinear sources. I have 
already dealt with these inscriptions in Parts lii and IV of this paper, 
but it would be as well to have a very short summary. 
1. 
The history of Ceylon in this period, based mainly on the 
chronicular Culawamsa, gives sole credit for driving out the Colas to 
Vijayabahu I. This is contrary to the contemporary epigraphic evidence 
cited above. 
2. 
The theory of a Sri Vijaya Empire based on Palembang can no 
longer hold water. If Palembang was Palambanpura, it could not have 
bee1:1 Sri Vijaya at the same time. Sri Vijaya was Chaiya, where an 
inscription with that name has been found. 
3. 
The historians of Sri Lanka have considered that all mentions 
of Kaiinga in their chronicles to have been located in India, but now 
that there is epigraphic evidence that there was a Kalinga in Southeast 
Asia <iavadvipa), to identify the Kalinga princes and princesses who 
became kings and queens of Ceylon as Sri Vijayan royalty would fit the 
story better. Such royalty included Raden Sangha, the princess from 
Palambanpu·ra mentioned above,'King Mahinda I\{'s Sundari, whom the 
Culawamsa 'called Kalinga princess, King Vijayabahu the Great's 
Tilokasundari,- the 'charming young princess of the Kalinga family'; 
Nissamkamalla, Sah.asamalla, Magha, Chandrabanu and Parakramabahu 
VI of Kotte, the last of whom was called Chandrabahu in a iiterai:y source 
written early in the reign called -the Saddharmaratanakara. This would 
indicate that he had conneetions with Sri Vijaya.

--- PAGE 49 ---
REVIEW AHTICLI' 
325 
Before the publication of these two inscriptions, there were some 
highly controversial Indian and Chinese records, such as the inscriptions 
of Kulottunga I of Cola, who appeared as Ti-hua-ka-lo in the Chinese 
records; and he was said to have been high Chief of San-fo-tsi (Sri 
Vijaya) as well as King of Chulien (Cola). This evidence will not fit 
the two Ceylonese inscriptions and make sense unless Paranavitana's 
sources are used as well. 
Without them, the histories of Sri Vijaya and 
Sri Lanka have to be revised anyway; but with them, the two stories 
can be integrated into a combined history of Sri Vijaya and Sri Lanka 
in the same way the stories of Normandy France and Norman England 
in the same period comprise one history. I donot know about historians 
of Ceylon, because as far as I can see writing the histories of India and 
Ceylon has now become a closed field of endevour for Western scholars; 
but historians of Southeast Asia should certainly be grateful to the 
memory of Professor Paranavitana for what be bas already contributed 
towards a far, far better History of Sri Vijaya than what Professor Coedes 
produced over fifty years ago. 
There will be a Part V to this paper, but it will have to be delayed 
somewhat. The story, from Chandrabanu's second invasion of Ceylon 
in about 1260 to the arrival of the Portugese at Malacca in 1511, covers 
two and a half centuries of the post-Sri Vijaya or pre-European period 
in the history of the Peninsula and Sumatra. 
M.C. Chaud Chirayu Rajani 
Chiangmai University

