# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1979-gupta-hoens-goudriaan-hindu-tantrism.pdf
# Total Pages: 230 | Direct: 219 | OCR: 0 | Blank/Sparse: 11
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:05:37
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 2 [DIRECT] ---

HANDBUCH. DER ORIENTALISTIK 
Herausgegeben von B. Sputer 
unter Mitarbeit von 
H. Franke, J. Gonna, H. HAMMIrzscu, W. Hexce, B. HROUDA, 
H. Kàurzn, J. E. van LornutizEN-pE Leeuw und Е. Vos 
©. 
` 
ZWEITE ABTEILUNG 
INDIEN 
HAY 
C 
(AM 
HERAUSGEGEBEN VON J. GONDA 
: 
‘ 
VIERTER BAND, ZWEITER ABSCHNITT | 
`` 
HINDU TANTRISM. `, 
T ai 
BY 
TU >; 
" 
d fi 
4 
RN 
жы 
Йй 
CR: 
"SANJUKTA GUPTA ө DIRK JANHOENS 7i: 
"ТЕЙМ GOUDRIAAN: 0... 
0 
ЕТУ, 
` 
yu 
«у z 
у 
LEIDEN/KOLN 
E. J. BRILL 
1979

--- PAGE 3 [DIRECT] ---

HANDBUCH DER ORIENTALISTIK 
Herausgegeben von B. SPULER 
: 
unter Mitarbeit von 
H. FRANKE, J. GoNDA, Н. HAMMITZSCH, W. HELCK, B. HROUDA, 
‚ 
I 
H. KAHLER, J. E. VAN LOHUIZEN-DE LEEUW und F. Vos 
ZWEITE ABTEILUNG 
INDIEN 
HERAUSGEGEBEN VON J. GONDA 
VIERTER BAND 
RELIGIONEN 
ZWEITER ABSCHNITT 
HINDU TANTRISM 
P 
LEIDEN/KÓLN 
E. J. BRILL 
1979

--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

. HINDU TANTRISM 
SANJUKTA GUPTA * DIRK JAN HOENS 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
€Je' 
LEIDEN/KÓLN 
E. J. BRILL 
1979

--- PAGE 5 [DIRECT] ---

ISBN 
90 04 05822 2 
Copyright 1979 by E. J. Brill, Leiden, The Netherlands 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or 
< 
translated in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, microfiche 
or any other means without written permission from the publisher 
PRINTED IN BELGIUM

--- PAGE 6 [DIRECT] ---

CONTENTS 
mbbreviations 
vns 
Putat 
ай 
ED. 
LIE 
E 
EHE 
PART ONE 
INTRODUCTION, HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY 
BY TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Introduction . 
I. Tantrism in History . 
jy 
H. The Place of Tantrism in Hindu ‘Religious Speculation cox 
PART TWO 
TRANSMISSION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUENTS OF THE 
PRACTICE 
BY DIRK JAN HOENS 
HI. Tantric Transmission 
i 
IV. Mantra and Other Constituents of Tantric Practice prs 
PART THREE 
MODES OF WORSHIP AND MEDITATION 
BY SANJUKTA GUPTA 
V. Tantric Sādhanā : Pūjā . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
+ 
+ 
+ 
VI. Tantric Sādhanā 
: Yoga 
. 
. 
. 
BIBIOgiNeliy. 7а 
HS УЫ 
em 
ue 
ROME 
X 
BE TU oru. 
ac eei 
a be DR 
REEL PEU WAS BEC 
я 
ё 
13 
47 
121 
163 
187 
195

--- PAGE 7 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

PREFACE 
This book tries to give an introductory survey of Hindu Tantrism. 
It is a product of joint effort. The three authors, although solely responsible 
for thc parts written by them, have consulted together on the whole. 
This, they hope, has resulted 
in a-certain 
levelling of differences of 
approach as well as in the purging, as much as possible, of mutual 
contradictions. Nevertheless, the reader will detect differences in the method 
of description and in the appreciation and selection of the sources; but 
in the authors' view this need not detract from the character of the book 
as a volume of the Handbuch destined for a general but scholarly introduction 
to the field. On the contrary, a certain variety of approach may serve as a 
“means 
of convincing the student of the manifold and ever varying character 
of the conglomerate of religious traditions which we are wont to subsume 
under the term Tantrism. The outcome will be very different if we study 
Tantrism only from its earlier written sources in Sanskrit or if we describe 
its present-day practice. Besides, it is impossible to study a living religion in 
a completely 
"objective", 
matter-of-fact 
manner, 
although, of course, 
statements of fact. and points of doctrine should be verifiable, sincere and 
unbiased. If the reader is able to collect from the following pages a fair 
impression of the main characteristics of Tantrism as an important and 
worthy offshoot of Hindu religiosity, the authors will feel amply rewarded. 
The authors want to express their pleasure in thanking the Foundation 
for Scientific Research in Tropical Regions (WOTRO) of the Dutch Govern- 
ment for subsidizing a study tour made by Mrs. Gupta in December- 
January 1976-77; Dr. B. V. Dwivedi, Prof. V. N. Khiste, Pandit Vamanji 
Diksit, and Sri Chandrashekhar Swami for their generous assistance during 
the collection of data; and Dr. Gunnar Carlstedt from Uppsala, Sweden, 
for kindly sending them a copy of some items of the periodical "Candi". 
For typing the bulk of the manuscript they are indebted to Miss M. 
Lamme and Miss W. van Putten of the secretarial staff of the Theological 
Institute at Utrecht.

--- PAGE 9 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

ABBREVIATIONS : SANSKRIT TEXTS 
A pastamba$rautasütra 
Ahirbudhnyasamhità 
Akulaviratantra 
Brhadaranyaka-upanisad 
Bhagavatapurana 
Bhàvanà-upanisad 
Brahmanasarvasva 
Baudhàyanasrautasütra 
Baudhàyanasulbasütra 
Brahmavidya-upanigad 
Brahmayamalatantra 
Chandogya-upanisad 
Devibhagavatapurana 
Devi-upanisad 
Dhyanabindu-upanisad 
Guhyasamajatantra 
Gayatritantra 
Hiranyakesisrautasütra 
Hathayogapradipikà 
Isanasivagurudevapaddhati 
Jaiminiyabrahmana 
Jiianakarika 
Jayakhyasamhita 
Jüanasiddhànta 
Jianarnavatantra 
Kalikapurana 
Kaulavalinirnaya 
Kulacüdamanitantra 
Kaulajfiánanirnaya 
Kamakalàvilása 
Kubjikamatatantra 
Karpiradistotra 
Kularnavatantra 
KAlivilasatantra 
Layayogasamhità 
Laksmitantra 
Maitrayaniya-upanisad 
Mahābhārata 
Mahàrthamaíjari 
Mantramahodadhi 
Mahünirvànatantra 
Mundaka-upanisad 
Milinivijayatantra

--- PAGE 11 [DIRECT] ---

ABBREVIATIONS 
Nityasodasikarnavatantra 
Netratantra 
Niévasatattvasamhita 
Para$uràmakalpasütra 
Pingalamata 
Paramarthasara 
Pránatosini 
Prapaficasaratantra 
Paratrimsikavivarana 
Pijavidhiniripana 
Patafijali, Yogasütra 
Ravana, Kumiaratantra 
Ràmapürvatüpaniya-upanisad 
Rgveda 
Rudrayamalatantra 
Satapathabrahmana 
Satkarmadipika 
Saundaryalahari 
Sammohanatantra 
Satcakranirüpana 
Saktisangamatantra 
Saradatilaka 
Svacchandatantra 
Śvetāśvatara-upanişad 
Tantraloka 
Taitt:riya-àranyaka , 
Tantrasara 
Tarabhaktisudharnava 
Todalatantra 
Tripuratapini-upanisad 
Tripurà-upanisad 
Taittiriyasamhità 
Tantrasárasamgraha 
Tantrarajatantra 
Taittiriya-upanisad 
Taittiriya-upanisadbhasyavarttika 
Vijünabhairavatantra 
Vidyàrnavatantra 
Vakyapadiya 
Vaikhinasasmartasitra 
Varivasyarahasya 
Yogacüdamani-upanigad 
Yoginihrdaya(tantra) 
Yoginitantra 
Yogasikha-upanisad 
Yogatattva-upanisad

--- PAGE 12 [DIRECT] ---

OTHER ABBREVIATIONS 
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona 
Agama 
Adyar Library Bulletin, Adyar/Madras 
Adyar Library Series, Adyar/Madras 
Anandaérama Sanskrit Series, Poona 
Bulletin de l'École Française d’Extréme-Orient, Paris 
Contribuuons to Asian Studies 
century 
The Cultural Негіка > 
of India, 4 vols., Calcutta 21953-62 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum 
Contributions to Indian Sociology, The Hague 
Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baro.a 
History and Culture of the Indian People, ed. R. C. Majumdar and 
A. D. Pusalker, 10 vols., London/Bombay 1941-... 
A History of Indian Literature, Wiesbaden 
Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta 
Journal of Ancient Indian History, Calcutta 
Journal of Asian Studies, Chicago 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 
Kashmi: Series of Texts and Studies, Srinagar (Bombay) 
Manuscript(s) 
New Catalogus Catalogorum, Madras 
Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta 
Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart 
Samhita 
Sanskrit 
Tijdschrift van het Bataviaasch Cenootschap voor Kunsten en Weten- 
schappen, Batavia (= Jakarta) 
Vikrama Samvat (era) 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens, Wien 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft

--- PAGE 13 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 14 [DIRECT] ---

PART ONE 
, 
INTRODUCTION, HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY 
BY 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN

--- PAGE 15 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 16 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCTION 
Tantric studies : present position 
Tantrism, a field of study almost generally neglected by carlier generations 
of Indologists, has often been subjected to misunderstanding, not to say 
_Misrepresentation and unearned disparagement. Western scholars with a 
liberal bourgeois background, starting from Christian norms and values or 
filled with enthusiasm for the Aryan element in the Indian tradition tended 
to consider this part of Indian religiosity as a medley of magic, super- 
stition and "revolting" rituals; orthodox Hindu intellectuals — sometimes 
under British influence — were and are wont to see Tantric esoterism 
(sometimes denoted by a peculiar pejorative use of the word “mysticism’’) 
as a wilful breach of the social and ethical base of the sanatana dharma, 
the eternally valid code of religious practice. On the other side there 
were — and are — those who recognized in Tantrism a hitherto almost 
unused force of spiritual regeneration, “a view of life which offers a uniquely 
successful antidote to the anxieties of our time" (Rawson, Art of Tantra, 
front flap). A reliable introduction 
into the subject will have to steer 
clear of both extremes by presenting the matter as objectively and disin- 
terestedly as possible. 
Although some — especially Indian — scholars are conversant with Tantric 
theory and practice, very little has been done as yet by professional 
Indologists (at least for Hindu Tantrism, to which the present volume 
will restrict itself) in presenting scholarly studies based directly on the 
sources. 
It is disappointing to find that the same, often faulty or one- 
sided, statements made by earlier authorities are repeated again and again 
without checking in scientific as well as popularizing studies (cf. the 
instance of the "Gupta" or "post-Gupta" Ms. of the КМТ: below, p. 22). 
The wri, сп sources have till now been made accessible mostly in an imperfect 
manner and іп many cases 
not al all. They will have to be edited 
critically and — if ever possible — ordered chronologically before even the 
problems of interpretation can be satisfactorily stated (Ray, Tantric Buddhism, 
p. 175). Only then, comparative studies of the diverse aspects of the Tantric 
tradition can lay a firm foundation for a reliable overall description. This 
work should be supplemented by serious research into the still existent 
oral tradition — а difficult and urgent task. Without oral explanation, a ` 
number of passages from the written sources are bound to remain unclear

--- PAGE 17 [DIRECT] ---

4 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
while secret meanings (whether intended by the author or established by 
subsequent tradition) will escape the student (Silburn, /ntrod. to the VBT, 
p. 8). However, even the interpretations given by pandits or gurus should 
not always be taken for granted. This research should be accompanied by 
accurately documented glossaries of Tantric terminology based upon extensive 
and unprejudiced collections of material. In the meantime, any survey of 
Tantrism, including the present one, can have only a preliminary character. 
Recent instances of a correct procedure 
in dealing with the written 
sources of Hindu Tantrism of the Sakta denomination are Carlstedt's studies 
on the KT — regrettably written in Swedish — and, in another way, Dwi- 
veda's edition of, and Sanskrit introduction into, the NST. Very useful, 
especially for the historian 
of religion, 
are also accurate excerpts 
or 
paraphrases such as that of the Indonesian JSid. by Soebadio, p. 7-46, or 
of the NT by Brunner, Netra Tantra, p. 125-197. 
Earlier work in the 
Tantras has partly been done in the form of collections and descriptions of 
Mss., for which the name of Hara Prasad Shastri (1853-1931) — who from 
1891 on was in charge of the search of Mss. for the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal as successor to Rajendralala Mitra — should be especially mentioned. 
Farquhar (Outline), partly relying on an earlier collection made by the 
Rev. K. S. Macdonald, made mention of a great number of Tantric texts and 
tried to classify them chronologically; but this was done without an ade- 
quate base of manuscript. study. Some old Mss. present in the former 
Durbar Library (now National Library) in Kathmandu, Nepal, were studied 
by P. Ch. Bagchi in 1929 and subsequent years, which resulted in that 
Scholar's Studies in the Tantras — one of the very few reliable books 
on 
the subject. A praiseworthy 
activity 
was 
developed 
by Sir John 
Woodroffe (pseud. Arthur Avalon), a former Justice of the High Court at 
Calcutta in the colonial period, who with the help of pandits prepared 
some preliminary editions and translations in the series Tantrik Texts. His 
other publications are often unreliable because they are motivated by the 
desire to propagate Sakta Tantrism and to apologize against orthodox 
Hindus and Victorian missionaries. Very often he is indebted, even in his 
style and diction, to — sometimes unmentioned — others, while written 
sources in Sanskrit are seldom accurately accounted for. 
Studies made by historians of religions (Eliade, Bolle, Beane and others) 
contributed important insights. 
Besides, these authors try to transpose 
Tantric terminology into the language of their own discipline (an extremely 
difficult task), or to discover a "potentially unified structure of thought and 
expression" (Beane, Myth, Cult and Symbols, p. 1X). But as a matter of 
- 
course they often base themselves too much upon a limited selection of the

--- PAGE 18 [DIRECT] ---

К 
INTRODUCTION 
5 
material, or on material selected and presented inaccurately by others. An 
excellent study on Tantric — especially Kashmir Saiva — sound speculation 
has been produced by Padoux, Parole. A very thorough knower of Tantrism, 
Gopinath Kaviraj, has published authoritative and thought-provoking studies, 
mainly in Hindi and Bengali: but they concentrate upon philosophy and 
of Tantric literature alphabetically arranged according to titles under the 
direction of the 
same scholar (Tantrika Sahitya). Of the only two serious 
attempts at a comprehensive 
survey of Hindu Tantrism (Chakravarti, Tantras; 
Bharati, 
Tantric Tradition), 
the former, 
although 
short and somewhat adhj3y? 
superficial, is the most reliable. 
р.Р. cChatep 
A Marxist interpretation was ventured on in 1959 by D. P. Chattopadhyay 
(Lokayata). He tried to fill a gap by means of a coherent picture of the 
prehistory and socio-economic background of Sakta Tantrism; but his 
remarks are necessarily speculative, not based upon a direct study of the 
Sanskrit sources and even incorrect from the Marxist standpoint : 
whatever 
Tantrism or Saktism may have been, certainly no revolutionary force created 
by the oppressed masses. The same approach has been followed up by 
N. N. Bhattacharyya (Sakta Religion). The book by R. N. Nandi (Institutions), 
a pupil of the Marxist historian R. S. Sharma, has the merit that in its 
restricted subject it makes full use of epigraphic sources, and the same can 
be said of the publications by the well-known epigraphist and historian 
D. C. Sircar. 
Meaning and Scope of the term Tantrism 
"Tantrism" is derived from “Tantra”. This Sanskrit word, literally “exten- 
sion", "warp on a loom", can be used in Sanskrit literary history for 
denoting any handbook 
or guide-whict-sets-Torth-a-eertain doctrine, or 
for 
its contents. 
In the history 
of Indian religion it is, however, 
used in a 
restricted sense (in the plural 
as well as -the singular) for the scriptures 
which expound non-Vedic doctrine..and 
practice, especially of the Sakta. 
denomiz.:ion, and again for their contents. Traditionally, Tantra is often 
explained by a reference to the verbal roots ran- “to stretch, expound” 
and - 
=s 
ers 
—— 
trà- "to save", so that the term became an indicator for the soteriological 
importance of this literature. 
The extremely varied and complicated nature of Tantrism, one of the main 
currens Tñ the Trdian religious tradition of the last fifteen hundred years, 
renders 
(Hë manipulation 
of a single definition almost impossible. Thei ds, 
accordingly, a general uncertainty about the 
exact 
scope of the word. 
exact

--- PAGE 19 [DIRECT] ---

6 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
In our opinion, it is mainly used in two meanings. In a wider sense, Tan- 
trism or 
Tantric stands 
for a collection of practices and symbols of a 
ritualistic, sometimes magical character (e.g. mantra, yantra, cakra, mudrà, 
nyasa, all of them discussed further on in this book). They differ from 
what is taught in the Veda and its exegetical literature but they are all 
the same applied as means of reaching spiritual emancipation (mukti) or the 
realization of mundane aims, chiefly domination (bhukti) in various sects 
of Hinduism and Buddhism.! 
In a more restricted sense, it denotes à system, 
m 
isting 
in many 
variations, 
of rituals full of symbolism, predominantly — — but 
by no means exclusively — Sakta, promulgated along “schools” (sampradaya) 
and lines of succession (parampard) by spiritual adepts or gurus. What they 
teach is subsumied undér the term sddhand, ie. the road to spiritual 
emancipation or to dominance by means of Kundaliniyoga and other psycho- 
somatic experiences. It is in this latter sense that ““Tantrism” is usually 
known in India itself. The two meanings given above should 
not be 
ifferentiated too sharply, because it is often difficult to draw a line. It is 
important to remark at this point that the true Tantric sadhana is a purely 
y 
individual way 
to release accessible to all people, women as well as men 
za N 
(at least in theory), householders as well as ascetics. 
At present, 
the practisers (sadhaka) of 
the Tantric system are mainly 
people who live an ordinary life within family and society. But beside 
this ordinary reality, they try to come into touch with a higher stratum of 
divine reality by a course of identification with their chosen deity (see below, 
p. 123) who is usually the Goddess. 
A 
Applying the wider sense, one can say that Tantrism or Tantric elements 
are found — in differing grades of frequency and intensity — in Vaisnavism, 
Saivism, Saktism, Jainism and Buddhism; but no one will probably deny 
the prevalent position of Saktism within the Hindu Tantric fold. 
In 
consequence thereof the Tantrism found in Sakta or in Sakta-influenced 
texts will be the main subject in the present book. 
The essential role of Saktism in the Tantric tradition is emphasized. 
by. 
EN 
| 
various authors. Sometimes Tantrism and Sakti cult are even identified 
y 
outright. 
But 
it seems 
best 
to consider, 
with Payne (Saktas, 
p. 72) 
Sàktism and Tantrism as “two intersecting 
but not coinciding circles". On 
account of its "inclusive" nature, Tantrism is much more diffused. Saktism 
is defined in different ways (Eliot, Hinduism, p. 11f.; Woodroffe, $. $, 
* Chakravarti, Tantras, p. 29 : “Brahmanic worship is all through permeated by tantricism" ; : 
Pratyagatmananda, Realization, p. 229; Padoux, Parole, p. 41, п. 2.

--- PAGE 20 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCTION 
7 
p. 158). Sometimes it is incorrectly identified with “the cult of female deities 
in general" (B. C. Raychaudhuri, in Sircar. Sakti Cult, p. 61). It. can 
shortly be characterized as the worship of Sakti (ŠST 1, 8, 26), i.e. the 
universal and all-embracing dynamis which manifests 
itself in human 
experience as a, female divinity. To this should be added that inseparably 
connected with her is an 
inactive male partner 
as whose power Of 
action and movement the Sakti functions (Gonda, Rel. Indiens 11, p. 40; 
. 
Padoux, Parole. р. 42f.; Nandi, Institutions, p. 119). It is 
therefore not enough 
to say that a Sàkta worships the female as ultimate principle; nor is it correct 
categorically to state that 
Saktism is characterized by the use of the five 
makaras (see below. p. 
. 
Like 
“Tantrism™, 
“Säktism 
is sometimes 
used in a wider meaning. It makes sense to distinguish an “independent” 
from a “dependent” variety (Bhattacharyya, Sakta Religion, p. 73). In’ the 
latter case, the Sakti(s) is (are) worshipped within the fold of another 
denomination (like Vaisnavism or Jainism) without constituting the essence 
of its creed and practice, while in the Sakta sect proper the Sakti is 
the chief divinity, Although Saktism is often defined also by means of 
typical ritual practices, it is advisable to restrict the use of this term for a 
world view oriented towards the Sakti, while Tantrism should be applied to 
a conglomerate of ritual and yogic practices and presuppositions. 
Some of the constituents of Tantrism (in its wider sense) are summed 
up below : 
1. Tantrism offers an alternative and practical individual road to salvation, 
characterized as a 
sadhana, beside the Vedic one which is often considered” 
to be antiquated (Padoux, Parole, p. 44; the following elements of this. 
list are partly indebted to this author). 
2. It recognizes and expounds mundane aims beside spiritual emancipation 
or final release as a lawful goal for a practiser. “Realization” indeed implies 
both aims which are hardly separable in the texts. "Domination" is an 
essential aspect of "deification". This again implies that Tantric methods 
are considered applicable for various sorts of practical attainments including 
astrology, medicine and magic. In practice, many written sources of Tantrism 
are'pre-occüpied with the description of supernatural 
abilities (siddhi-, 
“attainments” or the magical sarkarmáni “six acts"). There remains, however, 
always a connecting thread between the popular and the individual or 
esoterical ; 
between the magical and the spiritual. 
3. It teaches 
the practice of a special variety of yoga destined 
to 
transform the animal instincts and functions by creating an upward movement 
in the body along yogic nerve centres (cakra). The process is most commonly 
expressed as “rousing (or "raising") the Kundalini" (see ch. VI) The

--- PAGE 21 [DIRECT] ---

8 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
"esotcric yogic cult" which — at least in Bengal — lies at the base of 
Tantric sadhana is succinctly and clearly described by S. B. Dasgupta (Obscure 
Cults, p. XXXIV-XL). 
4. Connected with this yoga is the elaboration of a mystic physiology 
in which the “microcosm” of the body is 
identified or homologized with the 
` 
-pods- Imsight-mto and 
during an external püjà "worship" (see ch. V), the deity is invoked from 
the own heart and dismissed also there (PKS 4,1 and 5,23; PVN, p. 143). 
Passages on macro-microcosmic symbolism are collected in the PrT (Book 6, 
ch. 4). 
` 
5. Important are speculations on the mystic nature of speech and its 
constituents (the articulated sounds; in practice : the Sanskrit alphabet); 
the existence is assumed of a phonic creation parallel to the material 
phenomena. 
6. This has been developed concretely in the very frequent use of generally 
short, often wholly or partly unintelligible formulas (mantras and bijas) 
invested with supernatural power by means of definite ritual procedures and 
made the object of cosmic symbolism. 
7. General use of concrete devices like intricate formulas, geometrical 
designs (mandala, yantra, cakra), gestures (mudrá) for the expression of 
metaphysical or other abstract principles (thus formulated by R. Krishna- 
swami Aiyar, in Woodroffe, TT and ККУ, р. 131). This implies that such 
concrete resources are apt to be burdened with one or more symbolic 
meanings, by preference three, often distinguished by the terms sthüla- “coarse” 
or "material"; süksma- "subtle", which may refer to the phonic plane; 
and para- "supreme" or “metaphysical”. 
8. Realization of the supernatural world by specific methods of meditation 
(dhyàna), involving in the first place the creation of mental images or 
pictures of gods and goddesses who may be worshipped internally. The 
deity thus created may be invoked for social, especially medical, aims. 
9. Ambivalence of divine — and human — existence: the divine and 
the demoniac, as also the erotic and the destructive, are considered to 
complementary aspects of the same awesome 
invisible 
reality (a point 
stressed by Pott, Yoga en Yantra, p. 126). 
10. The importance of female manifestations called Saktis (see above). 
11. The 
practice of realizing 
the double-sided nature of existence by an 
intentional, regulated contact — often performed only mentally — with 
socially disapproved persons or entities such as meat, wine, low-caste women

--- PAGE 22 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCTION 
9 
orb odily excretions. This “religious revaluation of ‘worldly’ data" emphasized 
by Bolle (Persistence, p. 69) is also found in the Bhakti current. 
12. Emphasis upon the absolute necessity of 
initiation (diksd) by a qualified 
spiritual guide or teacher (guru) — who is „commonly identified with the 
chief deity — and of constantly following 
this guru s directions for spiritual _ 
practice (see ch. III). 
13. The development of a complete set of ritual practices beside the tradi- 
tional, . Vedacoriented one, This created a 
"double framework" Tor The" 
practice of Hinduism (Woodroffe, SS. p. 137, one of his best insights; 
Chakravarti, Tantras, р. 4f.). 
14. A far-fetched categorization of reality, aon in the symbolism of 
numbers and of speech. 
15. Further elaboration of speculations common 
in (or produced by) 
Brahmanism. Thus, the KT (6,72f.) distinguishes 
ten manifestations of 
Brahman as against the usual number of five; there occurs a symbolical 
explanation of the eightfold yoga in the NT (8, 9ff.). 
16. A connection of the yoga mentioned under 3 with the very old 
alchemical practices of the Siddhas (see p. 23 and Eliade, telat 
and the body culture of the Hathayogins. 
17. The existence of a special religious geography by the нашр 
(also in symbolic form) of places of pilgrimage of its own (see p. 37f.). 
18. The use of a special set of terminology or even of "code language", 
both of them requiring particular methods of exegesis which were originally 
meant to be handed over only orally by the guru. 
The above characteristics need by no means 
to be present in their 
entirety in a Tantric text; but their boundary lines, like isoglosses, tend 
to converge. The decision at what point a text or sect begins to be called 
“Tantric” is very difficult. The traditions of the relevant groups sometimes 
- 
contradict each other. For instance, the Paficaratrins — the followers of 
"Tantric Vaisnavism" — decline to be called Tantrics because they do 
not want to be considered 
worshippers of 
the 
Mother 
ESS. 
As for Hinduism in general, it might be proposed for Tantrism also 
that Tantrics are those who are wont to call themselves by that name 
(or who, if questioned, admit themselves to be Tantrics). 
In the sequel, 
we shall concentrate upon the Sakta variety of Tantrism and return only 
Shortly and intermittently 
to other 
varieties (Kashmir Saivism, Saiva 
Siddhànta, Pañcaratra, Jaina Tantrism), while Buddhist Tantrism has, when- 
ever possible, been left also out of the picture.

--- PAGE 23 [DIRECT] ---

10 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
q 
The sources 
The sources of Tantric tradition аге many and manifold and can be 
| 
classified in various ways. There is, at first, the distinction between oral 
and written tradition. The Tantrics have always considered oral instruction 
| 
by the guru as indispensable for the aspirant towards mystic truths. Exposi- 
_ 
i} 
tions given by present-day gurus and their comments upon older texts 
| 
aie of course of prime importance as a means of access to modern Tan- 
trism. Nor are they negligible as a source for the understanding of earlier 
phases of the tradition; but their evidence should be used with some 
caution because one never knows how far the oral tradition has remained 
| 
true to these earlier phases. In any case, the scientific investigation of the 
| 
| 
T 
still existing oral tradition has scarcely begun and the difficulties are so 
š 
| 
great that it might even remain an unborn child. 
The written sources are divisible into two main groups: those in Sanskrit 
and those in modern Indian languages, Dravidian as well as Indo-Aryan. 
` Although the Sanskrit sources are by far the most important, especially 
ir, the earlier phases of the history of Tantrism, the second group is by no 
"n 
means insignificant in size nor negligible in contents. Beside translations and 
paraphrases of Sanskrit texts, there are poems and hymns, books of magic, 
hagiographical literature, works by the Vaisnava Sahajiyás ii, Bengali, etc. 
In many cases, the Tantric nature of these works is a matter of doubt. 
The present book is usually based upon the written sources in Sanskrit. Many 
of them have been n 
composed in an abstruse and purposely dark style 
and in often ungrammatical language, while their contents are not infrequently 
incoherent. Many particulars of the ritual or points of doctrine 
have 
purposely been omitted or are only vaguely hinted at. Technical terms 
^ remain unexplained. Mantras are sometimes only indicated by codes. These 
` 
and other peculiarities render the study of Tantric texts a slippery and 
often frustrating task which is complicated still further by the imperfection 
У 
of the Mss., the lack of critical editions and the forbidding problems of 
date and authorship. For the history of Tantrism, ron-Tantric sources are 
also of some importance. We mention classical Sanskrit court literature, 
philosophical texts and inscriptions. Iconographical and other archaeological 
material, although seldom referred to in this book, also deserves attention. 
The Sanskrit sources lend themselves to a natural division according 
to o denominations, A 
generar principle i isthat the term Samhita "cellection" 
is re 
s 
reserved for the texts of the Paficaratra, Agama "(book of) tradition” 
4 
for those of Saivism, and Tantra for those of Saktism (Unde Classique, Y, 
р. 423; Gonda, Medieval Literature, р. 2); there are, however, important

--- PAGE 24 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCT ON 
1 
exceptions. Traditionally, the Samhitàs are 108. in. number (in. reality, _ 
there -are more .9f them)._Of_special_importance among them are the 
Sattvata. Jayakhya, Paramesvara, Pauskara and / 
Ahirbudhnya Samhitas and 
the Laksmitantra. Of the 
Saiva Agamas (28 according to tradition), the 
Kirana, Kamika, Mrgendra and Raurava are well-known. Other important ^ 
texts are the Svacchanda, Mialinivijaya and Netra Tantras which 
are — 
“especially | 
venerated (as well as the Mrgendra Tantra which seems to be the 
"philosophical" 
part of the Mrgendragama) by ihe Kashmir Saivas, but 
also by the Saktas. The famous a Tantric philosopher Abhinavagupta 
wrote his 
Tantraloka 
"Light on Tantra” 
about 1000 A.D. 
It is often 
difficult to distinguish between Saiva and Sakta sources, because the latter 
denomination developed within a Saiva context or background. On the 
other hand, the Paficaratra Samhitas and Saiva Agamas have much more 
in_common with each other than with the 
Sakta Tantras. The former 
two groups are usually handbooks 
for temple worship conducted by 
i 
Concentrate 
upon 
individual 
practice. — aI 
The Sakta texts are the Tantras par excellence. The texts themselves 
occupy much space in giving lists and classifications of this literature. 
They are not unanimous about the number of Tantras, but the number 64 
is most frequent among them. Among the lists of 64 Tantras which are 
found,’ also Saiva Tantras are sometimes included. The real number of 
Sàkta Tantric texts is much greater. The most important among them 
seem. to be the Nityasodasikarnava and the Yoginihrdaya (which together 
form the Vámake$vara Tantra), the Tantraraja (all focusing on Srividya 
worship with Tripurasundari as the chief goddess), the Kaulajfiananirnaya 
(tenth or eleventh cent), Kubjikamata, Kularrava (between 1000 and 1400 
A.D. according to Carlstedt), Saktisangama (sixteenth cent.), Para$uráma- 
kalpasütra (seventeenth cent. or earlier), Mahanirvana (late eighteenth cent.?). 
The dating of all these texts is usually a difficult matter. The Rudrayamala, 
of which many smaller texts declare themselves to be a part, belongs 
to a certainly old group, 
the Yamalas (see Bagchi, Studies; there are 
also the Brahma- and Jayadratha Yamalas, and others) But the part 
of the te - which is now available in edited form (the Uttara Tantra) 
shows vamistakable signs of lateness and -may have been added to the 
oldest core afterwards. 
1 For these texts, see J. Filliozat, Les Agama Civaites, in: N. R. Bhatt, ed. of Raura- 
vagama, vol. I, p. V-XV; Gonda, Medieval Literature, p. 180ff. 
? Cf. Kaviraj, Tántrika Sahitya, p. 19ff.; Dwiveda, Introd. to NST, p. 23ff.; Awasthi, 
Rahasya, p. 1211.: Pandey, Abhinavagupta, р. 141.

--- PAGE 25 [DIRECT] ---

12 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Besides the Tantras themselves which are usually anonymous, there 
exist several digests which sometimes range over the whole of Tantric 
tradition. Their author is generally known, at least by name. The most 
important among them are the Saradatilaka by Laksmanadesika (eleventh 
cent.), the Ргарайсаѕага Tantra ascribed to Sankara (but in reality without 
doubt, the product: 
of a somewhat later author from his school), the 
Mantramahodadhi by Mahidhara (sixteenth cent.) and compilations like 
Krsnánanda's Tantrasara (Bengal, sixteenth or early seventeenth cent.) and 
Ramatosana’s Pranatosini (early nineteenth cent.). There are also independent 
works as well as commentaries written by learned Brahmans well versed 
in philoso, 
e most famous — besides the works by Abhinavagupta 
and Ksemaraja of the Kashmir Saiva school — are the commentaries by 
Amptananda and Bhaskararaya on the Yoginihrdaya, by Raghavabhatta 
(about 1500 A.D.) on the Saradatilaka, and by Laksmidhara on the 
Anandalahari; independent works are Pirnananda’s Kamakalavilasa (six- 
teenth cent.), Bhaskararaya’s Varivasyarahasya (eighteenth cent.; both the 
latter works are on Srividya), and the literary production of Kasinatha 
. 
Bhatta (eighteenth 
cent.) (for more 
details, 
see Chakravarti, 
Tantras, 
p. 66ff.). There are-still other genres such as Upanisads (Tripura, Devi, 
Bhavana and others); Stotras or hymns, the most famous of which are 
the Saundaryalahari to Tripura (its first part is commonly known 
as 
Anandalahari) and the Karpüradistotra to Kali; and Puranas or insertions in 
Puranas (Kalika Purana; Devimahatmya in the Markandeya Purana). A 
special group is formed by the magical Tantras like the Sabara, Uddisa, 
Uddamara and Dattátreya. Tantras and the Siddhanagarjunakaksaputa. 
They have been very popular and the history of their tradition is accordingly 
very complicated. The Jainas have their own Tantras like the Bhairava-- 
|
padmàvatikalpa. 
PORE 
|
There is also an immense variety of practical ritual guides (prakarana, 
paddhati) such as the Nityotsava by Umananda, the Syamarahasya "the 
Secret of the Black Goddess", or the Srividyanityarcana “Regular Worship 
a" 
of the Srividya".

--- PAGE 26 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER ONE 
TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
Legendary Origins 
Many Tantras contain information on the mythical descent on earth 
(avatara) of the body of sacred texts (süstra). They are unanimous about 
the origin of the tradition from the Highest Being (Siva). He proclaimed 
it, usually with a view to enlightening His spouse, Devi, the Great Goddess, 
who on some occasion came to express a desire for elucidation on spiritual 
matters. The Sakta Tantras are usually presented as dialogues, or rather 
interviews, between this divine couple, although in a sma 
minority о 
texts (for instance, the RYT) Devi Is the proclaimer. 
a 
text 
is 
— 
n 
aa aa a 
a Nigama in contrast to Agama which can be used for any Tantric text 
or for the tradition as a body.! 
There are different speculations about the exact nature of this primeval 
revelation. Abhinavagupta tried to integrate it within the four evolutionary 
stages of speech. In Bhaskararaya’s opinion (Setubandha on YHT 7,47, 
where he quotes the SvT), the sacred truth came from the Supreme Brahman 
to Svacchanda, a Bhairava (fearsome manifestation of Siva), and after- 
wards in succession to the Independent (anàsrita) I$vara, Devi, Sadàsiva, 
Isvara, Vidyesvara and Srikantha, from whom it came down on earth. 
The primal urge is generally considered by Tantric philosophers to be a 
reflection of the Supreme — still unseparated from Its Sakti — on Itself 
(see also ch. II). This reflection involves a certain discursive relation: 
the prototype of the guru-disciple relation. A characteristic case is that 
of the BYT. This text ascribes itself to a tradition which originated in 
the Bindu (concentrated creative principle), which became awakened by 
Sakti and over Sadàsiva and other divine manifestations came down to Sri- 
kantha in the form of 125.000 anustubhs (Slokas, stanzas of two lines of 
sixteen syllables each). The latter elaborated it into millions of verse, but 
Ivara, who is introduced 
as 
the real revealer 
of the BYT, at the 
beginning of that text declares to present the original 125.000 to Devi who 
is the hearer (Bagchi, Studies, p. 102f.; Bagchi, Evolution, p. 217). Of this 
* Many Tantric authors, however, identify "Nigama" with “Veda”: Awasthi, Rahasya, 
р. 7; Sastry, Sidelights, p. 4f.

--- PAGE 27 [DIRECT] ---

ZI 
éd 
14 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
amount, a part is received by a Brahman from Kuruksetra and another 
part by a certain Devadatta of Odra (Uddiyana in the extreme North- 
West of the South Asian subcontinent) who hands it down to his disciples. 
Other texts give different expositions, but the principle is always the same: 
an unbroken succession (sampradàya, parampara) of teacher-taught relation- 
ships from the aivine origin of all existence up to the time of writing down 
the version destined for the present generations. The first stage is inexplica- 
ble: like a bolt from the blue, the Sastra in its first stage of unevolved 
speech came forth from Pure Consciousness (Abhinavagupta; quoted by 
Awasthi, Rahasya, p. 4). 
The gap between the divine and the human stages in the tradition is 
sometimes accounted for by a legend that a human being overheard the 
conversation between Siva and Devi. In the Natha cult, this role is played 
by its legendary founder, Matsyendranatha, who acted in the form of a 
fish (matsya). In the Kula tradition of Kashmir, there were four first 
human expounders for the four successive world-periods which are generally 
admitted by Hinduism. They look like fabulous "culture heroes" with a 
perhaps totemistic background (TÀ ch. 29; cf. Pandey, Abhinavagupta, 
р. 544Г.): 
Name 
Meaning of name 
World-period 
Direction of worship 
Khagendra 
Lord of Birds 
Satya (first) 
East 
Kürma 
Tortoise 
Tretà (second) 
South 
Mesa 
Ram 
 ' 
Dvapara (third) 
West 
Macchanda 
Fish? 
Kali (present age) 
North 
Completely different is the account of the origin of the most sacred 
mantra of Tripura, the Srividyà. In this more Veda-oriented tradition, 
the classical gods and sages are prominent. The origin of the Vidya lies 
with Ката who handed it down to twelve Vidyesvaras "Lords of Wisdom" 
or "Lords of the Vidya” among whom figure Manu, Agastya, Durvasas 
and some Vedic gods (Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya, р. 29; the same, ed. of 
YHT, р. IVf.). 
The Vedic sages (rsi-) continue to play an important part in the legendary 
prehistory of Tantrism. Prominent among them are Vasistha, who is said to 
have obtained enlightenment in Tibet (RYT 17), Durvasas, Agastya (also the 
name.of the first of the Tamil Siddhas : 
Zvelebil, Murugan, p. 222; the same, 
Poets of Powers, p. 71), the group headed by Sanatkumara (МУТ 1,! ff.). while 
also Parasurüma, the sixth Avatüra of Visnu, figures as a Rsi and a 
devotee of Tripurà. But the function of the sages differs from that given 
to them in the Veda: the Vedic Rsis spontaneously "saw" 
the sacred

--- PAGE 28 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
15 
ower manilestations. Therefore also а deity can fulfil the role of an Rsi 
(fike Mahakala Tor the mantras of KANY, 
; 
TT 
= 
Tantra and Veda 
Hindu religious tradition can be — and has been — reduced to two 
chief denominators: the Vedic amd ihe Tantric. The relaüons between " 
these two are extre 
- 
sented in a few pages 
only at the cost of gross simplification. 
Although the followers of the Tantra have often been accused of heterodoxy 
by the upholders of the Veda-oriented brahmanical system (some instances 
are discussed by Chakravarti, Tantras, p. 29ff.), Tantrism usually 
did realize 
very 
well the 
prime importance of the Veda as a source of revelation. Hence 
“ited in 
various ways to 
апай a 
атаа noe Ie 
problem : how to settle matters with the generally — although often only by 
lip-service — venerated oldest source of the Indian religious tradition, and 
especially: how to account 
for the apparent deviation from and even 
defiance of that source. There have been various attempts at integration. 
Some authors maintained that the tradition is in principle undivided:— and, 
indeed, the Pāñcarātra 
tried to prove that it came 
forth from a lost 
Vedic school (Gonda, Medieval Literature, p. 49f.) — but that there were 
important reasons for a modification of emphasis and ritual procedure. 
One of these reasons is that the Veda was considered to be no longer 
comprehensible for mankind in the present deteriorating stage of world fa 
Je = 
history (the “Kali age"). It was, however, also said that Vedic worship 
was lacking in results (KT 12,36 and others); hence it is understandable bs. 
that Vedism has also been described as a preparatory stage to Agamic or 
Tantric practice. Among the Kaulas, Vedacàra is the first of the seven 
` 
agaras or ways of practice which culminate m the Kulacara or Kaula 
conduct (KT 2,7f.). 
: 
“For some adherents of Tantrism who strove after a compromise between 
both standr^ints, the practice of Vedic as well as Tantric ritual (especially 
diksa) is г necessary condition to spiritual emancipation. On the other 
hand, the Tantric dharma is described as the essence, the best part of the 
Veda, “churned” by Siva from the ocean which is the Veda with the 
churning-stick of intuitive wisdom (KT 2,10; cf. Kane, History, V, 2, p. 1051, 
n. 1692). 
. 
A 
growing 
concern with Vedism 
is to be observed 
in brahmanical 
circles of followers of 
Saktism, especially the 
Srividyà worshippers who

--- PAGE 29 [DIRECT] ---

get 
^ 
2n 
16 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
styled themselves Samayacarins “Practisers of the Covenant" or Daksinacarins 
“Practisers of the Right" (see below, p. 44) Very often, the Veda is 
quoted as an authority, while a great number of Vedic stanzas are applied 
— sometimes completely without reference to their original meaning — in a 
Tantric ritual context. The names of the four Vedasamhitas (Rg-, Sama-, 
Yajur- and Atharvaveda) continu: to occupy their place in Tantric numerical 
symbolism; thus, the RYT (17,8711) connects them with four of the 
internal cakras (Müladhara etc.), allotting the highest position to the Athar- 
vaveda. Presumably because of its preoccupation with magical rites, this latter 
text was often claimed as the Vedic source of the Tantric tradition and 
thus the earliest Tantric text "avant la lettre" (Woodroffe, $. $., p. 136f.; 
Renou, Destin du Veda, p. 11). Many Tantric Upanisads ascribe themselves 
to the AV, while pivotal tenets such as the doctrine that Sakti is Brahman 
are said to derive from the same source (Devy Up., 2). Although there 
seems to be no justification for this, 
a number of later doctrines and 
practices are indeed foreshadowed by what is found in some earlier Upanisads 
and even Brahmanas (some material is to be found in Chakravarti, Tantras, 
p. 12f.; Padoux, Parole, p. 16). The most important connexions lie in the 
sphere of speech symbolism and etymology (see below, p. 90f.; micro- 
macrocosmic agreements (ChU 2; often, e.g. in SatBr 1, 3, 2, 13, established 
by way of analogies in-numbers); interiorization of sacrifice; sexual signifi- 
cance of the ritual (Eliade, Yoga, p. 256ff.; Bagchi, Evolution, р. 213); early 
instances of speculation on a yogic body (ChU 8, 6; cf. Kane, History, V, 
2, p. 1063, n. 1717); guru worship (SvU 6,23); growing importance of 
“Saktis” (Kane, History, V, 2, p. 1043f.; Arbman, Rudra); and emergence of 
the idea of an all-embracing female cosmic power; description of magical 
practices. Some Vedic practices are continued in early Tantras, for instance 
representation of the gods in sacrificial utensils (NT 3, 70; a case of 
AXyápti "mystical penetration" according to the commentator Кѕетагаја); 
traditional penances developing into Tantric vratas (Lorenzen, K. K., p. 73ff.); 
the practice of ascribing to each mantra a led Vedic metre and deity 
(rsyádinyása). „злс тте 
ҮПТЕ 
a 
"Despite the impressive number of such agreements, the differences in 
emphasis, mutual connection and, above all, in ritual and doctrinal systems 
are so obvious that it would be quite out of the place to consider Tantrism 
and Saktism as mere continuations of Vedic tradition. The agreement is, 
however, large enough to substantiate the hypothesis that in some cases 
the corporeal or spiritual descendants of Vedic theorists came to occupy them- 
selves with Tantric subjects. There must have been a continuation of Vedic 
esoterism side by.side with amplified and intellectualized restatements of non-

--- PAGE 30 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
17 
Vedic yogic’ and popular beliefs and practices; a process in the course 
of which both currents could not fail to influence each other. 
Origins and Early History 
The problem of the antiquity of Tantrism is a very difficult one. Here 
also, it is necessary to distinguish between “Tantric elements" and “Tantrism” 
as a ritual and doctrinal system. One can take for certain that some elements, 
and perhaps even early stages of the system, are much older than their first 
emergence in the literature. We have seen that the Veda contains many 
features which later re-appear in developed form in the Tantric sources. But 
without doubt the Tantra is rooted also in very old traditions of unsystematized 
yoga and body cult, shamanism, medicine, magic white and black, astrology, 
religious eroticism and folkloristic ritual which found little or no place in 
pre-Tantric literature. To some of these traditions, parallels have often been 
adduced from other cultures — and rightly, as long as one is not tempted 
to draw unwarranted conclusions about sensational borrowings. It is wise to 
start as long as possible from indigenous origins; indeed, some of these 
phenomena, in the first place mother worship and sex cult, can be explained 
as offshoots of a primitive agricultural economy (in contrast to Vedic 
pastoralism) which led to a ritual emphasis upon fertility symbolísm and 
eroticism (Chattopadhyay, Lokdyata, p. 232ff.; Ruben, Entwicklung der Reli- 
gion, p. 231). But while dealing with such hypothetica! matters, it is very easy 
to overshoot the mark by undue generalization. Vedic ritual also teems with 
fertility magic and references to agriculture do occur in it often enough. 
The emphasis on the female element in Saktism and Tantrism has also 
been explained (by R. P. Chanda and others) from matriarchal structures in 
prehistoric societies. In recent times, matrilineally oriented forms of society 
were found to be still prevalent among some Adivasi (‘original inhabitant") 
tribes on the outskirts of Hindu society in which woman 
plays an 
important part in the production process. The remains of the Indus Valley 
culture adduce some evidence of worship ef female deities and of the 
existence of religious symbols akin to those which are popular in Tantrism 
as well as `+ common Hinduism.? That orgiastic rites must have formed 
part of the folklore of at least some peoples in Ancient India appears 
2 J. Marshall, Mohenjo-Daro and the Indus Civilization, London 1931, Vol. 1, p. 52; Kosambi, 
History, p. 54; Gonda, Change and Continuity, p. 32f.; A. Parpola, Interpreting the Indus 
Script, И. in : Studia Orienialia, 45, T976, p. 125-160, .and other studies on the Indus script by 
the same author. 
i 
ë 
v

--- PAGE 31 [DIRECT] ---

18 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
from the Mahabharata and Jaina canonical texts.? Although their systematic 
description occurs only in comparatively late sources, “left-handed” practices 
with alcoholics and women must date at least as far back as the other 
Tantric elements like mantra, mudrà or nyasa. 
It may be of some interest to trace further in a few lines the oldest 
Post-Vedic evidence for Sakti cult and other kinds of mother worship. 
Attempts at a periodization of the history of Saktism have led to widely 
divergent results. Gopinath Kaviraj (quoted by Sharma, Sakti Cult, p. 5) 
preferred a classification into three periods : 
a. Ancient or pre-Buddhist (no 
independent Sakta sources known); b. Medieval or post-Buddhist (up till the 
twelfth cent. A.D. inclusive, the most productive period); c. Modern. The 
latter period was also productive, but its output is for the greater part 
of secondary importance. In the above system, it is not clear what Kaviraj 
meant by “pre-Buddhist”, but perhaps we have to consider this period to 
be closed with the disappearance of Buddhism as a major religion from 
India. The date of 1200 A.D. as a boundary line is not substantiated by 
clear evidence. Others, for instance N.N. Bhattacharyya, applied quite 
different divisions (Bhattacharyya, Sakta Religion, division into chapters), 
likewise on rather subjective grounds. A reasoned periodization is extremely 
difficult because of our lack of adequately dated sources for the older 
period. The emergence and development of Sakta elements in literary 
sources 
seems to be largely 
a function of the 
process of absorption of local, 
regional or tribal female deities within the ideolo ical system of the ** 
tradition" of Hinduism 
guided b Brahmans (cf. also Beane, Myth, Cult 
and Symbols, p. 37f.). The recent tendency to explain the rise of Saktism as a 
kind of protest against Aryanism or Brahmanism, however, amounts to 
unwarranted simplification. 
Opinions about the time during waich Saktism as we know it became 
a major factor in the religious life of India are again widely divergent, 
although the sixth or seventh century A.D. are most often mentioned as the 
decisive period. The best thing that can 
be done 
is to consider 
the 
available evidence with care and to try to constitute a coherent picture out 
of it. In Sanskrit religious and court literature, the references to mother 
cults are not numerous throughout the, Vedic and Epic periods — but they 
exist, chiefly in the the form of hymns directed to Durga and other mother 
goddesses; these are continued on a larger scale in the Puranas, There 
is, for instance, a famous legend of Durga 
as a sister of Krsna in the 
? A. Parpola, South Indian Megaliths, Madras 1973, p. 48: rites of the Váübikas and the 
Madras, both in the North-West, according to Mbh. 8,4417 (= Crit.Ed. of the Mbh., 8,30,91T. y 
— On occult rites with women referred to in Jaina sources : 
Nandi, Institutions, p. 160.

--- PAGE 32 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
19 
sixth book of the Mbh. and in the fifth book of the Visnu Purana 
(fifth cent. A.D.?.* The Devimahatmya, 
one of the basic 
texts of 
Sàktism; was included in the Markandeya Purana perhaps before the seventh 
cent. (Winternitz, Geschichte, I, 473, note, referring to Pargiter). The famous ksud5se 
poet Kalidasa (fourth cent. A.D.), a Saivite, in the concluding stanza of his 
drama Abhijhanasakuntalà calls Siva parigatasak 
tih "embraced by His Sakti”, 
and the introductory stanza to his Raghuvaméa addresses Parvati and Siva 
as the parents of the world, united just like speech and meaning. He 
also mentions a number of mother goddesses, but generally speaking Saktism 
is not at all prominent in the works of this author. There are, however, 
many 
references to the Sakti cult, especially 
to its s 
ctacular aspects — for 
instance, human sacrifice — in court literature from Bana 
(seventh cent. 
A.D.) onwards. Reference is often made to the worship 
of a 
group 
of 
Mothers, 
by 
preference seven, but other numbers are also found (see 
азо below, p. 65). The worship of Mothers in a group or circle must 
have enjoyed wide popularity during these centuries. In Tamil literature, 
the cults of mother 
goddesses are mentioned already in 
the oi 
(first centuries A.D.) Та all such cases 
it is difficult 
to decide how 
far these "Mothers" also functioned as "Saktis", ie. in connexion with 
inactive male partners. It has been suggested that the "marriages" between 
а god and a goddess in cult centres may have been the result of an amalg..- 
mation of two different cults based upon different social and economic 
structures. This may serve to explain why the typical village goddess in 
Maharastra, for instance, is "mother", but “unmarried” (Kosambi, ¿f иһ and 
Reality, p. 86f.); a comparable case is that of Pagupati and Guhyesvari 
in the Nepal Valley described by Übach (Nepdlamahatmyam, р. 18). It may 
also be suggested that in such cases the god and the goddess came from 
different sections of the population with their own economic function and 
social position. 
Iconographical evidence for mother goddesses, especially Durga Mahisa- 
Mardini "Slayer of Mahisa (a buffalo demon)", dates back to the pre- 
Christian era. Only in the seventh century 'A.D., however, images of 
Mothers — including the groups of Seven Mothers and Nine Durgás — 
became more frequent.5 Inscriptional evidence dates from the fifth cent. 
A.D. with the inscription of Gangdhar as their probably first specimen; it 
— — 
* Fora survey of references to Saktis in Puranas, cf. Sharma, Sakti Cult, р. 37ff.; fcr some 
Pevi myths translated from the same group of texts, see, O'Flaherty, Hindu Myths, р. 2381. 
* Majumdar, Ancient Bengal, p. 550; Nandi, Institutions, р. 151f.; H. D. Bhattacharyya, 
F: 
Classical Age, HCIP, Vol. III, Bombay 1954, p. 447f.; the same, in: The Age of 
Т; ial Калаш), HCIP, Vol. IV, 1955, p. 339f.; Т. V. Mahalingam, The Cult of Sakti 
‘amilnad, in 
: Sircar, Sakti Cult, p. 28. 
š

--- PAGE 33 [DIRECT] ---

Vx yr 
P 
20 
Š 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
refers to a temple destined for the worship of a group of Mothers (Fleet, CIT, 
Vol. Ш, p. 76-78; cf. Sircar, Sakta Pithas. р. 52). Such temples seem to 
have been constructed from that period onwards. On coins, goddesses appear 
already in the second cent. B.C. in the North-West of India (B. P. Sinha, in 
Sircar, Sakti Cult, p. 53; Bhattacharyya, Sakta Religion, p. 49). It has 
been argued from numismatic evidence 
that the first Sakta rulers 
іп 
Bengal appeared at the cnd of the sixth century during the upheavals 
which occurred at the end of Gupta rule (Bela Lahiri, in Sircar, Sakti 
Cult, p. 34ff.). But the remark made by R. C. Majumdar (Ancient Bengal, 
P. 517) is still valid, viz. that a definite judgment on how far Saktism 
dominated in Bengal before the period of Muslim rule is very difficult to 
give. An important criterion of dominance of a certain religious movement 
is its acceptance as an official cult by rulers. It is difficult to find evidence of 
this for Saktism before the time of the Gurjara-Pratiharas, who reigned 
from the eighth to the eleventh cent. (Sircar, Sakta Pithas, p. 105; Mishia, 
Religious Beliefs, p. 28). The claim of the early Calukyas of Badami that 
they were nourished by the Seven Mothers shows the versatility of their 
propaganda, but cannot be considered as a proof of their Saktism. 
From the preceding rapid survey it can only be concluded 
that the 
origins of Saktism are bound to remain a mysterious affair; that much 
depends on the way how the words Sakti and Saktism are interpreted ; 
and that conclusive evidence of a 
dominant position of Sakti cults in certain 
parts of South Asia cannot be found before the seventh or eighth cent. 
A.D. Besides, we have to reckon with important regional differences which 
scarcely appear from Sanskrit literary sources. 
The question of the antiquity of Tantrism is necessarily related to that 
of Saktism. The safest way to assess 
the terminus 
ante quem of the 
crystallization of Tantrism into a system is to ascertain the date of the 
oldest Tantric texts. Here again, much depends on what is understood under 
“Tantra”. If the word is meant to include the Vaisnava Samhitas of the 
Райсага(га school and the Agamas of the Saivas, there is a possibility 
that Hindu Tantric literature existed already in the fifth cent. A.D. or 
even earlier. А few remarks on early Buddhist Tantric 
literature are, 
however, desirable in this context. Of the early Buddhist Tantras, the 
, Guhyasamaja has been dated — on scanty evidence — as early as the 
third cent. A.D. (B. Bhattacharya). Tantric elements like Dhàranis (spells in 
a certain kind of structured prose) were included in Buddhist texts which 
have been translated into Chinese in the fifth century.* But the Tibetan tradi- 
* Padoux, Parole, p. 43, n. 4, referring to G. Tucci, Animadversiones Indicae, in JRASB, 
New Series, vol. XXVI, 1930, p. 128.

--- PAGE 34 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
21 
tion dates the Buddhist Tantras only after Dharmakirti, that is іп the 
seventh century at the earliest (Bagchi, Evo/ution, p. 219f.). Be that as it may, 
the problem of the relative antiquity of Buddhist and Hindu Tantrism, 
hotly contested, remains still undecided. Putting the question in terms of 
chronology is, it seems, even misleading. Without doubt both Hindu and 
Buddhist Tantrism were based upon older traditions handed down and 
developed by people who perhaps in some cases did not care much about 
their denominational position. Moreover, it seems certain that the Buddhist 
doctrinal tradition can never have developed an offshoot so completely 
foreign to itself like Tantrism on its own accord. The Tantric deities and 
practices in Buddhism must have been derived from other sources, viz. 
Brahmanic ritual and doctrinal speculation, yoga culture of the siddhas, or 
popular beliefs often introduced in Hinduism and Buddhism alike." 
Turning now again to Hindu texts, we can say that of the Pàficaratra 
sources, the JS has been placed in the fifth cent. A.D.* The Sattvatasamhita 
may be still older. References to worshippers of Vasudeva called Sattvatas 
or Bhagavatas are present in various sources long before the fifth century, 
but there is no proof of Tantric elements in them. In any case, the 
Paficaratra system is older than the Trika system of Saiva philosophy in Kash- 
mir and has been utilized by thinkers of that school (Schrader, Introduction, 
p. 18f.; Padoux, Parole, p. 59). 
For the Saivas, inscriptional and other sources prove the existence of regular 
cults already in the earliest centuries A.D. (Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism etc., 
p. 115.; Bagchi, Evolution, p. 214f.). The founder of the Pasupata school, 
Lakuliia or Lakulin, seems to have flourished in the second cent. A.D. 
It is, however, very difficult to ascertain if and in how far these cults had a 
“Tantric” character. The evidently Tantric sect of the Kapalikas became 
ular in certain 
parts of Western India during 
the seventh cent. A.D. 
(Lorenzen, K. K., p. 12f.). The Kashmir Saiva schools date from the 
beginning of the ninth cent. at the latest (Silburn, translation of VBT, 
p. 67; Pandey, Abhinavagupta, p. 137f.), but lists of gurus seem to prove 
that they go back some centuries earlier, perhaps to the fourth century. There 
is no unanimity about the date of the oldest Saivagamas, but it is quite 
plausible that the most important of them were in vogue as sacred texts about 
? A case in point is the introduction of Heruka and Ekajatà: van Kooy, Worship of the 
Goddess, 
p. 162, 
170; on 
Tara, 
cf. in this connection 
D.C.Sircar, 
in Sircar, 
Sakti 
Cult, p. 91. 
* B. Bhattacharya, Introduction to the edition of the JS, p. 34; Padoux, Parole, p. 43f.; 
but sec the critical remarks made by Gonda, Medieval Literature, p. 53f. — For Tantric 
elements in the JS, cf. Hazra, Purdnic Records, р. 218f.

--- PAGE 35 [DIRECT] ---

Are: 
fi 
NM 
2 
——— 
x 
22 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
800 
^ 
'* 
+ the latest (cf. Gonda, Medieval Literature. p. 164). Among 
them 
» 
“c some texts which preferred to call themselves Tantra (SvT, 
VBT, MVT) and which were revered sources of inspiration for Abhinava- 
gupta (about 1000 A.D.) and other exponents of the Trika school (Padoux, 
Parole, p. 62f.). In contradistinction to the Agamas and Samhitas which 
were та: лу intended to serve as practical guides for external and communal 
worship, these texts laid much stress upon internal worship, mysticism and 
secret esoteric knowledge of mantras for which there was no room in the 
temple cult and its descriptions. This tendency must have increased with 
the development of individual Tantric worship and yoga. Certain Upanisads 
are among the oldest sources of Tantric yoga methods (Eliade, 
Yoga, 
P. 121-143); some of them have been translated by Jean Varenne (Upanisads 
du yoga, 1971). The most important of them are the Dhyanabindu, Nàdabindu 
and Yogatattva Upanisads. 
An important proof for the use of Saiva Tantras for communal worship 
is found in a Cambodian inscription of about the year 1052 A.D. according 
to which four of them called Siracheda, Vinasikha, Sammoha and Nayottara 
(the term Tantra is not used) served as the base for a new royal cult 
directed by the court priest of king Jayavarman II from 802 A.D. onwards. 
The titles of these works occur 
in some MSS. of the Yàmala group 
preserved in Nepal. Internal evidence suggests that the Yamalas were produced 
Љу circles which developed a tendency 
towards Saktism. P. Ch. Bagchi 
Siva — with some important new developments among which are the Sakta 
orientation 
and the rendering accessible of their sadhana to non-Brakmans. 
Among the MSS. of this group a few have been dated before 1000 A.D. 
(Bagchi, Studies, p. 5f.; 93-114). However, the datings of MSS. need 
careful revision by competent scholars. For instance, too much speculation 
has been based solely upon the assumed early post-Gupta (or even Gupta) 
script of an old MS. of the Kubjikamata Tantra, a decidedly Sakta text. 
In reality, the MS. is written in an early variety of Ѕагада script from 
medieval North West India (K. R. van Kooy, in ZDMG 1977, Suppl. Ш, 
2, p. 88). 
. 
We have to admit that the question of the origia and early development 
of Tantrism is rendered extremely delicate by such chronclogical problems 
and by the stereotypic character as well as the subjecavit:: 
of references 
to Tantric practices in non-Tantric sources. Detailed and reliable studies 
on individual features (such as, for instance, the emergence and early 
development of Kundalini-yoga) are extremely rare.

--- PAGE 36 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
23 
With the emergence of the "Kula path", which can be proven to have 
taken place not later than the ninth century and 
perhaps 
even 
goes back to 
the fifth or fourth cent. A.D.,° Tantrism came to develop its probably most 
characteristic representative, in which the worship and mysticism of the 
divine Sakti became the most prominent element. (This does, however, not 
mean that all Kaulas were, or are, Saktas). The probably oldest extant 
Kaula text, the Kaulajfiànanirnaya, can be dated in the eleventh cent. 
or earlier (Bagchi), and refers to older sources; while Abhinavagupta also 
mentions a substantial number of written authorities of (another branch < NT 
эс 
of) the school. The same period witnessed the appearance of the Sàradátilaka, 
the comprehensive digest written by the Saiva abbot Laksmanadesika which 
deals with such topics as sound and mantra mysticism, initiation, magical 
powers and the Tantric worship of deities in a manner which suggests 
the existence of a well-established tradition. 
Siddhas 
Another important component of Tantric tradition, the body culture of the 
Siddhas, who taught the realization of “immortality” by means of bodily 
perfection and who were often believed to possess the elixir of life, must have 
been in existence long before this period. Their most famous representative, 
Siddha Nagarjuna (not to be confounded with his namesake, the founder 
of the Buddhist Madhyamika school), who is especially revered in Tantric 
Buddhism, but who was also credited with the authorship of an important 
handbook of magic, is said to have lived in the seventh cent. A.D., 
although he has been also dated on good grounds in the first half of the 
tenth century.'° The group of the “Eighty-four Siddhas" is also usually 
placed within Buddhism. According to Eliade, the Siddhas brought a “new 
revelation’ which would have taken place between the seventh and the 
eleventh centuries A.D. and which contained elements of Vajrayana Buddhism, 
Saivism, magic, alchemy and Hathayoga. The oldest Tamil Siddha, Tirumülar. 
perhaps flourished in the seventh cent. AD. the apogee of the Tamil 
Siddha literature, however, lasted from the tenth to the fifteenth century 
(Zvelebil, Poets of Powers, p. 18; 73; Zvelehil, Murugan, p. 221 ff.). The 
magic lore, which is almost universally present in Tantric literature, is partly 
a direct continuation of practices recorded in late Vedic texts; there are 
also references to sorcery executed by Brahmans and unorthodox monks 
in the Buddhist and Jaina canonical 
literatures. 
Books of magic must 
° Pandey, Abhinavagupta, р. 546 f. 
; 577; Silburn, ed. of the MM, /ntroduction, p. 14; Lorenzen, 
K. K., p. 49. 
t° Tucci, in JRASB, 1930, p. 137, according to Bagchi, Introduction to the K JN, 1934, p. 27f. 
— For literature on Siddha Nagarjuna, see Eliade, Yoga, p. 277, 387f.; 398. 
Mags

--- PAGE 37 [DIRECT] ---

D 
4 
ча? 
24 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
have existed long before the tenth century A.D. Bana (seventh cent.) in 
his prose romance Kadambari describes an ascetic who owned a collection 
of such manuscripts. The presence of magical fragments among the Sanskrit 
texts preserved in Bali and in Central Asia is another proof of the antiquity 
of this kind of literature. 
Besides, 
it is important to notice (as has already been observed 
for 
§aktism) that the development of Tantrism also must have obtained most 
important 
stimuli 
from royal patronage. 
This 
is easier 
to prove 
for 
Buddhist 
than 
for Hindu Tantrism, although patronage of Vajrayana 
Buddhism perhaps also served as an indirect factor stimulating Hindu 
Tantric schools. A significant date must have been the election of Сораја 
who was а follower of the Vajrayana to the kingship in Bengal about 
765 A.D. The same school counted persons of royal descent among its 
foremost propagandists in Kashmir. Many Vajrayana Siddhas were associated 
with Kamarüpa and Pala rulers in Assam and Bengal. It may 
be that the un- 
stable political situation in Northern India during the post-Gupta period, 
especially the seventh and eighth centuries, opened unprecedented opportuni- 
ties of development for tendencies which before that time had remained in the 
Bis ые ертен 
енене Мы ы A CN A ырын ыы а 
background. Weakening of the centres of authority enabled aristocrats of 
lower position who came to be associated with such tendencies to expand 
their power.'! 
The non-Tantric sources on the early development of Tantrism generally 
show themselves,'as has been remarked above, very subjective, often hostile, 
and cannot fail to give distorted evidence. But nevertheless they are very 
important and deserve to be evaluated in a careful study which goes beyond 
a тее enumeration of text-places. Of isolated references in other texts, 
опе of the most 
interesting 
is without doubt 
the description 
in the 
Vaikhànasa Smürtasütra (8,6f.) of "good" and "bad" ascetics.!? A most 
interesting group of sources is formed by the Sanskrit court literature from 
the seventh cent. A.D. onwards. Mention may be made of Вапа`з prose 
romances Kàdambari and Harsacarita ; 
Dandin's prose romance Dasakumára- 
carita; Bhavabhüti's drama Malatimadhava; RajaSekhara’s drama Karpüra- 
mafjari; and Somadeva's Yašastilaka in a mixed style of prose and verse — all 
11 Cf. Prakash, Aspects, p. 226ff., 232, for Kashmir. 
The connections of Tantric Saiva 
with royal houses of Central India are wellknown; cf. Prakash, Aspects, p. 286; Mishra, 
us Beliefs, р. 10, 
14. 
12 The text presumably dates from the fourth cent. A.D.; discussion of this place in Eliade, 
Yoga, p. 146f., who, however, fails to refer to the interesting Skt. commentary for which see 
Caland's translation of the VSS, p. 195, п. 2, and especially W. Eggers, Das Dharmasütra der 
Vaikhdnasas, Göttingen 1929, p. 79f.

--- PAGE 38 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
25 
of them dated well before 
1000 A.D. From. the eleventh and ‘twelfth 
centuries two important sources are another Somadeva's Kathasaritsagara, 
a famous collection of tales set within a frame story, and Kalhana's literary 
historical chronicle Rajatarangini, both from Kashmir. All these sources 
— except perhaps the Rajatarangini — have in common a tendency to 
sensationality in their presentation of Tantric adepts and their rites. The 
Tantrists described in them can be classified into three types: awesome 
(impressive personalities who possess secret means of enforcing their will), 
villainous (malicious ascetics who attempt to secure dominion over super- 
natural forces by sacrificing heroic kings or beautiful young ladies), and 
ridiculous (impostors or dupes who consider drinking wine and flirting 
with women to be an easy way towards release). There is also a marked 
preference for descriptions of the evocation of spirits. 
B 
Of another kind are 
the objective data of Tantric 
influence found 
in non-Tantric sources such as the Puranas and the Dharma literature.'? 
References to Tantrism in travel accounts by Chinese Buddhist pilgrims or 
by medieval Arabic and European authors are scarce (Eliade, Yoga, p. 275, 
278, 287f.; Prakash, Aspects, p. 333f.). 
Remarks on the Subsequent History of Tantrism 
About the year A.D. 1000, the process of development of Tantric schools, 
doctrines and rituals as well as the permeation of the traditional Hindu 
religious culture with Tantric elements seems to have reached its height. 
From that time onwards, Tantrism is richly attested in written as well as 
non-written sources. Among famous temples in which worship of Tantric 
deities was conducted are the Vaital Deul temple (eighth cent.?) and the 
Varahi temple of Chaurasi (tenth cent.), both in Orissa, and the Yogini 
temple at Bheraghat (tenth cent.). The iconography of these and other cult 
centres is of great interest (cf. Banerjea, Religion, p. 129f.) This period 
also witnessed a great vogue in erotic sculpture, which should, however, 
not too readily be associated with Tantrism (a good discussion of the 
subject can be found in Desai, Erotic Sculpture, ch. VII, p. 112-145). 
Sankar? 
According 
to $akta tradition, the famous Saiva 
philosopher Sankara was 
a 
Sakta and was most influential in promoting Tantric beliefs and rituals 
in India, especially the worship of the 
гіуідуа. He is also the reputed 
author of the PST and some important Sakta hymns, in the first place the 
13 Collections have been made by R. C. Hazra in IHQ, 9, 1933, p. 678ff.; ABORI, 15, 
1933-4, p. 220ff.; 16, 1935, р. 202ff. 
»

--- PAGE 39 [DIRECT] ---

26 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Saundaryalahari (see W. Norman Brown, ed. of the SL, Introduction, р. 27f.). 
This alleged position of Sankara can best be explained as a retrograde 
projection of the situation which in course of time developed for unknown 
reasons within the maths reputedly founded by Sankara and some South Indian 
temples where Sakti worship in the Srividyà method came to be a regular 
feature. 
Among those tantrically oriented religious ieaders who have played a very 
important role mention may be made, besides Abhinavagupta, of Matsyen- 
| 
dranátha (tenth cent.?), said to be the founder of the Kaulayogini cult as 
| 
well as of the movement of the Nath Yogins which exists until today. His 
| 
pupil Goraksanatha enjoys a perhaps still greater popularity. Lack of space 
| 
j 
prevents us to say more about this legendary figure and his following; the 
| 
Nath Yogins do not belong to Sakta Tantrism.'* The first of the Eighty- 
Four Siddhas, Lui-pa (Lohitapada), is perhaps identical with Matsyen- 
dranatha. 
" path? і 
А still more shadowy figure is Srikantha. His name is mentioned in the 
© 
SH 
Mahabharata in connection with the promulgation of Pasupata doctrints, 
while the Yamalas many centuries afterwards revere him as the Guru who 
was responsible for the diffusion of the sacred knowledge down on earth. 
He is also the reputed author of the Pingalamata and often recurs among 
the first names in certain lists of gurus. He may have been a brahman 
A | 
ç 
resident of a village near Prayaga, but it is also possible that several persons with 
the same surname have merged their identity in the tradition (Chakravarti, 
Tantras, p. 25; Hooykaas, Cosmogony and Creation, p. 131). 
Among famous historical authorities figure Laksmidhara, the propagator 
of the Ѕатауасага school (sixteenth cent.; see also below, p. 44); Ragha- 
vabhatta, the commentator on the $T (he lived in Varanasi at the end of 
the fifteenth cent.); Krsnananda Misra, the Bengali author of the Тапігаѕага 
К 
| 
(sixteenth or seventeenth cent.); Bhāskararāya, the main theoretician of the 
ia 
Srividya system, and his pupil Umanandanatna, 
both 
hailing from 
a 
South India and belonging to the eighteenth cent.; and Kasinatha Bhatta, 
M. 
, 
the eighteenth-century follower of Daksinacira and prolific writer of books 
NS 
І 
14 On the Nath Yogins, see С. W. Briggs, Gorakhnath and the Kanphata Yogis, Calcutta 
| 
1938; Dasgupta, Obscure 
Cults, 
p. 217-395; 425-441; 442-460; Sukumar 
Sen, 
in СНІ, 
/ 
Vol. IV, 21956, p. 280-299; K. Mallik, Маш Sampradàyer Hihās, Calcutta 1950 (in Bengali); 
Р 
K. Mallik, Siddhasiddhdntapaddhati and other works of the Nàtha Yogis, Poona 1954, Introd., 
p. 1-32. Other titles are mentioned by Eliade, Yoga, p. 403. 
'* On his life, see R. Krishnaswami Sastri's Introduction to the ed. of the Varivasyára- 
| 
hasya by S. Subrahmanya Sastri in the Adyar Library Ser., vol. 28, Adyar 21968, p. XVII-XXXIV; 
= 
on the guru tradition founded by him: Pandey, Abhinavagupta, p. 583 T.

--- PAGE 40 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
27 
and pamphlets against the Vamacarins. These and other authorities and 
their works have been discussed by Chakravarti (Tantras, p. 66ff.). The 
regular appearance of important and influential gurus and the incessant 
literary production of Saktism and other forms of Tantrism attest to an 
uninterrupted tradition which must have known its ups and downs but 
has gone on in much the same way for centuries. 
More research 
has 
still to be done in trying to find out the circumstances under which the 
Tantrists worked and propagated 
their 
tenets, 
and especially 
on 
the 
development of their doctrines by external and mutual influences. The study 
of later Tantric literature seems 
to reveal an ever tightening grasp of 
Brahmans and other intellectuals on the movement — or, as one could as 
well say, an ever greater hold of Tantrism upon the traditional bearers 
of Indian literary culture. Varanasi, from an early period onwards a centre Varanas! 
аа 
z: Tear GOOSSEN SEESE PENEN EEES 
EE POr aT 
tat 
baanhkann. 
of traditional learning, also became a favourite resort of Tantric teachers. 
On the other hand, Sakta Tantrism sometimes had a hard fight against rival 
religious movements like the Vaisnava revival of the fifteenth cent. in the Yost 
—— 
ks 
X 
Ganges area and the North-East. In Bengal, tradition records — perhaps 
anachronistically — a far-reaching animosity between Krsnananda and the 
deified Vaisnava 
mystic, Caitanya 
(Sircar, 
Sakta 
Pithas, 
p. 74) The 
rey 
Vaisnavas in medieval Bengal developed a special kind of Tantric sadhana Saha 
called Sahajiyā (from sahaja- “natural, inborn”) with as its most important 
characteristic the theory, and sometimes the ritual practice, of divine love 
exemplified in its most pure form in the feelings towards another’s wife 
(parakiya); for their particular method of sexual yoga they were indebted 
to the early medieval Siddhas of the Buddhist Sahajayana, which in 
some respects differs from the ordinary Tantric method (Bose, Sahajiya Cult ; 
iv 
Dimock, Hidden Moon; Dasgupta, Obscure Cults, p. 131ff.). A similar Bals 
tradition is continued up to the present day by the Bāuls, 
a community 
of householders as well as religious mendicants who regard themselves as 
outside the pale of the caste system. At the same time, the Sūfis of Moslem $ 
background played an important role in the development of the mystic move- 
ments in Bengal. In Assam, the Vaisnava movement became an ideological 
guide for the protest against the bloody ritualism of the Sakta aristocrats 
who occasionally (reign of Gadadhar Singh, 1681-1714) even seem to have 
indulged in persecution of other faiths. The Vaisnava revival was introduced 
into this region by Sankaradeva in the sixteenth century.'® 
'* On the interesting history of Saktism in Assam, see E. Gait, 4 History of Assam, 
Calcutta-Simla 21926 (1905), р. 168f.; Neog, Sankaradeva, р. 82f.; 111f.; 365; Basu, Assam, 
р. 225ff. ; 
34711; 64. 
ag 
a? 
al

--- PAGE 41 [DIRECT] ---

28 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Modern Taninsm 
The renewed interest paid to Tantrism by Bengal aristocrats in the latter 
part of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century resulted 
in the writing of (probably) the Mahanirvana Tantra and of digests like the 
Pranatosini and the Haratattvadidhiti. From the eighteenth cent. date also 
the famous Bengali Sakta lyrics by Ramprasad Sen. A very stimulating 
renewal movement within Saktism developed around Ramakrsna (1836-1886; 
ef. Isherwood, Ramakrishna). 
In the present century, Tantrism as a system of religious practice still 
flourishes 
in limited circles all over 
India. 
In Bengal, 
Saktism 
is still 
the prominent denomination, while it continues to occupy an important 
position also elsewhere. Sakti worship 
is said to exist in all Advaita maths 
(W.N. Brown, Introduction to the ed. of the SL, p. 27 and 29; Kaviraj, 
Tüntrika Sahitya, p. 30). In the Panjab countryside, even the Sikhs often 
pay reverence to Devi's manifestations (I. P. Singh, in: Vidyarthi, Aspects 
of Religion, p. 199). Tantric worship in Sàkta cult centres at present is most 
often "*puritanized" (Sharma, Sakti Cult, p. 270). The ritual is transmitted 
"through family-groups, down lines of teacher-pupil descent" (Rawson, Art 
of Tantra, p. 16). Some modern thinkers, in the first place Aurobindo Ghose, 
have undergone the influence of Tantrism (on Aurobindo and Tantrism, 
see Bolle, Persistence). Among the living Tantric gurus there are famous 
names. Tantric associations exist, i.a. the Sákta Sammelana in Prayag 
and in Varanasi; they are active in publishing pamphlets and periodicals, 
the best known of which is the monthly "Candi". There are centres of 
instruction like the Shakta Sadhana Peeth in Prayag. The individual sádha- 
kas are all considered to be loosely connected with Advaita maths, which 
thus serve as a kind of unofficial nerve centres. Besides, there are centres 
(akhras) set up by sádhakas who are not incorporated within a traditional 
"lineage 
of gurus. There is, however, ,nothing like a registration. Tantric 
propaganda is spreading in India as well as in the West. There are cases 
of initiation of Westerners by Tantric gurus. Books on Tantric yoga and 
on magic (indrajdla) can be bought cheaply and easily in Indian bookstores. 
Despite all these activities, however, 
it can scarcely be doubted 
that 
traditional Tantrism as a way to release able to capture the minds of the 
many is a thing of the past.

--- PAGE 42 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
29 
Social Position of the Tantrics in History 
Like all other religious movements, Tantrism did not originate or develop 
in a vacuum but must have been conditioned on all sides by the economic 
and social setting which happened to prevail. It has been argued that 
Tantrism had rooted in a movement of the masses which reacted against 
social ills and the excesses of the established religion. But the data at our 
disposal do not confirm this. Like the Buddhist path, the Tantric sadhana 
— although primarily intended for householders, not for ascetics — is a purely 
personal affair concerning the individual self's release from the bondage of 
existence (or the acquisition 
of dominion 
within 
it). Even where the 
movement did succeed in absorbing or reshaping popular religious cere- 
monies with communal aims in the social as well as the religious field, 
it did not try to direct its followers towards a greater self-consciousness in 
these matters, but on the contrary served to interiorize and symbolize what 
might have been genuine expressions of communal needs and desires. This 
process must 
usually have 
been 
directed by intellectuals, 
as can 
be 
concluded already from the prominence of Sanskrit among the Tantric 
literary production. The development of Tantrism as it is known to us 
through its literature is an interesting aspect of the highly original way 
in which the religious formulators of medieval India were able to expand and 
consolidate their hold upon the religious life of the subcontinent. It is unclear 
if there really existed (as is held by Bolle, Persistence, p. 45) a tension between 
the avowed striving after the common weal and the hyper-individual sadhana 
which was actually being practised. The assumption of such a tension may 
well be characteristic for Western minds in the post-Marxian period. If it 
existed, one of the means of overcoming the problem must have been the 
interweaving of symbols of social content into the network of interiorized 
worship. 
Among those who belonged to the first formulators of Tantric systems, 
there must have been a substantial number of professional priests to 
whom the conduct of worship in temples or other cults of common 
interest had been entrusted. An interesting case is that of 
Sivakaivalya, a 
guardian priest of the Sivalinga in a temple in Cambodia who came to 
act as a court priest (Bagchi, Studies, p. 2; 18f.). One could also point to 
the “Dravidian ascetic” in Bana’s Kadambari (par. 216), presumably a non- 
Brahman, who also had the control of a sanctuary (cf. Altekar, Rashtrakitas, 
р. 293). The Saivagamas, Райсагаіга Samhitas and some older Tantras 
were still preoccupied with the description of temple worship. Even at 
present, some of the Tantric full-time practisers act as temple priests,

--- PAGE 43 [DIRECT] ---

30 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
preferably in cult centres of Devi, besides adding to their income by 
the practice of astrology or magic. Some of these people in ancient and 
medieval times held a position (sometimes hereditary) as domestic priest 
(purohita) of a ruler or aristocrat. It seems that in most cases Atharvaveda 
Brahmans served in that function. Their public responsibilities must have 
induced them to search for ever newer and stronger methods of safeguarding 
the welfare of the ruler, the subjects, and as a matter of consequence 
also of themselves. This was without doubt one of the major reasons of the 
development of the magical component of Tantrism. Intellectuals like them 
were probably active in systematizing originally unconnected rituals and 
designing new methods out of existing traditions; a deposit of such activities 
is to be found in the NT (as has been shown by Brunner, Netra Tantra). 
Those with mystical leanings who were in contact with yogins — or who 
served aristocrats of that type — came to develop interiorized variants of’ 
external rituals by a process not unlike that which led to the speculations 
recorded in the Upanisads which were made on the base of Vedic rituals. 
Many Brahmans from non-Atharvaveda $ákhás (branches of. Vedic tradi- 
+ 
tion) must also have felt attracted to Tantric methods. Lorenzen (K. K., p. 1 1) 
refers to an inscription which mentions а member of the Kàlamukha 
sect who belonged-to the Harita clan (gotra) and for his ordinary ritual 
followed the Vedic A pastambasütra. Bhāskararāya belonged to a Rgvedasakhà 
and lived up to the ritual duties which went with that position. It is clear that 
among the Brahman followers of, Tantric methods there were theoreticians 
of outstanding ability like Abhinavagupta and his predecessors who were well 
versed in the Veda and in philosophy. Those among them who had a training 
in tàe philosophy of grammar — a subject which was definitely associated 
with Saivism — were best qualified to develop the sound mysticism 
which played such an important part in Tantric theory (Padoux, Parole, 
p. 53f.). One should emphasize with Padoux the difference between pure 
philosophy of grammar and the utilization of linguistic material as a 
concomitant to yoga methods; but there are interesting cases of specialists 
in grammar who conducted Saiva worship as well (Bhattacharya, Religions 
brahmaniques, p. 48). The Saiva maths and ashrams were probably important 
centres of such activities. The leading 
part 
played by learned Brahmans in 
shaping 
Tantric systems becomes clear at once 
by 
a study of rituals of 
i 
intellectual 
structure 
like the worship 
of Tripura 
in 
the NST 
i 
(1,78 I. But many of their followers and even many propounders of 
independent views and practices, although most often able to speak o« write 
some Sanskrit, were not familiar with higher Brahmanical learning. 
Another category of practisers was formed by the probably always rather

--- PAGE 44 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
31 
numerous yogins and ascetics, "renouncers" who tried to find a ‘direct 
access to the state of individual 
release outside the normal 
frame of 
Indian society. Their predilection for wandering or settling away from the 
centres of Hindu culture would bring them into contact, not only with 
the common peopie of Hinduized areas, but also with non-Hindu peoples 
and tribes who worshipped strange deities and practised deviating religious 
customs (Padoux, Parole, p. 54). Unhampered as they were by the authority 
of upholders of dogmatic discipline or canonical scripture, they freely set 
to work integrating these various influences into methods of their own. 
The results of such experimentation are clearly discernible in typical concepts 
of Tantric yoga like the “vertical phases of meditation” (see p. 61) or the 
Kamakala 
doctrine which 
is present 
in a preliminary 
stage 
in yogic 
Upanisads (DhBU 87f.; YCU 62f.). In practice, many of these ascetics 
were active for the benefit of the people as predictors, exorcists or magicians. 
This would give them a great influence on the minds of many believers, 
so that they became able to act as gurus and in this way to propagate 
their ideas and methods.'’ Since the Middle Ages, many of these people 
belonged, 
to the Natha sect; the Siddhas, also highly respected and popular, 
probably played a similar part. Also Saktism has its "saints"; without being 
masters of literature or philosophy, they excelled in practical religiosity 
and they often executed Tantric sadhana. The famous Ràmakrsna (see above) 
can be considered 
one of them (on the Sakta saints of Bengal, 
see 
Ch. Chakravarti, in CHI IV, ?1956, p. 416-418). Among the yogins and 
other Tantric saints there have been a substantial number of women who 
may have acted independently or as "$aktis" of male gurus. 
The requency 
or terms like yogini or dakini 
in Tantric literature renders this conclusion 
, unavoidable. 
Without doubt, large numbers of impostors constantly tried to 
make their living by presenting themselves 
as "yogins". The frequent 
sarcastic descriptions of such people in Sanskrit literature must have produced 
amused reactions of recognition with the cultured public. References to 
them are by no means absent in Tantric literature itself. 
Tantrism attracted people from all social strata. According to the great 
majority of Tantric authors, the rites are open to people of all castes 
and creeds (JT 2328f.; KT 3,74f.; MNT 3,92; Chattopadhyay, Lokayata, 
P. 331). It is even held in the texts that during the rite there is no difference 
© Cf. Eliade, Yoga, p. 300f.; for a modern case, see Surajit Sinha, Some Aspects of Change 
in Влити) Religion in South Manbhum, Bihar, in : Man in India, vol. 33, 1953, p. 148-164, on р. 161 f. 
— On yogins as miracle workers, see Briggs, Gorakhnath, p. 1; 23.

--- PAGE 45 [DIRECT] ---

32 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
whatsoever between those who belong to different castes, because all men 
are Siva and all women are Sakti. “All varnas become Brahmans" (КТ 8.96); 
*in the circle (of worship) all come to mutual identity like the streams 
which flow into the Ganges" (KT 8,98). Consequently, also the teaching of 
the sadhana is open to all. In theory, even a Candala may act as guru: and 
| 
cases of риги of low descent are indeed known (опе can compare the important 
function which untouchables sometimes have in the worship 
of Durga : Payne, 
Saktas, p. 70f.). On certain occasions, the texts even express a preference 
for anything which is associated with low social standing or with the breaking 
of social taboos. The KT (9,55) states that "anything which is despised 
in the world is honourable in the kula 
path". Five kinds of bodily 
excre- 
tions are the five means of purification in daily worship according to the KJN 
(11,11).!5 Of course, this was an important factor in creating for Tantrism 
| 
its bad repute with the orthodox. But anti-caste statements should never be 
read outside their ritual context (cf. Farquhar, Outline, p. 204; Lorenzen, 
K. K, p. 7). Returned into ordinary 
life, no high-caste Tantric would 
: 
think of breaking the social taboos. One might even argue that the predilec- 
tion for contact with low-caste people, especially women, in a ritual environ- 
ment served to render the high-caste practiser still more i 
conscious of the 
violent breakthrough of his ordinary situation which he had to make in order 
to proceed on the way to spiritual emancipation. Seen in this Tight, the 
| 
ritual egalitarianism of Tantrism in practice acted as a caste-confirming 
|! 
-and 
class-confirming force. One can compare the confirmatory and stabilizing 
„role of festivals like Holi or Šabarotsava, during which caste or class relations 
are temporarily eliminated.'® 
| 
There are on the contrary many traces of caste distinction in the Tantric 
texts. A familiar instance is the classification of people to be qualified 
for initiation with regard to their social estate (varna); a Brahman is quali- 
fied after, a pupilage of one year, a Ksatriya after two years, etc. (KT 14, 
104;: çf, also ST 2, 153). This can, however, be dismissed as a case 
of the pure theoretization so popular in Hindu ideology. While many 
Tantras ordain that a guru — of course among other requirements — 
!* On this courting of the strange and the despised, 
see also Kosambi, Myth and 
Reality, p. 100. 
** See McKim Marriott, The Feast of Love, in: Singer, Krishna, p. 212; Kane, History, 
1, p. 177; 304; R. W. Nicholas, Ritual Hierarchy and Social Relations in Rural Bengal, 
in: CIS, 1967, p. 56-83, especially on p. 79. Of interest is also G. Burkhart. Equal im the 
Eyes of God. in: 
CAS, 5, 1974, p. 1-14. The argumentation by Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus, 
Р. 341-346, 
focuses upon the complementary relation between acceptance of Ше and renunciation.

--- PAGE 46 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
33 
бу: 
should be kulina- “of good family", the author of the PrT (p. 170) explains 
that the word in this case means kaula- "belonging to the Kula or Каша 
school", and emphatically condemns those who favour a literal interpretation. 
But statements like the one in the PM (ch. 1) that both acarya and sadhaka 
should be agrajanmakulodbhüta- "sprung from a family of distinguished 
birth" can hardly be explained away as referring to the Kaula school. 
There is also a tendency to differentiate the use of bijas "kernel formulas" 
according to the varnas. The MNT declares (5,62f.) that only Brahmans 
may pronounce the Gayatri preceded by the most sacred Vedic bija Om; 
the second varna should apply Srim instead of Om and the third varna Aim; 
while the Südras, traditionally not entitled to the Veda, should use an 
adaptation of the Gayatri directed to Kali instead of Savitar. But, at 
least in recent ‘practice, there are groups of Brahmans who give Om to 
Südras and women. 
The Samaya school restricted the access to its sadhana to the twice-born 
(Laksmidhara and other commentators on SL, vs. 31). It is, however, possible 
that official claims to high social standing were meant as an apologetical 
device in order to keep up the respectability of the sect. We might conclude 
that the views of the Tantric authors in these matters are widely divergent, 
but that the twice-born descent which can be postulated for the great majority 
of them clearly reveals itself in regulations like those mentioned above. It needs 
scarcely to be doubted that the general theoretical standpoint that all men and 
women have “qualification” (adhikára) to initiation into Tantric ceremonies 
has been and is mostly brought into practice. A statistical survey of social 
position among present-day practisers, if possible, would prove instructive, 
Another feature worth investigation is the position of women within Sakta ‘Women 
+ Tantrism, Saktism proclaims the exalted position of woman as an incarna- 
tion of the Great Mother. A Sakta is warned in emphatic terms not to 
despise any woman, while he к 
consider everything around him as 
emak аднака nnd even gurus (for шац КҮТ 2,1071f., quoted by PrT, 
p. 179); but in the RYT (2, 110) 
a widow is excluded from guruship (cf. 
Kane, History, p. 1075). The tale of Devi's incarnation in the house of a 
Brahman in a village near Prayag may be the outcome of the appearance of a 
famous woman guru (BYT 1, according to Bagchi, Studies, 5, p. 
102). 
‘Lopamudra ` "She who breaks the seal", the legendary wife of the sage 
Agastya, is the reputed propounder of a certain variety of the Srividya 
(G. Kaviraj, Preface to the YHT, 2" ed., p. V.)., The chief role of women 
in 
the Sakta Tantric cult, however, is to act as female partners (Sakti, düti) 
of the male adepts who 
desire 
io realize their unity with the universal

--- PAGE 47 [DIRECT] ---

PUN, 
34 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Sakti. Such a human śakti should answer a number of requirements 
and be 
in: 
6d (KT 7, 42IT. SKIN 20, 14). Low-caste women may develop into very 
gc | 
Saktis because 
of the smaller number of social restrictions to which 
they are accustomed. The woman most hampered by such restrictions, the 
high-caste housewife, is for that ‘very reason often unsuited to act as her 
"husband's religious partner. No wonder that modern practisers often find 
it difficult to obtain suitable $aktis. 
A 
` 
Indeed, Tantrism seems to be inspired by a genuine awe for the female 
as the seat of reproduction, the source of all life. But it would again be 
wide of the mark to state that it acted as a liberating force which aimed 
at the improvement 
of the social status of women. Woman worship 
and the partnership of women in the ritual are embedded 
in a 
purely 
religious setting. The social 
inferiority of woman 
is even 
a necessary 
presupposition for the liberating antinomianism of Tantric sadhana. The 
ka is the bee, woman the flower which is left behind when the 
nectar of siddhi has been gathered (Bose, Sahcjiyà Cult, p. 76f., referring 
to the Bengali text Premavilása). This is precisely the opposite of Dumont's 
remark that “woman, made an inferior in ordinary life, takes her revenge 
in the cult" (Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus, p. 345). We may add that 
incidentally Tantric authors like to extend their love for classification also 
to womankind (КАМ 9,78f., = KT 7, 42f.). 
Another aspect which cannot be omitted 
is that full-time ѕадһакаѕ 
are still forced to make a living. The rituals which have to be conducted 
may cost an amount of money which can be prohibitive for the poorer 
among the practisers (among modern Tantric circles, in Varanasi at least, the 
utensils are preferably of silver). Gurus expected some material compensation 
(dakyina) from their pupils (who should not be devoid of money, KT 13,7), who 
thereby obtained the opportunity to clear themselves of the spiritual debt 
incurred. The daksinas required by some gurus seem to have been sub- 
stantial (KT 13,108; NT 15,21ff.; 16,112f.; TT 25,43). There are warnings 
that a client should not try to deceive the executor of a ritual about his 
real financial means. Modern Tantric institutions are financially supported 
mainly by contributions of followers who are often well-to-do. Besides, as 
has already been intimated, many Tantrics performed — and still perform — 
rites of immediate practical interest to ordinary men and women. A divine 
status can be claimed and divine power be applied on the practical leve". 
It is without doubt true that the popularity of Tantrism has to a large 
extent been ‘due to the relative cheapness of such services and the easy 
accessibility of their performers when compared with the traditional Vedic 
and Ригапіс ritualisms (Nandi, Institutions, p. 115). Innumerable mantras,

--- PAGE 48 [DIRECT] ---

SM 
TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
35 
yantras. astrological tables and charts, medicinal herbs and other devices 
came to be applied in this way to serve human needs and desires. Many 
age-old practices, for instance those of prognostication, have been incor- 
porated. As a rule, the general or specialized applicability (phala) is added 
in the texts to the description of the devices 
in a manner 
not unlike 
modern tactics of advertising (an exemplary case 
is TT 25,70ff., but 
instances can be found in abundance). Many rituals which were especially 
suited for the community: as a whole (e.g. those to be executed in time 
of famine or war) requited the sponsorship of kings or other aristocrats. 
As a matter of fact, one:could even speak of a competition of the religious 
denominations for royal support or influence at the courts (cf. Jhavery, 
Mantrasastra, p. 232; Lorenzen, K. K, p. 45). By means of magical acts like 
Gkarsana "attraction" or vasikarana "subjugation", persons of royal rank 
could be brought under control (MVT 19,88, a.o.). With their magical lore 
systematized into the satkarmáni “Six Acts (of magic)", they were able to 
present the rulers with interesting means of strengthening their position and 
of safeguarding the economic productivity of the country (rituals for. santi and 
pusti). Of course, Tantric magic was very often executed. 
in. thé. interest оз 
private persons; the texts which specialize in this field even belong to thé: 
most popular part of Tantric literature. The Six Acts are most often enumerated 
as: 
1. Santi “pacification”, the counteracting of all kinds of danger; this 
heading includes pusti, the promotion of welfare ; 
2. Vasikarana “subjugation”, bringing others (gods, kings, women) under 
one's control; this includes ákarsana "attraction", for instance of a woman 
partner; 
3. Stambhana “immobilization”, i.e. causing the victim (for instance an 
inimical army) to lose the faculty of moving; also prevention of miscarriage 
may fall under this heading; 
4. Vidvesana, causing two victims to come into conflict with each other; 
5. Uccatana, driving a victim from his home, position or mental equili- 
brium ; 
ы 
6. Marana "liquidation", which may in practice be restricted to vyádhi- 
karana “making sick”, for instance in case of the victim's timely compliance 
with the executor's desire; the reverse is called mrtyumjaya “conquering 
death”, i.e. curing the sick. 
There are many other varieties and the recipes are so manifold that it is 
clear that under the heading of the Six Acts we find a systematization of 
the whole of the magical lore (especially herb lore) used by specialists of 
differing title and status.

--- PAGE 49 [DIRECT] ---

\ ^7, 
eade 
36 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Geographical aspects of Tantrism 
Ithas often been argued, and not entirely without justification, that Tantrism 
was rooted, at least in its earlier 
phase. in the low castes of India. or 
outside the Aryan pale, 
on the outskirts of the Hinduized area. The fact that the 
Tantric texts written in Sanskrit often reveal the search for systematization, 
the intellectualism and respectability of the Brahmans, cannot conceal that 
many features presented as Tantric are survivals from a stock of scarcely 
Hinduized, sometimes even pre-Aryan semi-primitive religious folklore. The 
incorporation into the Tantric tradition as an esoteric ritual may represent the 
final stage of absorption into Hinduism of a primitive cult after an inter- 
mediate stage of, say, a vegetation festival (Bolle, Persistence, p. 68). The 
process can be surmised in many cases. Worship of Devi's bodily parts as 
«conducted 
in the cult centre of Kamakhya in Assam and in many other places 
may have its origin in a primitive worship of natural features of the soil 
associated with the female breasts or generative organ.?? The use of alcoholics 
or drugs and the breaking 
of taboos in erotic matters seem to have 
"much in use in early 
unso histicated agrarian rituals in India while man 
° Tantric deities must have begun their career as local godlings. Some traditions 
.9f miracle-working 
may 
ori zinally have been 
based 
upon 
shamanistic 
experiences (Eliade, Yoga, p. 316f.), but it is not advisable to try to explain 
the ferocious- or erotic rituals in general as degradations of what was 
originally a mental process expressed by means of symbols (Eliade, Yoga, 
p. 295). According to Eliade, this mental process itself may in its turn be a 
"revalorization" of actually conducted primitive rituals which were irrecon- 
ciliable with Hindu respectability: in the course of Tantric history this 
revalorization was then again followed by a “devalorization”, 
On the other hand, there was a retrograde process by which yogins, 
sannyasins and other Propounders of Tantric cults succeeded in 
propa atin 
many of their views among the common people. This may account 
for 
many Tantric features in 
popular religion or vernacular literature. 
There has also been a keen controversy over the question if and how far 
enc — Tantrism was due to influences from outside India. The theories of a 
borrowing 
of the whole of Tantrism from China, Tibet or the Middle East are 
usually based upon exaggerated interpretation of standard Passages (like 
RYT, ch. 17, on Vasistha's journey to Tibet) and can be dismissed. 
In 
29 Sircar, Sákta Pirhas, 
р. 8, referring to ia. 
the Mbh. 
as an early source 
cf also 
` Chattopadhyay, Lokdyara, р. 2941.

--- PAGE 50 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
37 
certain cases, however, the possibility of foreign influence should not be 
ruled out. Without doubt the Himalayan and Vindhyan tribes played a role 
of some importance as sources of cxotic rituals; the same can be said 
of Tibet, especially in the period of 
Tibetan military 
ascendancy 
In Teglons 
(o 
the 
South of the mai 
i 
ayan 
chain during t 
(Majumdar, Ancient 
Bengal, 
p. 
83f.). But in most cases these peoples must 
have been borrowers as well as providers.?! Such outlying regions are 
often mentioned in the texts. The process of formation of Tantric rituals 
can therefore be reasonably expected to have been localized primarily in those 
areas of Aryan occupation which 
ossessed a relatively 
strong 
element of 
non-Aryan tradition. There are grounds for the supposition that at least some 
elements of Tantric worship originated among peoples with a mountain 
culture in the North-West of India 
(Uddiyana or Swat, Gandhara, 
or the 
Kashmir Valley and its surroundings) and afterwards were propagated along 
the Himalayan foothills towards the East as far as Bengal and Assam (van 
Kooy, Worship of the Goddess, p. 34f.; Sircar, Sakta Pithas, p. 24); but other 
authors hold the opposite view and consider Bengal and/or Assam as the 
cradle of all Sakta and Tantric practices. The real state of affairs must have 
been too complex to be accounted for by general statements about the 
“original home of Tantrism", Many currents and counter-currents were active 
in shaping, transforming and transplanting a great variety of religious pheno- 
mena. In early Saiva Tantras there is, for that matter, а clear preference 
for the regions of the classical Aryavarta : the North-Western plains and the 
Central Ganges area (Bagchi, Studies, p. 14ff.). 
As a rule, the Tantras show a keen interest 
in religious geography. 
They know of various kinds of sacred places (pitha, upapitha, sandoha, ksetra, 
upaksetra; KJN 8,22), and pilgrimage to them is commended. Some texts 
advocate interiorized pilgrimage along the same sacred centres, but localized 
in the mystic body (an early instance іп МУТ 19,6f.). Saivism and Saktism 
both have their own places of pilgrimage, although in most of them Siva 
and Devi in some form or incarnation are considered to dwell together. 
A characteristic of a Sakta centre of worship is that the Sakti who is the 
main resident is accompanied by a more or less shadowy male “Bhairava”. 
This may, however, be due to a later development. 
Among the most famous sacred places of Saktism (pithas or seats") are the 
?! On non-Indian elements, 
cf. Bagchi, 
Studies, p. 45-60; Bagchi, Evolution, 
p. 225f.; 
Bharati, Tantric Tradition, ch. 3, p. 58-84: India and Tibet in Tantric Literature, Chakra- 
varti, Tantras, p. 46f.; J. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. Il, Cambridge 1956, 
p. 83-139; Eliade, Yoga, p. 283-289 (Chinese alchemy); Kane, History, V, 2, p. 1033f. 
nth cent, A.D. ° 
ч 
MY 
Wa 
| 
pac?

--- PAGE 51 [DIRECT] ---

38 
Ś3kh Prihas 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Kamakhya shrine near Gauhati in Assam, Kalighat in Calcutta, traditionally 
y also Hinglaj in Baluchistan, and several cult centres along the borders of the 
Ganges plain like those of Bagalamukhi in Datia or of Vindhyavasini near 
Mirzapur. The Sakta pithas are recorded by tradition in the form of standard 
lists. They vary in number from three to 108 (Sircar, Sakta Pithas). The lists are 
highly theoretical; 
an important centre 
like that of Vindhyavasini 
is 
left unmentioned, although it is known to have existed as early as the 
eighth cent. A.D. The origin of the pithas is generally connected with the 
legend of Sati (Devi as the "faithful wife") who died out of grief because 
of an outrage committed against her husband, Siva. The latter afterwards 
dispersed her body limb by limb all over India, and the places where the 
limbs fell (for instance, her generative organ at Kāmākhyā) developed 
into cult centres (Payne, Saktas, p. 8); a tradition which reminds of the 
worship of relics in Europe. Much archaeological and literary research has 
stili to be done in order to establish the antiquity and individual history 
— and, in some cases, even the identity — of these centres. The oldest 
(theoretical) series of pithas consists of only three names, mostly given as 
апа in the North (in reality, probably some place i in the Swat Valley in 
C. the North of the present Pakistan), Pürnagiri in the South (real location 
$ 
ndecided) and Kamarüpa (Kāmākhyä) in the East. Together, they form a 
ystic triangle with its point upwards (Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya, p. 30). 
ther sources may. differ: the KJN (16,5), for instance, gives байа 
„fn Andhra), Mahendra (in Orissa?) and Kamakhya. In the Srividya theory, 
Uddiyana is located within the central triangle of the 
Sricakra (ККУ 51); 
an indication of.the ever increasing tendency towards interiorization and 
symbolization of outside realities. If the list consists of four items, most often 
Jalandbara (real position in the Kashmirian foothills, North of Jullundur) 
is added to the first triad mentioned above; these four are conveniently 
identified with other famous quadruples like the four elements, the four 
stages of evolution of speech or four important mystic centres of the body. 
In another theory, the four pithas mean different arcus of realization of 
"inystical truth : vidya, mantra, mudra, mandala (Dwiveda, Introd. to the NST, 
. 56; Bagchi, Studies, p. 111). 
After a study of the religious geography of Tantrism, the conclusion 
should be that Saktism and Hindu Tantrism, although especially popular in 
certain regions like Bengal, Assam, the North-West and Kerala. is spread 
over the whole of the Indian subcontinent. In its Buddhist form, Ta :trism 
exceeded these limits towards Tibet, China and Jepan; in both its Buddhist 
and its Hindu varieties it has been propagated in South East Asia. Within the 
latter area, the influence of Indian religions was an active force from the

--- PAGE 52 [DIRECT] ---

P Asia 
TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
39 
е beginning of the Christian era enwards.^^ The tendency 
to coalescence 
between the Buddhist and the Hindu traditions in this area resulted in emphasis 
upen the complementan character of both as alternative ways to release. The 
predominantly courtly and upper-class character of the Indian religious systems 
imported into this part of Asia is also characteristic for its Tantric component. 
In Burma there are little traces of systematic application of Tantric elements. 
In Cambodia. the Hindu religious systems flourished for many centuries at 
the Funan and Khmer courts until they were ousted by Theravada Buddhism. 
In 802 A.D.. Jayavarman 
ll introduced the Tantra-influenced Devaràja 
cult as a means of enhancing the prestige of his newly established regime.?? 
King Udayadityavarman 
П (1050-1066 
A.D.) 
praised 
his predecessor 
Süryavarman I for having caused Saivite religious books (maniratantrani) to be 
promulgated. We do not, however, know anything about their contents, 
except that they described the worship of Siva, fire offering and asceticism. 
For a long period, Saivism remained in vogue in the Khmer empire. The 
Chinese official Cheu Ta-kuan in 1295 A.D. noted the existence of Saiva 
ascetics and linga worshippers ; 
there were women amon. 
them (Bhattacharya, 
Religions Brahmaniques, р. 46). Varieties of diksa are also. mentioned, such 
as the Mahamandaladiksa which was supposed to lead to abundant siddhi; 
the initiate was the king (Bhattacharya, o.c., p. 72). No erotic or fearsome 
Siva manifestations have been found in iconographic form; images of Devi 
were well known, although they are often difficult to identify with exactitude. 
Reliefs in Banteay Srei show the seven and the eight Matrkas (Mothers).?* 
4 dones? 
In Indonesia there are various traces of Hindu Tantrism. We refer, 
however, to another volume of this Handbuch for an adequate treatment 
of the subject.?5 We can only add that various Tantric elements are well 
\i 
known at present in Hindu Bali. Among them are the six cakras and the Balı 
Kundalini as well as micro-macrocosmic symbolism; books on Tantric 
subjects are available on the island. 
Cambo dia 
22 Coedès, Etats Hindouisés; some more recent data on Indonesia can be found with the 
help of J. Gonda, The Presence of Hinduism in Indonesia: Aspects and Problems, in: Vive- 
kananda Commemoration Vol., Madras 1970, p. 535-554. 
23 See Bhattacharya, Religions Brahmaniques, р. 49f.; Coédes, Etats Hindouisés, p. 17118; 
Bosch, Dinaja, р. 271f.; Zoetmulder, Hochreligionen, p. 249f. 
?* Sec J. Boisselier, Le Cambodge, Paris 1966, p. 286 ff. for Siva, and 294f. for Devi. 
23 J. Gonda, The Indian Religions in Pre-Islamic Indonesia and Their Survival in Bali. 1n : 
Handbuch der Orientalistik, VM. Abteilung, П. Band, Abschnitt 1, p. 1-54, Leiden/Kóln 1975, 
especially on p. 7f., 10, 14-16, 24, 32f., 52. An earlier authoritative survey is that by Zoetmulder, 
Hochreligionen. Some data also in Soebadio, JAdnasiddhanta; Pott, Yoga en Yantra; Goudriaan/- 
Hooykaas, Sruri & Stava, p. 240, 354, 371, 424, 481, and Index, s.v. Sakti.

--- PAGE 53 [DIRECT] ---

40 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Traditional Classifications of Tantric Schools.?* 
A survey of the history of Tantrism, however succinct, cannot 
be 
complete without making mention of the classifications which the authors 
of the Tantras themselves did make of their tradition. The general term 
for a "school", sampradaya, expresses the view that the revelation, which is 
of divine origin (see above, p. 13), was successively handed down by an 
unbroken lineage of spiritual authorities. It is usually in this context that 
the traditional divisions are applied. Sometimes they reflect the particular 
circumstances of the mythical first stage of the tradition (for instance, 
a fivefold division came about because the five-headed manifestation of Siva 
promulgated the sacred doctrine), in other cases they are based upon purely 
geographical principles. Their theoretical character is usually obvious, and 
sometimes they play their part in the mysticism of numbers. This implies 
tha, even if we had knowledge and understanding of all the references 
to these "schools" — which is by no means the case —, the real state 
of affairs would still very much escape us. We have to assume that behind 
these theoretical statements, meant to give an impression of an orderly 
structure which was in keeping with the secret connective forces in microcosm 
and macrocosm, there lies hidden a reality of a bewildering complexity. Any 
teacher coüld give new interpretations of what his guru had transmitted to him 
or add new details to it; lineages could become extinct or taken over b 
adherents of other schools; actually performed rituals could be symbolized 
and the reversal; schools might quarrel and split on seemingly insignificant 
details while important changes can be hidden behind a flood of obscure words 
or have been held back from written 
tradition 
altogether. The most 
annoying source of confusion 
is the inconsistency 
in the principles of 
classification and their consequent overlapping which resulted in an inextrica- 
` 
ble network. It will therefore be clear to the reader that the following obser- 
vations have only a very tentative character. 
The oldest divisions are probably those found in Saiva Agamas. The NT, 
for instance, (8,57) mentions Dvaita, Advaita, Vimisra "Mixed", Ekavira and 
Yamala; but elsewhere (9,2) it speaks of Vàma "Left", Daksina "Right", 
Siddhànta “Authoritative Doctrine", Saura “worshippers of Sürya", Vaisnava 
and Vaidika '"'Veda-oriented". This reminds of the six Daršanas or “view- 
points" recognized by the SMT (ch. 5), the SST (1,2,85f.) and others : Sakta, 
Saiva, Vaisnava, Saura, Сапара, Bauddha; i.e. the worshippers of the five 
... 
2% Literature: Chakravarti, 
Tantras, р. SOff.; Dwiveda, Introduction to NST, p. 53; 
Kaviraj, Tanirika Sahitya, p. 40ff.; Awasthi, Rahasya, p. 3ff.

--- PAGE 54 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
41 
deities recognized 
by the Smarta 
brahmans 
with only the Buddhists 
added to them. This category of six is in imitation of the classic six Dar- 
ganas of Indian philosophy. 
In the classification of the NT, different categories are welded together 
into one system. The terms Уата and Daksina here probably refer to Srotas 
(see below); Ekavira most probably refers to the worship of Siva without 
a Sakti or attendants: 
but the term 
is not wholly clear (Ksemaraja, 
commenting upon NT 13.39, connects Ekavira with the Pardtrisikamata : cf. 
Dwiveda, Introduction to NST, p. 52). The word Yamala "twin" or "pair" 
suggests the worship of Siva and Sakti as the complementary aspects of the 
Supreme Brahman, and therefore a more Sakta orientation (see also above, 
p. 22). From Kashmir Saivism we further know the schools called Krama 
and Kula. Abhinavagupta was initiated into the Krama system, but in a 
later stage he preferred the Kula initiation. These two traditions differed from 
each other in the method of worship followed and the variety of yoga 
which they proclaimed (Pandey, Abhinavagupta, 
p. 461ff.); both could 
include Saktas as well as Saivas among their followers. 
An important principle of classification followed in the Saiva Tantras i 
is 
that of Srotas “current”. In case three of these are distinguished, they 
are most often called 
Daksina, Vàma 
and’ Siddhanta.or Madhyama 
“Middling”. The NT associates the right current with Bhairava or the eight | 
Bhairavas, mythical propounders of the eight Yamalas and of Kashmir 
Saivism. The left current, which seems to have soon lost its importance, is 
associated with Tumburu, another manifestation of Siva, and included the 
Sirascheda, Sammohana and other Tantras (Bagchi, Studies, p. 6; Goudriaan, 
Tumburu). The Siddhanta was probably associated with the Saivagamas 
(headed in the lists by the Kamikagama). Another (without doubt younger) 
source considers Sakti to be the deity of the Vamasrotas and adds a fourth 
current, Misra, which comprised the worship of the Seven Mothers (Siddhan- 
ta&ikhàmani 5,11 quoted by Dwiveda, o.c., p. 53f) The terms “right” 
and "left" seem to refer to the Southern and Northern face of Siva in 
his five-faced manifestation; the Siddhanta would then have been uttered 
by that god’s “upper face” (BYT 39; Ksemaraja on NT 12,1). The Dvaita 
Saiva Agamas themselves seem to prefer a division into five currents each 
of which came forth from one of Siva's five mouths (Dwiveda, Introduction 
to NST, p. 54f.). 
The Šakta Tantras usually hold that the sacred revelation was given 
in different Amnayas "(subjects of) 
remembrance”; other terms used are an- 
“Vaya or 
samaya. 
There are often said to be five of them, also proclaimed 
by Siva's mouths. In some texts, six are recognized by the addition of the 
gx (a 
Узта\а 
hara

--- PAGE 55 [DIRECT] ---

42 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Adhara or “Lower” Amnaya which has been associated with Jaina deities 
(Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya, p. 25f.); and the number seven is also found. The 
Amnáya scheme is used for different purposes. It serves to classify not only 
texts (the KMT, for instance, reckons itself to the Western or Kulalikamnaya; 
the KT to the Upper А тпйуа), but also deities, mantras, bhavas “dispositions” 
of sadhakas, and stages of transmission (PrT, р. 116, quoting “another text"). 
The Āmnāya classification may have been partly based upon reality, but in 
general it betrays its artificiality. An accurate study of the relevant sources 
and their mutual dependencies is still necessary in order to obtain more 
light on this vexed question (a detailed enumeration and discussion of 
sources is given in “Amnaya”). In any case, the Ürdhva or “Upper” Атпауа 
to which the KT ascribes itself and which is highly extolled by this text 
(3. 1-47) seems to have become the favourite focus of ascription in the 
Sakta Tantras. It is associated in the first place with the Paraprasada 
(or -prasada) mantra discussed in the KT (ch. 4), but other mantras are 
also connected with it (the VidyT, 1, 17ff., lists 64 such mantras). The Para 
Tantra associates the Crdhvamnaya with the S$rividya (Kaviraj, Tantrika 
Sahitya, p. 28; “Атпауа”, p. 30); the Samayacara Tantra connects it with 
Kälikā and other goddesses (quotation in the PrT, p. 117). The [$anasam- 
hità, a Vaignava work which without any justification ascribes itself to.the 
KT, gives a completely deviating list of six Amnayas (Catalogue RASB, VIII, 
p. 115f.). 
Tantric methods of worship, and the texts which describe them, could 
also be designated by the term mata “conviction”, doctrine". Thus, we have 
the Kubjikümata and its Tantra; the Pihgalamata; the Kalikamata (according 
to the SMT, ch. 1, this school worshipped nine Kalikas, among whom Kubjika) 
and othcrs (on the Matas recognized by the Kashmirian Jayaratha, see 
Awasthi, Rahasya, p. 19). Most of their followers seem 
to have been 
reckoned to the Kaulas. In course of time, the word Mata became especially 
associated with the division into Kadi- and Hadimata. The opposition of 
these terms is an intricate and highly theoretical problem. We can distinguish 
two different principles of classification both lying in the mantra sphere : 
a. The interpretation of the “letters” (in reality : the first syllables) of Баз, 
This is a very important question because letters are phonic manifestations 
of deities. In the Hadi view; Aa —- Devi, and а = Siva. In the Kadi inter- 
pretation, ha = Siva {and Samhara, destruction of the delusion of existence), 
while ka, the first of the consonants, = 
Devi (and creation). The .atter 
—theory suits the worship of Kali with the bija krim. Both interpretations are 
possible within both the Kaula and the Samaya schools (for which see below). 
The matter is complicated further by the existence of a third group called

--- PAGE 56 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
43 
Kahadi which seems to represent the view (supported by the KT) that 
the supreme deity is an indissoluble unity of Siva and Sakti; the most 
‚ 
important bija in this case is sauh or hamsa, in which йа = 
Siva and 
sa — Devi. 
b. Two methods of division and interpretation of the Srividya. In this 
case, Kadi is associated with god Kama 
as its Rsi, Hadi with Lopamudra. 
This looks like a 
younger and specialized development of a). A complication 
is that both groups are subdivided into Sakta and Sambhava (Saiva) variants. 
On a certain moment, the Kadi view seems to have gained the upper hand. 
It is exclusively followed by the TT (also called “Kadimata” itself) and 
Bhaskararaya, while the YHT still advocated both views (and the Hadimata 
was indeed followed by its commentator Amrtananda). 
There is 
also a geographical principle of classification. The SMT (Bagchi, 
Studies, p. 99), referring to Sampradayas or Margas “ways”, locates the Gauda 
“Bengali” in the East, the Kerala in the South, the Kasmira in the West, and 
the Vildsa "enjoyment" everywhere, while the North remains unoccupied, On 
another place in the SMT, the first-mentioned three, together with Cina, Dra- 
vida and Jaina, constitute a group of six. In later texts, this pseudo-geographical 
principle is applied in a purely theoretical, often highly casuistic manner. The 
ŚST connects the Gauda, Kasmira and Kerala traditions with the worship 
of the three main forms of Devi recognized by that text: Kali, Tara and 
Tripura, complicating the matter by introducing the Hadi-Kadi division 
(1,5,24 ff.) : 
Kerala 
Gauda 
Kasmira 
According to Hadi 
Kalika 
Tara 
Tripura 
According to Kadi 
Tripura 
Kali 
Tarani 
The variation in nomenclature (Kali-Kalika etc.) is an almost universal 
feature in Tantric literature. The ŠST further contradicts itself (in 1,6,125f.) 
by connecting Hadi with Tripura, Kahadi with Tara and Kadi with Kali 
(while elsewhere, like in the VidyT, Kadimata is opposed to Kalimata). 
This instance has been presented here in order to show the intricacy and 
mutual overlapping of the methods of classification which have been applied 
in some Tantric texts. Nevertheless, the division into Kasmira etc. is still 
known among present-day Tantrics. In the North. of India, 
the Kashmir 
and the Gauda tradition exist; it is, however, unclear in how far they 
correspond to the criteria applied to them in the texts (cf. p. 122), 
Another division is that into three Krantas “Steps”; it also follows the 
geographical principle. The Visnukranta stretches from the Vindhyas to

--- PAGE 57 [DIRECT] ---

AD 
ГА 
>! 
44 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Chittagong at the Eastern coast of the Вау of Bengal; the Aśvakrāntā from 
the Vindhyas to Tibet; the Rathakranta from the Vindhyas southward and 
across the ocean towards South East Asia (Bagchi, Studies, 
p. 46f., 
referring to Avalon). But a different explanation is also found (Ghosh, Spirit 
and Culture; p. 242, referring to the Saktimangala Tantra). The importance 
of this relatively recent system is limited. 
The division which is perhaps best known outside Tantric circles is that 
into Vàma "Left" and Daksina "Right". These terms do not refer to 
but to “methods” or “ways of conduct" (acara); and they 
ma 
again cut straightly through differences of sect or school. Modern Saktas 
indecent or “revolting”. If pressed, however, 
they would — at least in Bengal — consider themselves to follow Vamacara 
while claiming the ritual purity of their sect. Although these terms were 
known to the older Saiva Tantrics in connection with the mouths of 
Siva or "currents" (see above), this method of classification seems to 
have come in vogue in the Sakta Tantra because of the activity of a Brahmanical 
reform movement 
(in the South 
?) in the later Middle Ages. These 
respectable Saktas styled their system the Daksinàcàra or Samayacara; its 
protagonist, Laksmidhara (sixteenth cent.) strongly condemned the ritual 
practices of ihe Vamacarins which he regarded as un-Vedic and unworthy. 
garded as un-Vedic and unworthy. 
The Samayacarins developed a highly intellectual method of purely internal 
worship of their Sakti, Tripura, in her Sricakra form. They abhorred the us 
p of 
their Sakti, Tripura, in 
her Sricakra form. They abhorred the use 
of wine and other unconventional ritual items. The term Vamacara (ог 
Уататаӣгра) became established for the time-honoured Sakta use of wine 
and meat, and perhaps also other antinomian elements in their ritual. The 
. KalPur distinguishes the “left” method from "ordinary" worship; according 
to this text, also the deities can assume a “left” manifestation in order to 
enjoy wine and meat (van Kooy, Worship of the Goddess, p. 28-30). If 
questioned about the nature of the left method, modern Sakta practisers 
might also point to an assumed connection „with vāmā "woman" and lay 
stress upon worship of the female element which is ordained as a general 
principle. During püjà, the ritual utensils are also put down on their 
"proper places in an order from left to right. Besides, Daksina and Vàma 
Occur in a Kaula classification of ritual conduct into seven : Veda, Vaisnava, 
Saiva, Daksina, Уата, Siddhanta and Kaula. The series is comprehensively 
climactic : the Vedic method is the first preparatory stage, and so on (KT2,7f.; 
Carlstedt, Til! Kulas Lov, p. 17f.; Ghosh, Spirit and Culture, p. 243). The 
rationale of this particular sequence is not completely clear, and its function 
is probably mainly theoretical.

--- PAGE 58 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HISTORY 
45 
The antithesis Vama-Daksina is cov ered also, and still more specifically, by 
the terms Samaya and Каша. Samay: “Convention” has several meanings, 
„but in the present context Samayácüra, as we saw, means the practice 
of internal worship as advocated by Laksmidhara and his followers while the 
Kaulas (according to the Samayins) conduct external worship including 
revolting acts. while contenting themselves with worshipping the internal 
Kundalini only in the Miladhara, the lowest cakra (Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya, 
p. 42; 45f.). Not all Samayins lived up to this distinction (Chakravarti, 
Tantras, p. 56). This opposition mainly obtains in Tripurà worship: in practice, 
every Samayin seems to be a Tripurà worshipper, but this can by no 
means be said of every Kaula. Indeed, the term Kaula largely transcends 
the opposition to Samaya. Within the Kaula school, samaya may have quite 
another meaning, as for instance when the KT (11,99f.) asserts that one 
becomes a Kaulika only when being aware of the Samayas, ie. the secret 
meanings of mantras and details of conduct. 
The Sanskrit word kaula is derived from kula “(joint) family". In the 
Tantric environment, kula can have many shades of meaning which are 
apt to completely bewilder a student of Western background.?? Аз а school: 
or sect, Kula includes those who (as Kaulas) consider themselves to belong 
ia 
ihe "family" of the Sakti ——and “have been admitted into il by 
initiation —, that is the Sakti herself 
and all her manifestations Which mystically 
encompass the Whole of creation. Only the transcendental Siva (who is akula) 
excedit 
On the planë of 
internal worship, Kula is 
the Sakti as Kundalini 
who moves upwards and strives after the unification \ the Supreme Siva in 
the Brahmarandhra (see below, p. 171; this unio 
so 
called kula 
by some 
authorities). It is sometimes said that real Kaulas are only those who have 
realized this union (Editorial, in the periodical Kaul-yuga, i, 1, 1972, р. 23; 
Punya Sheel Sharma, in: the same, p. 15). The kaula method is said to 
certainly the most characteristic — movemen 
Saktas, but also 
27 pandey. Abhinavagupta, p. 594ff., enumerates — not too systematically — 23 meanings. 
Carlstedt, Studier i KT, Uppsala 1974, distinguishes ten basic meanings. In our opinion, at 
least 24 "meanings" can be listed from Tantric literature. 
Kav v^ 
4 X A 
14

--- PAGE 59 [DIRECT] ---

` 
46 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
"Ts айыз баша и 
probably identical with Машучыкашира) who, 
however, is considered by the KJN to be the founder of one particular 
subsect, the Yoginikaula (Bagchi, Introduction to the K JN, p. 35; cf. Padoux, 
Parole, р. 58). Various subsects are mentioned in the K JN and other texts, but 
these classifications are not particularly relevant here (cf. also Dwiveda, 
Introduciion to the NST, p. 60f.). 
It seems that the Kaula sect has made great advance during the course 
of 
the centuries and succeeded in ousting several other traditions. In principle, 
the Kula method of worship is *vided into three-according to the manifestation 
of the Sakti which is accepi: 
2s supreme : $ri or Tripura, Kali and Тага. 
“In Bengal, the difference between Kali and Tara has become obliterated and 
Kili is the main deity; she is also popular in Kerala. The one division which 
is at present of particular relevance among the Sakta Tantric practisers of the 
Kashmir tradition (which is the most widespread at the moment) is that 
into the Srikula and the Kalikula. The former mainly concentrates upon the 
benign and lovely aspect of the goddess; the latter upon her frightening mani- 
festation. The worship of Sri was the first to be systematized and offers the 
most evolved symbolism ; the main reason why it has been chosen for a detailed 
description in Chapter V of this book. The guru can choose one of both 
alternatives in accorcance with the psychical disposition of the devotee who 
is to be initiated by him; but the sadhana of the Kàlikula is at present 
very difficult to be followed with success for a householder because of the 
eccentric ritual which it involves. 
Among the Kaulas, one can also distinguish the “риге” ‹ 
Sàkta view from 
that which is oriented towards the Supreme Beiag conceived as the union of 
Siva and Sakti | 
(Ardhanarigvara). The latter standpoint is held by the KT 
3 (cf. KT 16 26) as well as the KJN; the Akulavira Tantra distinguishes the 
Krtakas "artificials" who cling to dualism and the Sahajas “naturals” who 
are superior (Bagchi, Introduction to the KJN, p. 36).

--- PAGE 60 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER TWO 
THE PLACE OF TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
Generalities 
Taking into account the diversity of Tantric schools, one will not be 
surprised by the existence of many different, even mutually contradicting 
features in “Tantric” thought. Moreover, it should be said at the outset 
that the Tantras did not in the first place concentrate on developing new 
lines of thought (Dasgupta, Tantric Buddhism, p. 1; Gonda, Rel. Indiens, 
II, p. 30) Truths common 
to Hinduism are often repeated in them. 
Since Tantrism is essentially 
а sádAand, a 
ractical 
path to liberation of 
body and soul, a “shortcut to redemption" (Bharati, Tantric Tradition, p. 31; 
cf. Rāmeśvara, comm. on PKS, Introd., p. 1), there is some plausibility 
in the statement that “metaphysical subtleties” have been "superimposed 
* 
upon an original fund of practical yogic and mantric methods (Chattopadhyay, 
Lokayata, p. 296). But it should not be lost sight of that those who tried 
to mould (and account for) Tantric practice by connecting with it a view of 
the world and a speculative background were the indispensable architects 
of the many-sided structure of what we know as “Tantrism” today. 
Here again, an important question is that of terminology. Is, for instance, 
the Kashmir Saivite philosophy, especially the Trika system which culminated 
in Abhinavagupta's writings, to be considered as “Tantric”? It is, in so 
-Tar as 
it 
was the 
product of 
thinkers who were initiated into Tantric esoteric 
schools. Yet it can better be presented 
in а survey 
of medieval theist 
speculative thinking, 
and in the following pages we shall only refer 
to those 
elements of it which bear directly upon those subjects which..usually. play 
the foremost 
role in the Tantras themselves, especially the nature of. Sakti 
and | 
the road to redemption. 
2 
Beside the Kashmirians, the most consistent contribution to Tantric thought 
came from the 
learned 
expounders o 
rividya such as Amrtananda, 
Punyananda and Bhaskararaya. The Tantras themselves do not, in general, 
Trent us with a 
coherent body of speculation. Tantric authors by the 
multiplicity of their approach often deal with speculative matters in such 
a way that in our eyes they necessarily seem to be. inconsistent. A detailed 
monograph on the subject classifying and ordering the source material 
has still to be written. In this chapter we shall only mention some essentials.

--- PAGE 61 [DIRECT] ---

71 
Yere 
48 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
The general metaphysical principles followed by Saiva Tantric schools seem 
to have included monism (advaita), monism-cum-dualism (vimiśra or dvaitā- 
~dyaita) and dualism (vara, NT 16,237 8,561. Jayaratha on TA 1.35; Pandey; 
Abhinavagupta, р. 138ff.; Kaviraj, Digdaršan, p. 55). The Dvaita school seems 
to have been the oldest (Padoux, Рағо”, 
p. 57) With 
the growing 
predominance of the Sakta outlook 
within 
the Tantric 
tradition, 
the 
Advaita standpoint obtained more and more emphasis. Šakta authors often 
profess their monistic world view (KJN 11,2-21; AT, Ms. A. 39; TrTU 5, 
1f; Woodroffe, $. $., р. 74, 158f.). There are, however, important differences 
between Sakta Advaita and the best known variety of Indian monism 
propounded by Sankara; this has led to the characterization of the former 
as Saktivada and of the latter as, 
Mayavada (Woodroffe, $. $., p. 679; 
also on p. 59, 342ff.). Others call the Sakta system sarüpàdvaitaváda “concrete 
monism” (Chakravarti, Tantras, p. 39). It is also contended that the Tantric 
world view is elevated above both Dvaita and Advaita (KT 1,111). In the 
Tantric view, the Advaita standpoint is, moreover, inseparable from the 
Practical yogic course to liberation (sddhand), because the adept's own 
body is the principal means of realizing (in the full sense of the term) 
metaphysical truth. The doctrine is, in Tantrism even more than in other 
Hindu religious movements, inseparable from practice. 
A general review of philosophical influences on the Tantrics might be 
formulated thus: the Saktas, especially in North India, but also the 
Srividya adherents, 
in their metaphysical outlook adhere to a monism not 
‘essentially different from that of Kashmir Saivism. The statement that the 
Tantric Kula system formed the base of Abhinavagupta's Trika philosophy 
cannot be proved (Padoux, Parole, р. 59). In any case, that great scholar 
wrote his Tantraloka from the standpoint of the Kaula school, while he 
accords a secondary position to the —equally Tantric — Krama school 
(on this school, cf. Pandey. Abhinavagupta, р. 165ff. and 461f.; L. Silburn, 
Introd. to the MM, p. 16ff.). The Trika was certainl 
influenced by 
the 
hilosophy of language including alphabe 
/sti 
: 
erhaps also а 
eat deal by Райсагаіга! 
— 
a school which later largely 
hides behind 
Visistadvaita. The Southern 
Saiva schools follow the non-monistic 
Saiva 
Siddhanta or related doctrines (Bhandarkar, 
Vaisnavism etc., p. 121-127; 
Dasgupta, Philosophy, vol. V, 1955). But the early Saiva s "culations — some- 
! Padoux, Parole, p. 56, S9f , 
113n., notes elements of doctrine from the Ahirbudhnya S. 
and other Vaisnava texts in Trika; Abhinavagupta's PMS is а recast of a Vaisnava work 
of the same title ascribed to the cosmic serpent $esa ; Ksemaràja in his comm. 
on NT 13 
refers to the Jayasamhità, perhaps the Райсагага work Jayakhya S

--- PAGE 62 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
49 
times incorrectly also called Saiva Siddhànta — found in Indonesian texts, 
seem to be monistic in outlook (Soebadio, Jñanasiddhanta, p. 53; Goudriaan, 
Balinese Religion, p. 122f.). 
Tantric speculation 
is also directly indebted 
to the early Upanisads 
(Chandogya, Maitri and others; cf. Padoux, Parole, p. 38f.) and to the 
Mimamsa (Veda exegesis; cf. Padoux, p. 54). Of special importance is 
the influence of the Samkhya. mainly on three points: 1. The Tantric two 
highest categories of Siva and Sakti cannot fail to recall the Samkhya 
basic principles of Purusa and Prakrti; there is also some similarity in their 
functions and relation to each other, but a most important difference is 
the non-identity of the two in Samkhya as against the transcendental unity of 
Siva and Sakti usually held by Sakta and Saiva philosophy.” 2. The Samkhya 
evolutionary series of 25 categories : 
Purusa — Prakrti — Buddhi — Aham- 
kàra — Manas — the ten senses — the ten subtle and gross elements, 
often recurs in the Tantras and is, for instance, still clearly recognizable 
in the Sricakra system (see below, p. 114f.) with the notable absence of 
Purusa. According to the NTS, Siva taught Devi first the Vedanta, then the 
Samkhya series of 25 principles, and at last the Siva Tantra (Bagchi, Evolu- 
tion, p. 212). 3. The Samkhya doctrine of the relation between cause and 
effect as one of transformation (parinamavada ; Frauwallner, Geschichte, 1, 
p. 386) is handled by Sakta authors to prove their doctrine of the reality of 
the objective world (KKV 28; Woodroffe). 
Beside these philosophical influences, one should not neglect the consider- 
able emphasis laid on bhakti (“devotion”, “reciprocal love”) in many Tantric 
sources (TT 26, 49-53; Rāmeśvara, comm. on PKS 1, 6); the foremost 
recipient of bhakti is, however, the guru (see below, p. 74f.). 
Nature of God 
n 
As has been remarked above, the Advaita Saivas and the Saktas generally 
Who is the Upanisadic Brahman, as the supreme 
principle is sat (existent), 
П 
1 
ess) and Gnanda (bliss) (Kaviraj, 
Gktadrsti, p. 52). The Sākta 
texts (e.g, PKS 1,12) tend to emphasize 
the ananda aspect. The ultimate - 
© gnkhy a

--- PAGE 63 [DIRECT] ---

50 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
character of God is presented by a set of paradoxical qualities put in 
pairs: together with a statement of transcendence of these. The supreme 
Godhead is further designated by conventional epithets such as " beginningless" 
(anádi-), “formless” (arüpa-), “immovable” (acala-), complete" (pürna- or 
“independent” (svatantra-). Special emphasis is given to God's supreme 
nature of prakása- “luminosity”, as a rule in a polar relation to vimarsa- 
“reflection”. In many epithets, the terminology is Vedantic, but the Tantras 
often use well-known expressions in deviating meanings. A case in point is 
the passage in the RYT (25, 32ff.), where a discourse on “the knowledge of 
Brahman” turns out to deal with pranayama “regulation of breath” and 
with mystical centres in the body; elsewhere (RYT 1,136), “the practice of 
advaita” is identical with virabhava (on which, see below, p. 72f.). There is 
a marked tendency to concretize speculative truths and to locate them 
in present and tangible realities; thus, the SST (2,5,11) defines heaven as 
the bliss created by beholding a female partner. 
The Ultimate is conceived as Paramasiva by the Saivas and as the 
M female Mahasakti by the Saktas (Kaviraj, Saktadrsti, p. 77), but the term 
Sünya "the Void" is also in vogue (VBT 44f., 58; and elsewhere); 
it 
designates the absence of any limitative characteristic. The Kaula school 
followed 
by Abhinavagupta had a predilection for Anuttaram "the Supreme" 
(Pandey, Abhinavagupta, p. 635ff. records 16 meanings of this term in Kaula 
philosophy). 
А 
` 
Manifestations of the Divine 
is accounted for on the theistical and mythological plane by saying that 
God enters into different manifestations in order to grant different kinds 
of boons to different types of worshippers (NT 9,7ff.). According to the KT

--- PAGE 64 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
51 
(6.72f.). Brahman, 
out of benevolence towards 
those who strive 
after 
redemption, manifests Itself in ten different recipients: linga, altar, fire, ete. 
God is to be approached in visible form just as milk, which, though 
present in the entire cow, becomes visible through the teats only. In another 
context, the aim is simply to fight the demons (MNT 4,15; Mahisamardini and 
other forms of the Goddess). The Saiva concept of God's five functions 
(pancakrtya-) is maintained ; 
they are executed by lower manifestations of the 
Supreme including the Trimürti : 
Brahma, Visnu and Rudra. For Devi, the 
five functions are mentioned in various texts (SL 24; KPS 12; cf. LT, 
ch. 12, Gupta, p. XXVI). The commentator on the KKV (vs. 1) remarks 
that the three functions of creation, preservation and destruction of the 
world mentioned in the KKV also presuppose the two other functions 
of limitation or obstruction (nirodha) and grace (anugraha). It is, however, 
· 
also said that the Sakti performs the activities of the Trimürti in accordance 
with Her Husband’s will (MNT 4,23 ff. ; 
cf. Sharma, Sakti Cult, p. 153). 
The Vedantic doctrine of the identity of the Self with the Absolute is 
regularly repeated in Tantric sources (e.g., RYT 26,41; 
cf. Kaviraj, Saktadrsti, X 
p. 50 and 89; Gonda, Rel. Indiens II, p. 29f.). The Self (atman) is по other 
than Brahman (also called Paramatman) who has become subject to limitation. 
(KT 9,43; SST 1,1,117ff.). This can also be expressed іп this way that the 
individual soul (jiva) is identical with the Divinity (Siva or Devi; KJN 6,4ff. ; 
PKS 1,5; SST 1,11,41f.). This jiva should be meditated upon as present 
in the lotus of the heart with eight petals (Dhyanabindu Up., prose 
after 93). In Kundaliniyoga, the jiva ascends along the Susumnà as the 
Hamsa “goose” (KJN 17,18ff.; JT 21,12f.). The word hamsa is pronounced 
unvoluntarily and inaudibly by human breathing. In reversed form it is 
pronounced so ‘ham “He I (am)"; recitation of this *Ajapamantra" is 
often prescribed as a form of worship of the Supreme (KT 9,41). 
Emanation 
In agreement with the Agamic view of the reality of the objective world, 
creation is conceived of as a process of emanation or real self-manifestation 
of the Absolute; or as a “reflection” (abhàsa). By this process the Absolute 
remains completely unaffected, like fire from which fire has been taken. In Pañ- 
caratra, this faculty of unaffectedness is called virya (LT 4,16). The emanatory 
process is often described as a gradual development from pure (Suddha) to 
impure or, as we saw, as a condensation from subtle to gross, usually expressed 
by means of the triad 
para-suksma-sthüla or para-parápara-apara. The chief 
difference of Tantric Advaita with that expounded by Sankara is the

--- PAGE 65 [DIRECT] ---

52 
TEUN GOUDILIAAN 
reality 
of the world as against Sankara's doctrine of pseudo-cvolution 
(varia)? The creative process is, in the Tantric view, a transformation 
(pa, ináma) which is readjusted at the end of a cosmic period when the Sakti 
reabsorbs or retracts the universe like a tortoise its paws. In the view of 
Bhaskararaya (VVR 5), the transformation is realized in the guise of a four- 
fold creation : 
of categories (artha, explained as tattva, see below), sound, 
orbit (cakra, i.e. sricak-a and yogic body), and body. The Sàkta upholders of 
Рагіпата argue that also Sankara, whom they consider as their foremost 
adherent, admitted 
it: value 
in his commentary 
on 
the Brahmasütras 
(2,1,14; cf. R. Krishna: wami Sastri, Introd..to VVR, p. XXIX). 
The emanative proces; finds place by a successive unfolding of the categories 
of existence (tattva), thirty-six of which are generally admitted in agreement 
with the Trika system. They are enumerated by Abhinavagupta in his TA as: 
Siva — Sakti — Sadaiiva — Isvara — Suddhavidya “pure wisdom" — 
Maya — Kala (principle of particularization) — Vidya (individualized 
wisdom) — Raga (principle of involvement) — Kāla (time) — Niyati 
(conditionality) — and the twenty-five Samkhya categories of Purusa — 
Prakrti — Buddhi — Ahamkara — Manas — the ten senses — the ten subtle 
and gross elements. Of this list, the first five correspond 
to stages of 
Pure Creation. Besides, the Saiva Kula school admits Bhairava or Anuttaram 
as the the ultimate transcendent (tattvátita-) entity, sometimes regarded as the 
thirty-seventh Tattva. Sàkta Kula sources, however, stick to the number 36; 
the lists may differ in details (KT 7,65f.; 13,90; PKS 1,4 and comm.; 
VVR 36). 
A somewhat different course of emanation is described in the ST (1,17ff.) : 
from Siva in the form of a Bindu (see below) originated in due order Sadasiva, 
Isvara, Rudra, Visnu and Brahma, each with his special function, while from 
the primordial Unmanifest (avyakta, corresponding with the Samkhya prakrti) 
came Buddhi, Ahamkàra and the other categories. 
It is unclear whether 
or not this avyakta was conceived as a causa materialis separate from the 
‘Lord. The commentator, Raghavabhatta, hesitates between an identification 
with the Bindu form (presumably of Siva) or with the Sabdabrahman which 
is the Supreme Sakti. In any case this series, characterized by the inclusion 
of the Trimürti, continued to play an important role especially in the 
speculation on the phonic manifestation of the Absolute.* 
? On this concept see P. Hacker, Vivarta. Studien zur Geschichte der illusionistischen Kosmo- 
logie und Erkenninistheorie der Inder, Mainz 1953. 
* The same series occurs in somewhat augmented form in the doctrine of the Seven 
Deities equated with the seven particles of the syllable Om expounded in the Indonesian

--- PAGE 66 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
53 
No less than seventy categories were admitted by the Krama system 
of Kashmir while also the number 94 seems to have been known (Pandey, 
Abhinavagupta. p. 526 ff.). The SST (1.1.112fT.) returns to the Samkhya system 
in so far that it holds that Prakrti was evolved immediately from Parabrahman. 
The Райсагаіга doctrine of the six “unfoldings™ (vyitha) of the Lord may 
have exercised some influence upon the doctrine of the Samaya school that 
Devi represents herself in nine Vyühas (nine being a favourite number which 
e.g. also occurs in the Sricakra): Kala, Kula, Nama, Jnana, Citta, Nada, 
Bindu, Kala, Jiva (Laksmidhara, comm. on SL 34). 
According to the ST (1, 18), which follows a Samkhya doctrine, the psychi- 
cal system is divisible into three orders : Taijasa “fiery” (the mind), Vaikarika 
`. 
"evolved" (the organs of sense) and Bhitadi, the gross or subtle elements 
(Frauwallner, Geschichte, 1, p. 354). The five elements earth, water, fire, air and 
space-substance each possess 
their colour and geometrical form; they 
correspond to a particle (kala) of Siva (ST 1,21 ff.). 
The cause of bondage ; view of the world 
The process described above is due to the spontaneous free will (lila) of the « 
Divine. Also in Sakta texts, this Ша may be ascribed 
to Siva who continues 
> 
to be admitted as the Absolute behind Sakti (KKV 1). From the view- 
point of the individual soul, however, the chief cause of its bondage in the 
objective world is — in Tantric like in Hindu thought in general — the Maya, 
usually considered to be an aspect of the God(dess)'s eternal Sakti. It finds 
a place, as we saw, in the traditional series of categories. The Maya is 
that power by and with which the Supreme Being veils 
itself (Para- 
marthasara 1,15; cf. Kaviraj, Saktadrsti, p. 58) so that the jiva, enveloped by 
ignorance about its true cosmic nature, falls into the state of an individual 
subject with a limited knowledge. This means that the nature of Maya is 
twofold : 
limitative and dispersive. Its incomprehensibility is like that of an 
act of magic or jugglery. The Mayic process is, however, quite real from 
a metaphysical standpoint. The world, as God’s own experience, cannot be 
illusory (Woodroffe, Š. $., р. 272ff. ‘and elsewhere; 
Bolle, Elements, 
p. 128ff.). In the Kashmir tradition — also on this point often followed 
by the Tantras — Maya is one of the three “bonds” (páía-) or "stains" 
(mala-) : Anava “the atom-like”, the eternal basic cause of bondage, Karman 
and Maya (pasa: SvT 3,175; NT 16,61; mala: NT 19,145; KT 13,83). Maya 
is also one of the six Кайсикаѕ ("mails" or “covers”) which consist, 
Jüünasiddhànta and Saptomkdramantra; cf. Soebadio, Introd. to JSid, p. 24f.; Goudriaan/ 
Hooykaas, Stuti and Stava, p. 77.

--- PAGE 67 [DIRECT] ---

54 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
. of the Tattvas six to eleven included (Pandey, 
Abhinavagupta, p. 307). The six Košas in Paficaratra are à different series. 
although Maya features also here (Gupta, Introd. to LT. p. XXVIII; cf. 
also Oberhammer, Yamuna, p. 21, n. 24). The world process itself is, as 
usual, called samsar “perennial movement" (NT 19,145ff.). 
The common Tantric description of the world does not differ much 
from that 
of Puranic Hinduism. The earth is surrounded by the seven 
Oceans and the other continents; above it lie the seven heavens, below 
s The SST (1,2.4ff.) is one of the interesting 
are the nether worlds and hells.* 
sources on the subject. Its author assumes àn innumerable number of 
cosmic systems (brahmáànda). Their government is divided between the three 
main manifestations of Devi: Тага or Nilasarasvati, Sundari and Kali. 
The "globe of Brahman” is spread like a sunshade over the earth which is 
described as a vase resting on а $ricakra. The measurements of time 
which follow in the text are of the conventional type, but the subsequent 
treatment of geography is certainly interesting through written in a much 
drawn-out style. The TT (ch. 28) assumes that the earth is spread over a 
distance of more than rive thousand yojanas (nearly 50.000 miles) around a 
golden Mount Meru which serves as the throne of Lalità (Tripurasundari). 
The cosmos is surrounded by the “orbit of time" (kalacakra). It moves clock- 
wise and is sct into motion by the Icchasakti (see below). It comprises 
also, the planets (graha) as well as stars and constellations (naksatra); 
the whole system thus seems to have been conceived of as revolving around 
‘the sovereign Lady. 
according to Abhinavagupta 
Polarity ; 
the Sakti 
The notion. of the bipolar structure of the Ultimate 
is one of the 
keystones of Tantric speculation. This bipolarity is discernible in various 
Уітагёа (see above) in its metaphysical, and Siva Sakti in its theistic 
i 
а: "fire-watcr" 
ways, the most important of which on the cosmic plang-are the pairs 
oductive principles (known; already in the Veda);* 
5 On traditional Hindu cosmography, see W. Kirfel, Die Kosmographie der Inder, Bonn/Leipzig 
1920, repr. Hildesheim 1967. 
° Cf. Kaviraj, Saktadrsfi, p. 77; Padoux, Parole, p. 98; Pensa, Considerazione. — Da-gupta, 
Tantric Buddhism, p. 981. and Вагай, Tantric Tradition, p. 18f, and 1991. concentrave mainly 
ori Buddhist Tantrism. — A list of polar ideas reproducing the Siva — Sakti relation in the KT 
(3,87 ff.) includes sun — glow, night — day, purusa — prakrti, deliverance — enjoyment, word — 
meaning, See also Bagchi, Studies, p. 61 ff., who adds, araong others, sun — moon, Pingalà — 
198, heaven — earth (list from the AT).

--- PAGE 68 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
55 
in the world of sound, as vowels and consonants (MVT 3,11f.; ST 2,5; JT 1,6; 
see also below, ch. IV), which tend to be represented by the a and the h 
respectively (УУК 69). The most effective manifestation оѓ this truth. is 
that of man and woman; that is why creating the universe is comparable 
to a prolonged and varied sexual act (Amrtananda on YHT 1,6 and 
2,19; VVR 69). The same 
principle is covered by the Ardhanàriévara 
(half man-half woman) form 
of Siva in iconography. On the other hand, the — 
"relation between the sexes in ordinary existence represents the cosmic polarity 
(SST 2,59,2; KT 3,91; 8,108). 
The notion of Sakti is known to all Tantric authors, although with 
differences in content and emphasis." The Sakti 15 beginningless, her fornr 
is Incomparable 
and consists of pure bliss; she is the spotless mirror, by 
which Siva becomes conscious of himself; at the same time she contains 7 w 
the material universe in primordial shape (KKV 2). She is, however, also 
the efficient cause of emanation 
as well as its spiritual base; in the latter 
function she is equated with pure “consciousness” (cit, caitanya, samvid; 
Woodroffe, $. §., p. 240ff.; 279). She can be addressed by the devotees 
as Divine Mother, loving though limitless (Bose/Haldar, Tantric Philosophy, 
p. 71), but she can also be represented by symbols (Mookerjee, Tantra 
Art, Plates 45 and 58; for the triangle, see below). Her secret nature is also 
said to incorporate the transcendent unity of the two poles of existence. 
This is expressed by means of an identity with the word aham: the 
combination of a (Siva) and ha, sealed by am, the Bindu, symbolizing 
transcendence (cf. KKV 3 and 5; TT, ch. 1 and Avalon, Analysis, p. 17; 
Amrtananda on YHT 2,21-25; other interpretations exist). One should not 
confound this mystic aham with the ordinary Sanskrit word meaning "T". 
The above interpretation testifies to the fact that the Sakti is sometimes 
considered to be tantamount to Brahman. The world is not only permeated 
by her (DBPur 6,28,24; JT 10,3) but also a manifestation of her, i.e. 
identical with her (cf. NT 16,83; KKV 3; W. N. Brown, Introd. to SL, 
р. 13). In the consequent Sakta view, everything in the world is “of female 
form" (strirüpa-, SST 1,3,143). It is often emphasized that Sakti is the active 
partner in the cosmic act of procreation, while Siva remains purely passive 
and would be unable even to move without her impulse (SL 1; SST 1,1,33ff.). 
This motif of the active female and the passive male, well-known in Hindu 
culture, perhaps owes its origin partly to a similar juridical (and economical?) 
4 
7 On Sakti, cf. Dwiveda, Introd. 
to NST, p. 83ff.; Padoux, Parole, p. 47; Kaviraj, 
Saktadrsti, p. 51; Kane, History, V, 2, p. 1041ff.; Bharati, Tantric Tradition, р. 200ff.; 
Pandey, Abhinavagupta, p. 669 ff. 
/

--- PAGE 69 [DIRECT] ---

TA 
56 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
position of the male in primitive matriarchal cultures." In iconography it 
is reflected in the famous representations of Kāli (fierce aspect of the Mother 
Goddess) dancing or sitting on Siva's immovable body (Mookerjee, Tantra 
Art, pl. 73; KPS 18). But the authorities are still more unanimous in 
saying that Siva and Sakti together form an indivisible unity, like fire and 
smoke, fire and heat, tree and shadow or milk and whiteness (KJN 17,8f.; 
NT 19,157f.; etc.). Devi is also said to be Siva's body, while both are each 
other's atman (SL 34). Thus, creation is only possible by their mutual 
cooperation. In this process, the chief place is allotted to Siva by the 
Kashmir Saiva texts. But in Tantrism very often no precedence is given to 
s 
one of the two; they just unite and the female gives birth (NST 4,6; 
Hr 
VVR 4; Kaviraj, Saktadrsti, p. 76 f.). 
Aspects of the Sakti 
і 
The Supreme (Para) Sakti is usually said to be active in three manifesta- 
| 
tions. In the older Šaiva Tantras these are sometimes described as Aghora 
| 
0? 
*non-terrible", Ghora(ghora)tara “intensely terrible" and Ghorà "terrible"; 
- 
| 
š 
these names, abstracted from a Vedic mantra (TaiA 10,47), are also used 
i 
j 
for groups of Saktis. In the MVT (3,30-33) the scheme is as follows : 
| 
. 
Group of Saktis 
Metaphysical gradation 
Function 
Ghoratara 
Apara 
causes to fall 
i " 
Ghorà 
Parapara 
creates attachment 
EC 
- 
» 
. 
| 
Aghorà 
Para 
grants liberation 
4 
i 
| 
| 
Wi 
In the NT (19,159f.), however, Aghora is equated with Iccha "will, 
4 
desire", the second with Kriya "action" and Ghora with Jaana "wisdom". 
| у 
This view is independent of that expounded in the МУТ, because it implies 
Hi 
differences in function. Icchà is most often associated with creation (or "fall"), 
Kriya with preservation (or “attachment” ), and Jhüna(Sakti) with destruction 
š 
(or "liberation") 
— 
but they are 
also connected 
with other 
triads of 
| 
functions (Dwiveda, Introd. to NST. p. 75 and.78). The triad Icchà etc. remains 
i 
і 
the most popular division of Sakti in Tantric literature, but there are also four- 
| 
fold and fivefold representations (NT 11,25f. comm.; Goudriaan, Tumburu, 
| 
IF; 
р. 78 and 86; Pandey. 4hAinavagupta, р. 278, 461 a.o.). while the sixteen- 
| 
* Chattopadhyay, Дош, 
p 23201; N S Bhattacharyya, 
in Sircar, Suku Cult, р. 6511, 
k 
referring to the material collected bx O R Ehrentels 
Morker 
NS 
p. 18-35 
rat 
in India, Hyderabad. 1941,

--- PAGE 70 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU 
RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
57 
fold division into Nitya "eternal" goddesses is an essential feature of the 
Sricakra system. Many other groups of Saktis exist. 
_ The mythological names of the three Saktis_are_Vama, Jyesthà and 
taudri (NT 21.44: NST 4.10: JT 
1,14f.): the ККУ 
(22-24) connects 
^ 
Vama with Iccha. Raudri with Kriya and Jyestha with Jüàna. Most often 
these three are involved in the phonic aspect of emanation which, however, 
deserves special attention (see below, ch. IV). 
The realization of the divine : Macrocosm and Microcosm 
Tantric thought is characterized by an extreme anthropocentrism. The 
doctrine that the human body corresponds to. is even identical with, the 
universe is seldom systematically expounded but nearly always self-understood. 
This holds good for a mystic body which is, according to a now common 
term, "superimposed upon", but perhaps better "intraposed within" the 
visible body. Microcosmic symbolism is especially prominent in the passages 
which deal with kundaliniyoga; the constant experimentation with yoga 
practices was certainly a major factor in the popularization of this field 
of speculation. The Paratrimsika (24) stated that the seed of the nyagrodha is . 
related 
to that tree as the seed of the heart (which is ihe heart) to the 
world, while the yogin is able to mystically create the universe out of his 
heart lotus. An important term in this process hailing from the Trika is vydpti - 
“pervasion (by a mystical identity)". But already the Brahmanas and Upani- 
sads contain many instances of macro-microcosmic equation (Padoux, Parole, 
p. 35). Knowledge of such mystical connections leads to power according to 
both Upanisadic and Tantric thought. Ancient ideas of the “cosmic being" 
(mahdpurusa) from the RV (10,90) onwards without doubt also exerted their 
influence (cf. also BAU 3,2,13). It is, however, by no means evident that 
this concept of the body as a microcosm has its basis in the primitive 
materialism in which human body and earth or nature were felt to be 
interdependent (Chattopadhyay, Lokayata, p. XXI, 332f.). 
A very common expression of this principle is the outright equation of the 
body (deha, pinda) with the world or universe.? We also find many statements 
to the purport that gods, heavens, hells etc. are all present in the body (KJN 
4,2f.; 14,62-65; KT 3,79; ToT 2,6ff.). Symbolic substitutes of the universe in 
this context are tbe Isle of Gems (see ch. V, p. 143) or the Sricakra (YHT 1,25f. 
* KT 13,88; ToT 2,3; cf. the Bhuvanadhvan in the Kashmirian Ágama, e.g. MVT 5, 
in which the body is made to comprise the constituents of the universe. — The Balinese 
priests believe in a correspondence between the bhuvana agun "great world" and the bhuvana 
alit “little world" : 
Hooykaas, Cosmogony and Creation, p. 7.

--- PAGE 71 [DIRECT] ---

58 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
and comms.; cf. ch. IV, p. 114). There are also direct or indirect homolo- 
gations of the yogic body and the Meru (mythical mountain 
=ving as the 
pivot of the universe) or other representations of the axis 
й! (Avalon, 
Principles of Tantra, p. 666f.; ToT 2,1 : the body an "inverted tree"). While 
the upper part, especi Пу the dvádasánta (a mystic centre about twelve fingers’ 
X 
breadth above the head) or the brahmarandhra (fontanelle), is equated to the 
ДУ heavens, it is conceivable that the toes are said to be the abode of Kalàgni, the 
м subterranean fire of destruction which is a form of Rudra (NT 7,17 and 
Brunner, p. 144, n. 1; Hooykaas, Sürya Sevand, p. 62, element Ka 18). 
Especially in older texts, the body is commonly considered to be a Sivalifiga 
(КЛМ 3; МУТ 8; Hooykaas, Agama Tirtha, p. 23; JSid, ch. 16).>The 
famous mythical creation of a fiery linga or column by Siva, by which 
feat that god established his cosmical sovereignty, is thus repeated in the 
persevering adept's mystic body. The liñga is also a symbol of the 
reduction of existence to the original Whole or Void; the word itself is 
sometimes etymologically connected with the root /i- “to dissolve" (KJN 3,10; 
JK 3,8). 
A consequence of the “cosmization” of the individual is that the body 
is made to encompass the world of the gods in particular ways. The hierar- 
' 
chical structure of the pantheon is concretized by a vertical order in the 
Н 
mystic centres. Often the system is built ир by further equations with other 
aa 
important realities like the constituents of Om, the stages of consciousness, 
and the elements. We shall illustrate this by means of a few of- the older 
sources. The NT (22,25f.) offers the following scheme which is still lacking 
f 
he 
in rigour : 
К: 
N 
1d 
Stage of 
Aspect 
Жы 
МА 
Š 
t Part of body 
Deity 
Part of Om | 
consciousness Element 
of Siva 
D | 
` # 
Dwüdasànta — [Paramasiva] 
— ......... 
— turyünta — ...... 
— Капа 
> 
X " » forehead 
— Sadašiva 
— náüdànta 
— (шуа — — $ünya 
— ...... 
! 
eb 
|jeyebrows — — lšvara 
— bindu 
— 
— väyu 
— Tatpurusa 
P 
"a 
| 
palate 
— 
Rudra 
— ma 
— 
— fire 
— Ayhora 
у 
throat 
— Visnu 
—u 
—. 
— water 
— — Матадеуа 
| 
) 
‘heart 
=. 
— Brahma 
— а 
— 
— [earth] 
— Sadyojáta 
| 
5 
This may be compared — as to the main deities — with the Brahmavidyà 
| 
i 
Up. (Visnuite; 41f.) and the Jñānasiddhānta (ch. 10): 
BVUp 
JSid 
! 
i 
Š 
12 añgulas 
supreme 
head 
Paramasiva 
ES 
7 
above 
tip of nose abode

--- PAGE 72 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
59 
tip of nose 
Acyuta 
hands 
Sadasiva 
forehead 
Mahesvara 
eyebrows 
Rudra 
palate 
Rudra 
7 apertures 
Mahadeva 
throat 
Visnu 
throat 
Mahesvara 
heart 
Brahma 
heart 
Visnu 
navel 
Brahma 
It is clear that this system has been worked out independently, but that 
the principle of vertical correspondence is the same. Another method is 
to locate the pantheon in the constituents of the psyche. This was done in the 
_ 
Krama system where Buddhi, Ahamkdra, Manas and the five sense organs 5 
were connected with the Eight Mothers (see below, p. 65), while Prana 
“exhalation”, Apana "inhalation", Cit "consciousness" and Vimarsa “facult 
of reflection" were presided over by the gods Ganapati, Vatuka, Anandabhai 
rava and Anandabhairavi. According to irections incorporated in Abhinava: 
q 
are located in a circular formation in the heart-lotus (апапдакапда) aroun 
ka 
the supreme pair of Anandabhairava and his spouse. The Mothers worship 
th ow 
this couple with the objects of the senses as their offerings. Besides, the 
HELLO 
nàdis (yogic ducts) Idà and Pingala which lie at the left and right sides 
of the Susumna (see further below, p. 168). In the pitha aspect, the Ida 
is the Ganga and the Pingala the Yamuna (RYT 25,45ff.). In the cosmological 
aspect, the former is the moon and the latter the sun (NT 7,2 and 
comm.; Dasgupta, Tantric Buddhism, p. 119ff.; Dwiveda, Introd. to NST, 
p. 104). The KT (15,35ff.) connects the lunar number sixteen with the Ida 
and the solar number twelve with the Pingala, while the $T (1,40) combines 
the right side in general with the sun and with Agni, the left side with the 
moon and Soma (see also KT 15,35f.).!? The Vedic triad Agni — Soma — 
Sürya was maintained also here by the identification of the central duct with 
10 On water-fire symbolism in the body, see also the ISP, Kriyápáda, 3,69; Rangachari, 
ч 
Sri Vaisnava Brahmans, p. 144 (the hands); SKD, st. 48; TBS, p. 370 (fiery mantras generated 
Я 
in the right side, aquatic ог "somic" mantras in the left); RYT 17,97f. (liberation gained by 
fusion of the somic or amrta and the fiery or kundalini principles in the body).

--- PAGE 73 [DIRECT] ---

6: 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Sürya and the left and right ones with Soma and Agni (NT 7,2 and comm.). 
The sun-moon polarity also occurs in another way: the Yoga Upanisads 
know of a white bindu in the forehead which is the moon апа seed, 
and a red bindu in the genitals which is the sun and (menstrual) blood 
(DhBU 88); elsewhere, we find the two bindus replaced by lotuses of thousand 
petals. The tradition is still living with the Bauls of Bengal (Capwell, Bauls, 
p. 259). The lunar number sixteen is again the number of syllables in the 
$гїуідуй and the nuinber of the Nitya goddesses (sometimes 
15); the 
latter are equated wiih the particles of the moon in the NST (1,25ff.). 
The polarity of the male and the female is represented by the assignation 
— well known in Hindiism — of the female to the left and the male to the 
right side of the body (GT, p. 12; TSS 29,31 f. and elsewhere; Bagchi, Studies, 
p. 68). 
Since mantra and cakra are concrete representations of a higher reality, the 
body is thought of as identical with particular mantras or cakras, especially 
the Srividya and the Sricakra or Sriyantra (see below, p. 114). Bhaskararaya, 
for instance, in the VVR (20f.) equates the upward course of the Kundalini 
along the cakras Müladhàra etc. with a mystic recitation of the Srividya; 
the three parts (kia) of this mantra are again identified with fire, sun and 
moon 
(cf. also BhavUp 2; YHT 
1,25f.; 
2,69f.). 
Besides, 
the Saktic 
` 
pithas are sometimes located in the body, a procedure which converts 
the Kundaliniyoga ‘into a mystic pilgrimage. The oldest stage is perhaps 
the assignment of pithas to the vertical row of cakras (KJN, cf. Bagchi’s Introd., 
p. 57; RYT 17,51f.). But there are statements to the extent that all the fifty, 
fifty-one or even innumerable pithas are present in the microcosm (YHT 3, 
36ff.; cf. Bharati, Tantric Tradition, p. 90f.). On the other hand, the actual 
` 
sanctuaries in a certain area may be considered to represent the yogic 
microcosm.! ! 
The path to liberation 
Just as in Hindu speculation in general, liberation from the bondage 
of earthly existence is the chief goal for the Tantric thinkers. Their general 
principle is that the course of emanation described above should be followed 
by the individual adept in retrograde sequence. It is true that in certain 
traditions, especially that of the Siddhas, the perfection and “immortalization” 
of the body is held in high esteem, but this is a largely practical matter 
11 On Bali, six sanctuaries represent the six cakras : Hooykaas, Religion in Bali, p. 4. In Tamil- 
пади: Venkataraman, Sakti Cult, p. 258. In Nepal: Pott, Yoga en Yantra, p. 93 (eight 
cremation grounds = the eight petals of the heart lotus).

--- PAGE 74 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
61 
which scarcely 
affects the mainstream. of Tantric 
theory. 
In the "left" 
course. one should further strive after release by exactly those methods which 
in ordinary life are the cause of defilement 
— 
a very common maxim (see, 
e.g.. Pratyagatmananda. Realization, p. 231). 
The road 1o liberation is divided into stages or differentiated according to 
methods. Kashmir Saivism knows four methods (upaya "accesses"), con- 
sidered to be alternatives practised by different schools, but also fit to be 
followed the one after the other because of a certain inherent gradation 
(Silburn, trsl. of ММ. p. 42ff.). Other sources. especially those of the Samaya 
school. distinguish seven "gradations" (bhümikà) among them bhakti (Wood- 
roffe. Š.Š.. р. 224ff.). The best known series 
is, however. 
that of the 
six "roads" (adhvan) especially favoured in Saivism, but accepted by the Saktas 
and also found in the Pañcarátra (dealt with in detail by Padoux, Parole, 
p. 261 
ff. ; see also Schomerus, Saiva Siddhanta, p. 133ff.). They are alternative, 
but by no means mutually exclusive, courses of approaching the Absolute 
by. meditation on its manifestation in different series of entities or categ- 
ories: varna "letter", mantra, pada "position" or "site", kala “particle”, 
tattva “existential category" and bhuvana "earth" or "sphere". The first three 
constitute the "sound" 
(vāc) group, 
the others the 'meaning" 
(artha) 
group (KKV 12, comm.). Conforming to a frequent tendency, they are 
associated with numbers : varna with fifty (letters of the Sanskrit alphabet); 
mantra with seventy million; pada with eighty-one (9х9, number of sites 
in a yantra to be inscribed with potent syllables); kala with thirty-eight 
(number of particles of Siva) or, more frequently, with five (the vertical stages 
of consciousness nivrtti, pratistha, vidya, Santa and аташа); tattva with 
thirty-six (see above, p. 52) or with three (Atman, Vidya and Siva; on their 
role during pūjā, see below, p. 142); bhuvana with infinite, or with 118 (MVT) 
or 224 (SvT). 
The chief practical course is the Kundaliniyoga (see ch. VI). In connection 
with it we sometimes find a theory of what may be called “vertical phases 
of microcosmic meditation". A passing reference may suffice, because the 
treatment of the subject in the texts is imperfectly clear. Most popular is 
a series of four called pinda "solid mass", pada “position”, 
rüpa 
“form” and ripdtita “beyond form”. According to the MVT (2,36 ff.), 
pinda lies on the plane of coarse realities, rüpa on that of mantras and 
гарана on that of the Supreme Sakti; but other sources give different 
opinions. The series corresponds to a vertical order in the yogic body (see 
also ch. VI, p. 178). The KJN in a very unclear chapter (14; ed. Bagchi, p. 80) 
seems to assign different performances of vertical yoga to different Kaula 
schools.

--- PAGE 75 [DIRECT] ---

62 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
A leading role in the opening of the way to release is assigned to the Sakti 
in her Jñána aspect. Without her grace or revelation, no redemption through 
the body is possible. This activity of the Sakti is most often described as a violent 
| 
nt" (рага) upon the adept or а "possession" (дуеѓа) of his body and self 
PAS and 9б: MVT ТУТ Kaviraj, Sakadi, p. 58f.). It can be 
observed by means of outward phenomena like shaking, staggering, falling 
on thc ground etc., and is followed by a supreme serenity (VBT 111f.; MVT 
11,35). 
Liberation 
Liberation or redemption (moksa, mukti) means casting off the limitations 
set by human birth. It can be obtained during life by means of the mortal body 
(RYT 25,88). The supreme abode is realized because the internal Sakti, 
with whom the yogin has completely identified himself, has reached hef 
destination with the Supreme Siva, thus restoring the primeval union (JK 1,9; 
1,13). The result of this intensification of the "creative bipolarity" (cf. 
Pensa, Considerazioni, p. 394; 382f.; discussion of views brought forward by 
E. Neumann) is the flow of the internal amrta which causes supreme bliss 
(VBT 65; NT-7,49), a bliss which is sometimes said to be brought about 
by the ritual use of meat and wine (KT 5,79f.). Nothing inspires fear to the 
liberated man who has realized his identity with the Ultimate, thereby 
destroying the subject-object felation which is the concomitant of bondage. 
Liberation is often expressed as an identification of the individual soul with 
Siva or Devi (NT 8,35ff. ; 
KT 9,16ff.). The jivanmukta “liberated while alive” 
should constantly realize his identity with the Goddess Who acts through him 
(SST 1,11,42f.). Like the Divine, he is elevated above the dualities including 
good and evil. For him, the rituals (which he probably still executes) have 
lost their meaning; instead, he may concentrate on the performance of a 
symbolical course of ritual by mentally identifying the ritual acts with 
aspects of the supreme wisdom (VBT 142ff.; PMS 75ff.). He is like a boundless 
ocean without waves (VBT 129; K f 9,9); he wanders in isolation like a fire 
in the wood (AT, Ms. A, 69). 
5 
Sometimes the state of moksa is concretized by the use of more sub- 
stantial expressions like “the eternal abode”, "supreme abode”, “the s.ate of 
transcending the level of Mind” (unmani); the state of *'non-discursive iess"" 
(nirvikalpa, VBT 4311.; TrYU 5,11); “(state of) equal flavour" (of Saxti and 
iva; samarasa or sdmarasya); the state "born within" (sahaja, KT 9,34; 
; 
the term is popular with the authors of the Buddhist Caryapadas); "soaring 
above in the sky" (khecara, RYT 25,32); “emitting the psyche into the lotus

--- PAGE 76 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
63 
of the sky" (vyomambuje cittavisarjanam, RYT 29,50); or. characteristically, 
"communion of the goddesses of initiation and the spiritually powerful" 
(voginiviramelanam or a synonym, КТ 10,73 а.о.: KJN 11,38 a.o.; VBT 141; 
cf. Carlstedt, Till Kulas Lov, p. 25). 
The emphasis laid by siddhas or alchemists upon the goal of rendering 
the body immortal 
has been interpreted 
as a superimposition of the 
human craving for immortality upon the classical yogic liberation course 
(Eliade, Yoga, p. 337). According to another view, the chief aim of the Sakta 
' 
Tantric sadhana is “to become a woman" by identification with the Mother; ' 
but it would be more to the point to hold that the goal is the full к 
realization of the primeval creative bisexuality, the coniunctio (more than a 
coincidentia) oppositorum (cf. Pensa, Considerazioni, p. 400). Be that as it 
may, the Tantras never forget to mention that the result of the sadhana is 
also clearly visible and applicable in earthly life: besides mukti, the adept 
may expect to realize — 
if he desires so — bhukti “enjoyment”: the 
good of life in every respect. On this subject the texts are extremely productive. 
Their enthusiasm cannot fail to suggest a lively interest in this aspect of the 
tradition. It is clear that the spiritual achievements of an adept tended to be 
measured by means of outward signs. Therefore, a siddha is said to be (we 
give only a few selected instances) “free of old age and death" (RYT 26, — 
82); “worshipped by the gods" (SST 1,12,5); the favourite of women (PST , 
9,23ff.; JT ch. 17); healthy and prosperous (NT 7,4f.); eloquent (SL 17); 
his father and mother are fortunate (SST 1,12,5). But he is also ‘able to 
destroy the world by his wrath (SST 1,11,53, adding the warning that one | 
should beware of irritating a siddha) or to perform acts of “punishment” 
(nigraha, which may imply execution) or "grace" (anugraha). 
The Pantheon 
This interesting and complicated subject can be treated here only too 
briefly 
% 
detailed study 
of the structure of the Tantric pantheon is a desidera- Je 
tum. The adherents of the different denominations consider, of course, 
the world of the gods to emanate from their chief deity who is mentioned 
by many names because he/she manifests him/herself in accordance with the 
diverging needs of different groups of devotees. Thus, with the Saivites, 
Sadasiva is the name of the Supreme God in the Southern Ágama; in 
Kashmirian Saivism, this position is held by Bhairava (cf. Brunner, Netra 
12 Bhandarkar, Vaiynavism eic., p. 146; Chattopadhyay, Lokdyata, p. 286, connects this 
with ancient sexual rites of vegetation.

--- PAGE 77 [DIRECT] ---

64 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
Tantra, p. 134), a god who is usually accompanied 
by a number 
of Saktis 
(Brunner, o.c., p. 152; Malatimadhava 5,1). 
With the fäktas, the nomenclature of the Great Goddess is extremely 
yaried; it is commonly accepted that many names connected with particular 
manifestations denote originally independent regional or village goddesses | 
who were identified in a later stage with the Devi of the “great tradition", ? 
In Tantrism, all the divine functions possess a name and a corresponding 
iconographical reality All Tantric deities are identical with mantras and 
bijas on the sound level and by means of the latter can be created or forced" 
` 
(sadhita) by an adept who is initiated into the procedure. | 
Very often 
these deities are ambivalent; 
the best known instance is the double 
manifestation of Devi: two groups of "white" and "black" goddesses 
emanating from the benevolent and terror-inspiring sides of her nature, 
respectively Gauri-Umii-Parvati and Durga(Mahisamardini)-Kali-Camundà 
(Mishra, Religious Beliefs, p. 22). The Brahmanizing KVT (ch. 23; 24,13), 
however, explains the black manifestation as Kali as secondary and due 
Pn 
to a reversal of Gauri's true nature Very popular are the descriptions 
git 
of Kali while she indulges in cannibalism, with emaciated figure, protruding 
кае 
RUE 
ШО 
teeth, rolling 
eyes and a tongue hanging out of her mouth while she is Coveted 
with severed heads. These horrific features are often explained ymbolically 
by puristically minded exegetes; thus, the streams of blood vomitgd 
by the 
goddess are said to stand for the 
quality 
of rajas "passion" done aways 
with; the severed head for “the seat of Tattvajñāna (knowledge of Ultimate al 
Reality) free of attachment", etc. (Vimalananda Swami, comm. on KPS). 
à 
Besides the benign and the 
ferocious, 
a third appearance of Devi is that 
of a voluptuous young woman 
as a 
representation of the amanda aspect оѓ 
Brahman (Kamakhya, Tripurasundari, Nityaklinnà). A certain prevalence of ` 
ferocious deities in later Tantrism might have its origin in times of political 
and economic instability, but this has yet to be proved (if possible) by 
careful research. The exact nature of the Sakta pantheon is very difficult 
to determine because of the lack of system in the texts themselves which 
often use names and epithets of different 
aspects of the Sakti 
quite 
"jndiscriminately. 
Some 
mamtresuntom-are- 
Towever, &dered into clear-cut 
groups; thus, we have : 
š 
ey, 
: 
3 Д 
` 
13 Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism etc., P. 144f. (with an interesting classification); Gonda, Rel. 
Indiens 11, ch. 1; clear and well known cases are Vindhyavasini, (Parna)}sabari, Matangi; and 
Minaksi in the South. — On their iconography, see, in general. 
rjea, Iconography, p. 489- 
+ 
Rao, [conography, 1, p. 338 ff.; N.K. Bhattasali, /conography of Buddhist and Brahmanical 
Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, Dacca 1929, p. 191-227.

--- PAGE 78 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
65 
A 1. The Ten Mahavidyas 
: кай, Тага, Sodasi, Bhuvanesvari, Bhairavi, 
Chinnamasta, Dhümavati, Bagala, Ма!айр}] Kamala (list from: the Munda- 
mala Tantra, ef. Chakravarti, Tantras, p. Í 
). 
2. The Nine Durgas : Sailaputri, Brahmacarini, Candaghanta, Kismanda, 
Skandamata, Katyayani, Kalaratri, Mahagauri, Siddhidatri or Devaditi 
(Sharma, Sakti Cult, p. 232; other lists exist). 
3. The triad Sundari — 
Kali — Тага considered 
to be the three 
supreme manifestations of Tripura in the SST. For them, the KalPur (ch. 78) 
gives the names Bala, Sundari and Bhairavi. 
4. As “specialized” or “minor” manifestations might be considered the 
famous group of the Mothers. They are nine in number in the Devimahatmya, 
for the greater part female doubles of some important gods of Hinduism : 
Brahmani, 
MaheSvari, 
Kaumari, 
Vaisnavi, Varahi, 
Indrani, Camunda,. 
Sivadüti and Kali (Banerjea, Iconography, p. 504f.), but in other texts usually. 
seven (the first seven of the mentioned series), often flanked by Virabhadra. 
and Ganesa (Mallmann, Enseignements, p. 150ff.). A group of eight (the 
seven plus Mahalaksmi or another figure) presides over the eight sections 
of the alphabet (SVT 1,33 f.; KMT ch.24); they can be found in combination 
with the eight Bhairavas (see group 5). 
5. The eight -BhaNavas are most often called Asitànga, Ruru, Canda, 
Krodha, 
арапа, Bhisana and Sambarin (KCT 1,5-12; GarPur 
198,21f.); 
Ë 
y-aré combined 
with ihe eight mothers in the JT (4,63ff.) 
as pitha deities of Tripurà (cf. also Pott, Yoga en Yantra, p. 17 and 91f.). 
Other well-known groups of secondary goddesses and gods in the Sakta 
pantheon include : 
6. Attendant deities to be worshipped round an image (real or mental) of 
the main deity or on its pedestal (avaranadevatà-, cf. below p. 151); also 
Siva is very often surrounded by female attendants, preferably in groups 
of eight headed by Vama, Siddha, Jaya and others. The group уата etc. can 
also serve as attendants for Devi (JT 7,12f.). 
7. Deities of the 
@riyantra (BhavUp. 
2; NST 
1,151 ff.; Woodroffe, 
Analysis of the TT, p. 
6ff.). 
8. The fifteen or sixteen Nitya deities, connected with the Srividyà (SsT 
3,12,36f.; NST 1,25ff.; TT chs. 3ff.). 
`9, The deities of the six cakras of the yogic microcosm (R YT 26ff.). The 
most frequent series is headed by Dakini. 
10. Deities of the alphabet, usually a group of fifty (ST 2,29ff. : three 
groups, Rudras, Visnus, Gane$as; МУТ 3,15ff.; KMT 24); a special group 
among them 
is constituted by the lords of the Dvipas, microcosmic 
"continents" (КМТ 24). 
P

--- PAGE 79 [DIRECT] ---

= 
ESAE 
E 
eru 
3 
2 
66 
TEUN GOUDRIAAN 
11. Yoginis “goddesses or mistresses of yoga", originally connected with 
Pithas according to Ksemaraja (comm. on NT 2,13ff.); they are most 
often eight or sixty-four in number. This group is probably due to a mixture 
of popular goddesses, female ascetics, perhaps with initiatory functions, and 
abstractions of psychic powers (Eliade, Yoga, p. 3401.; Silburn, Introd. to 
MM, p. 9). The group of sixty-four has been worshipped in a circular 
pattern in temples (Banerjea, Religion, p. 129; Mallmann, Enseignements, 
p. 304f.; Jhavery, Mantrashastra, p. 233f.). 
12. Other similar groups are the Dakinis, Damaris, Dütis (a kind of 
Avarana deities in cases like TSS 27,35), Bhaginis “Sisters”, etc. 
13. Deities of the site of worship, especially Vatuka and Ksetrapala; a female 
counterpart is Nirmalyadharini ог Cande$vari. Gods like these can also 
function as bearers of the remnants of the food offerings presented to the 
main deity. 
14. Deities of magic, often Yaksas or Yaksinis, especially favoured by 
the Indrajala texts, but by no means unknown to other Tantra authors. А 
special group is formed by the six goddesses of the Six acts of magic 
(see p. 35) headed by Rati (MMD 25,6). 
The above list is certainly not exhaustive, but suffices to give an impression 
of the complexity of the subject. Indology is in need of a systematic survey 
accompanied by a carefully compiled index. 
. 
К 
A few words on Tantric mythology : from the rich storchouse of Hind 
myths, the 
Tantras 
tend to favour a few above all others. These are, 
in connection with Siva : 
a. The cutting off of 
Brahma’s 
fifth head 
by this | 
god, in a sense symbolical for the emergence of the Tantra-influenced 
period 
in 
Hinduism 
(cf. Banerjea, Iconography, p. 465; Rao, Iconography, 11,1,105ff.; . 
296fF.; 11,2,3661f.); b. Siva's conquest of Tripura, the “threefold fortress" 
” 
built by the enemies of the gods (Banerjea, Iconography, p. 487) and 
similar myths of the vanquishing 
of démons; c. Siva's burning of Kama with 
his third eye (SST 
2,69, 1311); d. Siva’s wanderings 
through the forest of the 
ascetics as a naked mendicant : 
the “Devadaru complex" iconographica!ly 
represented by the Bhiksatanamurti 
(sometimes 
confounded with the Kanka- 
lamiini-whieh-refersto-myth{a)-O' 
Flaherty, Asceticism, р. 272ff. ; 
Banerjea, 
Iconography, p. 483f.; Bosch, Dinaja, p. 238ff.). 
. 
ç 
The most important Devi myths seem to be: a. Birth of an aspect of 
the goddess, often in a pond or lake. Famous instances are Nilasar..svati 
in central 
Asia and Bagalamukhi; 
in folklore, 
ponds are sometimes 
explained as a 
yoni of the Goddess (Sircar, Sakta Pithas, p. 8); b. The Mahisa 
myth : Devi as Mahisamardini (without doubt one of her oldest manifestations) 
*'2:s the buffalo demon of that name (Devimahitmya; KalPur 61,5ff.;

--- PAGE 80 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRISM IN HINDU RELIGIOUS SPECULATION 
67 
Sircar, Sakta Pithas, р. 229ff.). There are other myths of similar content; 
c. The Sati complex : 
the division of Devi's dead body limb by limb over 
India; the place where a limb fell became a pitha (Sircar, o.c., p. Sff.; 
on Devi myths in general, cf. Beane, Myth, Cult and Symbols, p. 169ff.). 
Many tales of the deeds of yogins and siddhas are to be styled as 
legends; one of the best known concerns the overhearing of the sacred 
wisdom by Matsyendranatha (Bagchi, Introd. to KJN, p. 10). Legends 
are also told of famous Tantric savants like Bhaskararaya (R. Krishnaswami 
Sastri, Introd. to VVR, p. XXIIIf.).

--- PAGE 81 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 82 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 83 [DIRECT] ---

PART TWO 
TRANSMISSION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUENTS 
OF THE PRACTICE 
BY 
DIRK JAN HOENS

--- PAGE 84 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER THREE 
TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
Diksà : Introduction 
Persons all over the world have to perform or to go through certain 
rites if they want to have contact with things or beings belonging to the. . 
— 
depends from his cultural and social environment. If these rites form a 
system of purifications and instructions they are called initiation by which 
is reached “а radical change of the aspirant's religious and social state" 
(cf. Eliade in R.G.G.? Ш, 751). From these statements it is clear that 
initiation is not necessarily confined to the tantric currents in Indian 
religion. And indeed, initiation occurs already in the texts belonging to the 
Vedic-brahmanic period. Several forms of initiation can be traced here. 
a) The so-called upanayana (“leading to oneself" : 
i.e. the guru leads the 
pupil to himself). Till recently it still had the same meaning : every young man 
belonging to the higher classes of the Indian society had to be instructed 
in certain rites, texts and their interpretation in order to become a full 
member of that society. Now, the upanayana rite gave him admission to 
this instruction, which lasted a few years. Today the rite itself still exists 
but the period of instruction 
is confined to one single day. Important 
elements of the instruction were: 1. the reception of the famous mantra 
RV Ill, 62, 10; 2. the daily rites; 3. the Vedic scripture and 4. other 
knowledge important for daily life. 
b) Another form of initiation was the diksa, which is the common technical 
term in the Tantras. The word is perhaps a derivation from the desiderative 
of the root даку: "to be able, to be fit" (Monier Williams, Skt. Eng. 
Dictionary. p. 201) In the performance of a soma-sacrifice 
(cf. Lévi, 
Doctrine du sacrifice, p. 103ff.) the institutor of a sacrifice (the yajamana) 
and his wife become fit for the participation by means of the diksà which 
is chars :erized by fasting, being shut up in a cabin, and sitting in silence 
on a black antelope hide; when in need of speaking, one stammers. 
с) The ancient Indian royal consecration, the rajasüya, also knew а diksá 
followed by an aspersion rite, the abhiseka, (Heesterman, Royal consecration, 
P. 1141.). The tantric diksá has certain elements in common with both 
the ancient Indian upanayana and diksa.

--- PAGE 85 [DIRECT] ---

VII 
paie Era 
S= 
E 
icm 
72 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
The upanayana and the tantric diksá have in common: a) A special 
selationship between teacher and pupil and b) the communication of a mantra 
by the teacher. 
The older diksà and the tantric initiation have in соттоп: a) The hut 
which has an important role in both rites and b) the aspersion rite, the 
abhiseka as a rite which sometimes follows the diksa. 
In the tantras the term diksà is often explained in the following way: 
“ince it can give divine insight and can effect the destruction of evil it 
is called di-ksà" (divyam jñānam yato dadyát kuryat рараѕуа samksayam 
tasmad dikseti samprokta, ST IV, 2). Another Tantra says: divyabhavam 
dadyat : 
“it can give the divine state"; ksinuyad duritan and “сап destroy 
misfortune” (PT V, 2). In both Tantras 
the word diksà is supposed 
to be a compound of the roots da, to 
give and ksi-, 
to destroy. LT (XLI. 5-6) 
gives two explanations : 
a) "It severs klesas, karman etc. and it shows all states of existence" : 
yad dyati klesakarmadin iksayaty akhilam padam) and 
b) “Having destroyed all impurity it gives the highest place" (ksapayitva 
malam sarvam dadati ca param padam). The second explanation also derives 
diksà from dā- and kşi- but the first from do- to cut, to sever and iks- to 
see. 
Though these explanations are not philologically acceptable they have 
some merit as they point to. two aspects which indeed are significant for 
every diksà : the aspect of purification and that of divine contact. In every diksá 
there is a great deal of purification from impurity of ritual of cognitive nature, 
which paves the road for the other aspect : receiving contact with the divine 
world, It is true, only certain forms of diksà can give а divine state of 
existence or divine knowledge, but every diksa does provide introduction into 
a new sadhana with a new set of rules for rites and conduct (samaya). 
Ditya-, vira- and pasubhava 
In one of the texts just mentioned 
the result of the diksà is the 
divine state of existence (divyabhdva) which in PT V, 2 is described 
by siddhi: perfection. Now there are two other LEE 
em 
"cattle" which in &aiva circles 
is a well-known qualification of man chained 
by the bonds of “atom-like” nature, karman and lack 
of knowledge; 
and vira, "hero". Eliot (Hinduism, ЇЇ 283) says that three conditions of man 
called the animal, heroic and divine, are often mentioned and are said to 
1. characterize three periods of life youth, manhood and age; 2. three 
classes of mankind: non-tanirists, ordinary tantrists and adepts. These

--- PAGE 86 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
73 
three conditions clearly correspond to the three gunas. Eliot does not give 
any reference to texts on which his statements are based. Now,-only what 
Eliot says about three classes of mankind clearly refers to Pránatosini 965 
where pasu is related to the rules of conduct (acara) of Veda, Vaisnavas and 
Saivas: vira is related to daksina- and vamuücara. and divya is related to 
siddhanta and kaulàcára. Consultation of other statements in the KT and 
KT XIV, 50). From these statements the following conclusions can be drawn : 
a 
pau is a 
person who is bound by natural human desires, passions and 
spiritual darkness and therefore should avoid the kula path. A vira on the 
other hand is a person who has his desires and passions well under control 
and therefore is able to stand the temptation ‘and dangers 
of the paricatattvas 
(the 
five М) of 
the 
kula ly Yet he is not completely 
free from the 
bonds of 
human existence. Only in the divya- or devatabhava a person is 
completely free from those pasas and full of divine knowledge (divyaj 
Certain 
forms of 
diksa (varna and 
kala) lead a person from vira- to 
divyabhava. The divyabhava is not the highest state according to KT 
XIV 63 which also knows of a sivabhava. 
A second text which gives information is the Vivarana on the PT. There 
Padmapadacárya makes the following distinction between pa$u, vira and 
divya. The pašu is hardly to be expected to see beyond the sthüla or 
gross aspects of things. In the vira there is an urge to reach the plane 
beyond sthüla. The true vira is fighting the six enemies (the passions). The 
š See the cakrapaja, p. 147, 155.

--- PAGE 87 [DIRECT] ---

b 
74 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
divya is as the result cf this practice in previous births endowed with 
qualities which make him almost divine. Compared with the statements 
in KT there is similarity as far as the pasa is concerned. However, the 
vira and divya according to KT seem to be further on the road to 
perfection than i.. the PTV. There also is a comparable classification in 
older Vaisnava samhitas such as JS and LT which distinguish three types 
of їка: sthüla (gross), süksma (subtle) and para (highest) but where 
terms comparable to pašu, vira and divya do not occur. In one of the younger 
tantras (MNT) the following picture of these three bhavas is given (1, 
55-59): a pašu must collect with his own hands leaves, flowers, fruits and 
water and should not look at а 
$ййга-о- 
a šüdra oi think of a woman. In the yita- 
sadhana the paficatattvas are used (cf. also X, 204). The 
divya is like a deity, 
ever pure of heart, beyond all opposites (heat and cold etc.), free from 
"desire, enduring. How can there be purity 
of the state 
Of existence" 
(Suddhabháva) of those who are connected with (the) stains of the Kali 
(age)?? 
In this Kali (age) there is no pasubhava; the divyabhava is difficult to 
attain (durlabha), the rites of the virasádhana are manifest in the Kali 
age (MNT IV, 19). Apparently the requirements for pašu and divya both are 
impossible or nearly impossible in the period with which the MNT is 
dealing. The pašu obviously is the person who is engaged in the more exoteric 
cult. The divya's purity of state of existence 
is difficult to attain. In 
MNT the meaning of the three 
states of existence 
is more 
or less 
the same as in the earlier texts. 
The guru 
Before going into the subject of the tantric diksa extensively the persons 
involved in that initiation ask the attention : the teacher, called йсйгуа ог guru 
and the pupil, the sisya. After some remarks on the position of the guru 
in Hinduism in general, his position, his role and requirements in Tantrism 
will be described. After that the pupil, his role and requirements will be dealt 
with. 
r 
As is well known Hinduism bases itself on a body of sacred texts 
believed to be without any human origin and temporal beginning. These 
are the texts known as Sruti (hearing). After them comes the tradition, 
2. Cf. Ksemaraja in his commentary on NT: the vira endures everything in the 
sãdhana. 
э Any author considers the period in which hé 
lives as Kaliyuga.

--- PAGE 88 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC 
TRANSMISSION 
75 
‚ 
the sona t The difference between them does not so much concern the 
degrec of authority 
which 
all these 
texts 
have 
but 
its extension. 
All 
śrut! texts are considered to be authoritative for all Hindus. Of the smrti 
some have authority but only for some schools in Hinduism, other texts for 
other schools. Now the ācārya is in charge of the interpretation of the texts 
and of their transmission to the next generation. The great importance of the 
асагуа becomes even more evident if one is aware of the fact that the 
sacred tradition was partly secret either by content or by form of transmission. 
From ancient times onwards, there exists in India the upanayana already 
mentioned earlier in this chapter. Now the ācārya not only instructs the 
pupil but also performs the upanayana ceremony. During this ceremony the 
sacred Savitrimantra is muttered into the right ear of the pupil by the асагуа. 
ú 
Some rites of the ceremony, especially those concerning the relationship 
u^ 
т 
between teacher and pupil, have great similarity with rites of the wedding Ar 
ceremony, thus pointing to their intimate relation. In fact during his time 
"of 
instruction the pupil has to fulfil many household 
tasks which 
are 
performed by a housewife in a family. 
In the Upanisads there are teachers who give instruction to pupils living 
in the teacher's residence (acaryakulavàasin, ChU II, 23) but also to kings 
and fellow-teachers at the king's court and even to a boy whose father 
was unknown (ChU IV, 4, 5). And already in the BAU there are three 
lists of teacher succession (II, 6; IV, 6; VI, 5). This parampara 5 of teachers 
of the same school must be distinguished from the sarfipradaya which 
refers to a tradition of the doctrine of a school transmitted from one 
teacher to another. According to some rather early Upanisads the асагуа 
or guru is also active as teacher and example in the field of yoga (MuU 1; 
2, 13; MaiU 6, 28). As a result of his own 
training 
in yoga 
the 
teacher is able to estimate the qualifications and possibilities of his pupils 
in a transcendental way. The ideal teacher is he who is a good expositor 
of the tradition and at the same time an expert in. yoga. From the very 
beginning the main thing which is required from a pupil is confidence (sraddhà) 
` 
in the person of the guru and in the truth of his statements. Since the 
beginning of the Christian era this $raddhà alone is not enough: “These 
(mysterious) things which have been declared become evident to him of 
noble n»;ure who has the highest loving service (bhakti) to the deity 
and to his teacher as to the deity (Siva)" (yasya deve раға bhaktir yatha 
* $rutí generally is considered to be the revelation, smrti the tradition, šruti is considered 
to be authoritative for all, smrti not. 
t 
3 The term paramparà refers to the succession of teachers in the same school.

--- PAGE 89 [DIRECT] ---

76 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
deve tathā gurau SvU 6, 23). In the Bhagavadgità and the Epic in general, 
bhakti continues to be essential in a pupil. In a verse attributed to the 
great theologian and philosopher Sankara (8th cent. A.D.) it is said: “The 
guru is Visnu, the guru is Siva, the guru is Brahman himself, there is 
no greater deva than the guru". Such was the position of the guru in the 
period of the beginning of Tanirism. 
In this context it is useful to remember that in Hinduism certain types 
of gods are considered 
to be mightier and happier beings than man, 
although they too need liberation (moksa). In the older tantric texts the 
position of the guru is similar to that known from the pretantric texts. 
He is not a mortal being (TT I, 38); he is addressed as Siva in a hymn 
(I, 96-100). At_the moment of giving the vidya (a mantra belonging to a 
female deity) the guru is the goddess 
(II, 54). In the KT he is considered 
to be the.centre of the whole process of liberation because: “without 
diksà there is no moksa, and there 
is no. diksà without an асагуа” 
(XIV, 3). No wonder that in the same tantra the following statement 
occurs : "there is no god higher than the guru"; "the compassion of the 
guru is the root of moksa”; “Brahma, Visnu and Siva a.o. are content 
if the guru is content” and “there is no difference between Sada-šiva апае 
guru." 
X 
From these references 
it becomes evident that the guru is, at' féast 
according to some of the sources, not only a god but even the highest’ god. 
At the same time TT 11, 54 and other texts make it clear that He is 
not always a god. At the time of giving a mantra to the pupil’ the 
god appears in a human body and "just as an image and a yantra: in 
which the devatà is seated is the body of the guru". 
So one can understand that the guru is called a god but that at the 
same time the pupil should test him regarding his qualifications. These do 
not only include qualities as for instance: "being familiar with many 
tantras” (bahutantravid); “resolving doubts" (TT I, 19-22), “who knows the 
essence of all the subjects of the $ástras",* *who is learned in the Veda 
and the meaning of the Veda”, “who is skilful in going the path of yoga”, 
"touching the heart of the god" (ST II, 141-144); "knowing of examination 
and reasoning", “entirely engaged in the supreme spirit” (adhydtmavyakula); 
“not corrupting the darsanas” (PT XXXIII, 22-33, esp. in 31); "dear to 
the devotees”, "who does not give yantra and tantra for sale"; “who 
knows the difference between capable and incapable people" (patrapátravise- 
* KT XIII, 38-118 gives more details about tattvas and mudras (cf. also AS XX, 1-70).

--- PAGE 90 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
77 
savid) (KT XIII, 43, 45, 49); not only these things can be expected from 
a guru, but also “physical well-being and not being possessed by illness 
and unattractiveness” ; 
“faultlessness of figure", “good conduct”, "being of 
pure conduct “having given up love", "being grave and without fraud", 
“always honest", "compassionate", patient" (PT ; ST; KT). In this context 
it is remarkable that, whereas TT and ST still have a modest number 
of requirements, PT and KT have long lists of them. The last-mentioned 
text also gives a list of qualifications of a bad guru (KT XIII, 12-22); “һе 
is ugly, has extravagance of limbs, is sleepy, dull, gambling, crooked, 
deceiving others, destroying secrets" (of the mantra and Such others). It is 
not surprising that he is destroying confidence in himself. And the same 
KT (XIII, 99-109) says that the Buru "who gives wisdom just by instruction, 
who is without any expectation (sarvasamkalpahina) is difficult to Obtain", 
just as a guru “who is well learned in the matter of the highest principle" 
(tattva) and one “who knows mantras as spoken by nigama, agama and 
Sastras". None of the texts consulted Bives a systematic treatment of the 
tasks of the guru. However, there are a few older texts which furnish some 
direct information and many texts which give indirect information on 
this subject. The first task of an асагуа is of course the following : 
1. He examines (pariksate) the aspirant or pupil. This is the only part 
of the teacher's 
duties with which TT, ST, PT and KT deal extensively 
(cf. AS XX 8-10). The pupil should not only show characteristics which 
regard his instruction directly, as for instance: “who is faithful to the 
guru (Sraddhdvan), who believes in a god, who has steadful bhakti to the 
guru (TT I, 23-24), who is intent on obedience with voice, mind, body and 
material goods” (ST II, 147); “whose endeavour is after mukti, who has 
Studied the Veda, who considers the guru’s wife and sons his mother and 
brothers" (PT XXXIII, 40); “who is devoted to the practice of muttering 
and meditation and who longs for the road to liberation" (cf. KT XIII, 27, 
32-34), but also physical and moral qualifications such as “having a firm 
body, being young, without 
illness, well-dressed, with pure body and L 
garments" (TT, PT and KT); "not covetous, who has controlled 
his 
senses, clever, highly free from sexual desire, of little food and sleep, 
devoted to service of others, smiling, not proud, of steadfast vows, serving 
without deceit, helpful to everyone, talking beneficially, truthfully and 
sparingly, with concealed intentions" (TT, $T, PT and KT). In PT the 
characteristics of those who have to be refused by the àcárya as a pupil 
are : “who is ill, blind, deaf, lame, lazy, full of passion (ragin), sleepy, mischie- 
vous, attached to the fulfilment of selfish things." The passage ends with 
the following statement : 
“the guru should never accept a pupil with such 
fv 
n1 MP 
sant

--- PAGE 91 [DIRECT] ---

78 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
qualities. As surely as the fault of the minister falls on the king and the 
fault of the wife falls on the husband, so truly the fault made by the 
` 
pupil falls on the guru" (XXXIII, 42-50). 
2. A second task is the instruction (upadesa) (TT 1 52-57, 82, 83; KT 
. 
XII, 81, 85). Th 
pupil is instructed in the construction and the meaning 
of the cakra (or mandala) and yantra;? b) in the effective power (virya) of the 
mantra? and the first and last matrkà (energy of the letters) a and Куа. а 
is the original letter (sound) which precedes 
all and to which they all return. 
It is omnipres:x* Куа consisting of ka and „sa symbolizes the unsolvable unity 
between Siva and his energy (fakti), source of all letters.? c) the worship 
(püja)!? of the istadevata.!! d) one or more hand-gestures (mudrá).'? Part 
of this instruction, especially b) and d) is dangerous and is therefore 
kept secret. e) the ritual of the initiation (diksa) and the consecration 
(abhiseka), though not expressis verbis mentioned in the text certainly must 
have been a part of the instruction just as the teaching of the conduct 
(ücára)!? which the student has to follow in the period between the several 
diksas. This ācāra not only includes what acts he has to perform or to abstain 
from, but also the kind of yoga to which he has to devote himself and the 
kind of people he should meet or not. KT XIV, 12 makes it clear that 
guru and pupil both go to the twenty-one terrifying hells if the former 
does not give bis instruction according to the handbooks (asastriyopadesa). 
` 3. A very important task of the guru is of course the performance of the 
initiation and consecration rites. He also decides when the pupil has obtained 
the qualifications necessary for taking these rites. According to KT XIV, 
23, 24 there are some interesting characteristics which betray that the pupil is 
ready to undergo the diksa : 
“їп whom at remembering, mentioning, seeing, 
praising, serving, calling on or commission of the guru there are changes of the 
hairs, voice and eye caused by trembling with bliss, they are qualified for the 
act 
of the rite of diksa (yogya diksasamskárakarmani). This means that the guru 
is watching the pupil who normally lives at his residence very closely all the 
time. The length of the period of instruction depends on the progress made 
by the pupil (from one up till four or five years). Two tantras relate the 
number of years of instruction to the varna 
of the pupil : onc year for a brahmin, 
7 See p. 112f. 
* See p. 105f. 
9 Cf. Padoux, op. cit., 192, 249. 
10 See Ch. 5. 
11 “The chosen deity" who is assigned to the pupil during the initiation ceremony. 
32 See p. 115. 
13 Cf. KT XIV 5,

--- PAGE 92 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
79 
, two years for a ksatriya, three years for a vaišya and four years for a Sidra. 
(TT II, 37, 38; ST II, 153). 
ў 
Whereas the tantras give only scanty information about the task of the 
ácárva (guru) they are very eloquent as far as the obligations of the 
pupil are concerned: a) of course the pupil should be "eager to listen 
(susrisu) for thereby all evil is destroyed, the qualities of merit grow, all duties 
have success" (KT XII 66, 67); b) he should worship the guru with bhakti, 
“The bhakti to the guru should be the same as to Visnu and Siva, father 
and mother" (PT XXXIII, 52, 57; KT XII, 35). The Kulàrnava in a long 
passage (XII) even exalts bhakti above everything : “not the knowledge of the 
Vedas, but bhakti is decisive even if the pupil should be a man who 
cooks dog's meat” (27) "all asceticism, knowledge, even a vow comes to nothing 
without bhakti” (29, 36, 38). Insight grows with bhakti (37). There should 
always be non-duality (advaita) between guru and pupil (63). Bhakti burns all 
bad actions related to the great sins (asubhani karmani mahdpatakajani) (41). 
€) In the presence of the guru the pupil should avoid speaking without 
permission, cheating, sleep, buying and selling, association with enemies of 
the guru (PT XXIV, 55). d) On the guru’s birthday the pupil should respect- 
fully make a feast, a special püjà, a meal and pay homage to the guru's feet 
(TT 1, 31) e) Just as was the case 
in pre-tantra 
times the tantras 
forbid certain acts in the neighbourhood of the асагуа, as for instance : 
one 
should not cross his shadow, his footprint, his stick, his carriage or anything 
else one can think of, “опе should not pass urine or faeces, spit saliva 
or vomit" (PT XXXIII, 52, 54; KT XXII, 102). 
A pupil can switch to another guru if he thinks that he can find one 
who has better qualifications for conferring a higher form of diksa. Not every 
guru is equally specialized in all fields, viz. knowledge of tantraśāstra, 
mantra or yoga. So the pupil should choose the guru who is specialized 
in the field in which he wants special instruction. Rameévara in his commentary 
on PKS I, 20 clearly says that once the pupil has embraced the secret Каша 
system he should not switch over to another guru. 
_ 
Т Both discipleship and guruship are not exclusively confined to men. 
At least in circles of the kulacárins one knew the possibility of women 
to become pupil and guru (KT VII, 38 and RYT II, 107).!^ We have not 
much information about female gurus in other tantric schools. About 
discipleship KT XIV, 105 says "a widow, a daughter and a wife are 
only qualified as a pupil for diksa by instruction of her son, by the permission 
'* According to RYT 2, 110 a widow is excluded from guruship.

--- PAGE 93 [DIRECT] ---

80 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
of her father and her husband" (cf. LT XLI, 13). Nowadays female pupils 
and gurus are quite common. 
The course of the diksa ritual 
Proceeding now to discuss the performance of the diksa itself it seems 
best to begin with a description of the main elements of its lowest form, 
the kriyávati (ritualistic). As can be expected in the case of an institution 
which has a long history the order of the elements has not always exactly 
been the same. We follow the ST (HI, IV, V up to 115) because it gives a 
@еаг picture of the ritual. 
First day. Preparation of the place of the diksà 
" 
© 1. The worship of the place (vástuyága) (III, 1-18; PT V, 4-16). 
2. Construction of the (püjà) pavilion (mandapa) where the main rites of the 
diksa are to take place (19-26; PT V, 17). 
3. In the mandapa a square platform (vedi) is erected for the mandala !* 
(27, 28; V, 19). 
4. Placing of vessels (patrdni) and offering of shoots (ankurdrpanam) (34-37; 
V, 18-29). 
5. Preparation of eight pits (kunda) which can have different forms owing 
to the circumstances (quadrangular, semi-circular, triangular) (49-90; v, 
30-32: 5 pits). 
6. The drawing of the four mandalas (103-135; V, 36-70). 
Second day. Preparation of the teacher and the pupil 
7. The teacher should take a bath, being adorned, having performed the first 
daily rites, be silent and go to the sacrificial pavilion (IV, 4-5; PT VI, 
17). 
8. He should perform the worship of the door of the pavilion (dvarapüjà) 
(6-11). 
9. He should purify himself and make, his own body the seat of Dharma, 
Sürya, Indra and Pavaka (Agni) (23-55a). 
10. He should perform the püjà in front of the image of the deity (89-117). 
11. The pupil who has sipped water should perform the application on the 
different parts of his body (nyàsa) (136).'* 
15 See p. 112f. 
16 See 
p. 143f.

--- PAGE 94 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
8! 
12. He should get a tooth-brush (blessed with a mantra) from his teacher 
and after having cleansed his teeth throw it away (137). 
13. The teacher and the pupil should pass the night on the vedi on 
darbha-grass together (138). 
: 
Third day. The diksà itself 
14. The pit for agni (fire) is prepared, 
the fire brought into it and 
worshipped (V, 1-33; PT VI, 68-75). 
» 
15. Sacrifice of melted butter/(@j)q) into the fire (52-58). X 
16. The pupil should go to 
ire-pit with cleansed teeth, after a bath, 
after drinking of the five substances of the cow and in a state of 
concentration (76 ff.). 
17. The guru should look at him with a divine look, unite the pupil's 
mind with his own and then perform the purification of the (six) 
paths (adhvasodhana)'” : while touching the pupil's legs the guru thinks 
of the kala path, while touching his genitals he should think of the 
tattva path; while touching his navel he should think of the bhuvana 
path; while touching his heart he should think of the varna path; 
while touching his throat he should think of the pada path and touching 
his head he should think of the mantra path. In this way the six paths 
are destroyed in Siva and then produced again (79-95). 
š 
18. The pupil, whose eyes are blindfolded with the netramantra, is led to the 
mandala; his hands are filled with flowers which he has to throw into the 
direction of a jar, the guru reciting the mülamantra (100-102). 
19. The teacher then once more destroys and reproduces the pupil by means 
of the bhütasuddhi ' and then applies different mantras to the body. 
20. The follows the worshipping of the is/adevatà received by throwing the 
flowers (104). 
21. The teacher should asperse (abhisificet) the pupil by means of accomplished 
water (susádhitais toyaih) together with the mülamantra; also the màtrka !? 
_ 
after being worshipped is sprinkled. By this process the pupil has 
become identical with the deity who is worshipped by the guru (109, ' 
110). 
. 
22. The teacher then gives the vidya to the pupil; the pupil should repeat 
it еч times affecting by his mind the unity of the vidya, the guru 
апа the deity (111, 112 cf. PT VI, 121). 
*” See p. 100f. 
1° See p. 136f. 
`? See p. 97.

--- PAGE 95 [DIRECT] ---

82 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
23. The pupil should tow down on the earth in a straight linc (danduvat) 
in front of the guru and bring the feet of the latter in contact with 
his head and should offer to him (nivedayet) his body, his wealth, his 
whole life (cf. PT VI, 117). From that moment the pupil should make 
himself deat to the guru by thinking of him only. 
24. The pupil should feed the guru and the assisting priests and give daksinàás 
; 
“to them. 
Some comment on the ritual of the diksà. From the foregoing survey 
it is clear that, though the main lines can clearly be traced, there are 
traces of later developments as can be expected in ST which dates not 
earlier back than the eleventh century. 
1. The worship of the place is a very common feature as an introductory 
ceremony of a püjà and also of the erection of a temple. 
3. This is the mandala on which the pupil has to throw his flowers (see 
item 18). 
Ч 
4, The añkurárpanam is done by means of а number of pots into which 
` 
.. 
different kinds of seeds are put, which should sprout; this is a rite which is be- 
| lieved to give well-being (sampatti) and performed on different occasions, for 
instance in wedding ceremonies and when a temple is constructed. 
5. The kungas are either pits in the earth constructed with bricks or movable 
objects of metal. Only some of them are seats of the deities worshipped in a 
normal ritual. The others are used for special purposes. Thus ST notes eight 
kundas whereas PT only mentions five of them. 
6. The four mándalas have different designs. Though nothing is said about 
· 
their use it seems probable that one of them is occupied by the teacher and 
one by the pupil. 
7. The sacrificial platform forms part of the greater pavilion mentioned 
in item 2. 
\ 
8. The worship of the door is just as the ankurárpanam а common rite. 
13. Lying together on a same layer of darbha-grass (a kind of grass used 
already for cultic purposes in Vedic times) symbolizes the unity between 
guru and pupil. 
5 
16, 17, 19, 21. These rites all aim at purification, dis- and re-integration of 
the pupil. This seems to point to a certain development of the tantric ritual 
similar to that of the vedic ritual.?9 
16. The five producis of the cow are: milk, curds, butter, urine and faeces; 
* they are considered to be holy. 
20 Cf, e.g. Hoens, Santi p. 27, 115f.

--- PAGE 96 [DIRECT] ---

$5 
TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
83 
Me six paths are on the level of the words varna, mantra and 
pada and on the level of the objectivation caused by the words Kala, tattva and 
bhuvana. (See further on (page 100) and cf. Padoux, Parole p. 261, 363). 
According to the commentary on PT V, 118 the adhvasodhana can. be short 
or 1ong (samksepato vistarato và). 
. 
18. The spot of the mandala on which the flowers fall down symbolizes 
a certain deity. The pupil from then on has to worship that deity till 
the next diksà. He or she is his istadevatà. 
A comparison with two important scriptures of the Kashmir Saiva school, 
the Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta (TA) and of the Vaisnava Pāñcarātra, the 
Ahirbudhnya Samhita (AS) leads to the following remark : 
ST, TA and AS 
have much in common but, whereas TÀ does not give much attention to the 
different purificatjon rites of the pupil, AS has elaborate rites on this subject, 
which however are partly different from those described in ST. For instance 
AS speaks of three threads of different colours representing maya, wound 
round the pupil Whereas according to ŠT and TÁ the pupil has to 
throw a handful of flowers only, AS mentions a flower, a pearl, a piece of coral 
and a coin. 
22. The giving of the vidyà or mantra which is whispered into the pupil's 
right ear is one of the central elements of the апа According to PT VI, 
20 and 21 the pupil should recite the mantra a hundred times. After having 
mentioned 
the vidya ТА XV, 26 in deviation 
from $T records 
the 
following rites effecting a certain identification between Siva and the pupil : 
the guru worships with his left hand a glowing mantra mandala, the 
essence of all paths, which is on his right hand (— Siva). Then he imposes 
it on the head of the pupil, on whose body all the six paths have been 
projected. The teacher touches the different parts of the pupil's body 
with his right hand. 
The meaning of the kriyà diksa 
A few remarks on the ritual mentioned do not seem to be out of place, 
Many rites consist of the preparation of the sites of the diksà (1, 3, 5, 
6, 14); then there is a rite for well-being, the purification and temporary 
deification of the guru (7, 9), the purification and temporary deification of 
the pupi! (11, 12, 16, 17, 19, 21), the worshipping of the god (8, 10, 15), 
and the union of the ácárya and the pupil (17, 23). 
More specific rites of the kriyadiksa are: 1. the pupil gets an istadevata 
by throwing flowers blindfolded in the direction of a pot on the mandala 
(18); 2. the pupil receives a vidya or a mantra from his guru and thereby 
is qualified to receive instruction in mantra,

--- PAGE 97 [DIRECT] ---

84 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
Ж 
Other diksas 
The older &aktatantras do not mention other forms of kriyadiksa ; 
only 
KT (XIV, 67ff.) knows of a kaulikadiksà for the Kaulas only. After 
ritual worship the pupil is introduced into the closed community of the 
` kula (kulacakra) and is qualified for the piji with the five M's. 
The Saivagamas and the Vaisnavasamhitàs know two kriyadiksàs : 
A. the samayadiksà, the diks which includes a samaya: a covenant 
between the guru and the pupil, who is now called samayin, with a number 
of rules the pupil has to follow, and 
B. the nirvánadiksà leading to complete liberation of the bonds of existence 
(TA XV and XVI; ISP Ш, 16, 20; NT IV gives the nirvanadiksa only). The 
course of the ritual is the following: the preparations of the site of the 
diksà and the purification and the temporary deification of the асагуа and the 
pupil are similar to the rites of the lower kriyadiksa (see page 80f.), even 
among Sri Vaisnavas in modern times (Rangachari, Sri Vaishnava Brahmans, 
101-102). The main rites which the pupil has to pass through are : 
1. the purification of the six adhvans by means of oblations (TÀ 
XVI; ISP III, Rangachari, Śrī Vaishnava Brahmans, 113, 159ff.). In this 
way the pupil is purified and temporarily deified. 
2. Threads which represent the pasas are fastened to the pupil's body 
from the haircrest to his toes. Then the mind of the pupil is called into 
these threads in огде? to identify him with them. The guru meditates upon 
the several lives of the pupil. Then the threads are cut into pieces and 
thrown into the fire. In this way the pupil is liberated from the ра$аз 
ISP III, 16; 20). Rangachari describes a somewhat different rite: A string 
consisting of three threads of different colours representing the three gunas 
is twined round the pupil's body twenty-five times (that is the 25 tattvas). 
Then the string is cut into pieces, the ācārya must imagine the pupil to be 
burnt down (25 tattva ghee oblations are sacrificed into the fire) The 
guru repeats the 25 tattva mantras in the order of creation (srstikrama). 
Then the pupil's body is aspersed by means of water with the milamantra. 
In this way the pupil has died and is reborn. 
2 
3. The pupil obtains his new istadevatà and name in a rite sirailar to the 
lower Кгіуа (see page 81). 
4. The guru by means of yoga places the pupil into the Sivapada (the 
abode of Siva) (ISP III, 16, 20). 
In TA ХУ, 23íf. those to whom the nirvanadiksé has beea conferred 
are of two kinds : the sddhaka?' desiring enjoyment (bhukti) and the putraka, 
2! Cf, Brunner, BEFEO 1974, 136.

--- PAGE 98 [DIRECT] ---

| 
| 
| 
| 
js 
TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
; 
85 
desiring liberation (mukri). The sadhakas again are of two types : a) they who 
í follow the rules of Siva (#¿vadharmin) because they do not take part in 
the ordinary activities of the world. SvT IV 83, 84 gives the’ following 
characteristics of the Sivadharmin : 
"He whose adhvans have been purified 
by the Sivamantra and who is determined to the perfection of mantra 
(martrasüdhana)", In this way he becomes a Sivasádhaka; b) they who 
follow the rules of the world (/ckadharmin) because they long for results, being 
devoted to gather good deeds and to avoid evil deeds. The putrakas also 
are of two types : a) they who are "without seed” (nirbija) : 
“without rules of 
conduct”. They are the children, the unfit, the elder people, those who stick 
to their own property, the sick and so on, and b) they who “have seed" 
(sabija) : 
“having rules. of conduct” (samaya) : 
the people who have common 
sense and are able to stand fatigue and fast and are obliged to follow 
the various particular rules given by the acarya. ST distinguishes four kinds 
of diksa : 
a) kriyavati (IV, 3; Ш, IV, V up to 115). 
b) varnamayi (IV, 3; V, 116-121 a). 
c) Kalayati (IV, 3; V, 121 b-126). 
d) vedhamayi (IV, 3; V, 127-140). 
a) The kriyavati (or kriy8) whose ritual has been dealt with is the diksa in 
which a mandapa, a kunda and pots are used and which gives "success of 
everything" (sarvasamrddhi) or “the accomplishment of one's own wishes" 
(nijestasiddhi) (PT VI, 123). 
b) The varnamayi is the diksa of the letters.. The teacher applies the 
letters to the pupils body; according to KT XIV, 42 the diksa сап be 
performed with 42 aksara, 50 varna or 62 lipi? then he takes them 
together in reversed order (destruction of the pupil’s body). The deified 
guru identifies himself with the pupil and unites his mind with the Paramat- 
man; out of the Paramatman the guru again produces the varnas and 
applies them on the pupil's body. In this way “the state of a deity consisting 
of supreme bliss arises” (jayate devatabhavah pardnandamayah). This diksà 
bestows higher consciousness (samvid). (See KT XIV, 42-45). 
c) The kalavati, the diksa of the five Kalas, special kinds of energy 
(Saktayah). There are six kinds of them (see page 100). By a process of 
yoga the teacher penetrates the body of the pupil and in this way 
he gathers ihe nivrtti (because the emanation comes to a stop) from the 
footsole up to the knee, the pratisthà (since the tattvas stay there together) 
from the knee up to the navel, the vidyd (since here there is a higher 
‹ 
2722 See p. 110. 
dx А; 
Q^

--- PAGE 99 [DIRECT] ---

86 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
form 
of consciousness) from the navel up to the throat, the sdnti (since 
here the waves which give birth to the five harnesses (kañcuka) which 
cover the Self come to rest) from the throat up to the eyebrow and 
the santyatita (beyond Santi, the limiting energy of Siva united with 
Sakti) from the eyebrow up to the haircrest, and unites them with 
Siva. In this way the pupil is reintegrated in Siva, and therefore the 
diksà gives the divine state (divyabhavapradayini). From the results obtained 
by the varna- and kaladiksa it is obvious that they belong to the higher 
ones (cf. KT XIV 46-52,?. also TBS 104). 
d) The highest form of diksd-is the vedhamayi, 
the diksà of the 
penetration (vedha). It liberates the pupil from the samsara (samsárapra- 
mocini) (127) and gives divine awakening (divyabodha) and understanding 
of all things (sarvasamvid) (140). 
The process is the following : 
1. The guru meditates on Devi (Sivasakti) in the miladhara of the pupil. 
She is pure consciousness (cetanamatravigraha), beaming like a million 
flashes of lightning. The Sakti having split the satcakra, the six cakras, goes up 
through the central duct of the breath (susumnd) to Parasiva. 
2. The guru takes together the letters va, ša, sa, sa in the lotus seat and in 
Brahma; having united him with the svadhisthana (lotus with six petals 
with the letters ba, bha, ma, ya, ra and la) he penetrates the svadhisthana. 
3. The guru takes together ba up to /a in Visnu and unites him with 
the manipüra (the navel-lotus, with ten petals, with the letters da, dha, na, 
ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha) and he penetrates the manipüra. 
4. The guru takes together these ten letters in Rudra and unites him with 
the anāhata, the heart-lotus with the letters ka, kha, ga, gha, ña, ca, cha, 
ja, jha, na, (a and tha and he penetreates the andhata. 
5. The guru takes these letters together in I$vara and unites him with the 
vituddhacakra or asurandhaka, the throat-lotus with sixteen petals, and with 
a, à, i, i, u, ü, r, F, 1, T, e, ai, o, au, am, ah, and he penetrates this 
cakra. 
6. He takes together these vowels in Sadasiva and unites him with the 
ájfiacakra, the eyebrow-lotus, with two petals and the letters ha and ksa and 
he penetrates the cakra. 
7. The guru takes these two letters together in the bindu (Siva) and 
unites him with the kalà (— mantrakalà or nirodhini; cf. Padoux, Parole, 
p. 91). 
25 KT mentions three forms of this diksà: a) with 38 kalà; b) with 50 kalà; c) through 
tattvanyása.

--- PAGE 100 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
87 
8. The guru unites the Кай with the пӣйа,?* 
9. The guru unites the пада with the nadanta (having the nada as end). 
10. The guru unites the nddanta with the wimani, the supreme transcendent 
energy, one with Siva and quasi-identical with him (NT. XXI, 60). 
11. The guru unites the unmani with Vidruvaktrantare(?) who is transferred 
to the face of the pupil and then to the guru. By this process the pupil 
whose bonds have been cut descends in Paramasiva; he becomes Siva in 
person (139). 
KT XIV, 57-66 describes the manodiksà (mánasadiksa BS 106, 107) which 
has a place similar to the vedhamayi in the ST. It has two different 
forms, a lower and a higher one. The first is called "sharp" (tivrd) and 
consists of the purification, by means of yoga, of the six paths by the 
guru. The six paths here are the bhuvana from the footsole up to the 
knee, the tatrva from the knee up to the navel, the Кай from the 
navel up to the heart, the varna from the heart up to the throat, the 
pada from the throat up to the palate and the mantra from the palate up 
to the haircrest. In this way the pupil immediately becomes free from the 
bonds (pasas) of existence and will reach liberation (mukti). 
The second form of manodiksd is called “the sharpest one (tivratará)in which 
the pupil becomes free from the evil of existence” (chinnapdpah) simply by 
meditation of the guru (smrtamátratah). Further characteristics of this diksa 
are: the pupil cannot utter his happiness (na Saknoti tat sukham vaktum); he 
is Siva in person and will not participate in rebirths, being liberated from 
the bonds of becoming. 
KT describes six states of the vedha: bliss, tembling, uprising, turning 
around, sleep and fainting (64). It is not surprising that he falls down on the 
ground (bhümau patati) (61). 
KT mentions still other forms of diksa : 
1. Sparsadiksà (XIV, 53) (diksà by touching). Here the teacher projects Siva 
on his hand by concentration and mutters the mülàngamálini і.е. 
a number 
of mantras regarding the heart, the head, the haircrest, the kavaca and the astra 
` 
(Padoux, Parole, p. 271) and then touches the body of the pupil. This rite has 
some similarity with that of the samayadiksà in TA XV, 26. 
2. A somewhat higher form of diks is the vagdiksa (the diksa of speech) 
(KT ХГ’. 54, 55). Having concentrated the acquired (vitta) in the essence 
(tattva) the guru speaks the connecting mantras which are powerful by the 
highest tattva (Siva). The result of this diksà has not been recorded. 
` 
2% Sec p. 92f.

--- PAGE 101 [DIRECT] ---

N 
88 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
3. The next diksà is the drkdiksa (the diksá by looking) (KT XIV 55, 56). 
The guru points in concentration his closed eyes in the direction of the 
pupil while his mind is calm in the highest tattva (Siva). By this "look" true 
insight immediately arises (sadyah sañjayate jridnam). The comparison of the 
_sparsadiksa with a bird which teaches the young ones to fly step by step; 
the comparison of the drkdiksa with a fish which teaches the young ones by 
means of the eyes only and the comparison of the manodiksa with a tortoise 
which teaches its young by concentration only (KT XIV, 38) makes it 
clear that the manodiksà is superior to the drkdiksà whereas both are 
superior to the sparsadiksà. KT XIV, 40 gives still another list of diksàs: 
1. samaya-, 
2. visésa-, 3. sádhaka-, 4. putraka-, 5. vedhaka-, 6. pürna-, 
7. ácárya- and 8. nirvàna-. 
. 
Abhiseka. Now the same tantra XIV, 69-77 speaks about abhiseka 
(consecration), і 
ceremony which is already known іп ancient India as part 
of the rajasüya, the consecration of the king (Heesterman, Royal Consecration, 
p. 114ff.). The abhiseka runs as follows (TT II, 59) : the teacher makes a cakra 
or mandala and places a pot (kumbha) or a conch bn it. Then he fills the 
kumbha with water and asperses the pupil while muttering a mantra. $ST 
VI, 21ff. says that for abhiseka a favourable time and site are required. 
There a mandapa should be erected in which the Sarvatobhadracakra 
should be designed. The guru should asperse a thousand times with a 
mantra 
for. sodhanyasa25 and with the vidya of the main deity. The 
ceremony should be accompanied by singing, dancing and acting of yoginis 
(female yogins). According to VI, 104 one also can perform an abhiseka 
when there is a favourable position of the planets and in case of danger of war 
or sorcery. By using water brought in connection with Soma, Sürya and 
Agni опе can obtain appeasement (Santi) for all kinds of trouble (duhkha) (114). 
In the passage just mentioned KT speaks of 1. the dcdrya-, 2. 
the-swnayi-, 
3. the sádhaka-, 4. the putraka-, 5. the vedhaka-, 6. the 
párrig-ybhiseka 
Thus immediately after the kriyadiksa there is an abhiseká-by which the 
pupil becomes samaya (or samayin), which means that "dis should 
stick to certain rules of ritual and conduct and which authorizes the 
pupil to receive instruction in mantras and to perform the püjà at home. 
By means of a visesa-(samaya, SvT IV, 89) abhiseka the pupil obtains a 
special set of rules for certain special purposes. Now the diksà can — as 
was already the case in Vedic India?* — be performed in order to realize 
wordly ambitions, as for instance wealth, or superiority over enemies. 
25 See p. 136f. 
?* Gonda, Change p. 321.

--- PAGE 102 [DIRECT] ---

MT 
и 
TANTRIC TRANSMISSION 
89 
As has been mentioned before, a higher form of kriyadiksa is the nirvanadiksa. 
The pupi! becomes a putra( ka) or putrikà. By means of a more complicated 
abhiseka (601), the pirnabhiseka (6), the pupil either becomes а sádhaka (1) 
or an йсйгуа (3). According to NT V, 4a the sádhaka desires perfection 
(sidhi) in mantrasádhana.?? Thus he becomes а specialist in certain mantras 
by means of which he can obtain different powers such as flying through the 
air, the power of ЇЗуага or of Bhuvane$vara. The ācārya of course is entitled 
to initiate pupils and to perform the püjà in the temple.?* Finally the pupil 
becomes a vedhaka (5) by means of the vedha( mayi)diksa. So we have found 
that of the eight forms of diksà бує are also called abhiseka. Now a peculiar 
thing is that neither the $T nor the PT have a separate chapter on 
abhiseka; but they do mention а kind of abhiseka as part of the kriyadiksà 
(St V, 106, cf. PT. VI, 110). Did not certain schools in Tantrism know a 
separate rite of abhiseka? 
27 Cf. Brunner fc. 
38 Cf. Diehl, Instrument рр. 51, 52 notes.

--- PAGE 103 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER FOUR 
MANTRA AND OTHER CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
Sound and word in older Hinduism 
In no human civilization speculation on sound and word has played 
such a lasting and important role as in the Indian culture. 
In order 
to understand 
the place and the meaning 
of word 
and mantra 
in 
Saktism and Tantrism a short survey of the earlier developments of this 
subject seems appropriate. Owing to the defectiveness of the material available 
it is impossible to trace a continuous development of the relevant matter 
from the Vedas up to the Tantras. We can only speak of some stepping- 
stones here and there (Padoux, Parole, p. 17). 
1. In RV I, 67, 4 we already read that the wise men found the hidden 
Agni "when they recited the mantras formed in their heart" (Arda yat 
taştān mantràn a$amsan). And Agni supported heaven by means of “truthful 
mantras” (mantrebhih satyaih). RV I, 72,6 informs us of the time that those 
worthy of worship have found "the three times seven 
secret words" 
(trih sapta guhyàni pada; pada : footprint, here has a special meaning); “hidden 
at you(r place — Agni's), they guard the immortal one (Agni) by means 
of them (the secret words)". Thus certain words are so powerful that 
they can even check the mighty gods. No wonder that Vàc, Voice or Speech, 
is already in the Rgveda considered to be a goddess (see VII, 100, 11). This 
reference makes it further clear that Vac not only signifies the articulated 
human speech but also the sounds made by all kinds of animals. According to 
verse 10 she gives fourfold food and milk and according to RV I, 164, 45 Vàc 
is measured in four parts; three parts of her are secret (guhd trini); men 
speak the fourth part (turiyam vàco тапизуй vadanti) Geldner refers in 
Rgveda I, 164, 45 note to a similar statement about the Purusa (RV X, 90, 3). 
If this reference is correct it means. that three parts of Vac belong to the 
world of the gods. In RV. X, 114, 8 Vac is related to Brahman, the 
absolute: 
"as far as Brahman has been spread so far Vac has been 
spread" (ydvad brahma visthitam tàvati уак). Finally the hymn RV X, 125 
is wholly devoted to Vac. In this hymn she says: “I support (bibharmi) 
Mitra and Varuna, Indra and Agni, the two A$vins, the impe:uous Soma, 
Tvastr and Püsan, Bhaga (2,3. By me one eats food; who sees, who 
breathes, who hears the spoken (words) does this by me (4) 1 am

--- PAGE 104 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
91 
° blowing itke the wind reaching (drabhamdnd) the worlds beyond heaven and 
earth; 1 haye mightily become so great" (etávati mahind babhüva, 8). Thus Vac 
in this case is mightier than the most important deities. All creatures are 
dependent on her. Her power is reaching further than earth and heaven. 
Branman only seems to be superior to her. From all this it can be concluded 
that the supreme power of word and mantra in Saktism and Tantrism has its 
roots in the Rgveda-samhita,' 
2. In the Atharvaveda (AV) we find several examples of hymns containing 
certain words which are often repeated in order to strengthen their powerful 
effect. Only a short hymn may be mentioned here : AV V, 9, 1-6: “to heaven 
hail! (dive зуйлд); to earth hail; to atmosphere hail (twice); to heaven hail; 
to earth hail". The repetition of mantras is a well-known practice also 
in Tantrism. 
3. Both in the RV and the oldest Upanisads we already find clear traces of 
a connecjion between mind and speech, between breath and speech and 
between mind, breath and speech. A few references may suffice: RV X, 
71,2 says that “the wise create speech (Vdc) by the mind (manas); and X, 
181, 2: “meditating with their mind (manas) the old wise men (Vasistha 
and Bharadvaja) found the first sacrificial formulas (yajus)". According to 
ChU VII, 3,1 mind (manas) is greater than speech. For just as the closed fist 
holds two fruits so does the mind hold speech and name. The same 
Upanisad (I, 5,3) says : 
one should meditate on breath in the mouth (mukhyah 
pranah) as the udgitha (There is a trend of linking various concepts by 
means of a central structural principle like that of number; 
like the 
thread on which the pearls of a necklace are strung) “for it is continually 
sounding Om” (om iti hy esa svarann eti). This reference shows at the same 
time the great importance of om already in the period of the earliest 
Upanisads (cf. also ChU I, 4 and IX, 23,2). In BÁU I, 5, 3-7 it is said that 
Prajapati made for himself mind, speech and breath (mano уйсат prànam). 
Whatever sound there is, it is just speech (yah kaś ca Sabdo? vag eva sd) . 
verily the self consists of speech, mind and breath. These are the three worlds: 
speech is this world, mind is the atmospheric world, breath is that world 
(heaven). The same are the three Vedas : speech verily is the Rgveda, mind 
is the Y *iurvedá; breath is the Sámaveda. They also are father, mother and 
offspring. Mind verily is the father, speech is the mother, breath is the off- 
* On эйс see also J. Gonda, The vision of the Vedic poets, The Hague 1963, passim; 
B. 
Vac, Thesis Groningen 1952. 
A 
has the meaning of sound or word.

--- PAGE 105 [DIRECT] ---

92 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
spring. These statements show the strong connection between mind, breath 
and speech, a topic that is well known in Tantrism. 
4. RV I, 164, 39 runs as follows: "He who docs not know the syllable 
(aksara) of Re, the seat of all the gods 
in 
the highest space; what can he 
begin with the Rc?" If the "aksara of Rc is Om, this text is related to 
JB I where Om is called the essence (rasa) of the world and to ChU II, 
23, 2 and 3: “He (Prajapati) heated them (the worlds): out of them issued 
the threefold knowledge. He heated them...out of them issued these syllables : 
bhür, bhuvah, svar; he heated them and out of them issued the syllable 
aum. As all leaves are held together by a stalk, so is all speech held together by 
аит” (aumkárena sarvà уак samtrnná). “Verily the all is this syllabe aum" 
(aumkára evedam sarvam). The tantric speculations about Om (Aum) as the 
aksara, the essence of all existing syllables, seem to be well prepared 
in Vedic literature. 
5. A next important stepping-stone from the Veda to Saktism is the 
Mahabhasya by Patafijali. According to Ruegg this author not only taught the 
eternity of sound (Sabda) but also that it is the mental base of the signification. 
The signifying sound (dhvani) is a quality of the eternal sound (Sabdaguna). 
As the base of signification . 
абаа is s 
called : sphota | (bursting) which as the base 
of signification has a 
certain duration; an increase in intensity (таам) i 
is due 
to dhvani. 
Ў 
е 
6. The last stepping-stone is the Brahmakanda of the Vakyapadiya by 
Bhartrhari (beginning of the sixth century A.D.). According 
to this author 
Brahman 
is the essence of the sound (Sabdatattva) with which sphota 
is identical. VP 1,2: "Though not being different Brahman acts as if he 
were different from his energies (Saktayah). The forms (àkára) or trans- 
formations (vikāra) are not real; they are illusive only (vivarta) ". Bhartrhari 
assumes two different sphotas : 1. the internal (abhyantara) revealing meaning 
at the level of the madhyamd vac (speech accompanied by subtle breath) and 2. 
i external (bahya) 
at the level of the vaikhari vāc (the word as it is 
spoken). According to him dhvani = nada = 
signifying sound. The 
eae 
between пада and sphota 
is compared to the changes caused 
by the movements of the water affecting an image which is reflected in 
that water‘ d 1,50). Finally Bhartrhari already distinguishes three levels 
of speech: 
`l. the first and highest level is that of pasyanti_ (the level 
of pens 
2. madhyama and 3. vaikhari (both mentioned earlier). 
Much of what has just been described we shall find again in dealing with the 
Sakta theories of word and mantra.

--- PAGE 106 [DIRECT] ---

——ve 
m 
MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
93 
7. A iew words must be said about the importance of the correct 
utterance of sacred words or texts when they were used in the ritual or 
studied. Although many scholars have written about it, among them Bharati 
(Tantric Tradition, p. 122), Chakravarti (Linguistic Speculations, p. 102) and 
Gonda (Mantra, p. 270), only few references to older Indian texts can 
be given. At the end of the full and new moon sacrifice some gifts are 
given with the purpose of repairing the mistakes made during the sacrifice. One 
of these 
gifts is accompanied by the following 
texts (BSS 
1, 21 
= 
ApSS 3, 11, 2 = 
Hir$S 2,6): "Everything we neglected in formulae or 
in action during this sacrifice (HirSS : 
ritual) that 1 appease by means of this 
oblation". Thus the correct recitation of the ritual words is important. Yaska 
(Nirukta 1, 15) writes when dealing with Vedic mantras : “they are fixed as to 
the combination of words (niyatavacoyuktayah) and fixed as to the order 
of words" (niyatanuparvyah). According to Yaska a mantra consists of a. 
combination of certain words and the order in which these words are put is a, 
fixed one; both should not be changed. The most elaborate reference to the 
subject under discussion 
however is TU I, 2 which says : “We shall expound the 
pronunciation, the letters, the intonation, the prosodial instant, the stress, 
the harmony and the linking. Thus has been declared the study of pronunciation 
(Siksam vyakhyasyamah.varnas svarah mātrā balam sáma santana йу uktah 
siksádhyàyah). Van Boetzelaer in his translation of Sure$vara's TUBh I, 52-53 
says : 
"Varna (is) the sound “a” etc., so svara the acutely accented vowel 
etc.; the prosodial instants (mátrd) (are) long, short (or) prolated. Balam 
is declared (to be) stress. Sáman (is) the mutual harmony of vowels, 
(i.e.) the avoidance of unevenness. Santana (is) the linking. Thus the science 
of pronunciation is expounded." Thus the śikşā, the science of proper pronun- 
ciation of the Vedic texts, one of the six 
Vedáñgas (ihe auxiliary sciences 
of the Veda) gives very detailed instruction about the recitation of the 
ancient sacred texts. 
8. Phonic Emanation 
One of the most essential traits of Tantrism is its conception of a phonic 
plane of existence parallel to, and even basic to, the objective world. It is 
а leading: factor in cosmic evolution. The theory of sound and meaning 
probably originated in the speculation on the sacred syllables, particularly 
Om, which, as we saw, originated in the Veda and continues to be the main focus 
of Tantric sound symbolism. The first stages of phonic emanation are nothing 
else than mystic primordial constituents of Om. The first of them is ndda, 
paraphrased by Padoux (in French) as “first sonorous resonance (of the

--- PAGE 107 [DIRECT] ---

94 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
Рага Vac, sec below), an extremely subtle state of pure pnonic energy" 
(Padoux, Parole, p. 51). According to the NT (21,62f.), it is the "bursting" 
(sphota) in sound form emanating from Siva. But later texts usually derive it 
from Sakti as a consequence of her contact with Siva (NT 21, 62f.; ККУ 9). 
It may be equated with Kundalini; 
it is sy.nbolized by the crescent 
(Woodroffe, $. $., p. 397). 
Then comes the bindu, an extremely concentrated ambrosial “drop” of the 
pure primordial speech. It is symbolized by a dot or the full moon. Bindu and 
Nada are usually treated in combination as the decisive factor in the evolution 
of speech and reality. The subject is complicated intensely by the differences 
in thought and presentation found in the sources as well as with modern 
authors. In a short survey it seems the best way to take the system 
presented by the very influential $T (L7ff.) as a base. Its author assumes 
an initial triad which consists of Siva (the Bindu), Sakti (the Bija) and their 
union (not mentioned by name, but its effect or product is called the Nàda). 
This triad is called a “threefold Bindu”, identical with the Supreme Sakti. In 
the first stage, it causes to emanate triads of $aktis and male deities : 
. 
Siva (bindu) 
Sakti (bija) 
Their union (— nada) 
Raudri 
Vama 
Jyesthà 
Tech 
Kriya 
Jina 
Rudra 
.Brahmà 
Visnu 
Agni (fire) 
Soma (moon) 
Sürya (sun) 
In addition to this evolutionary series, there is a second one according 
to which the division of the supreme Bindu produces Rava “sound” which is 
Satdabrahman, “phonic (aspect of) Brahman”, i.e. the principle of intelligence 
in audible form. In the human microcosm it is manifested as Kundalini. 
A third, “mythological”, series originating from Siva-Bindu is: Sadasiva — 
Буага — Rudra — Visnu — Brahma. 
The word Bindu can thus stand for different things. Its extreme versatility 
is ably discussed by Padoux (Parole, p. 93ff.; cf. also Kaviraj, Saktadrsti, 
P. 77). For instance in Tantric code language, bindu can also be used 
for amrta “fluid of immortality” and for sperma. Whenu the YHT (1, 10£) 
describes Bindu as “of the nature of the Void, being the supreme essence 
of illumination" etc., it obviously describes the Bindu which is Siva. 
Amrtànanda, while commenting on this place, declares this to be the case, 
but adds the remark that there is a second bindu which is or the 
nature of Soma and Agni, the Ravi (Sun) called Kàma the nature of - 
which is the blissful union (sdmarasya) of Siva and Sakti. This is what the

--- PAGE 108 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
95 
YHT 5:1 (1,12) styles the Baindavacakra “Orbit of the Bindu" which 
forms the. central triangle (with its point downwards) of the Sricakra. It 
is also called Baindavasana “Seat of the Bindu”, i.e. Siva and Sakti united 
on the dead body of Sadašiva (the inactive category of Sadasiva) as a couch 
(YET 1. 14 and comm.). The name Ravi may have been prompted by 
two factors: a. The Vedic triad Agni - Soma — Sürya (fire, fluid, sun); 
b. the term Rava "sound" used in a comparable position as a synonym for 
Nada in the ST (1, 7ff., see above). 
A further step is that the twofold Bindu, Sakti — Siva, is characterized 
by both Amrtananda and Raghavabhatta in the mentioned passages of the 
YHT and the ST by the colours white and red, suggestive of semen 
and what is usually called menstrual flux, the two factors of reproduction 
in Hindu (including Tantric) embryology.* The triad Siva — Sakti — Мада 
obtained the name Kamakala “Divine particle (manifesting itself as) Desire", 
personified as Tripurasundari (JT 10, 8); in this context, Siva and Sakti 
are called Kamesvara and Kame$vari. The Kamakala symbolizes the creative. 
union of the primeval parental pair; a pulsating cosmic atom with two 
nuclei graphically represented by a white | and red dot \ 
which automatically 
produce a third point of gravi 
his situation is often represented in 
graphical form as a triangle. This can be done in two ways: with the 
point upwards or downwards. The second variety which expresses the initial 
cosmic dynamism would look like this: 
е 
Siva Kàmesvara 
Sakti Kàmesvari 
(white; Agni) 
EL 
BE is 
(red; Soma) 
sámarasya 
(Ravi; Kàma) 
A final step is taken when this triad is enriched with a fourth element 
sO as to constitute the graphic representation of the most potent parts of 
. 
Devi's mystical body (also in this context she is called Kamakala or Tripura- 
sundari) : 
her face, two breasts (the white and red bindu) and womb. They 
are represented by the letter ; written in an older form akin to the 
Newari sign, ог by the ha (the “womb” is often called hdrdhakala “the 
"particlc consisting of half the Aa", i.e. its lower part), as follows: 
3 R. F. G. Müller, Altindische Embryologie, Leipzig 
1955, р. 
15f.,. points out that. 
ártava "the female stuff of reproduction”, although often called sonita “blood” is not to be 
confounded with the menstrual flow.

--- PAGE 109 [DIRECT] ---

96 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
sw 
02 uu 
оле 
i 
£ ha 
According to more recent authorities, this is only the gross form of the 
Kāmakalā. The subtle form would be the Kundalini and the supreme form 
the “mantra body" with the Vedas as its main constituent (Rame$vara on 
PKS 5,16; Woodroffe, Analysis of TT, p. 134ff. On the fourfold Kamakala, 
cf. NST 1, 185f.; SST 1, 3, 87f. etc.). 
The Kamakala is identical with the Akatha triangle, the three sides of 
which are the three Saktis, the three stages of evolution of speech (Pasyanti 
etc.) and three sections of the alphaber- 
The fourth or “womb” element 
corresponds-to-tire-Para—Vac-or-initial-stage-ef-speech- identical with the 
Supreme Sakti (Ambika). There 
is a further correspondence with the 
mystic centres in the body. Here, we present the system as given in the 
YHT (1,36ff.), completed from Raghavabhatta's comm. on $T 1,110 (see 
also ККУ 22-24; Padoux, Parole, p. 115ff.): 
x» 
g 
# 
М 
E 
à 
Š 
M 
Goddess 
Form of Sakti 
Stage of Speech 
Place in Body 
Ambikà 
Parà 
Müladhàra 
Vama 
: 
Techa 
Pasyanti 
Svadhisthana 
Jyesthà 
Jüana 
Madhyama 
Hrdaya (heart) 
Ë 
Raudri 
. 
Kriya 
Vaikhari 
Kantha (throat) 
or Mukha (face) 
The — probably older — series of particles of Om evolves from Sabdabrahman 
which is the speech aspect of Nada according to Ksemaraja (Padoux, 
Parole, p. 87, n. 1 and p. 105), but which was probably still dispensed 
with in the oldest post-Upanisadic stage of speculation, as can be observed 
in texts of such different provenance as the Siddhantasikhopanisad, the 
Siva Pur. (p. 761) and the Jüànasiddhanta (Soebadio, p. 25 and 51). The 
Kashmir Agamas (SvT, NT), the Trika and the ST, as well as some 
later authors, developed this system still further; it is applicable on the 
+ 
microcosmic as well as the macrocosmic plane. We refer to the tables given 
by Padoux (Parole, p. 105 and 253), in which, however, the relative position 
of the stages 
is apt to be interpreted 
too boldly by an 
uncautious 
reader. 
:
7
j
|
І
9. The four stages of phonic emanation 
We now concentrate on the speculation about the evolution of the 
alphabet. All letters are in Siva as šabdaráši: the mass of sounds in an

--- PAGE 110 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
97 
eminent and undifferentiated way. According to ST, I, 108f. there is an 
evolutionary series of speech from Sabdabrahman (cf p. 94) to Para Vak 
or Para Sakti.* It is identical with Cit: (supreme) consciousness and is the 
springwell and the primary source. of everything. In the human body it ís 
situated in the müládhàra cakra. “It is at the same time the germinal speech 
in which neither any differentiation nor sound appear, where the vibration 
(spanda) of the consciousness is hardly perceptible, at the same time containing 
everything which will come into existence" (Padoux, Parole, p. 145). Рага Уак 
is also identical with the mantra AHAM ("T") which consists of M, the 
condensed presence (the bindu); of the energy or of the manifestation HA 
in the transcendent А (РТУ, 6). Now the mass of sounds is projected on the 
supreme-non-supreme energy (paraparà) : 
the Pasyanti уйк which reflects it. 
In the human body Раѕуапії is in the svadhisthana cakra. Then begins the 
emanation of the letters 
as pure energy and not as articulated and 
manifested (sphuta) letters. It is called mátrkà (mother) or pürvamálini 
(the primary lady of the garland). It is in this context that the expression 
varnamálà, the garland of letters, id est the whole series of fifty letters has to 
be understood (cf. ST I, 110 “In this way Kundali produces the garland of 
letters 
(the alphabets consisting of 42 (letters) from A up to SA” 
(kramendnena, srjati kundali varnamalikam akaradisakarantam dvicatvarim- 
Sadatmikàm). This varnamalà also is the universe. 
j 
LT XX 32, 33: The matrka is a projection of Visnusakti. It is: said that 
like Visnu the matrka 
also has fifty Saktis resting in it and making up a 
garland of letters (такат varnamdlinim) (cf. Gupta, 112). Pasyanti is 
identical in nature with Рага Vak but it has not its characteristics of 
transcendence and omnipresence. At this level according to TÀ III, 236 there 
arises in the consciousness a desire to see. There still is no question of 
the world of objects (vacya) but a tendency to it. According to Abhinavagupta 
there also is a grosser form of Pašyanti namely that of sonic vibration. At the 
same moment the šabdaraši is in a different way reflected in the Madhyama 
vak and called the uttaramálini or màlini. In the human body it is situated іп 
· 
the Hrdaya cakra. At this level the stage of indifferentiation has been left. 
Now also the difference between the signifying word (уйсака) and the 
signified object (vacya) comes into existerice. It is the moment in which 
the worl? of objects, the universe truly is born out of speech and 
in it (PVT, p. 5). It is no longer the level of consciousness but that 
of interior language. 
After this the sounds appear at the level of the lower (apard) energy and 
* In the pre-tantric period one regarded Pasyanti as the highest form of Speech (see 
p. 92). 
= 
пй t

--- PAGE 111 [DIRECT] ---

98 
^ 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
speech, the level of the Vaikhari vàk which is that of common speech. 
In the human body Vaikhari is situated in the mouth (cf. commentary on 
ST 1, 109). This is the level at which the differentiation is completely manifest. 
The vācaka and the vācya are now completely distinguished. The Krivàsakti 
dominates at *he level of Vaikhari vàk (PTV, р. ә). 
10. The origin of the alphabet 
During the emanation 
first arise the sixteen 
letters A up to 4H 
(visarga) called Sakti or kala as aspects of the divine transcendence (cf. PT 
HI, 1ff., ST IL, 19ff. and LT XIX, 
1-19). “Without 
the vowels the 
manifestation of the other(s) (letters), of the consonants does not arise” 
(vind svarais tu папуеуйт jàyate vyaktir anjasá). “People therefore proclaim 
the letters to consist of Siva and Sakti (sivasaktimayán prahus tasmad varndn 
manisinah). 
. 
; 
The A is the omnipresent 
Citše"ti and the source 
of all letters. 
А = A+A = Siva+Sakti in inseparable union (yamala) in a state of 
bliss (ananda). 
ANE: 
l is the Icchášakti (the power of the will); I = запа, the energy of 
sovereignty. 
U, here the desire to manifest the universe, takes the form of the awakening 
or of the revelation (unmesa). We have now reached the level of the 
Jñänaśakti. 
Ü as symbol of the first six letters together is considered to be the seed 
(bija) of the process of the manifestation of the letters A up to AH. 
R is the manifestation of the Icchasakti as a stable, not perturbated 
illumination; R has not the stability of R ; when this double energy acquires 
the stability of the earth (sthairya, ni$calatà) one has L and D 
At the level of R, Ё, L and L a kind of standstill has come in the 
internal movement of Siva towards emanation. At the level of E there is 
movement again for Е = A+I. We have now reached the 
level 
of the 
Kriyásakti (the power of action) and also of the triangle (irikona) consisting 
of the Iccha-, Јдапа- and Kriyasaktis, In AI is A+E we have already two 
triangles, since A+ A = A was the first. Together these triangles form a 
six-pointed star. 
In O = 4+0 the Kriydsakti is more manifest than in A/. in AU = 
A+ 
the Kriyasakti has become completely manifested. 
M is the bindu (the point) representing Siva in whom now the fourteen 
letters as fourteen aspects can be distinguished; nevertheless at the same 
time he remains the undifferentiated point, the only and beaming source 
of energy.

--- PAGE 112 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
99 
Whereas the bindu consists of one single point, АН (visarga) has two 
; points (:). It is the beginning of a new stage of emanation, which at the 
same time'also is a liberation, namely an escape of the breath.” 
The related HA is considered to be a grosser form of the visarga. 
The consonants (vvanjana) from KA up to KSA represent a lower stage 
of emanation : “the vowels are the ultimate cause of all the letters" (svard eva 
sarvavarnánàm mülakáranam, Jayaratha in his commentary on TA III, 184; 
cf. PT IV, 7). The vowels are their principle of life (prdna). They are 
considered to be the seeds (bija) and the consonants the womb (yoni). The 
consonants are considered to be a condensation (ghanatd) of the vowels. 
The vowels are the signifying items: уйсаКа; the consonants the signified 
items (уйсуа). Now the gutturals KA up to NA are the results of a 
condensation of A; the palatals СА up to NA are a condensation of J. In a 
similar way ТА up to NA, and TA up to NA have respectively arisen out 
of R and L; PA up to MA out of U; YA out of J; RA out of R; 
LA out of L; VA out of U+ A. SA, SA and SA have arisen from l, 
R and L but in a different way, namely not as the result of a union 
between the energy of the Transcendent and another energy, but they have 
come forth in an expiratory manner (usman). Finally the fiftieth letter К$А 
arose as a combination (pratyahára) of КА+ SA which are respectively 
animated by the transcendent 4 and the visarga. In this way KSA symbolizes 
the inseparable union of Siva and Sakti, the source of all letters. 
_ 
11. The relation between the consonants and the tattvas ( principles ) 
The universe consists of thirty-six tattvas. Froia the gross consonants, 
(the gutturals), there arose the five elements (bhüta) earth, water, wind, fire 
and atmosphere. From the five palatals arose the five subtle elements (tan- 
mátra) : 
the essence of odour, taste, sight, hearing and touching. From the 
five cerebrals arose the five organs of action (karmendriya) : speech, sight, 
movement, excretion and reproduction. From the five dentals arose the 
five organs of sense (buddhindriya) of odour, taste, sight, hearing and 
` 
touching. From 
the five labials arose 
the manas, 
the ahamkdra, 
the 
buddhi, the prakrti and the purusa. These twenty-five tattva all belong to 
the-manifested world (asuddhasrsti) which is subjected to illusion and duality. 
The three semi-vowels YA, RA, LA gave rise to the existence of the five 
armours jiafcuka) since they cover the Self and impede its original 
freedom and expansion. They аге: 1. attachment (raga), 2. knowing (vidya), 
limited by the differentiated knowledge, 3. the principle of determination 
(kala) and 4. time (kdla) and 5. restriction (niyati) which are included in the . 
first three. Out of VA arose mayá, illusion. These six tattvas form the pure-

--- PAGE 113 [DIRECT] ---

100 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
impure manifestation (fuddhàsuddha). $A corresponds to mahāmāyā (the 
great illusion); SA to the pure knowing (Suddhavidya); SA to the Lord 
(#уага); HA to Sadàtiva (the “eternal Siva") and KSA to Sakti «йш, 
Siva is the thirty-sixth rartva. 
12. The sixfold path of emanation and purification (sadadhvan) 
When dealing with the diksà the subject of the sixfold path has been 
touched upon a few times (see p. 81). We have now to deal with it more 
extensively. The six paths consists of two series of three paths. The first three 
belong to the sphere of the signifying speech (vdcaka) and are: varna (letter) 
` 
which is the highest (рагай), mantra (aphorism, spell) which is subtle 
(sūkşma) and pada (archetype of spoken words) which is gross (sthüla). In the 
sph'^re of the signified object (vacya) correspond to these three paths: 
kalà (determined energy) (see p. 81) which is the highest of the second 
triad, tattva, dealt with in the preceding section of this chapter, which is subtle 
(süksma) and bhuvana (world) which is gross (sthiila). A few words should 
be added about each of these paths. Varna corresponds to Siva's act of 
becoming conscious in an undifferentiated way of the several forms of energy 
of the letters. This only means a small perturbation (praksobha) since the 
letters appear in their most subtle forms only. We must keep in mind 
at varna can 
be at the same 
time: 
1. = 
Sabdardsi (see p. 95), 
2. 2-Parà уак or Pasyanti (see p. 92) and 3. = mátrkà (see p. 92). 
With mantra we are at a more evolved level than that of varna. One 
can speak of a certain degree of differentiation but at the same time of 
non-differentiation. According to Ksemaraja in his commentary on SvT IV, 
103ff. one should in this context think of the following mantras: LAM in 
the nivritikald (see p. 85), VAM the pratisthakala, RAM, in the vidyákalà, 
YAM in the santikalà and KSAM in the santyaritakalà. 
With pada we have definitely reached the level of differentiation. This 
implies a perturbation (KsobAa) in the consciousness of Siva because it turns 
to the world of objects. Jayaratha (commentary TÀ XI, 44) explains pada 
in the following way: 'since the manifestation falls (padyate) and is known 
(Hàyate)". With pada appears temporal succession (krama), discursive 
thinking (vikalpa) and mental construction (kalpana). Thus pada can be 
Considered to be the archetypes of the spoken letters and words (Padoux, 
Parole, p. 274). 
About the number of padas there are different statements : 
according to 
TÀ XI, 51-53) there are ten of them; SvT IV, 252 distinguishes eighty-one 
ie. nine times the letters om, ya, va, la, ma, Ка, ra, ha and й, but 
each time om moves. one place to the right.

--- PAGE 114 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
101 
Now we come to the three paths of the world of objects. The highest 
class of objectivity is represented by the kala, a higher form of energy which 
encloses as weli as penetrates the гапуа and the bhuvana. The five Каіаѕ 
have been mentioned before (see p. 85f.). Above the Santyatitakala is Para- 
mesvara, the undifferentiated absolute, the immovable source of the universe. 
Sometimes he is considered to be the thirty-seventh tattva. (TÀ XI, 21). 
The tattvas have already been dealt with. They are energies at a somewhat 
lower level than that of the kala. According to Ksemaraja, (ауа is that 
which expands itself (tananàt tattvam) which means: which causes the 
manifestation to appear. 
The bhuvana are the worlds which can be divided into earthly, heavenly 
and spiritual worlds. TÀ mentions a number of 108 worlds, SvT IV, 198-200 
even counts 224 bhuvanas.* 
Although these six paths are mentioned separately one should keep in mind: 
that they are all interconnected. Thus there are tattvas and bhuvanas in the 
kalàs, and padas and mantras in the varnas. This means that the pupil who 
purifies one path purifies the whole manifestation, 
all the forms of 
energy of the other five paths included. The purification is connected with 
speculations on prana which is identified with Kundalini, 
the human. and 
cosmicenergy residing in the abdomen of the human body. By means of certain 
exercices in which пуаѕа (application) plays an important part, the ргапа or the_ 
mantra От as the Kundalini is led upwards to the head where Siva resides... 
In this way the bhuvanas, tattvas, kalds, padas, mantras and varnas are 
brought back from the level of manifestation to that of the undifferentiated 
absolute. By this process of resorption the pupil becomes liberated from 
the limitations and illusion of this world of manifestation. 
13. What is mantra? 
A mantra is any combination of letters believed to be of divine origin 
and used in order to evoke divine. powers and to realize a communion of 
man with the divine source and essence of the universe. The difference 
between Vedic and tantric mantras can be formulated with Renou (EVP VI 
11-12) in this way : “The tantric mantra tends to go beyond language into the 
sphere of 
of silence, whereas the Vedic mantra was beneath language, being. 
translated) * "The Vedic and tantric mantras both richly endow to silence? the 
unexpressed, the mystery being the result of its unfinished aspect, the 
* A number of them are mentioned by A. Avalon, Garland 252, 253.

--- PAGE 115 [DIRECT] ---

M 
102 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
true aspect of Brahman, was the most important in the Vedic mantra, 
whereas the tantric bijamantra situated beyond language tends to the highest 
level of speech, to its source where it still is silence". The tantric mantra 
communicates an exact consciousness of the universe in order to enable 
man to acquire the knowledge of the reality aud by means of this to save 
him from the transmigration, the samsdra (Padoux, Parole p. 294). The Indian 
authors therefore given the following etymology of mantra: (PT V. 2) 
mananát tattvapadasya trayata iti mantram ucyate: "by meditation оп the 
place of the (highest) principle he is saved; thus it is called man-tra" and KT 
(XVII, 54): mananát tattvarüpasya devasyamitatejasah tráyate sarvabhayatas 
tasmán mantra itiritah": “by meditation on the deity of boundless glow 
in the form of the (highest) principle, he is saved from all danger; therefore 
it is called mantra". And Jayaratha (comm. on ТА III, 225) says : 
mananam 
sarvavettrtvam tranam samsáryanugrahah : "meditation is omniscience; salva- 
tion is favour to him who transmigrates". According to western scientific 
etymology the word mantra consists of the root man- “applying emotional, 
moved, willful, intentionally directed thought" and the suffix -tra- which is 
ia. used for names of instruments (Gonda, Mantra, 2429 
f). 
Thus mantra means : instrument of "thought". Now we have seen in the 
first two paragraphs of this chapter how closely word and thought are 
connectcd in Indian speculation. Both the Indian and western etymology point 
be it initiation or consecration, worship or yoga or meditation. The relation 
between mantra and speech, a subject already touched upon earlier in this 
paragraph is clearly stated PTV 243 : "the mantras are the venerable (energy) 
of the letters" (mantrá 
varnabhartáraküh.) The mantra 
is and always 
essentially shall be pure energy of speech at its highest level but at the 
same time there are innumerable mantras which are in accordance with 
their kind able to act 
at different 
levels of manifestation 
and which 
moreover exist at the level of the empiric world since one 
is able to 
pronounce them in Vaikhar and write them down (cf. Padoux, Parole, 
p. 295). In the texts often the icrm vidya occurs where one expects mantra. 
TT XI 61-62 has a statement about the difference of these two words. “There 
are vidyà and mantra, it is said. What is the difference, tell ime that, O 
Lord" (asks Devi). Siva answers: "The difference of the deities of the 
* vidyà in Kashmir texts also can have the meaning of: deified energy depending on the 
Goddess (Padoux, Parole, p. 338 note 5).

--- PAGE 116 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
103 
ketters is twofold allover. The vidyas are regarded as having Thee for deity 
and the mantras have Me for a deity" (varnánám devatàbhedà dvividhah $ум te 
tv аќсѕатаћ tvaddaivatyah smrté vidya maddaivatyás tu mantrakaéh). Thus 
the mantra is said to refer to the god and the vidya to the goddess. 
14. Munrrasástra 
In view of the importance of sound, speech and mantras in Saktism and 
Tantrism it is not surpising that the terms /antraéüstra = the teachings of 
the Tantras, 
ard mantracástra 
= 
the teachings « of mantra 
are often 
interchangeable. This however is only the meaning of mantra&ástra in a broader 
ясе. Next 10 it exists а more specific meaning, that of a kind of mystic 
Imguistics comparabie to the medieval jewish Kabbala)’ Thus Vedantadesika, 
the famous teacher and the successor of 
Ramanuja in the school of the 
Sri Vaisnavas, living in the fourteenth century gives the following explanation 
of the first word of the most important mantra of his school (the 
mülamantra): om namo nàràyaniya (cf. Rahasyatrayasara 353-362). 
Om = 
Aum. 
The ‘a’ is Visnu who creates, sustains and destroys the world, 
`m` is the individual soul (jiva), who exists for the fulfilment of the 
purposes of Visnu. 
"w' indicates this relationship of Visnu and jiva as the only existing one. 
‘a’ is derived from the root ava-, “to protect, to please", the termination ‘va’ 
being dropped; thus ‘a’ means ‘protector’. Towards the ever-liberated (a 
special kind of superhuman beings) and those who are already liberated the 
protection of the Lord is full and complete; but it is restrained in the 
сазе of those who still are in the samsdra by the need of punishment caused 
by actions which are displeasing to Him. 
The primary reason for protecting is the Lord's mercy, now "the Lord 
protects with His Consort Laksmi (= Sri) ever by His side, for she is the 
very embodiment of mercy". 
‘a’ is in the dative, the dative singular suffix has been dropped. 
Aum means the surrender of the self to the Supreme Self. 
'w means "only", i.e. the devotee of Narayana should not have contact 
with other deities, and this avoidance of contact extends even to the devotees of 
other deities. 
"m = jiva. In accordance with the Sàmkhya, the Sri-Vaisnavas distinguish 
25 tattvas (principles) of which jiva is 25th. These tat’as correspond with 
‚ Scholem, 
Major trends_in Jewish mm р. 20707.

--- PAGE 117 [DIRECT] ---

104 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
the consonants of the alphabet where the ‘m’ is the 25th consonant. More- 
over ‘m’ stands for the root man- = “to know", so it denotes the jiva who is 
atomic and who is of the essential nature of jfiana (knowledge) and possessed 
of the attribute jñāna (a reference to Brahmasütra 2:3:18: *jivatmá is a 
knower". This knowledge is expressed in the following words : “The seeker 
after liberation (moksa) should meditate upon the jivátman as absolutely pure 
and having its enjoyment only in being Sesa® to the Supreme Being". 
Moreover some consider this (third letter) to be a short form for aham = I. 
15. Secrecy of certain texts 
Though the subject is not directly connected with mantra it does not seem to 
be out of place to make a remark on the secrecy of certain passages in 
tantric texts, especially those dealing with details of the cakra-püjà of the 
Kaulas. Thus in TT VIII, 72-90, the verses are written with disordered 
letters. This cryptic style of writing has been adopted to keep the contents 
concealed from non-initiated people. These can only be read by those who 
have the key. TT VIII deals with the different kinds of wine to be used 
in the cakra-püjà, how to prepare and how to drink them (cf. Avalon, 
Introduction TT, 26-28). Quite different is the habit of the editor of the 
SST, for instance in II, 13, 15, to replace the words which could lead to 
embarrassment by asterisks (***). 
Still another way to conceal the contents of certain passages 
is the 
use of sandh(y)abhdsd: intentional language. In this language a state of 
logical vocabulary is enriched by hathayogic and sexual terms (Eliade, Yoga, 
ed. 1960, 251). The Sandh(y)abhasa 
which is more prominent in Buddhist 
than Hindu Tantrism uses words which have several meanings of 
which one is 
erotic. For instance vajra: thunderbolt also can have the meaning linga 
(phallos) or $йлуа (the void). But also words which have a primary sexual 
connotation as e.g. sdmarasya: 
"the bliss of sexual union" can be used 
for the bliss of mystical union. This is the meaning in the following sentence 
(ST): Those glorious men who worship that body of (Sakti) in samarasya 
are free from the waves 
of poison 
in the untraversable 
sea of the 
universe (the samsara) (cf. Woodroffe, Garland, p. 172). 
* Litt, remainder, secondary matter. In this context it means : 
part. Rahasyatrayasdra p. 25) 
$ege means : 
existing not for (its) own sake but for the fulfilment of God's purposes.

--- PAGE 118 [DIRECT] ---

— 
z 
Cn 
c G 
s a sbs 
MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
105 
16. What is bija? 
Like most of the terms used in Saktism and Tantrism. bija has different 
meanings: 
1. Bija occurs in the context of the emanation of word and 
speech. Thus $T 1 78 records that from the saguna Siva rise šakti, пайа and 
bindu. This bindu is threefold : a) bindu (Siva). 
b) bija (Sakti) and: с), пада 
(Siva-Sakti) 
2. Bija is also used 
to indicate the vowels whereas the 
consonants are called voni (see page 99). 3. Bija — bijamantra i.e. a mantra 
consisting of one syllable with no ordinary meaning and always ending in the 
anusvára : m. 
. 
According to PT (IV, 14) bija “owes its name to the fact that it is the seed 
of the moving and immovable world" (cardcarasya jagato bijatvat). 
The most important bijamantra will be discussed in the section on the main 
mantras (see page 110f.). Here the relation between bija and deity asks our 
attention. According to Woodroffe (Garland, p. 242-243) : “each deity (devata) 
has his or her bija”. Thus the deity of KRIM is Kali, that of HRIM is Maya, 
that of RAM is Agni. The mantra of a devatà is that devata. 
A few words must be added on the origin of the bijamantra. According 
to Bharati (Tantric Tradition, p. 114-118) we can distinguish three different 
theories : 
1. association of certain sounds with aggression and power, e.g. the 
can refer to Krsna; SRIM to Sri (Laksmi). 3. The vibration (spanda) theory : 
certain sounds in nature are felt to have a definite pitch for the Indian 
ear. Now, if we assume that the elements in action produce a pitch which 
creates vibration to the creator of the mantra, then he will probably evaluate 
the constituents of his mantra by means of an allocation of their sound- 
vibration to the elements with which the particular deity is connected; 
thus RAM for Agni (fire) VAM for Varuna (water). Except for the facts 
mentioned under 2 the reasoning of Bharati 
is highly speculative. 
In 
reality the problem is still unsolved and must be left for future research. 
17. Purascarana (preliminary rites) (cf. elso page 161). 
KT XV 1-11 gives information about this subject. Sri Devi asks Siva about 
the characteristics of the puraScarana (purascaranalaksanam) and the details of

--- PAGE 119 [DIRECT] ---

106 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
that already by listening to his explanation “the essence of the mantra becomes 
clear" (mantratattvam prakdsate). “There is no higher worship here than that 
of muttering (mantras)" (japayajfiát paro yajfio naparo 'stiha ka$cana). There- 
fore by japa one realizes dharma, artha, kama and moksa, the four aims of 
life. “Therefore one should practise the training consisting of muttering and 
meditation" (japadhyanamayam yogam tasmát samacaret). 
The deit” then explains: 1. "the worship uf an image three times a day 
permanently, 2. muttering, 3. refreshing (the deceased or the good) (tarpanam), 
4. sacrifice, and 5. feeding of brahmins is called ригаёсагапа”. In case of default 
a double number of japa is presented. 
18. Mantrasiddhi (perfection in mantra) 
The KT (XV, 12ff.) says : 
“of him who in a correct way is perfect (siddha) 
in one mantra, (in combination) with the worship with five paths (the items 
one up to five just mentioned) all the mantras come to perfection (siddhi) 
by your favour (tvatprasadat), mistress of the kula". By four things perfection 
in mantra is obtained : 
by ability of instruction (upadesasya samarthyát), by 
favour of the guru (guruprasddatah) by power of the mantra (mantra- 
prabhdvat) and by faithful service (bhaktya). The mantra of a person who 
mutters a mantra which at both sides is enclosed by the bhütalipi (mantram 
bhütalipyà tu samputam ; 
on bhütalipi, see below p. 136, 143) a thousand times 
in the usual order and the inverted order (kramotkramat), becomes perfect. He 
should worship the mandala (see page 112) which has at both sides the letters 
of the alphabet connected with sixty-three letters (mandalam irisastyaksara- 
samyuktamatrkaksarasamputam). Only the mantra which has been obtained by 
the favour of the guru will lead to perfection. “But the mantra which has 
been accidentally heard or which is overheard by a trick or which was 
written on a page, the muttering of this (mantra) is useless”. 
19. Instructions for japa 
Japa means the muttering of mantra 
(see also page 153) We just 
dealt with the preparations for japa. In this paragraph the place of japa 
and the requirements for the person who performs it will be mentioned. 
Japa is very important because if properly done the power of the mantra is 
discharged and can accomplish different aims, be it worldly aims or complete 
liberation and the realization of the highest deity. KT XVII, 34 gives the 
following “etymological” explanation of japa : “оп account cf destruction of 
evil done in thousands of lives and on account of the appearance of the highest 
deity it is called japa” (janmantarasahasresu krtapapaprandsanat paradevapra- 
kásác ca јара ity abhidhiyate).

--- PAGE 120 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
107 
ST 11 129-140, and KT XV 22, 34 mention special places which are favourable 
for japa and others which should be avoided. The person who performs 
japa should eat certain things (140) and should be "calm, pure, using his 
common sense, adorning himself, full of faithful service, having authority, 
free {rom dualities, steadfast, being silent, with controlled self" (KT XV, 111) 
and “adorned with fine odours, flowers, clothes and so on" (KT XV, 113). 
20. Wien is a mantra not powerful and ineffective? 
At page 78 we already mentioned that one of the tasks of a guru was to 
;astruct the pupil in the virya- (power) of the mantra. Without this special 
knowledge the japa of the mantra is uscless. According to a late manual, 
the Pranatosini (pp. 422-3) each japa has to be introduced with the following 
rites : 
В 
1. mantracaitanya (consciousness of the mantra). One has to consider the 
mülamantra as identified with the Citsakti, the highest Sakti, a) by means of 
raising the mülamantra from the mūlādhāra, up to the centre of the sahasrára 
or b) by means of uttering KLIM, SRIM, HRIM, then putting the 
mütrkà before the beginning and after the ending of the mülamantra and 
repeating this entire formula 108 times. 
2. mantrürtha : 
knowing "the meaning of the mantra". 
3. kulluka: “2”, differs according to the deity of the mantra to be 
muttered. e.g. for Tara it is a bijamantra of five syllables 
4, setu: "bridge". This differs according to the varna: brahmins and 
ksatriyas have to utter in their heart OM; vai$yas : PHAT, and šüdras : HRIM. 
5. mahdsetu: "great bridge" is different according to the deity of the 
mantra; e.g. for Tara it is HRIM. Mahasetu serves to ensure the suitability 
of the time of japa. 
6. nirvana: “bliss”, since without this rite there will be no perfection 
(siddhi). In the manipüracakra the aspirant should utter OM AM + mila- 
mantra + AUM + the entire alphabet + OM. 
7. yonimudravibhavana : 
showing the yonimudra (gesture of a triangle with 
the top downwards). 
8. Then follows anganyása : "application of the mantra to the (six) limbs 
(of the body)" (see page 143). 
9. pranayama : “control of the breath". 
10. mukha- or jihva@Sodhanam : purification of the mouth or the tongue. It 
consists again of muttering certain bijamantras which differ according to 
the deity of the mantra. It is repeated ten times. 
11. pránayoga : “training of the vital breath". It consists of repeating seven 
times the bijamantra HRIM before and after the muttering of the mantra.

--- PAGE 121 [DIRECT] ---

108 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
12. dipanam or dipani: "kindling". The mantra is repeated seven times 
with OM before and after the muttering. 
13. Sometimes asaucabhanga "destruction of impurity" is added. The PrT 
does not give any further explanation of this rite. When these rites have 
been performed the japa of the mantra can begin. The PrT has no reference 
to any of the older texts as TT, PT, $T or KT which are the main 
sources of the matter dealt with in these chapters. The older texts, however, 
mention a series of ten samskára (ceremonies) which have to be performed 
in the case of faults (dosa) in the mantra. ST II, 64-110 (cf. KT XV 65-70) 
and NT XVI, 33-36 give a list of all the faults. They consist mainly of the 
presence or omission of certain sounds or of a wrong number of syllables. 
According to ST 11, 111 the aspirant should perform the yonimudrà to make 
up for the faults in the mantra. 
If this is impossible the pupil should 
perform the ten samskdras : 
1. jananam "producing". It is the lifting up of the mantra out of the 
alphabet (mátrkamadhyàd uddharah). 
2. jivanam "'vivifying". It consists of interspersing the syllables of the 
mantras with OM. 
3. tàdanam "striking". Having written down the letters of the mantra the 
pupil should strike them separately with sandal-water and the bija Y AM. 
* 4. bodhanam *awakening". He should strike the written mantra with flowers 
“ofthe oleander, in number of the letters of that mantra, and with YAM. 
` 5. abhisecanam “consecration”. The pupil should according to the manner 
récord in his own Tantra sprinkle and purify the mantra with aévattha 
blossoms in a number equal to that of the letters of the mantra with МАМАН. 
6. vimalikaranam “purification”. With concentrated mind the pupil should 
burn the threefold evil of the mantra by means of the light mantra: OM, 
HA RA AUM. 
i 
7. āpyāyanam “causing to swell". The mantra is muttered 108 times and 
‘during the muttering each letter is sprinkled with water.mixed with flowers. 
8. tarpanam “refreshing by libation". The mülamantra is said 108 times 
and the mantra is refreshed with water. 
9. dipanam “kindling”. The mantra is connected with OM HRIM SRIM. 
10. gopanam "keeping secret". One should not reveal the mantra to other 
people (see ST Il, 112-122 and KT XV, WG 72). 
If one compares the rites given іп the PrT with the samskaras of the older 
° NT XVIII 6-8 mentions only nine samskáras: jananam and Jivanam are missing, but it 
has a new samskàra: indhananivesanam "entering the kindling”; before and after the japa, the 
bija HUM is muttered.

--- PAGE 122 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
109 
texts one can conclude that there is some similarity. The ten samskàras 
serve to eliminate faults of the mantra. But if one takes a closer look at the 
names of these rites, one is tempted to conclude that these samskàras 
could originally have been a more general series of ceremonies introducing 
the practice of mantras. Perhaps study of more texts can solve this riddle. 
21. Mantranyasa 
The subject of the application of mantra has been touched upon a few times 
(see page 81, 85). Here we have to discuss several different forms f nyàsa. First 
we have to distinguish between mantranvàása and mátrkányása; the latter is 
the application of the energy of the whole alphabet. ST VI, 1-3, deals with the 
nyasa of the matrka which in this case is the goddess Sarasvati. The 
commentary gives the following instruction : 
1. The aspirant begins with АМ КАМ KHAM GAM GHAM NAM AM 
hrdayáya namah (“homage to the heart"). 
2. Then follows the purification of the hand (karasuddhi) by means of the 
four neuter letters R R L L, since they belong neither to the vowels 
which are male (bija) nor to the consonants which 
are 
female (joni) 
(cf. PT IV, 9). 
3. Then follows АМ KAM KHAM GAM GHAM NAM angusthabhyam 
namah (“homage 
to the two thumbs") and after it follows kgranydsa 
"application of the mantra on the hand". The sixteen vowels are applied 
to the palms and backs of the right and left hand and to the fingers of 
both hands. Then follow the consonants KA up to SA which are applied 
to the top of the phalanges of the fingers beginning at the forefinger of the 
left hand and ending at the forefinger of the right hand. HA and LA are 
applied to the two thumbs and KSA to all the limbs. The same ST 
(VI, 28-33) gives other forms of nyàsa for the same goddess: 28 deals 
with the srstinyása (creation-application) which implies applications of the 
letters of the alphabet — in this case all with visarga (thus: AH АН etc.) — 
starting from the heart and going down 
to the feet, then beginning 
again at the hands and ending at the head. 
28, 29 deal with the 
sthitinyasa (duration-application) which implies beginning at the head and 
ending at the feet. In this case the aspirant starts with DA and ends with 
THA. 31 speaks about the samháranyása (annihilation-application). It starts 
at the feet and ends up at the head, applying the letters KSA up to А (cf. also 
PT XXII, 5-7). 
4. The 
ай 
üsa or sadanganyása (the application oi the (five) or six ahga- 
. 
Jmantras) These are: OM hrdaydya namah, Om Sirase 
Sikhayai (haircrest) vausat, Om kavacdya hum, (От netráya (eye) vue; 
муке

--- PAGE 123 [DIRECT] ---

110 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
Om astráya (weapon) phat. (Cf. SvT I, 60-64, IV, 97 and Padoux, Parole, 
p. 257; cf. also ch. V. p. 135). 
5. Finally we must give attention to the hütalipinyása (application of written 
letters which are elements; cf. also ch. V, p. 143). ST VII, 1-4, furnishes 
-a description of this form of nyasa: “Now I shall tell you the bhütalipi 
which is to be kept secret, and very difficult to obtain; and having obtained 
this the wise of Siva reached. all wishes” (sarván kdmdn prapedire). The 
letters are written down in this way: 
first group (varga) 
AT URL 
second group: E Al O AU 
third group: HA YA RA VA LA 
fourth-eighth group: KA KHA GA GHA and NA and so forth up to MA 
ninth group: $4 SA SA: together 42 letters. 
According to the Tantrasamuccaya (II, 14) the aspirant should “having 
controlled his breath, having caused to fall from above his haircrest a 
stream of nectar in the form of the letters from A up to KSA (adyarnarüpamrta- 
váridhárám) all over his head and having immersed his body, he should 
spread over his body those written (letters)." 
22. Some important mantras and bijamantras 
A. Padukdémantra (mantra of the sandals). According to KT XII, 12, there 
is no mantra higher than the paduka; and in TT II, 12-16 it is said: 
"Tell me that vidyà which produces all that is dear". Then lord Siva 
communicates the padukamantra to the goddess: кабат pūjayāmi “1 
worship the sandals (of the guru)". The meditation connected with this mantra 
is given in the Padukapaficaka). The aspirant adores the lotus feet of the 
guru resting on jewelled sandals which are inside a triangle which is in 
the twelve-petalled lotus which is in the pericarp of the sahasrara. 
B. HAMSA mantra which is given in PT IV, 16-21 “Ву birth from that 
bindu (see page 94), being the end of that it is called HAM. HAM is called 
a man, SA is recorded as prakrti (female). That Sakti (SA) is thought to be 
unmutterable; therefore there is something (added) at the right and the left 
side. The bindu (the dot under the M) is the right part and the visarga 
(the h) is the left part. HAMSA being the self of the prakrti, this world 
has that (HAMSA) as self. Prakrti, having known that her own form 
is a male has come to the state of SO HAM" (pumrüpam sa viditvà svam 
sohambhàvam upágatà). “That is the mantra called the Paramatman” (sa 
esa paramātmākhyo manuh). “From that great mantra, after the dropping 
of SA and HA, comes OM."

--- PAGE 124 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
111 
. The Gavatri-mantra, RV IIl, 62, 10, is also of f 
great | 
importance 
in. 
Pura (cf. also ch. 
V. p. 123). It is described PTX 
XXIX 14-2 
14-26, The man ша. 
is tat savitur varenyam Ur devasya dhimahi г 
dhiyo yo nah pracodayát and 
г 
шуа CUOI DO NO DOI раду ааш 
is explained in the following мау: 
l4- Tar refers to thé first cause of all substance in the form of fiery 
energy in the disc of the sun, that is sadánandam param brahma: the 
. 
true bliss, the highest Brahman. 
15. savitur (“of the Sun"): Always the producer of all animate beings. 
16/17. varenyam : on account of its excellence and therefore recorded 
to be served and worshipped by all; aad to whom prayer should be said. 
18a. These 8 letters are bhür = 
A. 
18b. bhargo: on account of destruction of evil and on account of being 
propitious to the faithful. 
19. devasya : 
of him who is always connected with the virtue of giving rain 
etc. or who is glowing by revealed brightness. 
20. dhimahi a form of dhyai- which means "to think". 
22a. We always think about our identity with the subtle one (yah 
süksmah so ‘ham ity evam cintayámah sadaiva tu) 
22b. The second eight letters are: bhuvah = 
U. 
23. dhiyo means buddhi in the accusative plural. 
23b. yo, the masculine gender being used here for the neuter yat which 
is the form of glow that is the centre of all the Vedas. “Тһе incorporation 
of the destruction of the evil of the faithful" (bhajatam papandsasya dehabhü- 
tam). 
25a. nah is the genitive plural of asmad (“us”). 
25b. pracodayát : 
the meaning is: may it send us on the path of prayer. 
26a. Thus is the third group of eight letters: svar — M. 
D. Bijamantra: OM. This famous mantra has been dealt with at p. 103. 
E. Mayabija ( HRIM) is another famous mantra. PT IV, 1-10 gives an 
explanation of it: 
H: from it arose six ürmis or waves (of existence) : 
hunger, thirst, sorrow, 
ignorance, decay and death, and the six letters from A up to 0. 
К: from А arose the four elements beginning with fire and ending with 
earth together ee (their) attributes : 
touch, form, taste and smell, and the 
four letters R, R, L, L. 
1: the four е, "organs of sense" (тіпа, intellec., sense of individuality 
and reflection), the body and the consciousness (cetana) are called the 
attributes of I; and also the six letters from Е up to the visarga. M is not 
explained in PT IV. 
Р

--- PAGE 125 [DIRECT] ---

112 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
23. Cakra and mandala 
A. Cakra "wheel, circle" can describe several things in Saktism and 
Tantrism. 
1. In yogic contexts it usually means one of the six or more centres of 
"bus in the human body. They will be dealt with elsewhere in this 
book (see рр. 184f.). 
2. In texts dealing with püja by means of the five М; among the 
Y 
Kaulas cakra is used for the group of participants in that pūjā sitting іп 
a circle. 
3. Cakra is also used as a synonym for mandala ("anything round, circle") 
and is then a term for diagrams consisting of different geometrical form 
representing the cosmos with 
its deities and used both as place for 
worship (see page 139) and as object of worship and meditation. By means 
of these the aspirant hopes to participate in the powers present in the 
cosmos with its deities and to be able to fulfill his wishes. On account of the 
correspondence between macrocosmos and microcosmos in Tantrism there 
also is a correspondence betweém the cakra in the body (see 1) and the 
mandala. 
Something should be said on the process of meditation. Though it is well 
known that the meditation of a mandala and yantra starts from the outside 
and then proceeds step by step to the centre of it, we do not know older 
tantric texts that give a description of it except YHT I and III. There are 
at least three further indications showing that the meditation practice formerly 
was the same: 1. ST Ш, 117 speaks of doors in the outer square of the 
mandala. 2. Already RTU IV, 52 mentions the term bhügrha = bhipura: 
“house or abode of the earth". The bhüpura represents our visible world 
where 
the meditation starts (cf. also p. 114f.). 3. On pictures of some 
mandala we find the bindu in the centre, which only can represent the 
—highest divinity. - 
The main geometrical forms are squares and circles. Often there is a 
great square inside which is or are (a) smaller square(s); in other cases 
the mandala consists of a great square inside which there is a smaller 
circle which encompasses the main symbols. Already in BSuS I, 22-28, there 
are regulations for the preparation of the vedi (the Vedic altar) in the 
form of a square (cf. ST Ш, 8-9). And according to Sat Br УШ, 3, 
1, 27 the vedi represents the extent of the earth. Dr. Kramrisch argues 
that the square and the circle are coordinated in the architecture of India 
from the Vedic fire-altar onwards (Temple, 22). The vastupurusamandala 
(mandala of the Lord of the site) which is of two main types, the mandüka

--- PAGE 126 [DIRECT] ---

: 
| 
i 
1 
MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
113 
with 64 squares and the paramasayin with 81 squares is the base of the 
Indian temple and also of each place of worship (cf. ST IIT, 8, 9: place 
for the diksa) (Kramrisch, Temple 86, 87). The difference between the 
plan of the temple and most of the mandalas under consideration is that the 
latter do not only consist of squares and circles, but are also provided 
with triangles and demi-circles. Often bijas are written on the mandala. 
After our reflections on bija and cosmos (see page 102) the significance of their 
presence on the mandala is not difficult to explain. 
A. Some mandalas 
ST 11, 103-135 records as part of the preparations for the kriyádiksà 
(cf. page 80) the drawing of four mandalas. 
L The first, the sarvatobhadra (“in every direction auspicious”; 
127), 
consists of a great square divided into 256 small squares (107). In the 
centre there is a lotus of 36 squares (108); and in the middle of the 
eastern, southern, western and northern sides of the great square there is a 
door (117). The mandala should be painted in five colours (119ff). 
II. The second mandala (128-130) is a variant of I, but consists of only 
144 small squares. 
III. The third mandala (131-134), the navanübhamandala ("the mandala 
with the nine naves"), consists of 265 small squares; in the centre of the 
great square there is a space of 64 small squares with nine naves: five of 
them are decorated with a lotus and four with a svastika. 
IV. The fourth mandala (135), the paricabjamandala ("the mandala with 
the five lotuses") is a variant of III with the difference that the svastikas 
are left out. 
24 Yantra 
A. In the existing literature yantra and mandala are often considered to be 
synonyms. This is not correct, because yantra is general means an instru- 
ment, an implement. The yantra is often three-dimensional whereas the 
mandala always is two-dimensional. Mandala and yantra often have the 
same geometrical forms, but the yantra may also have different forms. 
(cf. SL ed. R. Anantakrishna Sastri and K. R. Саги, Madras 1937, passim). 
The yantra is more worshipped than meditated upon.!? As far as the aims 
are concerned one can say that the -yantra is more used for worldly 
purposes than for liberation, whereas the mandala is used for both purposes. 
10 Cf. ch. V, p. 142f.

--- PAGE 127 [DIRECT] ---

114 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
B. Some yantras 
1. The Sriyantra is well known from the frontispieces of several works 
of J. Woodroffe (e.g. Sakti and Sakta, Sth ed. 1959).'? See below. $T 
VIII, 141-143 describes another form of this yantra, namely as "a lotus 
with the vowels written on its leaves and the consonants written on its 
filament". This yantra is called the “Mahalaksmi yantra which gives the 
résult of complete sovereignty, which appeases all suffering and which 
keeps off all mishap" (Mahdlaksmiyantram sarvaisvaryaphalapradam sarva- 
duhkhaprasamanam sarvapadvinivaranam). 
2. ST VII, 53-64 mentions five different yantras for differérit purposes : 
a) 53-54 records the Viyad-yantra (yantra of the ether) which has certain 
letters on it, is made with red lac and sandal (laksácandananirmita-) and 
which gives complete appeasement as antidote at the rise of Ràhu in 
Rohini (а єегїаїп constellation) (rohinyam udaye rahor visaghnam sarvasanti- 
‘dam). 
b) 55-56 records the Vayaviya-yantra (yantra of the wind) also with letters 
and it should be dug in at the north-west of the door of the house of an 
enemy, at the rise of Saturn in Arcturus. “Certainly it will be his death” (tasya 
mrtir và bhavcti dhruvam). 
с) 57-59 mentions the Agneya-yantra (yantra of the fire). It also has letters 
on it and is made with red lac and saffron (Jaksd/.unkumanirmita-). 
It 
gives protection of all beings (raksakrt sarvabhiitanam), it will destroy the 
enemy. 
Here follows a short description of the Sri yantra as given by Avalon 
(Introduction TT 4-8). 
The Sriyantra consists of : 
a) a great square with four doors. 
b) inside this square there are six concentric circles; the fifth and the 
sixth are decorated with petals and leaves of the lotus. 
c) inside the small circle there are nine interpenetrating triangles: five 
with the top downwards and four with the top upwards: 
1. the centre of the yantra is a dot (bindu) inside the smallest cakra 
(called sarvanandamaya : consisting of complete bliss) representing the source 
and base of the universe. 
à 
2. The second cakra is called siddhiprada “bestowing perfection” with the 
three Saktis. 
: 
3. The third cakra is the sarvaraksakara “effecting complete protection.” 
* 
м Cf. Rao, Iconography, 1, 330f.

--- PAGE 128 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTITUENTS OF TANTRIC PRACTICE 
115 
It has eight angles representing heat, cold, happiness, sorrow, wish and 
the three gunas. 
š 
4. Then follows the sarvarogahara “taking away all illness", having ten, 
angles representing the ten lower šaktis. 
5. The fifth cakra, the sarvarthasadhaka "performing everything" also has 
ten angles representing the ten pranas (vital breaths). 
6. isthe sixth innermost circle mentioned above (c) compassing the fourteen 
angles = 
14 nddi (arteries) and called sarvasaubhdgyadayaka “giving all 
well-being". 
7. Then follows the cakra of the eight lotus-leaves called sarvasamksobha- 
kara “making everything restless". 
8. The eighth cakra is the fifth circle called sarvásáparipüraka “fulfilling 
all expectations", consisting of 16 petals representing 16 devatas of the 
siddhi. 
9. The space oetween the fourth and the third circle is related to cakra 2; 
that between the third and second circle to cakra 3, 4 and 5 and that 
between the second and the first circle to cakra 6, 7 and 8. 
10. The whole space between the sixteen petals and the outer square is 
called bhüpura “abode of the earth" = bhügrha “house of the earth" (RTU IV, 
52). 
d) 60, 61 the Váruna-yantra (yantra of the water). It has letters on it 
and is worshipped at the rise of Naksatra in Sukra. L. will bring (the 
enemy) uuder control etc. (vasyadikrd bhavet). 
e) 62-63 finally gives the Párthiva-yantra (yantra of the earth). It has 
letters on it and is made of white mustard in (a vessel of) clay and at the 
rise of the sixteenth lunar mansion in the moon it is causing obstruction 
(for the enemy) in every case (sarvatra stambhakrd bhavet). 
PT XXXII, 1-37 gives different yantras for different purposes, e.g. for a long 
life (4), for controlling others (6), for protection of one's own dwelling- 
place (12, 13), for perfection or success of all wishes (21). 
25. 
Mudràs 
Mudràs or symbolic gestures occupy a major position in Tantric rituals. 
ў 
In their terminology the word mudrd has many meanings.!? Etymologically it 
1 
means ар impression, (or a signet ring) from which it came to mean a seal. 
n 
It may also mean special features or a stamp — a hall-mark distinguishing — © pe 
a particular регѕот. or thing (NT 19, 80). In Indian iconography the distinc- 
н 
12 See J. Gonda, Mudra, in Ex orbe religionum, Studia G. Widengren, Il, Leiden 1972. 
р. 21. 
;

--- PAGE 129 [DIRECT] ---

116 
DIRK JAN HOENS 
tive features of a particular person are, inter alia, often depicted by specific 
hand-gestures symbolizing his status and functions. These gestures that 
figure so prominently in classical Indian dancing too are usually known as 
hasta, meaning position or gestures of the hand. When employed by a sádhaka 
in Tantric 
rites 
as 
symbols 
representing 
a sacred 
being 
or 
object. 
such gestures are called mudras and are invested with sacred power by the 
authority of the deity worshipped. In this sense mudra does indeed signify 
seal, stamp or hall-mark. 
A 
mudrā is just as efficacious as a mantra. 
In fact a mantra only 
becomes effective when accompanied by the appropriate mudra (NT 20, 36). 
Tantric sadhana to achieve perfection (siddhi) comprises the three constituents 
of mantra, dhyana and mudra. In his commentary on the TA 15, 159 
Jayaratha confirms this close relationship between mantra and mudra by 
asserting that to take effect the former must be accompanied by the 
latter (cf. NT 20, 60). To stress the utility and importance of mudras in 
Tantric sadhana, Tantric texts tend to offer far-fetched — and incorrect — 
etymological explanations. The Yogini Tantra (1, 57) states that the term 
mudra is derived from two roots : mud- (to delight) and drà- (to disperse). 
Mudra is in fact a manifestation of the active force of the original Sakti 
«consisting of pure knowledge and, in that form this active force delights the 
sádhaka (by bringing success) and disperses misfortunes away from him. 
Abhinavagupta’s explanation is slightly different. He traces the term mudra 
to the roots mud- (to delight) and rā- (to yield). He claims that the 
physical effort of forming a mudra yields to the sádhaka the mental 
satisfaction of experiencing the supreme bliss (mud) of union with the Self 
(ТА 32, 3). And so the term gradually came to be identified with the 
divine active force (kriyasakti; cf. SVT 4, 375). Abhinavagupta mentions 
three types of mudra produced respectively by the efforts of the sadhaka’s body, 
of his mind and of his speech (ТА 15, 259). He seems to extend the 
term to cover all the three elements of sadhana : mudra, dhyana and mantra. 
Mudras are undoubtedly physical presentations of mantras and as such 
on a par with the iconographic representations so vividly visualized in dhyana. 
Thus, as pointed out by A. J. D. Campbell,'? the three active constituents of 
the sadhaka’s personality — his mind, speech and body — are activated to 
participate in expressing the one reality in three ways. 
Mudras also aid and accentuate the enactment of the symbolic drama, 
which раја undoubtedly is for effecting the ultimate union with the Cosmic 
'3 Introduction to Tyra de Kleen's Mudra, London 1924, p. 11

--- PAGE 130 [DIRECT] ---

MANTRA CONSTIEUENTS ӨР 
TANTRIC 
PRACTICE 
117 
Reality. 
This dramatic 
aspect 
is quite obvious 
in certain 
forms of rites 
(cf. Ksemaraja's commentary 
on NT 
20. 36 ab.) 
The term mudra not only applies to hand-gestures formed by interlacing 
the fingers of one or both hands, but also to holding the hand or hands in a 
fixed position, and is moreover used to cover certain body-postures sometimes 
specifically referred to as mudrabandha. The NT uses the word mudra in this 
context which then also means a seal and which is then identified with a Sakti 
of the deity. “The knower of yogic technique (then) gets (into the) mudra 
called KAecara which resides there (in müladhara). O Goddess, when the spirit 
(of the aspirant) is scaled by that mudra, he rises up (to his ѕаһаѕгага)”, 
Ksemaraja explains that here mudra is identified with Khecari-Sakti. From « 
the context 
it is clear that here the Tantra 
is referring to khecari-mudra- 
(bandha), a special posture adopted by yogins to awaken the kundalini 
in Kundalini-Yoga (sec Avalon, Serpent Power, p. 206). The Hatha-Yoga 
mentions several other mudrā-bandhas. like mülabandha etc. Mudra seme- 
times denotes the sadhaka’s female partner or wife of a deity'5 but in 
that 
sense 
it 
is almost 
exclusively 
confined 
to 
the Buddhist 
Tantras. 
Mudra is the fourth of the five makaras used in Kaula types of Tantric rituals 
(sec p. 73). where 
in modern 
times 
it stands 
for parched 
rice, some 
other cereal or savoury tithit. Nevertheless one wonders whether originally 
it did not mean a female partner 
'4 Sec HYP. ed 
v/ 
15 Jean Przyluski, Mudra. Indian Culture, Part 11, Calcutta. 
1936, pp. 715-719

--- PAGE 131 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 132 [DIRECT] ---

x 
i 
1 
| 
| 
| 
Я | | 
PART THREE 
MODES OF WORSHIP AND MEDITATION 
BY 
SANJUKTA GUPTA

--- PAGE 133 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 134 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER FIVE 
TANTRIC SADHANA: РОЈА 
Introduction 
Tantric sadhana (religious practice) consists of two parts: ritual worship 
(paid)! and meditation (yoga). Both are of equal importance to every Tantric. 
Even the siddha or avadhüta, recognized to be so highly spiritual that he 
can afford to disregard rules applicable to ordinary Tantrics, continues to 
perform his daily puja along with his yogic practices. The importance of puja 
cannot be exaggerated. From the time of his initiation till the end of his 
life, every 
Tantric is bound b 
the duty 
of 
performing 
his daily 
püjà. 
But it is not easy to find a definitive form of Tantric ritual. The only possible , 
criterion for labelling a Tantric ritual that we can suggest is that it is a ritual 
performed by Tantrics, and that a Tantric is one who firmly believes himself 
to be a Tantric. There are, however, dangers in this because Tantrics 
may also perform non-Tantric rituals. On the practical level, when Tantrics 
are engaged in performing their religious activities, a great deal of confusion 
prevails. The muddle is partly due to their non-exclusive allegiance to 
various streams of tradition, which may be ancient and/or recorded, or 
comparatively modern and local. Besides, there is a tendency amongst present- 
day Tantrics not to establish their exclusive identity, but to take over other 
religious traditions which approximate to their own. 
Admittedly there is nothing strange in that. At any point in the history 
of a religious system of ritual, new and local elements of practice and 
interpretation may appear to have been introduced into the main body of the 
recorded system. There are no means of checking this practice, and it 
continues to date. Within the last hundred years, for instance, a great many 
texts have been published in the Tantric milieu recording a mass of magic 
practices not found in older texts. A typical example is the Savari Tantra — a 
collection of a vast number of magic rites and formulae used by rural people, 
especially in North India. These are mostly described in local languages, which 
the editors have sometimes corrected and/or translated into chaste Hindi 
or Sanskrit. 
1 The term püjà is briefly but thoroughly handled by Diehl, /nstrument and Purpose, рр. 66-67 
in a footnote.

--- PAGE 135 [DIRECT] ---

122 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
Nevertheless in describing Tantric ritual, it is safe for our purpose to adhere 
as far as possible to well-established texts. Here again difficulties arise : 
the 
body of these is vast, diffuse and heterodox. Practising Tantrics theniselves 
follow different texts or groups of texts as authoritative, according to the 
particular stream of tradition prevailing within their own group, е.в. Kaulas, 
Kāpālikas etc. In this survey we restrict ourselves to the practice of those 
who worship tl. Goddess (Sakti/Devi) in three popular forms : as Tripura/Sri/- 
Lalita, as Kali and as Тага (i.e. the Kasmira-krama or tradition). The famous 
ten goddesses (data mahavidyás) are direct or indirect manifestations of one 
or other of these three. Secondly, we confine ourselves mostly to textual . 
references recorded in Sanskrit not later than the middle of the nineteenth 
century of the Christian era. Later.texts are consulted chiefly to clarify 
ambiguous terminology or to explain performances of Tantric rituals that 
we have actually witnessed. The main bases for our interpretation of Tantric 
rituals are, however, the earlier Tantras, exegeses and compendiums (e.g. 
'Nityásodasikarnava, Yoginihrdaya, Kularnava, Tantraloka, Mahakalasam- 
| 
hita, Tantraraja, Mahanirvana, Śāradātilaka, Tantrasara by Krsnananda, 
I Prünatosini, Varivasyarahasya, Bhaskararaya’s commentaries on NST, YHT, 
Bhavanopanisad and Saundaryalahari; ParaSuramakalpasiitra with com- 
mentary, Nityotsava, Raghavabhatta’s comm. on $T, etc). 
Phe criterion for determining a particular Hindu sect or subsect is to pick 
out which deity it regards as its supreme godhead. But for classifying 
Tantrics it is important to know the particular parampard or group to 
which they belong. To determine the parampará, it is further necessary to 
know its traditional line of teachers, the special etiquette applicable to the 
tradition followed, the complicated variations in ritual performances arising 
* from the theological and metaphysical background of the parampara, and the 
personal attitude and idiosyncrasies of eminent teachers in that line. These 
factors are responsible for the incredible number of divergencies in Tantric 
ritual activities. Notwithstanding the divergencies, however, the fundamental 
structure of Tantric ritualism remains constant, whilst it provides scope for 
introducing almost infinite variations in the ritua! practices. These concern 
the worship of an equally vast number of deities, belonging somewhat loosely 
to the Sakta pantheon. A fairly regular pattern in Tantric rituals can be 
discerned by analysing a simple form of daily Tantric worship of the Goddess, 
which will be described presently. 
Tantric ritualism obviously comprises a conglomerate of rite; drawn freely 
from Vedic and other concurrent religious traditions. Tantric tradition has 
made use of all these rites with modifications to suit its own ideology. The 
spiritual practice of Tantrics is based on the idea that their philosophical

--- PAGE 136 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: РОЈА 
123 
junctures of the day 
skeleton ¿í it to be worshipped at the beginning of all ritual undertakings, 
but have replaced the name of the Sun by that of their own deity.? Hence 
one comes across numerous forms of the Gayatri-mantra. This is just a single 
example; for Tantrics have adopted many other Vedic mantras, often without 
any change whatsoever, or with only slight modifications. Another important 
rite modelled on a Vedic rite is the fire-sacrifice (homa). 
What needs to be stressed is the fact that Tantrics continue to ascribe value 
to the normative Hindu religious rites and if, as belonging to the higher 
castes, they are obliged to perform these, they do so alongside performing 
their own obligatory Tantric duties. What is more, they may even give 
priority to the normative ritual in preference to their own. For instance, 
persons who have received the standard sacrament of initiation and the 
sacred thread (upavita), must first observe sandhydrcand.** Since the Tantric 
type is obviously a copy of the Ѕтагіа, it is difficult to understand the reason 
? See p. 111. 
? Eg. the Tara Gayatri: aim bhagavaty ekajaje vidmahe vikajadamsjre dhimahi tannatàre 
pracodayát. 
Ja i.e. the normative one.

--- PAGE 137 [DIRECT] ---

124 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
for the double performance. A possible explanation is that the theology 
of the Goddess-worshipping Tantric religion had already firmly imprinted 
its precepts, code of religious behaviour and duties on its followers long 
before these were recorded in Tantric texts. Meanwhile, the synthesizing 
process of Ригапїс and other mythological and historical influences had also 
been busy infusing Tantric ritual with the prevalent practices of standard 
Hinduism. The rites practised by Tantrics today 
are 
based on 
texts 
recorded not much earlier than the fourteenth century of the Christian 
era. By that time, Tantrics had quite forgotten the source of some of the 
rites they were performing, and devoutly adhered to the practices they had 
been taught to follow as belonging to their paramparà. So they performed 
all the religious duties obligatory for their caste, and at the same time never 
questioned observing all religious duties imposed by their parampara; 
There may be another explanation which is admittedly purely hypothetical. 
The more sophisticated Goddess-worshipping Tantrics tend to treat all their 
ritual performances as strictly esoteric, and aim at conforming with the dictum 
that “опе should behave like a Vaisnava in court (or company), like a Saiva in 
ordinary life, and like a Tantric proper only in strict privacy”. “Like a Saiva" 
presumably means here that Tantrics should behave in the same way as 
standard Saivas following the normative religion. Generally speaking the 
latter worship the group of five deities : Siva, Visnu, the Goddess, the Sun and 
Сапа With Siva as their chosen chief god. But it is perfectly permissible for 
them to select any of the five as their supreme deity. Since Tantrics are 
urged to keep their religious beliefs secret, they may well have a motive for 
openly following the standard religious practices of the worship of the five 
(paficayatana рӣјӣ) of their society to conform with caste behaviour. 
Classifications 
As previously stated, the classical division of Hindu ritual, viz. Vaidiki, 
Гапігікї апа Misra (Vedic, Tantric and a synthesized form, see BhagPur. Il, 
21, 7) is purely theoretical and never actually observed in practice. All we can 
say is that there is the normative Hindu ritual as well as the other forms of 
it containing avast amount of variations. Tantric ritualism belongs to the latter 
category, and henceforth we can ignore the classical classification altogether. 
‘In dealing with Tantric ritualism, once again we see how closely it has been 
modelled on 
the normative 
ritualism. 
Following 
the 
latter's example, 
Tantrics divide their ritual practices into three groups : 
nitya, naimittika and 
kanya. Nitya covers the group of rites regarded. as being compulsory for 
a Tantric to perform every y day; naimittika rites are ob erved on 
particular.

--- PAGE 138 [DIRECT] ---

ЅАРНАМА : РО)А 
d 
occasions; and катуа rites are 
pel formed to fulfil a special wish, or to avert 
a great misfortune. 
WES 
"ur 
The first group, nitya-karn 
"has two subdivisions: 1/Ahnika-karman 
ог activities very much resembling the caste duties of the/normative Hindu 
religion. We discussed them above and shall presently =f 
the Tantric 
innovations therein.[2.| The daily worship of the Goddess. 
his is actually 
the important part of/nitya karman and is termed nitya-Püjà. A detailed 
description of this püjà will enable us to detect the basic structure ‘of Tantric 
ritualism and at the same time reveal 
its specifically Tantric features. 
The performance of nityapüjà and other daily religious obligations brings 
no special merit to the performer. nor-does-it-avert-any-pacticular- had. luck, 
The Tantric has to observe these rites in order to conform to the religious 
discipline to which he belongs. Naimittika-püjà 
on the other hand is an ela- 
borate form of worship, in which 
all the functions of the daily püjà 
are observed in greater detail. This is in fact considered to be the complete 
as an abridgement of it. 
ecial occasions known as 
th of the dark fortnight, 
ry 
month, 
the deity's special annual festival. the birthday of the Tate 
MU Mn 
the festivals of payitràropana-and damanarohana 
(KT. X. 78; PKS p. 280). 
We shall describe these later on. All these pūjās have special names such 
as tithi-puja, таѕа-рӣја and parva-püjà, etc. Unlike nitya-püjà, naimittika- 
püjà is invariably performed in the late evening (KT. X 1,8); but the 
time selected has nothing to do with secrecy. 
As now practised, one 
tends to think that the main reason for performing these rites in the 
evening is that then the Tantric has more time and the peaceful atmosphere 
needed for performing a long drawn-out series of rites with great care and con- 
centration. One has to remember that every part of the ritual has to be per- 
formed without a mistake, because only faultless performance brings the 
desired result. A complete püjà is regarded as an organic whole, and faulty 
performance in any part of it is a defect disfiguring the whole püjà. 
.Kamya-püjà covers а completely different category of rites. A special püjà- 
programme. is undertaken in order to obtain ‘particular benefits; ет. a 4- 
for the sadhaka (practiser) himself, or on behalf 
of 
some 
“Else. 
These rites are also known as satkarman (infra pp. (sop .) They can 
performed during the day or duri ig the night, depending on the nature of the 
purpose envisaged (KT XL8) 
It is important to know that only the 
performer of the daily püjà is eligible to perform naimittika-püjà, and he who is 
capable of performing both is entitled to perform kamya-pija (e.g. KT. XVI,

--- PAGE 139 [DIRECT] ---

126 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
8f.). The reason is obvious. Only a Tantric firmly embedded in his tradition i$ 
entrusted to perform these special rituals that aim at mobilizing the divine 
Power for fulfilment of a specific purpose. These rites verge oa magic in the 
sense that, if performed without a flaw, they will automatically produce the 
desired result. But their potency is only aroused when they are performed 
by someone in whom the divine power has been awakened (KT. XVI,8). 
That means tL. it, at least once in his lifetime, the performer of the rite has had 
direct experience of absolute illumination, i.e. of the Divine as identified with 
himself. This experience is obtained only through prolonged practice in 
performing rituals and by meditating on the mantra of one's istadevatà 
(YHT 1,3-4 and 11,1). After a lengthy period of intensive daily practice of 
püjà, meditation and mantra-japa (repetition of the mantra of the istadevatà, 
also called purascarana, see below), the Tantric receives* the awakening of 
this divine power within himself, if and when his istadevatà is moved to 
grant him her grace. By then he is sufficiently self-disciplined to prevent 
misuse of this cosmic power, which he can now direct at will. 
Tantric definitions for these three types of püjà, namely nitya, naimittika 
` 
and kdmya, are sáttvika, ғајаѕа and tamasa respectively, which clearly 
reveal the Tantric evaluation of these (Bhaskararaya, comm. on BhàvUp.). 
Nitya-püjà is a manifestation of the Tantric's devotion to his istadevatà 
and is performed without any ulterior motive. The deity, whose presence 
is a living fact for the Tantric, must be treated in the only realistic way he 
spontaneously thinks of. Therefore, nitya-püjà 
is classified as the purest form 
of püjà (sáttvika). This spontaneity is somewhat lacking in naimittika-pija. 
e Tantric is much more self-conscious while performing it and, besides, 
ther people are often present. This elaborate form of pūjā entails much more 
‘dynamism, and that inevitably reduces the performer's tranquillity, which is 
So vital for awareness of his identity with the deity. Therefore naimittika-püjà 
. ‘is described as rdjasa — a mixture of purity and impurity. It is pure because 
it is performed without ulterior motive; at the same time it is impure because 
it tends to defeat the Tantric's main objective of merging himself in his deity. 
Катуа-рӣја, on the other hand, is frankly classified as obviously impure 
(tamasa) since it is invariably performed with a finite earthly motivation. 
Kamya-püjà undoubtedly posed a problem for Tantric ideology. Its importance 
in the general pattern of ritual is undeniablez but it stands in glaring onposition 
to the Tantric objective of the votary's perfection and self-liberation. All the 
* Although this is an experience, the word ‘receive’ 
is used because Tantrics regard 
this experience as a divine gift coming down (as it were from heaven): Saktipata.

--- PAGE 140 [DIRECT] ---

ый. 
ьа 
да 
TANTRIC SADHANA; РОЈА 
127 
cautionary remarks about who is eligible to perform kàmya-püjà and so 
forth are signs of this mental uneasiness on the part of the later authors 
of Tantra texts (e.g. Gandharva Tantra xxii, 14), who sought to systematize 
the conglomerate of Tantric religious phenomena. 
Further Tantric classification is based on the various aspects of the deity 
worshipped. Bhaskararaya has classified püjà in three groups : 
апіага, јара 
and bàhya respectively, meaning internal or mental püjà, muttering of the 
mantra, and a ctual offerings made to the deity, according to the 
the supreme, 
‘subtle and gross aspects of the deity 
(Bhásya on the BhavUp. D. The 
order of sequence in this classification is somewhat arbitrary, since in actual 
practice japa comes at the end of dntura- and bāhya-pūjā. Otherwise the 
classification fits the nature of these three distinct parts of à complete ritual 
worship of the deity that precede meditation. The main characteristic of bahya-- 
рӣја is that it involves physical acts as well as the use of material objects by 
the votary. Further analysis reveals that the nature of this form of рӣја takes 
into account many external factors. The votary needs to take physical 
measures to be clean and purc; the place of worship needs to be consecrated 
in order to receive the iconic or aniconic symbol of the deity, which is after 
all a gross form of the divine; 
the offerings themselves presuppose 
some form of the acceptance of material objects by the deity. So here the 
votary serves the deity with his entire person, with deeds both physical 
and mental — in Indian terms these would be of three forms, namely 
efforts of kaya (body), vak (speech) and manas (mind) — and with all 
that he holds precious, such as his honour, loyalty, devotion, sensual 
pleasure, etc. 
At the japa stage, most of the external physical activities are left behind. 
/The votary uses a rosary or his fingers to keep count; the deity is conceived 
as identical with the mantra he is repeating, and no symbol is used; only 
the vocal organ and auditory sense are used. The latter two only function at the 
beginning of japa, when the votary performs his japa just audibly to himself. 
After a while, the repetition takes place only in the mind and hardly any count 
is kept. Thus the use of external tangible matter has been dispensed with, 
although the role of the rosary betrays some symbolic representation of 
Word/Letter (any complete system of letters is called málini and the rosary is 
usually referred to as mālā). While performing japa, the votary interiorizes 
the deity and envisages her as identified with his own self as well as with the 
complete set of Sanskrit letters (mantra-matrka, or fountainhead of all 
mantras). Just as tt > Tantric's istadevata is a special manifestation of the one 
and absolute divine Being, so also is his istamantra а manifestation of the 
mantra-mátrkà (see p. 97). The votary evidently employs far less physical 
"ET 
EN
—— 
oo 
ni 
ae 
ERR 
ав

--- PAGE 141 [DIRECT] ---

128 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
activity in japa than he does while performing bahya-püjà. Therefore this 
form of adoring the deity is regarded as subtler than bahya-püjà. The 
third form of püjà, namely àntara-püjà, 
is mainly contemplative... The 
worshipper interiorizes the whole of the external puja with a strong 
tendency to idealize its concrete elements by transforming them into 
ontological abstractions such as the five basic elements, mind, etc. 
This mode of adoration calls for a well-developed capacity for vivid 
visualization and sound philosophical training in the ability to form 
abstractions out of concrete material objects and physical activities. These 
faculties demand rigorous concentration and this form of worship is held in 
higher esteem than any other, so that it is considered to be the supreme 
form of worship. It is the first stepping-stone to meditation — 
ie. the 
stage that leads to the ecstatic experience of bliss. The idea at the 
root of this is that the further one progresses in spirituality, the less need 
there is for elaborate methods of püjà. The point finally reached being that all 
ritual activities — whether actually performed, or lifted to the contemplative 
plane and interiorized — simply become unnecessary, and all effort on the part 
of the votary then becomes a ritual form of worship. As Abhinavagupta puts _ 
it (TA IV, 120cd-121ab) ‘whatever sensual pleasure (the Tantric) derives 
y using any of 
his senses, 
he attaches the pleasures to the supreme Being 
апа it becomes an item of offering (to the deity). This very assertion 
that there is no 
distinction 
between the votary's own sensation of pleasure 
and the pleasure of his 
deity 
makes the monistic 
(advaita stand-point clear to 
ihe Tantric. The whole point 
of performing antara-püjà is to gradually 
establish 
this notion in the mind of the Tantric and keep him constantly 
aware of it. In a certain sense, he is then worshipping his own self 
elevated to the level of, and immersed in, his deity with offerings which are, in 
reality, not different from that same deity (LT 36, 81-85). 
- 
A similar type of classification is found in some Tantra texts. Rituals are 
either divided into groups according to the three descriptive states of the deity's 
gradual secession from indivisible absoluteness: niskala or undifferentiated, 
sakalaniskala or undifferentiated and at the same time differentiated, and 
sakala or differentiated; or they are divided into another group of three that 
is descriptive of the deity in relation to her ontological position, namely para 
(infinite), parápara (infinite and at the same time finite), and apara (finite) 
(YHT 1112). 
It is important 
to understand 
that these classifications concern 
the 
different forms of rites which go to make up Tantric ritual as a whole. 
Although Tantrics worship many forms or manifestations of the goddess, 
the modes of worshipping Sodasi (Sri) on the one hand and Kali/Tara on the 
z. 
hine

--- PAGE 142 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : РО)А 
129 
other are the best documented. Since worship of the first form has received the 
most efficient and systematic treatment and enjoys the most popularity 
amongst all Tantrics, excepting in the eastern and possibly extreme south- 
western regions of India, it is best to deal with that first, It should then be 
easier to revert to the mode of worshipping Kali by showing the points 
of difference. 
The texts regarded today — or rather for about the last two hundred 
years — as being the most important, are the Para$urama-kalpasütra, the 
Paramananda Tantra, the Püjaratna written by Syamaraja Diksita, the 
Parananda Tantra and the Gandharva Tantra. The first and last mentioned 
of these are popular in the southern regions of India. The Tantrics_of 
Varanasi generally follow the ritual mode laid down in the Paramananda 
- . 
Tantra, while the Püjaratna is popular in the region of Mathura. The. 
Parasuráma KS. is a quasi-aphoristic (sūtra) work attempting to codify the: 
modes of Tantric ritualism and the cult of Tripura, and give them an official 
status side by side with the vast Vedic literature on ritual, the Kalpasütras. It 
deals with the following items: 
1. ahnika-karma, 
or the daily routine 
duties of a Tantric; 2. saparyd, or the ritual worship of the goddess; 
3. homa, or the fire sacrifice; 4. тийгй, or hand- and body-postures; 
5. nyasa; 6. јара; and 7. naimittika-püjà. The text also deals with astrology, 
though very sketchily, in order to determine the most suitable moment for 
starting a ritual; with different forms of initiation and its various stages; 
and with the worship of different deities. 
1 
ü 
@ 
" 
Ыы 
|| | 
4 
| 
1 
| 
А i 
Ё 
Ahnika-karma 
At the time of initiation, a Tantric gets complete and detailed instructions 
about his daily duties. This lays down a 
regular way of life 
for him. It should 
be remembered 
that his first aim is to arrive at directly experiencing the 
complete identity of 1) his istadevata, 2) his ista-mantra, 3) his guru, 
and 4) his own self. What is strongly impressed on him from the very 
beginning is the fact that in being accepted by his guru, who is in fact the deity 
herself manifest on earth as. guru, he has obtained his first experience 
of divine grace. And henceforth all along the Tantric's path towards his 
5 We have based our descriptions of püjà mainly on this text with 
its offshoot the 
Nityotsava, where necessary supplemented by other texts. 
$ Technically this is known as Saktipáta (descent of divine Power). It is said to come 
(о: ће Tantric as a result of God's compassion and ardour. This is envisaged 
as a 
projection of divine love manifest. See footnote on p. 126. 
ee 
т

--- PAGE 143 [DIRECT] ---

130 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
ultimate goal his guru comes first. Therefore upon waking and while still 
in bed, a Tantric should sit up and meditate on his guru in the company 
of his consort as representing the Two-in-One state of the Divine. While 
envisaging this celestial state of his guru and his šakti, he offers the mantra of 
salutation to them, and then recites the five verses in praise of his guru 
which are called the Padukapañcakam. By declaring his total submission and 
loyalty to his guru, he thus confirms his solidarity. with Tantric ideology. 
He then envisages his guru in the middle of the lotus of a thousand petals 
(meaning of course innumerable petals), which is situated on top of the crown 
(sahasrara padma at the dvadasánta). 
His next step is to envisage his own self (kundalini) — usually situated at the 
bottom of his spinal column (müladhárd) near his genitals — as a manifesta- 
tion of his goddess suddenly rising up like a flash of red lightning through the 
susumnà chaanel to reach the~sahasrara ‘at the top of his head. This 
visualization occurs while he practises pranayama (rhythmic method of in- 
haling, holding the breath, and exhaling). Sahasrara is the centre where the 
supreme deity 
and his 
guru are 
tually situated in union (see p. 170), 
and this short practice of meditation brings to his mind the fundamental 
unity of his own self with the deity and with his guru. He also envisages the 
letters of the bija of his ista-mantra engraved in appropriate colours on the 
first three centres through which the kundalini passes on its lightning flight 
to’ the sa’asrdra (see below). On reaching the sahasrára he imbues the 
amrta existing there, which is another way of envisaging the bliss inherent 
in the supreme deity. The whole of this imagery links up with several religious 
‘concepis. The lotus is always a symbol of purity. Its thousand petals 
present its infinite nature which, though depicted 
as 
the abode of the deity, is 
none other than the deity herself. To complete the imagery, the goddess is 
envisaged in the centre of the pericarp of that lotus and being a flower, the 
lotus naturally contains honey — in this case amrta. But this amrta has 
no resemblance whatever to the mythical amrta of Hindu religion. Here it is 
bliss indeed, permeating the godhead and in fact identical with the goddess. 
Thus, being once — however passively — reminded of. or rather having 
contemplated on this ultimate identity of his own self with bliss, the 
Tantric indirectly gets a taste of that bliss, which is represented by the more 
or less actual sensation of being bathed in, or saturated with, amrta. Thus 
totally redeemed from all impurity, he starts his day in peace and confidence. 
Next follows the usual process of scrupulously going through the round 
of observing hygienic habits that culminates in the ritual bath. Up to 
this point, each Tantric follows the rules of his own caste. The bath however 
differs from the usual Hindu bath, in that the Tantric takes several forms

--- PAGE 144 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : POJA 
131 
of bath, one after another.’ These are called mantra-sndna (mantra-bath), 
bhasma-snana (ash-bath), and so forth. As a group, these different forms 
of ritual bathing ere called special baths (visesa-sndna). 
The Tantric bath 
Aier the usual ritual bath with oil, riverbed-clay and bathing in deep 
water, whilst still standing in the water the Tantric takes water in his 
cupped hand, sips it three times and pours back what remains into the water 
he stands 
in. With 
the appropriate mantras 
he then 
purifies his six 
important limbs (ariga), viz. Siras (head), sikha (topknot), netra 
netra (eyes), hrdaya 
(heart), 
art), astra (weapon) a and 
karatala-prstha (palms and backs of his hands), 
by touching each in turn with his hands and making the appropriate gestures 
(mudrà). Next, he utters the sacred sound ‘krom’ and, hooking the fingers of 
his right hand in imitation of a goad, he evokes sacred water from the 
orb of 
the sun, repeats the bija-mantra of 
his istadevatà ten times, and envisages 
the transformation of the ordinary water into sacred water followed by 
throwing that water into the actual water while forming a gesture with his 
hands to resemble a yoni (the female sex-organ). After that, with his hands he 
first makes the gesture (mudra) of dhenu (drawing milk from the uddders 
of the celestial cow, which symbolically transforms 
the water into 07074), 
followed by the gesture of yoni (symbolizing that the water is primordial 
water) Next he consecrates the water with 
the mantra am) and repeats 
Iien times. He then envisages his istadevata in that water, which has now 
become 
‘become blissful атга, and consecrates this атта by repeating his işa- 
mantra ten times (abhimantrana). He then sprinkles himself seven times 
with this consecrated water which he envisages to be issuing from the 
goddess’s exquisitely beautiful mouth. Then he repeats his ista-mantra 
twenty-one times, whilst simultaneously taking three dips in the water 
which he envisages to be a stream of amrta issuing from the goddess's feet. 
Thereafter he again anoints himself thrice or seven times with the water, 
his hand held in the gesture of yoni. Emerging from the water, he wraps 
himself in two pieces of clean cloth (one as loin-cloth, the other as scarf), 
and decorates his forehead with consecrated ash from the sacrificial fire 
by making the sacred mark of 'tripundra' (three horizontal darts). 
7 See $T p. 127 with Rüghavabhatta's comm. Amongst Tantrics there are somewhat 
divergent views about the form and number of these baths.

--- PAGE 145 [DIRECT] ---

r3 
^ 
e 
132 
Tantric 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
aghamarsana 
The Tantric form of aghamarsana (removal of all sins) differs from the 
Vedic aghamarsana in that it.does not use any Vedic mantra (for Vedic 
oaghamarsana see Brahmanasarvasva p. 99ff. and P. V. Kane, History, 
Š vol. IV, p. 130). 
< 
Тһе 
visualizing that the water in his hand is being inhaled and passes down through 
his idà 
Tantric takes a handfu! of water and performs pranayama while 
-channel to reach the far end of the left side of his torso, where 
apparently sins lurk. He envisages wrenching these out and exhaling them 
through his pingala-channel together with the inhaled water which has 
turned 
sins. 
black, and by returning that water to his palm rids himself of all 
Tantric sandhya 
Afte r observing the ordinary worship of sandhyá, the Tantric invokes the 
goddess who resides in the sun and offers her three libations of water 
while uttering the Vedic gayatri. Then he repeats the gayatri-mantra of 
his istadevatà (e.g. Sodasi-gayatri) for a number of times. 
Tantric tarpana 
After aghamarsana, the Tantric resumes his usual routine and starts his 
tarpan 
to ‘all 
å (water-libation). He first follows the Vedic form, i.e. to offer tarpana 
gods and to one’s ancestors. But before offering tarpana to the 
Sun-God (süryárghya), he offers it to his istadevata and her entire retinue of 
avafamfádevatas etc. He does this by tracing on the water the basic yantra. 
He draws a triangle, puts a circle around it and encloses that within a square 
boundary and then offers libations to these deities. The final tarpana is offered 
to'the Sun-god. Last of all he recalls his identity with the Absolute 
5: Réality by uttering the formula ‘hamsah so "ham' (see Ch. IV p. 110), and 
`" then envisages returning the sacred water to the sun. Thus purified, he 
proceeds to the actual place of worship in absolute silence. 
Comparing these three rites, viz. папа, sandhya and tarpana as prescribed 
by the Tantra texts with those prescribed by the Vedic tradition, we see that 
the former introduce elements that are specifically Tantric. In the ritual 
snàna (bath), we noticed that the water has to be envisaged as drawn from the 
sun, which is but one aspect of the goddess symbolizing her omniscience (see 
* Вг, pp. 116-123

--- PAGE 146 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : PCJÀ 
133 
LT XXIX,7-70 to understand how the goddess is represented as Sürya, Soma 
and Agni). The water is consecrated by tracing a yantra and showing a few 
consecratory mudras. The element of vivid imagery is brought in too for the 
contemplative transformation of ordinary empirical things into spiritual ideas 
in order to create a separate dimension of existence. And so, through vivid 
imagination accompanied by certain acts, a Tantric effectively 
lifts his 
dimension of existence from the ordinary worldly level to the spiritual 
level and achieves the same state of existence as his deity. What is note- 
worthy is that he does not reject anything, but just transmutes everything 
by aid of something akin 
to drama. 
Although he is the sole actor 
— provided he has the necessary imagination, propensity and experience — 
with forceful imagery he is able to create a completely different world (a cosmic 
existence let us say), which he shares with the goddess. The aghamarsana 
rite is an instance of this. The water exhaled, carrying away all the Tantric’s 
sins, is conceived to be black ; 
and sometimes sins are collectively envisaged as 
an anthropomorphic being (pàpapurusa) who is as black as soot. The 
intensity of such an imagination enables the Tantric to feel these events 
to be quite real, and they affect him far more deeply than, say, the 
Vedic ritual of aghamarsana can ever do. Incidentally, Vedic aghamarsana 
is always accompanied by a couple of hymns collectively called aghamarsana- 
süktas (RV, X 190,1-3), and is only performed on certain Occasions, not 
daily, (the Brahmanasarvasva mentions another rite, drupada, which bears 
close resemblance to Tantric aghamarsana).? 
In the performance of sandhyd and tarpana, again we encounter another 
aspect of Tantric 
religion, namely 
its monotheism. 
That 
is why the 
ordinary sandhyà is followed by the repetition of the goddess's Gayatri- 
mantra and, besides offering tarpana to the ordinary Vedic gods, sages and one's 
ancestors, the Tantric offers it to his istadevatà and her retinue in exactly the 
same order as is followed in the daily worship of the goddess. Furthermore, 
the Tantric finally declares his total identity with the Absolute reality, albeit in 
a cursory manner. 
The Tantric form of tarpana makes clear that, in spite of being monotheistic, 
the Tantric does not consider ihat his is the only deity that exists, denying 
thereby the existence of any other. To the contrary, he recognizes the 
existence of other deities, especially those belonging to the goddess's pantheon 
which does in fact make it possible to include almost every conceivable 
divinity. The crucial point is that the existence of these deities is considered 
9 loc. cit. 
ah 
| 
Е 
| 
ji

--- PAGE 147 [DIRECT] ---

134 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
to depend entirely on that of the goddess, whose manifestations they are; 
and it should be remembered that the goddess — 
in full regalia with 
all her retinue — is always invoked in formal worship. This is where the 
sámpradàyika (observing the Tantric sampradaya form of ritual worship) 
differs from the normative (smárta) form. Therefore, even in performing as 
simple a rite .s tarpana, а yantra has to be drawn to indicate that the 
specially consecrated and protected area has been made worthy for the 
descent of the goddess (ST p. 154, line 19 comm.),!° and her attendants, 
bodyguard etc. are invoked and treated with the respect due to a sovereign’s 
retinue. 
Place of worship 
The criterion for a suitable place for worship is that it should be unpolluted 
and quiet. Some texts give a list of such places : 
holy places, banks of rivers, 
caves, hilltops, places visited by pilgrims, water-resorts, near the confluence 
of a river, sacred woods, lonely gardens, under a bilva tree (aegle marmelos/ 
woodapple), on the slope of a hill, in a tulasi (sacred basil) grove, cowstall in ' 
which there is no ox, Siva temple, in the shade of such trees as the 
aévattha (sacred fig tree) or amalaki (emblic myrobalan), a cowherd-village 
near water, a temple, seashore, one’s own house, or the house of one’s 
guru (ST 2, 138-139). 
Sites such 
as cremation-grounds 
etc. 
are also 
recommended: for Tantric püjà, especially in Kali worship. Mostly рӣјаѕ 
connected with purascarana and abhicara (p. 159-61) are performed outside 
home, while other рӣјаѕ are generally performed in front of the family altar 
at home, which is strictly guarded from pollution. 
Nitya-püjà (preliminary rites) 
The next important daily duty of a Tantric is the worship of his deity. This 
major ritual act, which reveals the essential character of Tantric worship, is 
divided into several units. The first of these entails the purification (suddhi) 
of everything involved in the worship and necessitates performing five 
consecratory acts (Suddhi) concerning 1) the Tantric’s self; 2) the place (ѕглапа) 
of worship; 3) the mantra used; 4) all utensils and objects (dravya) \ 
used 
for the offering; and 5) the deity (devata) worshipped (KT VI,16). 
“Before going into the details of these, it should 
be pointed out that to 
understand the method of Tantric ritual it is necessary to classify the rites 
comprised in a fully developed Tantric püjà under three main heads. The 
10 Often in Tantric circles yantra, mantra and devatà are homo!ogised, and the one is 
incomplete without the others; $T pp. 154f.

--- PAGE 148 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA : РОЈА 
135 
first of these is the group of purificatory rites; the second group covers 
precautionary measures aimed at removing obstacles or preventing interference 
from malevolent agents; aad the third group deals with the actual püjà 
ceremony in which gifts are offered to the deity. Now all five of these 
consecratory acts fall under the first group of rites in a püja which deals 
wah the. purification of everything used in the worship, whereas some of 
these acis also fall under the second group of precautionary measures. The 
remaining ceremonies are listed amongst the rites that concern the offering of 
gifts to the deity. Of all the consecrations, the first — the consecration of 
the Tantric's self — is of most interest to us as it illustrates the central 
attitude of Tantrism. Observance of this rite qualifies the Tantric to invoke 
the deity to bc worshipped, and 
at the same 
time 
it covers 
a wide 
range of minor rites concerning the Tantric's daily obligatory religious duties, 
namely sndna, aghamarsana, tarpana and sandhyárcana. Once the Tantric 
completes his tarpana, he proceeds in absolute silence to the place where 
he performs his daily worship (Tantrasára, p. 230). This is a sign that 
he has already withdrawn himself from his mundane reality and is seeking 
to attain that other dimension of reality that he shares with his deity. 
When about to enter the site of worship, he performs the prccautionary 
rite of invoking and worshipping the guardians of the goddess's abode 
and gate of her cosmic residence. But even before that, he invokes the 
Sun-God and worships him with a simple offering of water and a few 
grains of rice smeared with sandalwood. The Sun is invoked to act as 
chief witness of the Tantric's performance 
since that god is universally 
regarded as the witness of good deeds (/okasaksi). Then guardian-deities such 
as Ganesa, Durga, Sri, Vajuka, Ksetrapala and the like are invoked in order 
to safeguard entrance by the coor of the place of worship. Hence this should 
be regarded as one of the precautionary rites. At the same time the Tantric 
consecrates the door by thrice sprinkling consecrated water on it while 
uttering his ista-mantra (see p. 129). He consecrates this water by filling a 
jug with clean water brought from some holy source while pronouncing 
the Ard-mantra (of the six limbs),'' and then repeats his isfa-mantra a 
couple of 
times as prescribed by his guru. This is accompanied by the gesture 
of the dhenu-mudrad, whereby he envisages the changing of the water into 
атга. This consecrated water known as sámányárghya is prepared as soon as 
the Tantric completes his tarpana and is used for purposes of consecration 
!! There are six limbs (айда), viz. hrd (heart), Siras (head), sikh (topknot), netra (eyes), 
astra (weapon) and kavaca (armour or torso). Note that the last one differs from the 
last mentioned in the list given on p. 131.

--- PAGE 149 [DIRECT] ---

136 
SANIUKTA GUPTA 
throughout the performance of his рӣја (see TanS p. 231 and ST pp. 230-231). 
Here we have an instance of how the three groups of rites mentioned above 
constantly overlap, and this recurs 
all through the performance. The 
traditional divisions of a Tantric püjà are six. viz. dhyana (meditation), puja 
(offering), japa, homa (fire-sacrifice), пуйѕа and tarpana. 
Atmasuddhi 
'? has to be performed by every Tantric before he can start his 
раја. Only a minor part of this rite. the ahnika section, entails physical 
acts; the major part involves two of the most important features of Tantric 
rites, namely bhütasuddhi (consecrating one's physical body) and nyása (trans- 
mutation and accommodation). These concern the process of the sadhaka’s 
sublimation and spriritual transformation. The worshipper first salutes his 
teacher (guru) and then Ganesa. Then using his yogic technique and his highly 
developed powers of imagination and concentration, the Tantric practiser 
envisages all the ontological realities that go to make up his personality. He 
then proceeds to envisage within himself the process of cosmic creation 
(evolution) in reverse order (i.e. cosmic involution). He follows every single 
step, imagining the dissolution of each element into its preceding cause, until 
in the end he is ultimately dissolved or immersed in his cosmic source. He then 
envisages his own resurrection, retracing each step of cosmic creation. Only 
now, having burned away with cosmic fire and blown away with cosmic air all 
his human imperfections and limitations, he experiences bliss and, permeated 
with it, remains immersed in the cosmic source. 
He actually pictures 
himself as bathed in amrta. He now has a body made of pure substance 
(sattvika) identical with that of the deity's and he is free to invite her to 
descend into it — to invoke the divine ego to descend on to his ego. 
Needless to say, mantras play a central role in the Tantric procedure of 
translating ontological realities into ritual acts. Each reality is represented by a 
seed-(bija) mantra, and visual imagery is also provided for each. Thus, having 
envisaged the cosmic drama of the final cataclysm followed by cosmic 
creation, the Tantric ensures his identification with the cosmic goddess 
(pránapratisthà). The next stage of the rite of atmasuddhi is nyása. Не 
accommodates 
the divine form, limb by limb, in his own body.'? 
He then proceeds to house the entire cosmos within his body, by conceiving 
it to be the divine mansion wherein 
all the attendant deities and the 
entire galaxy are present. He also accommodates in his body the татка 
(letters) mantras, their seers, and ritual application (the latter items are 
12 See also KT, VI. 17 
15. Sadanganvasa starting with 
and müladevinyása. 
These are most important (YHT 11.58-62). 
karanvasa, ууйраКа пуйза, sodhanydsa, атта etc., siddhinydsa

--- PAGE 150 [DIRECT] ---

"mm 
cn 
TANTRIC SÁDHANA : РОЈА 
137 
obviously an imitation of Vedic tradition). Each act of пуйза is accompanied 
by a salutation to the object of the act, and the Tantric pronounces 
the mystic syllable representing the seedmantra each time he vividly envisages 
the actual placing of that object on a part of his body.'* At the end of 
this process, his body has been lifted into the mystic world of the goddess, 
in the centre of which, 
in the lotus-sanctuary 
within 
the mysterious 
bejewelled island, she, holds her court (see ST. p. 9). The rite of inviting 
the goddess to descend in the heart of the worshipper, which is envisaged 
as the lotus-seat and is performed after bhittasuddhi, has already effected the 
worshipper's essential transformation into divine personality (ST., p. 137-8). 
Sthanasuddhi and dravyasuddhi, on the other hand, mostly contain rites of a 
precautionary nature to ward off evil spirits and other malevolent agencies. 
These may try. to pollute the site or other ingredients of the püjà, and 
thereby rob it of its validity as a whole. Many lesser gods and spirits are 
invoked and offered gifts to ensure correct and safe performance of the рӣја, 
to protect the premises and the performer, as well as to safeguard that the 
merit envisaged shall be duly awarded. Some of these rites are reconciliatory, 
e.g., invoking the lord of the terrain (ksetrapala) and offering food to the spirits 
(bhüta-bali). There are others in which divine protection is sought by envisaging 
a material representation of the deity’s most terrifying manifestation (Vatuka, 
Yoginis), or typical weapon (arrows, etc. ). 
In the rite of digbandhana (enclosing 
the site of worship within 
a fixed boundary), 
the Tantric envisages a 
magic boundary, consisting of arrows (márüca) shot by the goddess as 
surrounding the whole area. Similar acts are casting a glowering look around 
to disperse aerial spirits, stamping the floor three times to drive away any 
spirits lurking there, and snapping the fingers — thus making menacing noises 
to frighten off undesirable elements. There are mantras, too, commanding 
spirits to disappear on the authority of the deity (apasarpantu, etc.). The 
site and all the objects used in the püjà are sprinkled with consecrated water, 
and all such acts are accompanied by appropriate hand-gestures (mudrds), e.g. 
naraca-mudra, chotika-mudra, avagunthana-mudrá, paramikarana-mudra, etc. 
(see p. 116). 
: 
Needless to say, the actual cleaning and scrubbing of the site and of all the 
utensils and objects used in the ritual have to be done very thoroughly. 
Moreover, whenever possible the site should be decorated. But usually all 
14 The sixfold nyāsa (sodhà-nyása) of Ganeša, graha (planets), naksatra (stars), Yogini, 
ráíi (constellations) and pitha, and the great sixfold nydsa of prapafica (world), bhuvana 
(universe), mūrti, mantra, devata, and mátrkà (8) are considered important in the worship of 
Sri. Şodhā-nyāsa is used for the worship of Sri-yantra (YHT III-8ff). The great sodha-nyasa 
is mainly used. in the worship 
of Ardhanarisvara..

--- PAGE 151 [DIRECT] ---

M
138 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
that has been seen to long before starting the precautionary rites. Thus the 
physical cleaning of atman, sthana and dravya does not take place at the 
same time as the contemplative and symbolic cleansings are performed. 
It was completed before the rite of door-worship is observed. After that, 
the symbolic cleansing is undertaken by sprinkling the consecrated water 
three times accompanied by recitation of the isfa-mantra and the mantra 
`of the weapon (astra) and, in the case of the practitioner, by his taking 
three sips of that water from his cupped hand and then touchíng both 
traeieg 
a circle around her whilst uttering -a( manta : the avagunthana- 
uaa) yee 
T 
A 
CT 
3 
€ then performs the rite of sakalikarana (giving the deity a finite form 
composed of parts) by uttering the appropriate man.ra and displaying. the 
д0® 
prepared to accept his offerings, the Tantric draws a magic circle (by 
` 
relevant mudrá. Next, he performs the nyasa of the deity's six main 
fimbs (anga). After that, he repeats his ista-mantra three times, the dipani- 
mantra once, and the matrka-mantra once, shows the dhenu-mudrà, and 
sprinkles arghya-water on the deity thus visualized. Although generally 
speaking this concludes the rites of consecration, sometimes certain other forms 
of consecration are added to these before starting on the actual offerings. On 
entering the place of worship. the Tantric lights a lamp and worships it 
as the lord of lamps (dipanátha).'* He then requests the earth to permit 
him to sit on her, and after consecrating his three tattvas (айтап, vidyà and 
Siva tattva) and other cosmic realities making up his physical existence 
© 
(thirty-six in number, see p. 52), he takes a little hemp.'’ Next, he 
arranges in front of himself all the flowers and utensils etc. that are to 
be used in the püjà (see also Bharati, Tantric Tradition, pp. 246-241, 
251, 254-256 and the notes thereon). 
15 |t should be noted that there are diverse methods of mantraSuddhi of which only 
one is mentioned here. 
\ See YHT 
11, 170 and ST p. 132 with the commentary 
on 
the importance 
of 
kuladipa. 
‘7 This must be a rather late innovation and is not widely practised (MT.V.82-88).

--- PAGE 152 [DIRECT] ---

СИЕ 
РАР 
TANTRIC SADHANA: РОЈА 
139 
Image and symbols of the deity 
Püjà is offered to a deity who is represented by various symbols. These are 
described as the locus (adhdra) of the pūjā offered (see PrT.ch.5). The 
symbol may be some aniconic form such as a linga, or a triangular pebble 
of black marble found in the bed of the Gandaki. It can be an image 
made of stone, terra cotta, crystal, any precious gem, or metal. It can be a 
pitcher full of water decorated with vermilion, leaves and grass. A bowl of water 
(viSes@rghya) or a сир of alcoholic drink (śri-pātra)' may represent the 
- goddess; ог a water-resort,. books, or a plateful of flowers may be used 
as symbols for the deity; or a young girl (kumari), a woman (suvásini) and her 
sex-organ may be worshipped as symbolizing 
the goddess. ~ ~ 
Bhaskararaya enumerates three forms of the goddess that are worshipped : 
the gross, the subtle and the absolute.'? Gross forms are those mentioned 
above. The mantras are the subtle forms of the goddess, while her absolute 
form is worshipped in the worship of one’s guru and of one’s own self 
as pervaded by the goddess. This last form of worship is found in antara- 
püjà (see p. 145). In practice however, images are very popular and are 
x 
widely worshipped. But in a Tantric рӣја, the yantra of the main deity is 
| 
always worshipped, while a pitcher full of water plays an almost equally 
important role as symbol of the goddess. A wide range of iconographic 
descriptions of various deities are available in Tantric literature in the 
dhyànas of these deities.?? These symbols are only venerated when pervaded 
by the deity; otherwise they are merely physical phenomena. It is only after the 
Tantric has put life into them through performing special rites (pranapratisthd) 
that they become sacred. 
Ua 
The püjà programme 
The various purificatory and consecratory 
rites have been somewhat 
elaborately 
discussed 
in order to emphasize 
their importance 
in the 
performance of a püjà. The order in which these rites are performed both 
by Kaulas and by non-Kaulas in a complete püjà-programme runs as 
follows : 
1. Approaching the door of the sacred рӣја-агеа and consecrating it. 
2. Precautions against three types of hindrances. 
18 See plate 1. 
1° Comm. on BhàvUp., p. 111. 
30 See for instance: D. C. Sircar, Text and Translation: Tantrasáradhrta dhyánamálà. 
JAIH, Vol. VI. parts 1-2, 1972-73, Calcutta, pp. 186-278. 
7

--- PAGE 153 [DIRECT] ---

140 
SANJUKTA GL?TA 
3. Worship of Vastupurusa (guardian of the divine abode) and other rites 
to safeguard and consecrate the place of worship. 
4. Purification of the worshipper's seat (аѕапа). 
5. Worship of the guru-pankti (original line of gurus) and of Ganesa. 
6. Раја of the sun-god. 
7, Drawing the cakra or yantra, symbol of the divine abode. 
8. Meditation on the goddess s abode. 
9. Bhütasuddhi and other related rites. 
0. Atma-pranapratisthà, or meditating on the replacement of the worshipper's 
1 
mundane self by his divine self. 
11. Pranayama, or practice of controlled breathing exercises. 
12. Nyasa. 
| 
13. Dhyana (meditation on the deity) and the showing of mudras. 
1 
14. `Antarayága (interiorized worship). 
i 
15. A. Preparing the višesarghya (water used for special consecration) and 
| 
B. arranging containers for offering drinks to the deities etc. This 
| 
second part of the rite is followed by the Vama and Kaula Tantrics. 
| 
16. Bahya-püjà (physical worship). 
17. Sadanga-püjà (worship of the six parts of the deity's body).?! 
18. Worship of the Nityas. 
19. Worship of the three groups (ogha) of gurus, namely the divine group 
(divyaugha), 
the siddha group (siddhaugha) and the human group 
(manavaugha). 
20. Worship of the deities of the main goddess's pantheon (avaranadevatà).?? 
21. Pránáhuti,? or the offering of cooked and other food to the deity. 
22. Offering of the kuladipa (the kula-lamp). 
23. Puspañjali (offering a number of flowers). 
24. Meditation on Kamakala. 
25. Homa (fire-sacrifice). 
26. Offering of bali and animal sacrifice. 
21. Pradaksina (going round the deity one or more times starting from the 
deity's right side). 
28. Japa (repeatedly reciting the main mantra). 
29. Stuti (chanting eulogies of the deity). 
китүне" 
21 The parts are the head. topknot, heart, eyes, weapon and armour, collectively envisaged 
as a separate deity called Sadangayuvati. 
22 Avarana devatàs surround the main daiy in concentric circles 
23 Ritual concerning the consumption of food. 
Bodewitz, Jaim 
Br. p. 254-256 and 
appendix

--- PAGE 154 [DIRECT] ---

| 
| 
TANTRIC SADHANA : POJA 
141 
30. Suvdsini- or dūti-pūjā (worshipping a woman).?* 
31. Cakra- (or Bhairavicakra) püjà (an equal number of male and female 
Tantrics observing püjà collectively). 
32. Visarjana (leave-taking). 
33. Nirmálya-püjà. 
34. Kumari-pija. 
Commentary 
1. Approaching the place 
of worship, the worshipper sprinkles the door 
(sometimes only in imagination) with water from the samanyarghya-jug,”* 
whilst uttering the mantra pha! (of the weapon). He worships Mahàlaksmi 
and Sarasvati оп the lintel; and Gane$a, Ksetrapala, Сайра and Yamuna 
on the sideposts of the door. 
: 
2. He banishes interfering spirits etc. from the sky by casting a glowering 
look around; from the atmosphere by sprinkling holy water while uttering 
the mantra phar; and from the earth by striking the ground three times 
with his heel. 
3. Entering the sacred precincts, he worships the guardian-deity of the 
abode and Brahma on the north-east corner. He consecrates the entire 
sacred place, that has already been bedecked and cleaned with paficagavya?* 
and with arghya-water, whilst uttering the astra-mantra (phar). He further 
safeguards the site by casting a glowering look around whilst uttering his main 
mantra and sprinkling the place with arghya-water. He then repeats the 
astra-mantra and strikes the ground with a bunch of ku$a-grass,?? whilst 
uttering the same mantra. He then sprinkles the place thoroughly with 
consecrated water whilst 
uttering the varma (armour) mantra (vausat). 
Finally, he burns incense, scatters popped rice, sesame-seed, sandal-wood- 
paste, rice, ash, darbha-grass and mustard-seed, and sweeps away all 
spirits while repeating the astra-mantra.?* 
" 
4. He then proceeds to consecrate the place he has chosen for his 
seat. He envisages and utters the mantras of the three boundaries set 
up by fire, by Siva's weapon, the pasupata, and by Visnu's weapon, the 
sudarsana-disc. He sprinkles consecrated water on the place selected for 
24 Items 30, 31 and 34 are not parts of a general Tantric nitya püjà. 
25 Specially consecrated water with scents etc. Throughout the püjà only this water is 
used. See above. 
26 Five products from a cow: milk, curd, clarified butter, urine and dung. 
27 Saccharum Cylindrilum. 
28 Certain other mantras are also uttered in which the worshipper peremptorily orders all 
evil spirits and obstructive elements to clear off at Siva’s command.

--- PAGE 155 [DIRECT] ---

142 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
his seat, and salutes the soil as vajra (thunder). Then uttering the mantra 
for drawing diagrams,?? he draws a triangle with sacred water and traces 
the sacred letter hsauh. He worships the seat as representing the lotus, the 
supreme Sakti who is the locus of all (adhàrasakti). He requests permission 
from the goddess of the earth to be allowed to sit on her and then settles 
himself in his seat. On sitting down, he places a jug full of water on his 
left side next 
to a bowl in which 
to wash 
his hands, and 
all the 
other items of püjà-offerings on his right side. He consecrates his three 
basic principles (tattvas) viz. Atmatattva, Vidyátattva and Sivatattva. Then he 
lights a row of lamps or only one lamp. 
5. He salutes his preceptor, grand-preceptor and great-grand-preceptor 
and requests their permission to commence the ritual. 
6-7. He worships the Sun (the supreme witness of all deeds) to witness 
his present endeavour. The description now given is specially relevant to 
the püjà of Sri-cakra. Sri-cakra is a geometric representation of goddess 
Tripura (Sri) — a complicated diagram of nine figures and nine triangles 
intermingled to form a concentric figure, in which the central point is 
conceived as the seat of Tripura (see page 112-3). This figure can be 
freshly drawn at each performance of püjà. Otherwise it is curved out on 
metal plates or blocks of special stones.?? The Goddess Tripura is here 
worshipped as the source and essence of All, the Universe represented by 
the diagram. As this yantra of the goddess is most popularly worshipped all 
over India, and as there is a text in the form of a religious exegesis called 
Para$urama Kalpa Sütra — dating from at any rate the seventeenth century 
of the Christian era — in which the ritual worship of Tripurà is handled 
systematically, this form of püjà has been chosen by us as a model of 
Tantric püjà. 
The Sri-cakra 
(or any other such diagram 
representing 
the deity 
worshipped) should be drawn with care and exact measurements, and 
then be consecrated. If a metal or stone Sri-yantra?! is used, it is bathed 
with consecraied water and with райсйтпа3? It is then wiped with a 
clean cloth and sprinkled with red powder. Then the yantra is invested 
with divine personality by uttering the sacred 
syllables and formulae 
declaring that the life, soul, senses, speech and mind of the divine Sri- 
cakra are entering into this phenomenal Sri-cakra. 
29 This praises the lines used in geometrical figures. 
29 See plate 1. 
?! Each deity's yantra is named after that particular deity. 
?? Milk, curd, butter, honey and sugar.

--- PAGE 156 [DIRECT] ---

> 
` 
8. The ‘worshipper carefuily. envisages the sacred” abode’ of Sri-cakra’s . 
, 
presiding deity Tripura with ali its details. It is conceived as a jewelled. 
* 
island floating in ai ocean of атца. On. this fantastic site surrounded 
` 
by gardens etc. made of precious stones, the goddess's palace stands. Inside, 
on a special platform decorated with four gates, is set her couch. Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra and Ivara hold its four legs; Sadagiva is the plank on which 
. her bed is spread with soft cushions.. 
The Sri-yantra is then conceived to 
' 
be set on this bed and the. worshipper imagines that -a big curtain is 
drawn across in front to hide the bed. While visualizing each detail, he salutes 
"it when mentioning it and offets it arghya (perfumed flowers and rice). 
9. Now comes the time to perform the consecration of the worshipper’s 
own self (bhütasuddhi). The details of this rite have already been discussed 
„оп pages 136f. 
10. After completing bhütasuddhi, the worshipper invests his own self 
with. divine. personality. . 
He visualizes the deity, his main mantra (ista- 
or.müla-mantra) and his guru as all being identical. This resplendent, divine 
personage then enters his heart as his essential self. While thus mentally busy, 
he thrice utters thé formula declaring that his own self is identical with *he 
absolute, divine self. It should be noted that the envisaged identification is 
not effected in one step. There are in fact a series of identifications. 
First, ‘the worshipper's guru is identified with Siva. Then Siva and the 
Goddess are identified as the Two-in-One. Next, the main mantra of the deity 
' 
is identified with the deity's mystic form. Finally, this form replaces the 
worshipper's mundane self. Only then is the investment of the worshipper 
with the divine self accomplished. 
11. The worshipper then performs regulated breathing (prà ayama) sixteen 
times (see page 169). 
^ 
i 
12. He starts performing the rite of nydsa. First in the series of nyàsa 
comes that. of the mátrka (alphabet) as the essential, mystic form of the 
Goddess who is the source of all the names and forms in the universe. 
This is followed by the nyàsa to sublimate the worshipper's fingers, palms and 
back of his hands. Thus consecrated, he uses his hands once again to dispel 
any lurking evil spirits by snapping his fingers, striking the left palm 
with two fingers of his right hand, and by glowering around. He also 
recites certain mantras ordering such spirits to depart forthwith. He then 
continues with the rite of nydsa. The nyásas performed by the worshipper 
of the sri-cakra are: mátrkà-nyàsa (to consecrate his hands) nyasa to 
protect the worshipper, nyàsa of the four seats,?> nyasa of the six main 
33 The self of the goddess, Sri-cakra, all mantras and the sádhya-siddha. 
TANTRIC SADHANÁA : 
POJA аг СОН 
x M3. i

--- PAGE 157 [DIRECT] ---

144 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
limbs of the goddess $т1,3* nyása of the attendant deities, луйза of the 
letters of the main mantra, sodhd-nydsa,>* and cakra-nydasa.*® Finally, he 
transforms his body into the seat of the deity by means of pithc-nyàsa 
(nyása of Devi's seat). The latter stands on eight legs consisting of holy 
duties (dharma), knowledge (јйапа), divine excellence (ai$varya) and renun- 
ciation (vairagya) together with their opposites. These are mentally placed 
on the Tantric’s upper body. The mystical lotus-seat of the deity, with its 
bulb buried in bliss and stalk consisting of pure consiousness, is envisaged 
in the worshipper’s heart. On the pericarp of this lotus the three luminaries, 
viz. Sun, Moon and Fire with their parts (kala or digit), are invoked an1 
also the three constituents of the cosmic source (sattva, rajas and tamas). 
Next he performs the nyàsa of atman, antarátman, paramátman, jánátman,?" 
and the nyása of Māyātattva, Kaldtattva and Vidydtattva. After that he 
performs nyàsa of the seat and at the same time recites 
its mantra 
which consists of the mystic sound Asauh. He then salutes Sadašiva, the 
supreme corpse (mahápreta) who is symbolic of the goddess's lotus-seat. 
713; Whilst meditating 
upon the goddess as seated, 
the worshipper shows 
a set of mudras. For Tripura these are ten, but the number varies for 
each deity (see TanS, p. 90; ST p. 141 comm.). Mudrás, or symbolic hand- 
postures, are in fact distinctive features of all deities. For instance, 
in 
the case of Sri-cakra, each of its nine geometrical figures has a presiding 
-deity whose distinctive mark is represented by tue relevant mudra.°* The 
chief goddess Tripura’s special symbol is trikhanda (having three parts), 
which refers to the mystical visual representations of the goddess as the 
sound im written as a letter composed of three parts (see p. 93). These parts 
are imagined as portraying her main characteristics as the cosmic woman. 
attention is focused on her head, breasts and sex-organ. The visual symbol 
is used for meditation on Tripura. The mudra consists of denoting the 
number three by joining palms and keeping three of the five pairs of fingers 
in an upright position whilst bending the other two pairs (Nityotsava, 
p. 72). The worshipper then performs a short meditation on the deity 
?* See plate 4. 
Ganesa, the planets, stars, yogini, constellations and holy places; these six go to make 
up a group that represents the main domain of the goddess. 
3 Nyāsa of the nine geometrical figures of the Sri-cakra. 
These four átmans are the various states of the self. Atman is Brahman, antarátman 
is the enjoying jiva, the jiva in essence 
is paramütman, white jüünàtman 
is Brahman 
as 
undifferentiated from jiva. Bhaskararaya's commentary Setubandha on YHT 1, 12. 
э® These are sarvasanksobhini, sarvavidravini, sarvakarsani, sarvavasamkari, sarvanandani, 
sarvamahankusa, khecari, bija, yoni. trikhanda. 
3s 
37

--- PAGE 158 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANÀ : РОЈА 
145 
in her full iconographic representation, as well as on her as represented 
by the mystic sound im (Kamakala). 
, 
M. This short meditation is followed by another form 
of meditationV 
The 
‘worshipper first performs kundalini-yoga and envisages the supreme Goddess 
as pure knowledge, experienced as a luminous flash illuminating his entire 
susumna nàdi (see p. 168) from the lowest point where cosmic power 
usually lies dormant (mūlādhāra) to the crown of his head (brahmarandhra). 
He thus identifies his innermost being with the supreme divinity. In the 
middle of this susumná is the centre of the heart. There he envisages 
the ári-cakra with the Goddess upon it. He then starts offering Her the 
customary services and gifts presented to a deity in ordinary pija. Only, 
he offers these items mentally, substituting ideas in place of concrete objects. 
This 
is called àntara-yaga 
(mental 
offering) 
and 
is highly esteemed 
amongst Tantrics. Flawless performance of this form of püjà is dependent 
upon the worshippers's concentrative powers and experience in kundalini-yoga. 
A Tantric at the highest stage of spiritual development may depend almost 
entirely on this mental püjà and thereby drastically simplify the more concrete, 
or physical, form of püja. Since all the ingredients used in this püjà are 
ideas, one has no need to bother about the availability of gifts. etc. for 
offerings. The worshipper offers the Goddess a seat which is just his 
heart. He offers water to wash Her feet, and that water is the атда oozing from 
the thousand-petaled lotus above the crown of his head. He offers Her 
arghya (see p. 143), and that is his mind. He gives Her water to rinse Her 
mouth, and that is the same атга. The latter is again offered to bathe 
Her in and the principle of the sky-element to dress Her in. He offers Her the 
cosmic principle of smell (gandhatanmatra) as fragrant unguent, his experience 
as flowers, his vital air as incense, the cosmic fire as lamp, and amrta as 
food. 
He offers 
Her the ringing of a bell represented by unstruck 
sound (andhatadhvani); a fly-whisk represented by the cosmic element of air; 
and entertainment in the form of dance represented by the functioning 
of his senses and the agility of his mind. Finally, he offers Her fifteen 
flowers representing non-deception, non-pride, non-attachment, non-conceit, 
non-ignorance, non-boastfulness, non-hostility, non-perturbation, non-jeal- 
ousy, non-greed, non-violence, non-indulgence (especially in all forms of 
sensual pleasure), benevolence, compassion, and experience. Then, instead 
of sacrificial beasts, he offers his two main vices, desire and anger. 
After making these offerings, he envisages the fifty letters of the alphabet, 
each with the addition of its nasal sound, as forming a rosary strung on the 
kundalini as thread. Using this rosary, he repeats his chief mantra both in 
forward and in reverse order. This performance is also offered to the

--- PAGE 159 [DIRECT] ---

146 
SANJUKTA GUPTA ` 
Goddess. Lastly, he performs the fire-sacrifice. The kunda (pit in which 
the sacrificial fire is lighted) is the cakra said to be situated in the 
vicinity of the navei. The worshipper envisages his antaratman, paramatman 
and jfiánàtman as permeating this kunda and awakening his kundalini-power. 
which is pure knowledge. In this fire he sacrifices all the activities of his 
senses and his duties as well as his non-duties (acts to be refrained from). 
This emphasizes the worshipper's total sacrifice of all his personal interests 
in favour of the deity's supicme will. Last of all, he sacrifices his алатий 
(ego) in the same manner. 
Thus this mental püjà contains all the three 
parts of ordinary püjà : offering gifts and services; repeating the main mantra: 
and the fire-sacrifice. 
his form of рӣја is considered to be the ideal oné 
б 
ially exalted spiritual tone The deity is invited 
to take 
ssession 
of the worsl ipper’s inner consciousness by replacing 
his ego- 
onsciousness. His physical body, his merits and demerits — everything 
that goes to make up his separateness as an individual — are vividly recalled 
ard-then-offered-to-the deity) 
m 
(should be noted that oftén an abridged form of mental püjà is performed 
by the ordinary worshipper (i.e. when the Tantric is not performing daily 
puja as part of his purascarana or primary worship of his deity and mantra. 
and has not vowed to complete a hundred thousand or multiple thereof, 
repetitions of the mantra, japa, terminating upon his attaining perfection in 
its performance, mantra-siddhi and directly experiencing identity with its 
deity). This abridged form of mental püjà consists of offering the five basi¢ 
gifts to the deity, viz. fragrant unguents, flowers, incense, lamp and food. 
for which the cosmic elements of earth, sky, air, fire and water in the 
form of amrta are respectively substituted. Finally with the offering of 
tümbüla (betel-leaf prepared with other ingredients), the worshipper offers all 
his abilities and energy. Each of these gifts is offered whilst pronouncing à 
mystic syllable, making an obeisance to the deity, announcing the name of 
the offering, and at the same time showing its mudra. After that follows 
japa of the mantra and meditation on the deity as the letter im, Le. 
as Kümakalà, the cosmic mother. 
15. A. An important rite in Tantric püjà is the setting up of the receptacle 
for the water of the special argbya. Usually, a white conchshell, placed on 
a stand with three legs, is used for this purpose. The worshipper draws 
in vermilion a special diagram consisting of single and double triangles 
enclosed within a circle and a square. He then places the. three-legged 
stand upon 
it. The diagram is worshipped as the source of power, or 
locus, of the universe; while the stand is worshipped as the orb (mandala) 
of Fire, composed of ten parts (Kala). Next he places the bowl or shell 
NO

--- PAGE 160 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: 
РОЈА 
147 
on the stand, and worships it as the orb of the Sun, consisting of twelve 
parts. Then he pours a little alcohol from the container (kalasa) and scented 
water from the jug of ordinary arghya into the receptable containing the 
° special arghya.*? This he worships as the orb of the Moon containing 
anirta and consisting of sixteen parts. He pours some of this liquid into a bowl 
and sprinkies it over himself and all the offerings, without moving the 
container of visesarghya. 
B. In the Каша type of püjà*? with its five special offerings of 
alcoholic 
and other consecratory rites. 
Next, he pours alcoholic drink into the container until it is full, while 
uttering the mantra of mairkd (alphabet) in reverse order. The liquid is then 
sanctified by invoking and worshipping the orbs of Fire, Sun and Moon 
and performing various other consecratory rites.*? Then he toasts the goddess 
Anandabhairavi and the god Anandabhairava (the goddess of bliss and her 
partner) with the alcohol and Salutes them. After that he places containers 
full of meat, fish and tasty snacks and consecrates them in the prescribed 
manner. These items act as purifying agents to counteract the effects of 
alcohol and always accompany the drinking which, without them, is considered 
sinful and pointless. 
The next important rite in Kaula-püjà is the arrangement of the drinking- 
cups (pàirasádama) These are small round cups with a rounded bottom 
and are always set on little separate stands. This particular rite gains special 
significance in the case of cakra-püjà, which is püjà performed jointly by a 
39 Note that only followers of Sri-kula use the special arghya. Other sampradayas do 
not always use it. Kàli-worshippers of certain vàmücára sampradaya (schools) add to the 
water a piece of cloth soaked in menstrual flow, and sometimes also a little semen. 
40 Kaula Tantrics always follow the most orthodox form of 
esoteric rites involving the practice 
of drinking alcohol, eating meat and fish, and having sexual intercourse with a chosen 
partner during püjà. The partner is sublimated to the position of the goddess and is 
called Sakti, She is initiated in the sect and, at the time of püjà, is consecrated and 
worshipped. Her face, breasts and sex organ are specially revered. The tantric exerts himself 
to please her with food, drink and gifts. e.g. KT V, 85-7; ibid. ix, 49-58; ibid. x, 5; SL, 
Laksmi¢hara’s comm., p. 182-3. 
*! Opinions vary about this item. It seems that any tasty snack is generally acceptable 
as the fourth item. 
42 See plates 5 and 6.

--- PAGE 161 [DIRECT] ---

A 
148 
SANJUKT/, GUPTA 
group of Tantrics on a special occasion. Theirs is a very intimate circle 
admitting no stranger. A highly experienced and much revered Tantric 
guru acts as leader and ensures that strict rules of etiquette are observed. 
he most important cup is that reserved for the Goddess (sri-pátra), which 
s placed in the centre with elaborate ritual. Then come the cups for the guru, 
for the worshipper's self, for his $akti (female partner), for the yogini, for 
the vira, and the containers for offering bali, pàdya (water for washing the 
deity's feet) and acamaniya. These are placed in a row alongside the cup for the 
Goddess. Starting 
with Hers, each cup is three-quarters filled-withthe alcohclic 
beverage, into which the meat etc. are put. Finally, madhuparka*? is placed 
in a cup by the side of these**. 
16. Now starts the actual ceremony of offerings, or bāhya-pūjā. The 
worshipper first worships his own self by placing a fragrant flower upon 
his head. Then he mentally invokes his spiritual teacher and the latter's 
predecessors in the holy order of his sampradaya. He worships them with 
flowers, and pours out an alcoholic libation containing some meat, fish and 
snack of some kind. With these he purifies the three ultimate realities 
(Sivatattva, 
Vidyatattva, and Atmatattva). Then he sips the alcohol as 
prescribed in the ritual. 
Thus symbolically identified with his guru and guru’s line of predecessors, 
as well as with the Goddess, he performs the рӣја of Her sacred seat. 
He envisages and salutes the locus-power (in the form of the Goddess holding 
two lotuses). On her head is perched the bluish turtle surmounted by the 
foundation-stone, upon which the white serpent Ananta is seated. On this 
serpent, Visnu (in the form of a boar) is envisaged holding the goddess Earth 
aloft. The Earth in turn holds the mystic jewelled island containing marvellous 
. 
and mysterious gardens and pavillions made of gems. In the centre of these, 
‚ 
he visualizes the couch of the Goddess as described before (page 143). But 
now, instead of Sada$iva, he first envisages the eight-petaled lotus, the 
mystical seat of the Goddess. The bulb of the lotus — buried in the primordial 
Maya and Vidya 
** — is supreme bliss, its stalk is pure consciousness, and the 
lotus itself consists of all the cosmic realities. Its petals are the primary 
material source of the universe. Its pollens are the modifications of that 
primal source. The fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet form its pericarp. 
The three luminous orbs — Fire, Sun and Moon — are placed in this lotus. 
*? A 
mixture of curd, milk, clarified butter and honey. 
** These cups — starting with the main jüg Of wine — are arranged in a row froin 
the left to the right of the sadhaka. See plates 7 and 8. 
*5 See page 52.

--- PAGE 162 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : POJA 
149 
The worshipper envisages each of these and offers obeisance to it. Finally he 
envisages each of the three constituents of the pranava-mantra (a, u, m) and 
the three elements of the primal source (sattva, rajas and tamas), and worships 
` them as identified with these three luminous orbs. Then at the four corners of 
the seat, ātman, antarátman, paramatman, and jñanatman are worshipped. 
Last of all, eight pitha-Saktis (guardian deities of the seat)*® are worshipped. 
Only after that is Sadasiva, the actual seat of the Goddess, worshipped. Thus, 
having envisaged the seat, the Goddess is invoked to arise from the worshipper's 
heart and take her place on the Sri-yantra. He meditates on the Goddess and 
her spouse in his heart while holding in his hand a flower smeared 
with sandalwood paste. Then, by means of pranayama, he brings the Goddess 
up through his suswmnd-channel to his sahasrara-centre. Next, he envisages 
Her coming out through his nose into the flower in his hand. He salutes 
Her and mentally utters the mantra: ‘O mother, supreme goddess, who 
resides in the great lotus forest, and whose form is the bliss that is 
the cosmic source, you who are the embodiment of universal goodness, 
please come here, come here. O supreme goddess, easy to approach through 
> 
devotion, Í beg you to abide here with all your attendant deities for as 
long as Í am performing this ritual worship'. After uttering this mantra he 
places the flower on the Sri-yantra. 
Then, the elaborate ritual of welcome starts. The worshipper utters his 
main mantra and, addressing the Goddess, invites Her to come with Her 
spouse, settle on the yantra, be present, confine Herself to the sacred 
area and meet the worshipper face to face.*" Each of these requests is 
spelled out and accompanied with the suitable gesture (mudrà). 
This is followed by the interesting rite of sakalikarara, or setting up parts of 
he deity. This suggests that in reality the Goddess is formless and hence 
as no parts (kala) but, for the sake of being able to worship Her, she is 
nceived as an embodied entity. Her main six parts are saluted as separate 
ities (i.e. hrt-$akti, Siras-Sakti, Sikha-sakti, kavaca-Sakti, netra-Sakti, and 
ra-Sakti)** After that come the ritual safety-measures,, such as enclosing 
r within a magic circle and dispersing all evil elements by uttering the 
ra-mantra and snapping fingers. Then the Goddess is turned into amrta 
and acclaimed supreme (parama) by means of mantras and gestures. Finally, 
*5 These vary with each goddess. For Tripurà they are: Icchā, Jñána, Kriya, Катіпі, 
Kamada, Rati, Ratipriyà and Nanda. 
*7 These are fixed steps in the ritual, common to all forms of worship. They are called dvdhana, 
sthápana, sannirodhana and sammukhikarana. See Rüghavabhatta's commentary on $T, p. 255. 
** Collectively these six parts and their respective śaktis are referred to as sadangayuvati, ог 
sádàngi (Nityotsava p. 44).

--- PAGE 163 [DIRECT] ---

150 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
the pránapratisthà is carried out by showing the gesture of flame (leliha- 
mudrd) while uttering the mantra: ‘Let the five life-breaths of the Goddess 
Tripura and Her spouse be here i the yantra; let Her soul be here with 
that of Her spouse; let all Her sense-organs be here; and let Her speech, 
mind, sight, faculty of hearing and of smelling, Her life-breath, etc. be 
here'. This mantra is interspersed with the entire alphabet and other mystic 
syllables. Then the attri' utes of the deity are shown in gestures. 
Then the worshipper welcomes the deity and proceeds to offer Her gifts 
(upácára). Although a minimum of five items suffices, in practice sixteen 
items are usually offered.*? But one may offer ten, thirty-eight, sixty-four, 
or up to a thousand items. Raghavabhatta explains that the term upacara 
means something that enables one to approach the Goddess with devotion 
and that ensures Her closeness and favour (loc.cit. 
p. 156). In other 
words, the purpose of this püjà is to serve (updcarati), and whatever the 
worshipper served the deity with is an upacára. Each item is offered with a 
mantra consisting of a few mystic syllables, an address to the deity combined 
with a declaration of what the worshipper is offering and his salutation to 
Her. This is followed by a libation to the deity. After all the upacaras 
have thus been offered to the main deity, the worshipper shows Her a 
series of mudras. 
17. Тһе six angas of the Goddess, sikha etc., are worshipped 
at the 
four corners of the yantra, and in front and at the back of the main deity 
who is in the centre. This forms a David's star with the six tiny triangles 
each holding one part ог алда. 
18. The most intimate attendants of the Goddess are then worshipped. 
In the case of Tripura, these are the fifteen Nityas. The Goddess Herself 
is also worshipped in the centre as the sum-total of all the Nityas. Each 
Nitya is identified with one of the fifteen vowels, while the Goddess 
represents the last vowel (ah). These Nityas and the vowels with the nasal 
added are invoked on the central triangle of the yantra, five on each 
side of it. 
19. The worshipper then worships his own guruparamparà on the first 
triangle inside the yantra. This rite covers the worship of three groups: 
the celestial group, the perfected group, and the human group. The list 
of names varies according to the Tantric's own tradition. 
** One list of sixteen upácaras is given by the Mahànirvàna Tantra VI 78 and 79. These 
are: water 
to wash feet, arghya, water 
to wash face and mouth, madhuparka, 
requisites 
for the bath, dress, ornaments, scents and unguent, flowers, incense, lamp, food, a second 
offering of water for washing face and mouth, amrta and betel. tarpana and salute

--- PAGE 164 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: POJA 
151 
20. The dvarana deities or attendants, who reside in the abode of 
outer enclosure of the yantra, the ten guardians of the quarters are worshipped, 
followed by worship of the weapons and all other objects that in Her many 
manifestations the Goddess holds in Her hands. Finally Vatuka, Yogini, 
Ganeša, Ksetrapála, etc., chieftains of the Goddess's special hosts are 
worshipped. 
21. This is followed by a short ritual offering of the incense, lamp and 
libation. Finally the worshipper offers cooked food to the deity, which 
should preferably include rice cooked with milk. This is done with great care 
after having duly consecrated the food. He requests the Goddess to accept 
this food prepared with due care skilfully blended to please all varieties 
of taste and attractively served. He then performs the prandgnihotram by 
offering the Goddess a small portion of the food five times and uttering 
mantras, each consisting of a few mystic syllables such as aim, hrim, Srim, etc., 
and the five lifebreaths (prána, apana, vyana, udana and samana) respectively 
mentioned in each mantra. The mantras end with the word syahd, standing 
for an oblation to the fire of the Goddess's life-breaths. The last mantra 
mentions Brahman separately.5? Then he prays that the Goddess who is his 
main mantra too (in the case of Tripura the mantra is split into three 
groups of mystic syllables), and who pervades the three fundamental realities 
of Atman, Vidya and Siva, may find the food acceptable. Next he meditates 
on the Goddess by envisaging Her as partaking of the food. He finishes 
this rite by offering Her drinks. After carefully removing the dish of food and 
placing it at the north-east corner, he offers Her water for washing and 
rinsing (dcamaniya), elaborately prepared betel,*! money as daksinà, and 
then places a lamp of burning camphor in front of Her. 
22. In kaula-püjà, the worshipper now offers the Goddess a kula-lamp. 
It is made of special metal (sometimes it may be made of dough) and 
is filled with alcohol. This is lighted and he utters the following mantra 
while swinging it in a circle around the deity: "I offer you the kula-lamp 
representing internal fire as well as external fire which has unlimited lustre and 
I swing it around you three times’. 
23. He concludes this part of the pūjā of offerings by taking a handful of 
flowers and offering it to the Goddess (puspañjali) together with praise and a 
prayer. 
. 
_ 
50 Sce Bodewitz, JaimBr, pp. 243-245; 253-256; 310-314 and appendix. 
*! Tàmbüla, a preparation of betel leaf (рдл), areca пш, lime and other herbs, etc.

--- PAGE 165 [DIRECT] ---

152 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
24. He meditates for a while on Her Kamakala-form and on the seed-syllable 
of his isfa-mantra as identical with the Goddess's essence. 
25. The next step is to perform the fire-sacrifice, which is optional. It is 
performed when time and money permit. Therefore, it is performed regularly 
in most temples and in domestic worship on special occasions. At the north- 
east commer of the püjà-pavilion, a square platform of sand is erected 
amcasucing Фуше 
of a square metre. On it the worshipper draws 
three horizontal ‘and #hree vertical lines crossing each other. On these six 
lines he worships the six deities of the quarters (Brahma, Yama, Somu, 
Rudra, Visnu and nära). Then performing nyüsa of the Fire-god’s six 
angas on his омафоду, he worships these in the fire-pit. Next, he worships the 
mine pitha-Saktis | 
Kgoddesses ‘of the Fire-god's seat). He then salutes the 
bree gunas (sattva, etc.) and the four atmans (antaratman etc.). Above them 
T 
the triangle which is the symbol of the universal source. In that 
‘triangle he envisages the Goddess Vagisvari in sexual union with Vàgisvara. 
Then he places the sacred fire in the pit, conceiving it to be their son. He 
praises the fire and requests it to rise and destroy, burn and roast everything. 
He recalls all the sacraments (samskára) of this fire's lifetime up to his 
marriage. Then he performs the usual consecratory rites for the fire-pit, 
envisages the diagram representing fire and worships the Fire-god in its centre ` 
surrounded by attendant deities. After consecratiug the clarified butter, he 
offers as oblation one spoonful for each of the Fire’s seven flames conceived 
as tongues. Then he offers three oblations to the Fire-god. Of the seven flames, 
the central one is the most sacred, and the worshipper invokes Goddess 
Tripura upon it. She is then offered a brief pūjā with five items, after which 
the worshipper offers Her oblations (thrice, ten times or more) followed 
by oblations to the attendant deities. Finally he performs the Mahavyahrti- 
sacrifice by offering oblations with four vyahrti-mantras (bhüh, bhuvah, svah, 
and then all these three together). In purascarana, the number of oblations 
offered to the main deity is always one tenth of the times the main 
mantra is repeated in japa. 
26. After the sacrifice, bali (offering) of cooked food is made to the 
other beings (bhūtas). Usually Vatuka, Yoginis, Ksetrapala (guardian of the 
ground), Gane$a and all bhütas (sarva-bhüta) are deities to whom bali is 
offered. A mandala containing a triangle, circle and square is drawn on 
the right side of the main deity (but not on the platform itself where 
; the seat of the icon is set up). The worshipper here invokes the deities 
| (usually Vatuka, Yoginis and sarva-bhütas) and worships them with a libation 
| 
of water and arghya. Then he offers them food and drink whilst uttering the 
[nonae mantras. These beings are regarded as being instigators of 
LESEN 
aln 
uL 
bn

--- PAGE 166 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : РОЈА 
153 
hindrances (vighnakrt) and are propitiated together with the leader of the 
Goddess's host, Vatuka and the Yoginis (the Goddess's 
supernatural 
followers). The gesture (mudra) the worshipper makes is significant : it is the 
nardca-mudra, or gesture of the arrows, apparently used to intimidate the 
bhütas. 
Animal-sacrifice as bali: In the case of certain deities, such as Durga 
or Kali, and also in some other special forms of pūjā or in fulfilment of 
a vow, the Tantric sometimes sacrifices a living animal, fish, bird, or even 
human being as bali (see KalPur, ch. 67). Sacrificing-a-human-being-seems 
however to have been practised only by the most violent Tantric groups like 
the Kapalike-and by criminals (cf. Bhavabhüti's Malatimadhava, act V). 
The most common animal chosen for sacrifice is the goat, though buffalos 
v are also sometémes sacrificed, especially to Durga. Animal-sacrifice 
is 
performed after the usual bali-offering. The sacrificial animal is ritually 
bathed and consecrated, then worshipped with the five upácáras and various 
^ 
mantras, including a special Gayatri 
for a pašu (human being) The 
AY 
sword used to sever its head is also consecrated and worshipped, and is 
o 
envisaged as being the seat of the divine triad of Siva, Visnu and Brahma. < 
Then after having dedicated the animal to the Goddess, it is beheaded. The 
head of the animal. a little of the blood and a bit of raw meat are offered 
in a metal bowl to the Goddess Durgà, or to Goddess Kausiki. Then 
blood and raw meat are offered to Vatuka at the south-west corner, to the 
. Yoginis at the north-west corner, to Ksetrapala at the north-east corner, and 
to Gane$a at the south-east corner (PKS, pp. 516-521). 
An animal-sacrifice never figures in private daily puja, 
but only in паі- 
mittika-püjà, excep! in big temples like the Kali Temple in Calcutta where 
animal-sacrifice is performed in daily püjà. Again, it is more common in 
the worship of Kali than of Tripura. Kali is sometimes offered the blood. 
of 
a freshly killed animal, or of one’s own body (see KalPur, 67,40 and Kali 
Tantra ch. 3). 
27. The worshipper now circumambulates around the deity and prostrates 
himself in complete surrender. 
28. Japa is one of the most important elements of Tantric ritual. It is 
in fact part of the meditation known as Tantra-yoga, or Mantra-yoga 52. 
ET 
E 
ess in two ways, in ritual pujas he con- 
ceniraies chiefly on a visual representation of the 
ess, on 
Her icono- 
graphic or linear (yantra) form or some symbolic representation, whereas in 
_ UU — MEL 
532 See KT XV, 15. "when tired of performing japa one should perform dhyàna, when 
tired of dhyana one should practice japa’.

--- PAGE 167 [DIRECT] ---

154 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
japa, Her mantra — as one of Her manifestations — is the most important 
element. The only concrete object needed to carry out this ritual repetition 
of the mantra is the rosary, which is very carefully chosen and conse- 
crated. It is concealed from all eyes and carefully guarded from possible con- 
tamination. The beads can be made of various substances, e.g. seeds of certain 
fruits, gems, crystal, special types of wood or bone. 
Rosaries contain 
fifty or a hundred beads, with an extra bead called meru to mark the centre. 
After each round, on reaching the meru, one must not cross over it, but 
must turn back and retrace 
the order of the beads. This means 
that 
instead of turning the rosary circularwise it is moved forwards and backwards. 
The consecration of the mantra is equally elaborate. First, the Tantric offers 
a handful of flowers to the Goddess whilst uttering the usual mantra of offering. 
Secondly, he performs a brief pranayama. Thirdly, he performs nyasa of the 
different elements of the mantra on various parts of his body, concluding 
with the пуаѕа on his hands and on the six limbs (sadanga). Fourthly, he 
envisages setting up a magic enclosure safe from unwanted interference, and 
then meditates on the Goddess. He meditates on the rising of Sakti within 
himself and shows the appropriate тойга. He then utters a series of preliminary 
mantras to safeguard the efficacy of the main mantra. These are Kulluka, setu, 
mahisetu, nirvana, Kamesvari, Kamakala, the collective mantra of all Yoginis 
¿belonging to all exoteric and esoteric Tantric groups, utkilana, safijivini, 
prana (life-breath), Dipani and the mantra of Camunda (the fierce manifesta- 
tion of the Goddess) to remove all hindrances 
** (see p. 108f.). 
Next, he briefly worships the rosary with five offerings, and follows this 
up with praise and a prayer for safety and spiritual guidance. Then he 
starts japa (repeating the mantra for the predetermined number of times). 
After that, he repeats the mystic syllables ascribed to the Goddess's close 
attendants followed by the mantras of the attendant goddesses, sometimes 
adding certain prayers. In concluding, he addresses the Goddess as one 
who conceals all mysteries, and offers Her his performance of japa, and prays 
for Her Grace and for his own perfection. He also utters a prayer for the 
rosary and, thanking it, stores it away in a hidden place. He then utters 
his guru's mantra with salutations, salutes his guru's guru and lastly the para- 
mesthi guru (the first guru in the line of his tradition). 
29. He terminates the worship of the Goddess by singing eulogies of Her 
and of other deities in Her pantheon. 
X 30. In kaula-püjà, where the five items of alcohol etc. are compulsorily used, 
[tie worship of a young a 
handsome woman 
is included 
after the 
33 See PrT pp. 221-225

--- PAGE 168 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: РОЈА 
155 
| 
worship of the main deity. Bv means of various consecratory rites and simple 
meditation, she is purged of her worldly impurities and limitations and 
| 
is elevated to the status of representing the Goddess Herself. Th» worshipper 
effects her transformation by means of initiation and nydsa. Then every 
| 
Saat at 
her ТОНЕ person 1s 
Worshipped БУ The Tantrc Aller completing | {ne 
| 
š 
her toilet, he dresses her up, presents her with gifts of ornaments and money, 
ar 
Ñ 
food, drink and betel. He concentrates on giving her pleasure which culminates 
| | 
in sexual union (Nityotsava, p. 60). Ritual drinking by the worshipper with 
this woman, who is called his Sakti, is a very important part of this act (see 
| 
SL pp. 182-83). The Tantric offers her the first cup of alcohol together with 
| 
pieces of cooked meat and fish and, after obtaining his guru's permission, lets 
| 
the woman drink it while he utters a mantra and envisages the consecration 
| 
of her three essential realities (tattvas). She may drink more if she so wishes. 
| 
Then the Tantric offers her another cup of alcohol, and addressing her as the 
| 
Goddess, requests her to accept the drink with the accompanying meat and 
| 
fish, and to favour him by granting him fame and the destruction of his 
| 
enemies. The woman then drinks part of what is offered and returns the rest 
to him with the words: ‘my son, I give уои. аск 
the rest of the 
"n 
drink in my cup. I shall destroy your enemies and grant you the fulfilment 
of all your wishes'. He drains the cup and does not drink any more and then, 
| 
when she has finished her meal and is rested, he has sexual intercourse with 
` 
her. 
Cakra- r$ 
| 
31. Kaulas sometimes perform a collective form of worsl.ip called cakra- 
| 
piid**. Pupils of the same gura-parampari 
gather together їп a 
closed _ 
| 
and small circle, each accompanied by his female partner. The convener 
, 
conducts the nitya-pūjā, including a much simpler form of suvásini-püjà 
TE 
ог düti-pijà (worship of a woman) (see KT X, 102). Each member of the 
j 
group performs the rite of purifying the tattvas by drinking a little alcoholic 
ч 
bi 
drink and eating the cooked meat and fish. If the guru of the chief worshipper 
j 
(convener) or someone of similar status is present, he is invited to be 
| 
the guest of honour and offered the drinks first. The rest of the püjà 
follows the same pattern as in suvasini-piija, except that the convener, 
who is the leader of the circle (cakra), offers the cups to his guests 
"n 
who share them with their partners. 
Btrict rules of conduct are observed 
within the circle; ordinary Tantrics who have not yet reached a high level 
^ 
of spiritual competence and have not received their final form of consecration 
| 
(pürnàbhiseka, see р. 88f.) are not allowed to get drunk and behave 
| 
improperly (see KT; chapters VI and VII). The spiritual level attained by a 
| 
< Rp 
kl 
ттмд 
эө: 
BIA
за This is not a part of nityapüjà but a Kaula Tantric performs it often and so it is 
w 
enumerated here for convenience.

--- PAGE 169 [DIRECT] ---

B 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
Tantric is referred to as ullasa (ecstacy). There are four stages in which 
after their first initiation Tantrics of the lowest grade learn the intricacies of 
pūjā and of yoga (the technique of meditation). The first stage is called 
the beginning (Grambha), the second is adolescence (taruna), the third is 
termed youth (yauvana) and the fourth is maturity (praudha). These terms 
NO obviously describe the gradual development towards the mature experience 
i 
vf ecstacy, the realization of identity with the deity (Sakti). The last three 
; 
stages describe both the degree or intensity and the duration of the 
| 
х 
ecstatic feeling after that experience. After the stage of maturity comes 
| 
the post-maturity-stage (praudhünta). The next stage is that in which 
| 
mental limitations no longer have any hold (unmana). Last of all comes the 
| 
state that defies description (anavastha). Only Siddhas and Viras reach these 
| 
j 
last three states and rise above all màndatory 
rules and 
protocols (see 
KT. VII 2; Nityotsava p. 61). 
32. The ritual worship now draws towards its conclusion. The Tantric 
begs pardon of the Goddess for all his acts whether good or bad, and 
| 
^ 
offers them all to Her. He then sprinkles water from the visesarghya over 
| 
those assembled as well as over himself. At the same time he begs the 
| 
Goddess's pardon for any fault or misbehaviour that he may have wittingly 
| 
or unwittingly committed. He then envisages the disappearance of the Goddess 
I 
from the yantra back to his heart, while all the attendant deities are 
envisaged as disappearing in Her. He mentally worships Her there in his 
heart, but very briefly. This is also accompanied by a suitable mudra 
(visarjana or leave-taking), indicated by the mudra of samhára, or involution). 
33. Concluding cautionary measures : 
the cups used for offering alcoholic 
drink to the deity and also by the Tantrics themselves must be carefully 
protected by measures to neutralize their potency. These-cups are emptied 
completely, turned upside down on the ground to drip dry, and are 
| 
then removed, cleaned and stored in a hidden place. The ground is protected 
` by tracing 
æ 
mystic syllable upon it. The flowers and other items offered, 
excepting food, are removed from the place of worship on a plate and placed 
| 
on the ground on the north side of the place of worship, whereupon a 
vyápaka (general or comprehensive diagram) has been traced. The vyapaka 
= 
consists of a triangle, circle and square with a central point. Here the deity 
Qe 
уа of the left-overs (Ucchista Bhairava) is invoked. Не (or she) is conceived as 
| 
je 
possessing a terrible form — a manifestation of Siva ov of the Goddess — who 
ul 
removes all bad luck. This deity is then worshipped with flowers etc., and 
the contents of the aforesaid plate are offered to him with the request 
, 
that he (or she) should protect the Tantric and ensure his success. 
Then the worshipper recites the hymn of well-being (santi-stotra), praying

--- PAGE 170 [DIRECT] ---

NY 
Y 
"e 
| 
WE 
NN 
й 
v 
~ 
n 
| | 
n 
£ 
i 
| 
| ! 
IR! 
d š 
"T 
"E 
\ | 
Plate 1. Sri-cakra—the diagram of nine intersecting figures carved on black rock, the square surface 
of which is slightly elevated and rounded like the back of a turtle. It is mounted on a silver throne. 
| 
Behind it the drinking cup dedicated to Sri (Sri-pátra) is filled with alcohol.

--- PAGE 171 [DIRECT] ---

Жл 
Plate 2. The special lamp is placed on a silver plate on which a diagram (yantra) 
lion. The wick is fixed in an upright position by securing tts 
bottom end with a little dough 
is painted in verr

--- PAGE 172 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 3. Bhutasuddhi—the worshipper is envisaging the deity's descent to his heart.

--- PAGE 173 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 4. The worshipper is substituting the divine limbs for each part of his physical 
body (ahganyása). Here he is accommodating the deity's head on his own.

--- PAGE 174 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 5. The special jug for alcohol (sudhà kalasa) is being filled with wine.

--- PAGE 175 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 6. The wine jug is being consecrated with a mantra and meditation on the 
deity as the spirit infusing the alcohol (sudhadevi).

--- PAGE 176 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 7. Before utensils are placed on the wooden pedestal, the space allotted to each is consecrated 
by painting a simple diagram (mandala) upon it.

--- PAGE 177 [DIRECT] ---

Plate 8. The jug of alcohol, the jug of special arghya and the cups for offering alcohol to the main 
gstand on the top of a painted diagram. 
Sri-patra is in the centre. 
deity and attendants are each placed in a row on its own rin

--- PAGE 178 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: РОЈА 
157 
for universal peace and happiness for all, Next he offers a libation to the 
Sun-god whilst uttering his mantra, and then prays that, by his grace, what- 
ever fault he might have committed while performing the ritual should be 
condoned (this rite is known as acchidragrahanam). He then takes a flower, 
sniffs at it and smearing it with the sandalwood paste used for the yantra, utters 
a curse by saying that whoever he sees first or touches with his foot shall 
become his slave, even if that person be as powerful as Indra. After 
that he makes a spot on his forehead with that sandalwoodpaste and 
does the same to the other Tantrics attending the püjà. Only now is the 
. 
worshipper free to eat the food offered to the deity (naivedya) after 
having given some of it to brahmins and other Tantrics.5* 
34. In certain forms of Tantric kaula-püjà after completing the püjà of 
the Goddess and Her attendant deities, it is necessary to worship a young, 
unmarried girl of twelve or under (kumari). The method followed is more or 
less the same as in suvasini-püjà, except that no alcohol is offered and sexual 
intercourse is forbidden (Nityotsava p. 27). 
This ends the description of the daily worship of the Goddess which: is 
compulsory for every Tantric. Some simplification within the individual 
rites is permissible. For example, one may reduce thé number of. attendant 
deities worshipped after worshipping the main Goddess. It is also possible to 
use less expensive items as offerings. For. instance, it is not always feasible . 
- 
for a poor Tantric to offer alcoholic drink, meat ‘and fish every day,.': 
and so substitutes are allowed (e.g. milk instead of alcohol, radish for fish and. 
+; 
ginger for meat). 
оре 
| 
Naimittika-Püjà 
: 
| 
nights in every mont 
(counted from one new moon to the next). These 
| 
are the eighth and fourteenth night of the dark fortnight, the new- and Tull- 
moon nights, and the last night of 
tie mont 
s 
pujas_are called naimittika-püjas and are 
fi 
night. The rites of nyasa, internal worship and japa are considerably elaborated 
ity. 
Otherwise the 
pattern remains the same. There are also certain occasions in each year 
55 In the case of cakra-püjá, the sexual acts take place only after all rites have been completed 
and the food has been eaten. 
56 it is very important for а Tantric to have good knowledge of astrology. In fact many 
Tantrics earn a living from fees obtained for preparing horoscopes and calculating auspicious 
Occasions for performing sacraments for ordinary people.

--- PAGE 179 [DIRECT] ---

158 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
that are set aside for special worship. Damanaka is an important form of 
worship performed on the fourteenth night of the bright fortnight of the 
month of Сайга (spring)*". That evening the Tantric goes to a garden 
and cuts a length of the damanaka creeper (artemisia indica). This is then 
cleaned, placed in a basket, consecrated and worshipped with five upácáras. 
Then, covering it with a piece of fine cloth and placing it in the corner of 
a temple, he keeps vigil over it throughout that night. This rite is know 
as adhivàsa. Next day, 
ifter his daily worship, he performs a special 
püjà to the deity, with the damanaka 
as offering. He also worships 
the attendant deities in the same manner. He then performs the fire- 
sacrifice three times in a more elaborate form than usual. 
Another special pūjā that is widely regarded as important is pavitráropana. 
This special worship of the Goddess, observed on the full-moon night in thé 
month of Srávana (the rainy season), is an expiatory rite involving the 
ceremonial offering of a necklace made of thread 58 to the main deity and all 
Her attendants. This rite is performed to redeem all the accumulated short- 
comings of the worshipper on account of mistakes and any other faults 
on his part during the observance of all the püjas performed during the 
past year. The pavitra (thread) offered has a certain number of knots in it, 
each of which is allotted to a particular deity. There are various methods 
for determining the exact length of the thread, which is made of several 
strands twined together. It should be noted, however, that this rite is observed 
by all Hindu sects and is not confined to Tantrics alone. 
There are also а few other important dates?? for observing special 
püjas. Besides these, the birthday of the Tantric's guru also counts as one of 
these special occasions. 
Expiatory rites and rites performed on the death of a Tantric (sraddha) 
also fall within the classification of naimittika-püjà. The former consist mainly 
of pūjā and japa of a mantra for a fixed number of times. 
In the 
Tantric form of death-rites, the corpse should be specially consecrated with 
nyasa etc. by a Tantric of the same school (sampradáva) who then 
performs the pūjā of the deity and japa of Her mantra for the required 
number of times before 
the body 
is cremated. 
In case of delay 
in 
finding a suitable Tantric, the cremation takes place nevertheless, but within 
57 This rite is performed in order to crush enemies 
in general and to avert misfortune 
caused by adverse constellations (graha) 
** Different varieties of thread can be used: for instance, gold or silver thread, silk, grass- 
fibre. cotton, etc. 
can all serve the purpose 
** In the sense of lunar junctures.

--- PAGE 180 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: POJA 
159 
three days the Tantric rite is performed on a tiny replica of the corpse made 
of special grass.°° 
Катуа-рӣја 
The third category of püjà is known as kamya-püjà. These rites are 
performed in order to achieve a particular aim, or to fulfil a special desire. _ 
They are с 
fied in six groups a or 
to the nature of their purpose. 
However, various texts classify these groups differently, The SSI names 
three alternative groups; the TT presents another list; the YogT and the 
$T (23,122 
f) enumerate Santi, vašya (subjugation), stambhana (making inert), 
vidvesana (generating enmity), uccatana (displacement) and marana (causing 
death). 
ARAM laid 
Santi-rites are observed to cure disease, to remove bad luck due to an 
adverse astrological situation, and to thwart bad influences caused by the 
ritual practices of others. This type of püjà is performed for either the Tantric’s 
own safety, or on behalf of somebody else who seeks his occult help. The other 
types are grouped collectively as abhicára (or krüra karma) which may be 
translated as black magic. 
Generally speaking kamya-püjà tends to be regarded 
as infamous, since 
its purpose is always worldly and has nothing 
to do with spiritual perfection. 
Yet the magical aspect of this form of püjà and faith in its efficacy 
have à wide appeal for many who are not even Tan.rics. As a matter 
of fact fantrics, who are usually married men with families, often derive 
their income from performing the first type of kàmya-püjà on behalf of other 
people. 
The abhicàra-rites,-on the other hand, are usually condemned. In fact 
Tantrics often suffer from public mistrust and fear stemming from the 
belief that they can cause harm. Tantra texts always advocate extreme 
caution іп practising abhicára. 
First of all, only Tantrics who have 
reached a very high spiritual level are allowed to practise these rites. 
This is to ensure that the public can rely on the discretion and disinterestedness 
of such men. It is also prohibited to practise abhicára for personal gain 
or revenge, and it should never be practised against those who are 
innocent and harmless. The only permissible occasions for resorting to абћісага 
are in cases of emergency, sudden attack, invasion, or to prevent a crime, 
etc. Even so, the TT (13,99-100) stipulates that a Tantric who performs 
márana must follow this up with an expiatory rite that involves the penalty 
60 Information received from Prof. V. N. Khiste. 
er 
TT == 
LEES 
—— 
== 
| (

--- PAGE 181 [DIRECT] ---

160 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
of giving away money or property and must, at the same time, undergo 
acts of penance and perform a vast number of japas. Nevertheless, these 
cautions do not prevent Tantrics from performing these rites to demonstrate 
their supernatural power (e.g. NT 20,53-55). Ordinary people both respect 
and shun them through fear lest, in anger, they cause harm. 
The mode of performing these ritual рӣјаѕ does not significantly vary from 
that of daily worship. The main features are a) the yantra, b) the mantra, 
€) the deity. Each type of such a püja has its special yantra — 
a 
geometrical figure of a particular type drawn with special ingredients on a 
special surface. Inside this complex diagram, the special mantra earmurked 
for the act is written in a complicated pattern interspersed with various 
mystic syllables, amongst which the name of the beneficiary or of the 
victim is also written. Sometimes an effigy may be used (see $T. 19, 
72-73 and 22, 123ff), or a 
part of the victim's body, e.g. a hair or 
nail The mantra is always a very special and long one, expressing th? 
purpose most effectively. The japa of this mantra is the most important 
factor of the ritual. In abhicara rituals the deities are different from 
those in ordina 
йјаѕ and often have dangerous characteristics 
(see 
T 13, 126. Rati, Vani, Rama, Jyestha, Durgà and Kali are said to be 
the deities for Santi, va$ya, stambhana, vidvesana, uccatana and mürana 
respectively). At the beginning of each ritual the special deity is worshipped 
in the usual manner described under daily worship. Kartavirya, Nrsimha etc. 
aie also important deities in this context. But any manifestation of the main 
deity can be substituted for an abhicara-deity and, generally speaking, the fire- 
sacrifice with special offerings figures rather prominently in kamya-püjà. 
The main feature is, of course, japa. Every ritual for a special purpose 
has its own stipulated number of repetitions of the mantra, which is 
usually not less than a hundred thousand times, or even more. The 
wearing of a talisman consisting of a mantra specially inscribed on a 
particular surface is not uncommon. For curing a disease or other ailment, 
or for purposes of subjugation, eating or drinking certain items that were 
offered in the ritual is often recommended. 
In some forms of kamya-püjà it is customary to burn one or more 
lamps?! continuously until the required number of japas has been completed. 
Should the lamp or lamps go out before then, the Tantric regards it as an 
` indication of failure. Many other such obvious magical elements feature in 
Катуа-рӣја. If however the required ingredients are collected faithfully 
*! See plate 2.

--- PAGE 182 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : POJÀ 
161 
and correctly, the steps.of the ritual followed without error, the mantras 
are correctly uttered and repeated the required number of times, and no 
sacrilege or impurity has crept into the performance — then the desired 
result should follow automatically. 
But the result depends crucially on the capacity of the worshipper. Not 
just anybody can perform these rites. 
In the first place, only he who 
has undergone the final initiation is qualified to do so. Secondly, the performer 
should moreover have attained perfection (siddhi) in the worship of his own 
main mantra (müla-mantra). That means 
that he must 
first succesfully 
bring his purascarana ritual 
to an end, which makes it necessary to say a 
few words here about that ritual. The word purascarana means preliminary 
acts, After his final initiation, a Tantric is entitled to start practising the 
preliminary rites that will lead to his perfection in the mantra given to him 
as his main mantra: 
There are five рап "to purascarana : daily worsh 
he has completely mastered the technique of yoga. 
In kāmya-pūjā the rites of homa, japa, etc. form part of the prescribed 
puraécarana ritual for worship of the mantra and its deity. When this 
has been brought to a succesful end, the worshipper becomes identified 
with the power of the divine and is empowered to use the mantra for 
the relevant act. He can then persuade. that divine power to fulfil whatever 
he desires. 
1; 
Use of a corpse for püjà ($ava-sadhaná). Tapa 10 9 
One of the extremely daring ways of performing kàmya-püjà is to use a 
corpse as seat for the Tantric and, at the same time, as representing the 
deity. This rite is performed in a very lonely place, preferably near a 
cremation-ground. The corpse is chosen with great care and discretion. 
In certain cases, a child's corpse 
is preferable to any other. Only a 
vira-type of Tantric is entitled to perform this difficult rite. He needs an

--- PAGE 183 [DIRECT] ---

162 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
assistant to help him in his sadhana. This assistant is called uttarasádhaka 
and should be as spiritually advanced as the performer himself. This is a 
secret rite and the secrecy should be strictly observed. The corpse, which 
should be fresh, is bathed and consecrated 
in the usual manner with 
mantras, mudras and пуаѕа. The worshipper and his helper have also 
bathed in the same way. An important feature of this rite is that the 
participants must have had a good meal before starting püjà. The usual 
steps of püjà are observed with special emphasis 
on the protective rites. 
Sava-sàdhanà is no rite for the timid to undertake, as the performers 
tend to have hallucinations of a most terrifying nature. By means of 
пуаѕа etc. the torso of the corpse is transmuted into the cosmic seat 
of the Goddess. As identified with Her, the worshipper sits upon 
it. 
Its face is conceived to be the deity's face and is worshipped as such. The 
Tantric pours alcoholic drinks into the corpse's mouth and feeds it with 
cooked meat. The uttarasádhaka sits a short distance away at the imaginary 
gate of the sacred enclosure. The hair of the corpse is tied into a topknot 
and sixteen upacdras are offered to the Goddess, who is envisaged as 
entering the corpse to enliven it. The Tantric then duly starts his japa 
(repetition of his mantra for the required number of times). The corpse 
is expected to start moving and then gradually to come to life, the divine 
life and ego having descended into it. The Tantric binds the deity, who 
speaks through the voice of the corpse, with a promise to grant him Her 
favour, and he then prays for fulfilment of his special desire. At the end of the 
püjà, he disposes of all the remaining ingredients of the püjà and of the 
corpse itself, either in the water of a swiftly flowing river, or buries them 
in the ground. The Tantric must keep this act a secret for at least three 
to nine days, even though he must feed some brahmins after performing 
this püjà (see KAN, Uttara 14). For achieving a particular end specified 
by the nature of the Kamyakarma utilized, the worshipper prepares a 
yantra containing special signs and the mantra of the specific kamyakarma 
is written down on that yantra in a highly technical manner (NT 18, 
10-12).

--- PAGE 184 [DIRECT] ---

M 
CHAPTER SIX 
TANTRIC SADHANA : YOGA 
1. Ба, 
ИИ part of Tantric practice (sádhand) is yoga. Though the actual 
practice of Tantric yoga is held to be jmpossible without the. personal 
guidance of. а 
guru, 
the basic theory and schemata underlying this practice 
occupy a large part in the texts. 
2. The classic characterization of yoga is that at the beginning of Patañjali's 
Yoga Sütra (I, 2), where yoga is defined as the suspension of the cogni- 
tive functions of the mind (yogas cittavrttinirodhah)." 
All Tantric texts 
accept this technical definition, but in characterizing yoga lay more stress on 
its goal than on 
its character 
as a means to a goal. The goal, as 
should be clear from the preceding pages, is the union of the individual self 
(ivàtman) with the supreme 
Self (paramátman) (ST 25, 1; KT 9, 30). The 
ST enumerates other formulations of this goal, but all the- Tantric ones are 
theistic.” 
š 
Thus for Tantrism yoga is а discipline, leading to the goal of merging 
oneself with the divine. Several disciplines are accepted as potentially 
efficacious; these disciplines are by no means mutually exclusive, and most 
of them are also found outside Tantra. The two disciplines which are charac- 
teristically Tantric, and which are indeed always present in Tantra yoga, 
are meditation on mystical syllables (Mantra yoga) and a scheme of medi- 
tation, known 
as Laya yoga or Kundalini yoga, which concerns 
an 
elaborate mystical physiology. As Mantra has been considered in chapter IV, 
it is the latter which will occupy most space in this chapter. Laya means 
‘dissolution’, and refers to the dissolution of the everyday world (macro- 
cosm) within the Tantric's own body seen as a microcosm and ultimately 
the dissolution of his empirical self into the deity. Kundalini yoga, which is à 
! For more information about the meaning of yoga in PYS, see E. Frauwallner, Geschichte 
der indischen 
Philosophie, |. Band, Salzburg 1953, pp. 408-445; Pütaüjala Yoga is often 
called astáñga Yoga, ‘the discipline of eight steps' or 'eight constituent parts’ — see below. 
2 These are the experience of the identity of Siva and the individual self (pratyabhijñë 
theory of Kashmir Saivism); identification of Siva and Sakti (Uttarámnàya/ügama school); ra 
true knowledge of the Primal Purusa (purána purusa) (Vaisnava dualists). The views of 
Samkhya and Nyàya philosophy are also mentioned. ST 25, 2-3 and Raghavabhatta’s 
commentary thereon. 
MAS

--- PAGE 185 [DIRECT] ---

164 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
‘name for the same process (though some Tantrics are unaware of. this 
identity between the two), takes its name from Kundalini, the coiled female 
` 
serpent which lies at the base of the spine and symbolizes the cosmic 
energy (see pp. 
170-5); due to the individual's ignorance the cosmic 
energy remains powerless and limited, as the individual energy (jivasakti). This 
‘serpent has to be aroused to proceed up the centre of the body till it 
. 
reaches a point just above the top of the head which symbolizes the Supreme 
Self (see p. 57ff.). 
The mystical physiology envisages a series of lotus centres (cakra) and 
of nodes (granthi) arranged up the (mystical) spine, and a system of veins 
(nadi) through which passes the vital air (prana or vayu). Crucial points in the 
body are occupied by deities and other symbols which historically arise from 
the macrocosm-microcosm equivalence. The whole system is visualized in 
great detail. Thus, though Tantric meditation involves suspending the mind's 
cognitive functions, this must not be understood to imply that the mind 
is emptied : 
on the contrary, the introversion (cessation of response to the 
external world) is to give free rein to the intuition (saksijfiana). The mind, once 
controlled, is concentrated on the yogin's picture of himself and step by step 
on the process which this visualized self is to undergo in order to achieve 
liberation (see chart, also Frauwallner, 138, 139 and 141). 
3. Classifications of yogic disciplines 
Yogic texts enumerate four types of yoga in this order: Mantra Yoga, 
Hatha Yoga, Laya Yoga, Raja Yoga (YTU 19; YSU 1, 129; 5, 17 etc.)? 
The first and third of these we have just characterized. Hatha Yoga may 
be summarily characterized as a discipline in which the overcoming of normal 
physiological limitations plays a great role. We shall later come back to 
some detailed description of this discipline. Raja (royal) Yoga is sometimes 
interpreted as Patañjala Yoga, but sometimes just as the final step in any of the 
yoga disciplines.* The interrelation between Laya (this term is more popular 
3 The definition 
in the Yogatattvopanisad (YTU 24) suggests 
that 
this text 
at any 
rate includes Patafijala (i.e. Astánga) Yoga in Hatha Yoga. 
* About the fourth form of yoga, viz. Raja Yoga, there seems to exist some ambiguity and 
opinions differ. The Y ogasikhopanisad tends to suggest that it means yoga that uses sex-symbolism 
(YSU 1, 136-138); but from statements 
in the PrT it would seem 
that Raja Yoga is 
equivalent to the final stage of Laya Yoga. This is the stage in which the whole of the 
yogin's differentiated existence is totally submerged in the undifferentiated (HYP 4, 77) 
HYP (4, 103) contends that Raja Yoga is the goal of Hatha Yoga. Therefore, it might 
be permissable to conclude that Raja Yoga is that which leads to immediate samadhi, 
or rather what Pātañjala Yoga terms 
as undifferentiated merger (asamprayfidia samadhi). 
Vyasa, Bhasya on PYS 1 1, 2, 11, 18 and 20. 
d

--- PAGE 186 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : YOGA 
165 
amongst Hatha yogins), Mantra and Hatha yogas (we here name them in the 
order in which we shall deal with them) is also complex. As disciplines they 
are more or less complementary; but individual yogins and the pupillary 
tradition (sampradaya) see themselves as adhering principally to.one of them 
and accepting elements from the other two. Laya Yoga and?Mantra Yoga 
are approved in Tantric texts as suitable for the adept (s@dhaka), but one 
whose primary affiliation is to the Hatha Yoga tradition is not considered 
a true Tantric.? Tantric texts clearly state that Tantric yoga consists of ` 
Mantra and Astanga, combined with Kundalini yoga ($T ch. 25). The 
Kularnava Tantra declares that Tantric yoga consists of japa and meditation 
on Mantra (KT 15, 5), the Nityasodasikàrnava too affirms this (NST 2, | 
ff.), 
though some other step of Astànga yoga 
is mentioned. The Yogini 
Hrdaya Tantra, on the other hand, is very definite about the importance 
of Kundalini yoga in Tantric sadhana and includes 
it as part of the 
puja (YHT 3, 139-142). This means of course 
that Kundalini yoga ‘is 
practised together with Mantra yoga. Though we can 
to some extent 
separate them in exposition, it is hardly possible to separate Mantra and 
Kundalini yoga in the practice of Tantric yoga. And even at an earlier 
stage it was not uncommon for Tantrics to use Hatha Yoga techniques 
alongside their own.” 
4. The steps of yoga 
The Patafijala Yoga Sūtra says that yoga has eight steps, and ST accepts 
that (ST 25, 4). The eight steps аге: yama (abstention), niyama (observance), 
asana (postures), pranayama (breath control), pratyahdra (withdrawal of the 
senses), dhàranà (fixed-introverted-attention), dhyana (contemplation) and 
samadhi (concentration, fixation). However, in strict Tantra circles yoga had 
only six steps. They are thus listed in the Tantralokaviveka? : pranayama, 
dhyana, pratyühára, dhdrand, 
tarka (transcendental 
discrimination) and 
samadhi. This list omits the first three of Pataüjali's eight steps, which 
are in fact preliminaries to the actual practice of meditation, and adds 
* A Hatha yogin is on the other hand more concerned about his physical perfection 
and follows strenuous techniques to achieve that. These techniques are often despised by the 
Tantra. cf. KT, 9. 
6 NST 2, 12 mentions mudrà as aid to Mantra-japa. The real meaning of the term mudrà as 
used in the verse is not quite clear. 
7 The Tantra yoga utilizes many of the Hatha Yoga postures 
like Khecari mudra, 
Yonibandha mudrà etc. for awakening the individual energy. Cf. V. V. Dviveda, Introduction 
to NST, pp. 114-115. 
* On TA 4, 15-16. See also V. V. Dwiveda, op. cit. p. 118.

--- PAGE 187 [DIRECT] ---

166 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
tarka.? A Buddhist Tantra, the GuhyaSamaja Tantra, incorporates the 
same six steps of yoga into its own system (GST 18, 140), and a much 
„earlier text, the Maitrayaniya Aranyaka (6, 18 also cf. Maitri Upanisad 6, 
8) has the same six again. On the other hand the Pr.T. quotes the 
Niruttara Tantra 
as 
listing six steps, 
but not 
the same 
six: dsana, 
Pranayama, pratyahara, dhàraná, dhyana and samadhi. This list restores 
sana and omits rarka. From all this we conclude that the oldest classification 
gave yoga six components. Tarka, which meant philosophical speculations 
about the nature of phenomena (later systematized in Samkhya philosophy), 
was an integral part of yogic practice, and this tradition was preserved in 
orthodox Tantric circles.!? [t complemented the psycho-physical techniques 
which became systematized in Patafijala yoga and this became accepted 
as part of the standard form of yoga; these were the techniques which 
culminated in Hatha Yoga.!! 
atha-yoga prescribes a sixfold self-purificatory programme to be practised 
fore practising dsana, mudrá, Pratyahara, pranayama, dhyana and samadhi. 
This sixfold practice (satkarma) entails purely physical methods of cleansing. 
Through persistent practice the yogin learns to clean his nasal Passages 
(sinus cavities), windpipe, stomach, bladder, intestines, etc. by inhaling or 
sucking up water through his nose, anus or penis, or by pushing a long thin 
strip of muslin through his nasal cavity, swallowing it and then carefully 
pulling it out. These are practices to keep the body healthy. Asanas 
and mudras are the two important factors that figure in this form of yoga. 
Both entail certain postures in which the physical organs are locked in a fixed 
Position. Asanas are in fact sitting-postures, though many дѕапаѕ make 
sitting quite impossible. Mudràs are specific positions of the body made by 
using the hands, fingers, toes, heels, and even the tongue to close several or all 
inlets and cavities of one's body, and both dsana and mudrà are important aids 
for successfully regulating the vital breath (pranayama). 
5. Preliminaries to meditation 
However, Pátanjala Yoga, and the Tantric tradition. which accepts its 
eight steps, do not insist on such elaborate physical preliminaries. They 
° On tarka see Amrtanüdopanisad, 
6; TA 4. 86-107; also Jayaratha's commentary 
on 
these verses. 
Note that the commentary 
on verse 96 mentions that the system of Kashmir 
ivism recognizes 
six components 
of yoga 
Abhinavagupta 
seems 
to have accepted. 
the 
components of Pátanjala Yoga as well 
10 The Mrgendragama 
enumerates 
Japa 
along 
with 
the 
six components 
The 
Visnu 
Samhita enumerates the traditional 
six. 
The Layayoga counts turka as an integral part of 
Laya Yoga 
! See 
YTU 24-29

--- PAGE 188 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: YOGA 
167 
lay more stress on the moral than on the physical preparations for meditation. 
They? explain the first three steps as follows. 
Yama. This consists of ten virtues: not injuring anythingwor any being; 
truthfulness; not stealing another's property; 
practising *Góntinence and 
chastity; compassion; straightforwardness; mercy; resolutí8n ; 
éating abste- 
miously; and purity. 
Niyama. The practice of asceticism and fulfilling vows; 
+ 
contentment; 
faith in religion; offering gifts; worshipping God; listening to religious 
discourses; modesty; speculation on philosophical ideas; performance of 
japa; and performance of the fire-sacrifice — these are the ten physical 
and mental acts recommended under niyama. 
The distinction between Yama and Niyama is somewhat arbitfary: For 
example, the Yogatattva Upanisad (28, 9) declares that the main festure of 
Yama is abstentious eating and that of Niyama not harming any cré&ture. 
Asana entails sitting-postures. There are a vast number of these approved 
of and practised in yogic circles. Some are very difficult and take long practice; 
but for astánga-yoga simple sitting-postures are recommended. YTU seems 
to suggest that ¿sana also means the place where yoga is practised as 
well as the posture itself. It describes the аѕапа suitable for practising 
pranayama as a thoroughly clean and flawless temple, with a pleasant 
atmosphere and a minute entrance. The yogin should spread a seat made 
of matting, deerskin, or silk, in a position that is neither too high nor 
too low, and there incense should be burned to make the place cheerful. 
The posture recommended is the lotus-posture. ST mentions five suitable 
postures, viz. lotus, svastika, vajra, bhadra and vira.'? 
6. The acquisition of control 
, The fourth, fifth and sixth steps of eightfold yoga, pranayama, pratyahara and 
dhàraná, are three processes to regulate, control and arrest the mind by fixing 
it upon some spot in the body. Thus the yogin acquires control over his 
vital processes. Pranayama literally means control of the vital airs. To 
explain how Tantra conceives of this control, however, we must begin our 
account of its mystical physiology. The breath of life, which is generally 
12 Our explanations of the eight steps follow ST 25, 5-26; the PYS account is slightly 
different. 
13 For explanations of various ásanas, mudrüs and bandhas — 
all of which concern 
special physical attitudes and even efforts, consult B.K.S. Iyengar, Light of Yoga, London 1966; 
also the plates and explanations of the mudrás and bandhas given in the Hatha Yoga 
oe edited by Swami Digambarji and Pt. Raghunath Shastri Kakaje, Lonavla, Dt. Poona

--- PAGE 189 [DIRECT] ---

168 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
called prana, is usually held to consist of five'* breaths or winds (уйум) 
| 
moving in different directions: рапа, apana, vyàna, udàna and samana. 
The vital breaths constitute everything airy which is felt in one's body; 
they pass through all its physical passages and regulate all its functions. 
They are manifest forms of vitality or life itself. Prada in the generic 
sense is the cause of the particular breaths, and they in turn are the 
cause of the mind. Therefore control over the one leads to control over 
‘the other two. All are normally unruly, but by controlling the breaths 
the yogin calms down and controls the whole complex. 
The theory of the breaths is not peculiar to Tantra; what follows is. The. 
e 
mystical body contains a vast number of veins (nadi), which are considered 
| 
to be the connecting links between the senses апа the mind. Moreover, 
they are activated by the passage of the breaths. If the yogin stops the 
passage of the breaths through the nádis, he thereby stops the activities 
of the senses and severs the connection be:ween the mind and external 
sensory objects, which are what distracts him from concentrating on the 
essence of his individual self. In this theory pranàvama thus merges with 
pratyahara, withdrawal of the senses, which is the next step of the eight 
(see below). 
Though the TT (27, 42) records fifty thousand nadis, only fourteen are 
relevant for Tantric yoga. Their names are : susumna, ida, pingala, sarasvati, 
varana, pusa, hastijihva, yaSovati or yasasvini, visvodara, kuhü, samkhini, 
payasvini, alambusa, and gandhari.'* All of them stem from the lowest of the 
MEER 
iz 
Sree 
six centres (cakra) which are arranged up the spine. This cakra is in fact | 
called ‘the locus of the roots’ (mūlādhāra). In the middle of the miladhara 
^ 
cakra is a triangle. From the centre of this triangle rises the central, axial 
, 
hich-is considered to be the door to the realization of the knowledge 
Brahman. )The ѕиѕитпа is the only nàdi which is not connected to a sense 
organ. Orreither side of susumna are two nàdis called іда and pingala which 
terminate in the left and right nostrils respectively. 
As for the other паі : alambusà goes down to the anus, kuhü connects 
with the tip of the penis, visvodarà 
reaches 
the abdomen, 
vāraņā 
is 
spread all over the body, hastijihvà and yasovati respectively connect the 
two bip toes, gündhüri and pusd connect 
one eye each, samkhini and 
payasvini connect one ear each and sarasvati stretches up to the tongue. 
< 
the susumni ; 
it rises to the brahmarandhra, a cavity at the fontanel, 
‘+ Sometimes this number is raised to ten, 
Ct. ST 1, 44-45 
'5 Bhüvanopanisad 15 and Bhiskararáya's commentary on the same Upanisad, 1; see also 
$T 1, 41-43, the number of ndis is here ten.

--- PAGE 190 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : YOGA 
169 
We are now in a position to describe pranayama. It primarily concerns the 
first two of the five breaths : ргапа and арапа. Prana is the stream of air 
H 
2 
— Y 
V 
that moves upwards in the body, and арапа is the stream that moves down- 
н 
Lm 
— 
r 
a 
wards in the body. These two streams represent the respiration of living 
beings. When these two breaths flow through ida, the mind becomes 
concentrated and introvert, and when they flow through pingala the opposite 
takes place. Normally, breathing is done througlt one of these two nadis, 
and the process does not alternate regularly between the two. In pranayama 
the yogin so regulates his breathing that the inhaling (рйгаКа), keeping the 
breath in (kumbhaka), and exhaling (recaka) are paced equally. He inhales 
through one nasal passage and exhales through 
the other, and then 
reverses the process. Holding his breath takes longest when he pushes it through 
his susumna channel. This process helps to rouse his individual consciousness 
fkundalini) and to elevate it towards the Ultimate consciousness. It is the 
most important of all yogic techniques and Tantrics practising sadanga-yoga 
(with six constituents) always start with pranayama.! ° 
ŠT mentions two types of pranayama : 
one accompanied with japa and 
dhyana of the mantra and its deity; and the other practising pranayama 
without any japa or dhyana (ST 25, 20-23). Furthermore 
it states that 
these two types should be practised one after the other and that long 
practice of pranayama produces several: symptoms indicating approaching 
success in gaining control over the senses. 
Pratyáhára, the fifth step has virtuallysbeen covered by our account of 
pranayama. |t aims at controlling the functions of the ѕепѕеѕ 
іп order to 
prevent the mind from being diverted by external sense objets. This is a 
process that reverses the mind from the outer world to one’s inner self. 
Attention is prevented from wandering from object to object and is turned 
inwards (interiorized). This is achieved by blocking the functions of all 
other nadis, excepting the susumna. 
. 
Dharand, the sixth step is described as holding the vital air at a certain 
place (ST 25, 25). It aims at focussing the mind on a given point. For Tantrics 
this point is some centre within one's own body. These centres are scattered 
all over the body. The ST names the following : 
toes, ankles, knees, thighs, 
frenum of the prepuce, genitals, navel, heart, neck (ghantika), throat, base 
of the palate (/Jambika),'” point between the eyebrows, forehead, crown and 
16 V. V. Dwiveda, op. cit., pp. 117-119. 
e 
17 Between vi&uddha and аја cakras. at the base of the crown is the centre called 
lambikà. This cakra usually falls. outside the group of six cakras but holds an important place 
in another system of nine cakras. This latter series of cakras is followed by the Kaula 
yogins of the Tripura sect. See Amrtánanda's Commentary on YHT 3, 146.

--- PAGE 191 [DIRECT] ---

170 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
brahmarandhra. Bhaskararaya on the other hand gives a different list of 
nine points: the six cakras; two thousand-petaled lotuses, one below the 
miiladhara, and one above the crown; and /ambikàgra (comm. on BhavUp p. 
p. 277). 
7. The culminating stages 'of Eightfold Yoga 
The final steps of yoga, dhyana and samadhi concern pure meditation and 
realization of saving knowledge by means of intuitive insight. They are 
. described as follows : 
Dhyana is fixedly contemplating one's deity as within one's own self (ST + 
25, 26). Sometimes the Tantric’s guru is also the object of dhyana. The 
KT speaks of contemplation on a gross form and on a subtle form. The 
first entails contemplation on a particular form of the deity; whereas 
the second, which is the final stage of dhyana, entails contemplation on infinite 
and boundless absolute knowledge — Brahman, which is illumination 
(KT 
IX, 3-9). In his commentary on ST 25, 26 Raghavabhatta mentions sagarbha- 
dhyana and vigarbha-dhyàna, respectively meaning dhyana on an object with 
form, and dhyana on ap object without form. The latter is indeed the 
culmination of dhyana and is known as samādhi, or the eighth constituent 
of yoga. 
Samé@dhi is attained when іп deep contemplation 
the yogin becomes 
unconscious of any distinction, discrimination or awareness of anything 
' 
extraneous to the Absolute Reality. This is sometimes described as ecstasy, 
resulting from self-realization, This stage is reached when the yogin experiences 
yoga or union, the union of the individual self with the Supreme Self. 
The experience is totally devoid of any notion of differentiation, and is 
likened to a void, or illumination (see ST 25, 27, and Raghavabhatta’s 
commentary thereon).'* 
8. Laya/Kundalini Yoga 
In Patañjala Yoga samadhi is the consummatory stage of the whole process, 
However, 
in Tantric 
yoga 
the saving 
realization 
is more 
specifically 
attained by Kundalini and Mantra Yoga which supervene on the earlier 
scheme. We must now describe Kundalini Sakti, the cakras and the granthis 
(nodes), and say something of 
the identification of macrocosm with microcosm 
and the ultimate one-ness of the Supreme Reality, which is the source of all. 
\* The same two types of dhyana are also called saguna and nirguna respectively. See Ragha- 
vabhatta's comm. 
on $T 25, 26-27 and YTU 
104-105.

--- PAGE 192 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : YOGA 
71 
The Layayoga '? states that since the macrocosm and microcosm both owe 
their creation to Brahman and Prakrti, they are closely related, or might even 
be considered identical. Therefore knowledge of the microcosm automatically 
results in knowledge of the macrocosm. 
On the individual 
level, the 
phenomenal world functions when Kundalini, the infinitesimal part of the 
Cosmic Energy (Sakti), lies asleep in the individual's müladhàra. By awakening 
her, and bringing her up to the point just above the top of the susumna, called 
the sahasrara cakra, where the Cosmic Energy — 
the aggregate of all 
Kundalinis — resides in inseparable union with Parama Siva (Brahman, the 
Supreme Rality), and there merging her with the Cosmic Energy, the 
yogin is able to obtain spiritual release from the bondage of this world 
and everything worldly. We can see in the process that symbolically he 
has reversed the process of creation and effected the reabsorption of the 
world (and himself) into an undifferentiated unity. This process is known 
as Laya. 
The yogin's spine is assimilated to Meru, the cosmic central mountain, and is 
called brahmadanda (Brahmà's stick, i.e., the axis mundi). Thus the centre of 
the yogin's mystic body is the centre of the world. The susumni, 
is inside 
it, so it is hollow like a bamboo. In the susumna exists the entire manifest 
world in concentrated form. Ranged vertically along it are six. centres 
called ‘wheels’ (cakra), each of which is conceived. 
as a stylized lotus 
inhabited by a deity and containing the constituente of both physical and 
sonic creation (see pp. 52, 93). Above this series of six cakras exists. the 
topmost wheel, sahasrara (thousand-spoked) just above the yogin's head. 
` The five cosmic gods, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Isvara, and Sadaéiva, the 
five gross elements (bhiitas) with their respective subtle essences (tanmátras) 
and their bijamantras, each of the manifest motor organs, as well as each of the 
cognitive organs belonging to each of these five elements — all these are 
envisaged as situated in the first five cakras within the susumna. Thus 
the whole structure of the primary creation of physical phenomena is within 
reach of the yogin’s contemplative vision, so that step by step he can 
dissolve it back to its primordial source. In the ājñā-cakra are the very first 
three elements of the manas group, the first three evolutes of prakrti — the 
source of phenomenal creation. For practical purposes the yoga accepts 
only one mind-element (see Frauwallner, pp. 139-140). Laya-yoga enables the 
yogin to go beyond prakrti, by passing through the opening in the susumna 
at the brahmarandhra and merging in the absolute Reality inside the sahasrara- 
cakra. The yogin’s journey towards his source and eventual union with the 
1° Layayoga Samhita, 2, 1-3.

--- PAGE 193 [DIRECT] ---

172 
Í 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
cosmic Reality is symbolized by turning the faces of the six lotuses upwards 
towerds this cosmic Reality. During the state of creation they remain pointing 
downwards. Hence this process of samādhi, or reunion with the cosmic 
Reality, is often described 
as the spiritual practice of reversion 
(ultd- 
sadhana. 
See S. B. Dasgupta, 
Obscure. 
Religious 
Cults, 3* ed. 
1969, 
«рр. 229-235). 
Similarly the mātrkās, the primary sonic emanation and the source of the 
rest of the sonic creation (see pp. 93ff.) are situated on the petals of the 
lotuses of these six cakras. 
Uttara malini (see Ch. IV, р. 97) on the other hand 
` 
remains on the petals ol 
її. 
lotus of the sahasrara cakra (see chart). 
9. Kundalini is the consciousness 
(cit-sakti) which, as a result of the 
l 
I 
evolutionary process of creation, becomes limited as Jiva (a 
‘(a living being). 
g). After i 
ET created 1 
the grossest of all basic elements — the solid (prthivi, ї.е. 
ie. ihe ^ 
ses 
to function as it were, because from t then on the 
ORE universe functions almost automatically. Hence it is conceived 
| 
that Kundalini, encased in each individual | being, j just goes to Sleep. ‘As soon ` 
as 
as this p 
power is roused from her slumber, she proceeds to Tevert to | her real 
existence as 
as undifferentiated from the ultimate Reality. She is “called | 
Kundalini, as s 
as she is visualized as a coiled snake lying inside the lowest cakra, 
" 
müládhàra. Since cit-sakti is identified with the Goddess, the Cosmic Woman, 
Kundalini is referred to as feminine.?° 
a} 
Os 
10. We must now describe the cakras in detail. Though their number varies 
| 
in different schools, usually they are said to be six.?' They are arranged 
in a vertical hierarchy to emphasize the spiritual stages attained through 
direct experience of cosmic causal realities, passing trom the gross to 
increasingly subtle aad pure forms. The set of six cakras (sat-cakra) is: 
miiladhdra (or ádhara), svádhisthàna, manipüra(-ka), anáhata, visuddha (ot 
visuddhi) and ајда. The müladhara is at the bottom of the spine, and the 
series rises till 4/йй cakra which is in the centre between the eye-brows. 
Each cakra is envisaged as a stylized lotus, with a large pericarp and a number 
of petals. Each lotus is sometimes identified with a particular goddess 
(Sakti), or that goddess is considered to exist in it (see KAN 21, 30-80; and 
140; YHT 3, 33). 
Mülàdhàra is а red lotus with four petals, It is red like the rising sun 
2° Kündalini is envisaged as the Goddess — the divine Energy, subtle as the fine fibre of a 
lotus stalk and not fully manifest. Therefore she is visualized as lying coiled to conceal her 
divine glory. 
?! See note 17; see also YHT 1, 25: NT 7, 1 and Ksemaraja’s comm. thereof.

--- PAGE 194 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : YOGA 
173 
and the letters va, $a, sa and sa are respectively stamped on its petals. 
The kümarüpa-pitha (see Ch.-1, 
p. 38) is situated here, and the lotus 
is situated in the middle between the anus and the penis. There is a bulb 
or pericarp in it (kanda or mülakanda), and in the middle of the lotus is 
a triangle (yoni). often compared to a water-chestnut (srhgàtaka).'Inside the 
pericarp is the square, symbol of prthivi (element of solidity) and the 
bija-mantra of that element, namely lam. Brahma resides there and so does 
Kandarpa (the god Eros), as identified with apana уйуи (the apana breath 
or air) The bija of prthivi is mounted on an elephant and carries the 
Creator (Brahma).?? The Sakti of this centre is Dakini, who is red, has four 
arms and shines with beauty. She is the bearer of the revelation of pure 
intelligence. 
Inside the triangle, which 
is called kamariipa-pitha, 
is the 
svayambhü-linga (phallic symbol of Siva). This is of the colour of gold 
and is turned downwards. Its shape is like a bud and its head is slightly 
depressed. Covering it is the Kundalini, fine as the fibre of a lotus-stalk. She 
(Kundalini) is the Goddess Maya, who bewilders the created. She covers the 
mouth of the svayambhü-linga with her own mouth and is coiled around it 
three and a half times, like a sleeping snake. Her murmur sounds like the 
drone of innumerable intoxicated bees (ST p. 560; Raghavabhatta comm. 
KAN 21, 25-36; SN 5-11). 
Svadhisthana, the second cakra, is inside the susumná-nádi and is situated 
at the root of the penis. This is a vermilion-red lotus with six petals, upon 
which the letters ba, bha, ma, ya, ra, and la are respectively stamped. 
This is.the region of the element of liquidity (water), envisaged here as а 
half-moon in the pericarp of the lotus. The bija-mantra of this element is 
vam, which is mounted on a makara (trunked dolphin), and Visnu is 
seated within the point of the nasal in vam. Here Rakjni is the presiding šakti 
(goddess), who has four arms and holds in her hands a trident, thunder, 
a lotus and a kettledrum. She has three eyes, fierce fangs, and is terrifying. 
Manipüra is conceived as a ten-petaled lotus of dark cloud-colour. On these 
petals are the letters from da to pha. This is the region of the fire-element, 
and the bija of fire is envisaged in the pericarp as ram, which is within a 
triangle — the symbol of fire. The fire is seated on a ram, is radiant 
as the sun, and carries Rudra (Siva).?? This centre is situated at the base 
of the navel and its Sakti is Lakini. 
Anáhata. This is a twelve-petaled lotus situated in the heart. It is of a tawny 
22 This is the region of the body in which sensations of desire that stimulate procreatory 
acts are experienced. Therefore Kama, the god of love and Brahma, the progenitor are 
envisaged in this centre. 
23 KAN 21, 50 puts Brahma in this centre. 
У^ 
WY

--- PAGE 195 [DIRECT] ---

174 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
colour and the letters ka to tha are stamped on its petals. The element of air 
(gaseity) is within this centre, and is represented by a hexagonal figure of 
smoky gray colour containing the bija of air (vam), which is mounted on an 
antelope. This centre is called апалага, because here one can experience the 
original sound produced without any physical cause (i.e. without striking two 
objects together). Kakini is the Sakti of this lotus. She is yellow in colour and 
looks intoxicated. Four-armed, she holds in three hands the drum, the spear and 
the noose, whilst her other hand is held in the gesture of protection. In the 
pericarp of the lotus is a triangle, and inside that is the banalinga (another 
phallic symbol of Siva’s), which has an orifice on top. In the bija yam 
is the god Isa, who has three eyes and four hands. One should meditate on the 
Pürnagiri-pitha in this centre (KAN 21, 63). It should be noted that this 
lotus is different from an eight-petaled lotus situated just below it. This 
second lotus of the heart is called ananda kanda (rooted in bliss), and is 
the residence of one's favourite (sta) deity. This lotus stands apart from 
the group of six that is of such importance in Kundalini-yoga. 
Visuddha, envisaged as a sixteen-petaled lotus placed in the throat, is 
regarded as the locus of speech (bháratisthàna). All the sixteen vowels 
from a to ah are stamped on its petals. It is of a smoky colour and 
in its pericarp is the region of ether (space), represented by a circle. Inside 
the circle is the bija of the element of ether, namely kham, mounted 
on a white elephant. In the bija dwells Sadásiva as ardhanárisvara (an andro- 
gynous form) He has five heads and ten arms, and 
is clothed 
in a 
tiger's skin. The šakti here is Sakini, purer than the ocean of nectar. She 
is terrible in form and is permanently intoxicated. 
Ajña, situated between the eyebrows, is a two-petaled white lotus. The 
letters ha and ksa are stamped on these two petals. The Kaulavali-nir- 
naya calls it the place of manonmani (beyond the scope of mind), which is the 
place of bindu (ie. pasyanti,.see P. 97). In the pericarp is a triangle in 
which Hakinisakti resides. She holds one hand in the gesture of granting 
boons, and in the other three she respectively holds a drum, a skull and a 
rosary. She has six faces and is white in colour. Inside the triangle is the 
itaralinga (another phallic symbol). Here exist the manastattva and the 
highest of mantra-bijas, like om or hrim and pure intelligence, which is 
usually envisaged as a flame. Above the triangle is the point of the nasal 
(апизуйга) at the end of the bija. Above that is the crescent of the nasal 
resonance, above which is the bindu which is called Rodhini or Bodhini. Above 
bindu is nada, white as the diffused rays of the moon. The deity in this centre 
is parama Siva (the supreme Siva). The Jalandharapitha is envisaged here 
in this cakra.

--- PAGE 196 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC 
SADHANÁA : YOGA 
175 
Generally speaking, all these lotuses face downwards to symbolize the 
condition of procreation and decentralization, as well as the fragmentation 
of the central, 
integral 
Reality. 
In Laya-yoga however 
the process of 
decentralization 
is arrested and turned 
into the concemtric 
process of 
cosmogonic involution, whereby each effect is merged in its immediately 
preceeding cause until all differences are finally merged in the supreme 
source. This is symbolized by reversing the lotuses, i.e. by turning their 
faces upwards. The process is envisaged as Kundalini's journey through 
all these six lotuses, and is described as the piercing (bheda) of the cakras. 
Jivatman (the individual self) is identified with Kundalini and resides in the 
miiladhara, while antardtman (the essential self) resides in the djfia-cakra. 
11. Nodes (granthi) 
Within the region of the six cakras, three nodes (granthi or blocking-points) 
are situated. These are so named because at these points the yogin encounters 
particular obstruction on his spiritual journey. The first of these nodes 
is situated in the mülàdhára and is called the brahma-granthi. But there are 
differences of opinion about its situation. Some texts place it in the svadhistha- 
na, While others go so far as to put it in the manipüra, which would 
scarcely be credible. The visnu-granthi — the second node — is said to 
be the door to the anühatacakra — and is situated in that cakra.?* This 
is the second barrier the yogin must overcome 
in order to enter the 
region of the cosmic 
elements. 
The 
third 
node 
is situated 
in the 
ájfià-cakra. It is called the rudra-granthi, which is as it were the door to 
perfect union with the divine and total elimination 
of the experience 
of duality (see the Yogasikhopanisad 
1, 83-87 and the comm. 
of Sri 
Upanisadbrahmayogi thereon). 
à 
Apparently the susamna-nadi is not hollow all the way through. Just as 
the hollow in the centre of the bamboo branch is closed at nodes (granthi), 
so too is the susumnd closed at its bottom, middle and top by three joints acting 
as doors. Just as one has to burn holes in the bamboo-joints in order to 
obtain an uninterrupted passage, so also must the three aforesaid nodes in the 
susumna be pierced before Kundalini can reach the sahasrára cakra. Once 
the piercing has been done, she has no difficulty in achieving union with 
the cosmic Energy (and with the cosmic Reality), and the same holds for the 
yogin. 
24 There are two schools of opinion on the location of Vignu granthi. The second school 
maintains that this granthi is in manipüra cakra.

--- PAGE 197 [DIRECT] ---

176 
к 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
It should be noted that the Yogini Hrdaya (3, 139) speaks of twelve nodes, 
as it counts two nodes in each of the six cakras, with one at each end of a cakra. 
The NT (7, 22-25) confirms this view, with a slight variation. 
12. The awakening of Kundalini 
Kundalini, victim of her own delusion, remains as it were asleep in the 
miiladhara. She^can be roused by holding the breath (kumbhaka) while, 
through special posture and tightening the muscles in the region of the 
miiladhara, the apana vāyu is stimulated. In normal breathing, the prána and 
apana vàyus circulate through ida and pingalà, and Kundalini obtains 
sustenance in the natural way. When the normal method of breathing is 
stopped, the sustenance ceases and Kundalini wakes up. Then the pressure 
of apāna opens the mouth of the susumna, through which Kundalini 
starts rising up. As she does that, all the other nadis connected with the 
external sense-organs stop functioning, and the yogin's awareness of the 
external world 
is blotted 
out. Mülàdhàra being the container of the 
elemeut of earth, whose subtle essence is the subtle element of smell, 
Kundalini's departure from miladhara marks the dissolution of the earth 
into its essence, the smell and the latter in due course into the water- 
element. Kundalini then reaches svadhisthana-cakra, which is the locus of the 
water-element. Here, the latter i^ dissolved into its cause, the subtle element 
of taste (rasa) and, as Kundalini leaves this centre on her way to mani- 
püra-cakra, the subtle element of taste is dissolved into the fire-element. 
In тапірӣға-сакға, the fire-element is dissolved in its essence, the subtle 
element cf form, which is in its turn dissolved into the air-element. As 
Kundalini rises to anáhata-cakra, the locus of the air-clement and its essence, 
the subtle element of touch, the air-element is merged into the touch and 
the latter into the ether-element. Kundalini then proceeds to visuddha-cakra, 
the substratum of ether and its essence, the subtle element of sound. Here 
too, the former element is merged into the latter and the latter into its 
cause the mind. 
From there Kundalini rises to ajna-cakra, the locus of the cosmic creative 
reality, the mind. As she leaves behind the gross elements with their 
essences, constituting the gross body of the individual self, this self, already 
identified with Kundalini at the heginning of the Kundalini Yoga, also rises 
above the gross body. That is to say, the yogin's conscious identification of 
his self with his gross physical body ceases. In djfid-cakra he is only aware of 
his subtle body consisting of mind, which includes individuation (aham- 
kara), as well as discriminatory intelligence (buddhi). All the essences of

--- PAGE 198 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA : YOGA 
177 
knowledge and action are connected with this subtle cosmic reality. This 
is the last centre in which consciousness of duality exists. Hence it is symbolized 
as a lotus with two petals. Here the element of mind is merged into aham- 
kara, its cause; which in turn is dissolved into its immediate cause buddhi. At 
that moment the discriminatory intelligence changes into pure intelligence and 
the symbolic shape for meditation is given to be that of a flame (see Dipika 
of Amrtananda on YHT 3, 172-174). Pure intelligence is merged into the cosmic 
source, Matter or Prakrti. 
While describing the ajfid-cakra we have seen that the gradual elimination 
of differentiation experienced by the yogin on the sonic level has been 
represented by the nasal (anusvára), 
the crescent 
(ardhacandra), which 
represents the resonance, the bindu which is Rodhini or Bodhini and then 
пада, arranged in an ascending order. In the àjfia-cakra the last of the 
manifest sound is experienced as the pure bija-mantra. The yogin then passes 
to the region of hindu, the unmanifest sound and from there to the region 
of causal sound пада. 
In the yogin's mystic body this causal stage 
(karandvastha) is visualized to exist between й/йй-саКта and sahasrara. The 
individual self leaves back his subtle body in 4ajfid-cakra and becomes 
merged in his causal body (karana sarira), which is Prakrti. This region 
between ájfid-cakra and sahasrara is divided into eight steps representing the 
gradual fusion of the sonic and phenomenal emanations leading to the 
final merger of the individual self into the supreme Energy in sahasrara. 
An interesting point is that, though the phenomenon of mind is apparently left 
behind in ajña-cakra, meditation, a mental exercise, continues till the very 
last point, the eighth step. These points or steps of experience are: the 
crescent; Bodhini or Rodhini; nada, which is considered the united form of 
Siva and Sakti; таһапада (the supreme nada) or nadanta (end of nada), 
conceived in the shape of a plough; &akti (SN does not recognise it, Serpent 
Power, p. 140); vyápikà-sakti, which is envisaged as a crooked line; samani- 
šakti and unmani-sakti. All these eight are envisaged in a vertical hierarchical 
order to emphasize the spiritual progress of the yogin.25 Unmani literally 
means beyond mind, signifying that at this stage of meditative experience the 
yogin rises above all limitations of the mind. 
Above all these is the supreme cakra, sahasrára. This is a white lotus, the 
face of which is turned downwards. It is situated above the susumna in 
an open space. Well hidden in the pericarp of this is the subtle (void), where 
25 See YHT 3, 173 and Amrtánanda's commentary thereof. One should note that the 
Saktas maintain 
that before Vyàpikà 
is the Sakti which 
is equated with the cosmic 
matter, Prakrti.

--- PAGE 199 [DIRECT] ---

178 
5 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
all polarity ends. There the nirvanakala?$ exists, and this is the aspect of I 
the cosmic Energy when she is completely fused with the supreme Reality, 
the supreme Siva. After having pierced the six cakras, Kundalini merges into 
nirvanakala, so named as this merger brings nirvana (liberation) to the 
yogin. In this way Kundalini unites with the Supreme Siva. There in ulti- 
mate harmony, she is saturated with amrta, bliss, but only for a time. 
Because soon she works her way back to djfid-cakra and, from thence 
| 
through all the other cakras, back to the miladhara. But since she is 
now saturated with amrta, the susumna and all these cakras also get filled | 
with атка as she passes through them. Then as she saturates the müládhara, 
all the other thirteen nadis besides susumna which are connected with this 
cakra imbibe amrta too; and the yogin's entire sensory system thus becomes 
saturated with amrta (bliss), and he experiences both enlightenment and 
ecstacy. 
The sahasrára-lotus is situated above the crown of the head. In its peri- 
Carp is a triangle (yoni), with its apex turned downwards. Here the susumna 
"terminates in an aperture called brahmarandhra. Kundalini passe: through 
this opening in order to reach sahasrara-cakra. 
MUR For another account of enlightenment we return to the theory of the nodes. 
YHT calls these “obstacles” (3.94). 
Я 
At each of these junctures we find a triangle representing Sakti (voni), 
1. а lifiga (Siva's phallic symbol) and a granthi. Another Tantric philosophical 
i. theory about these three joints gives an even clearer explanation. Ultimate 
‘Reality, through the mediation of its power (Sakti), projects itself in creation 
‚ as rüpátita, rapa. pada, and pinda. The last is the gross form corresponding 
to the jàgrat (waking) 
state 
of the individual 
self. 
Pada, 
rüpa and 
rüpátita indicate the gradual sublimation of the айтап (self), corresponding 
respectively to the svapna, susupti and turiya states.?" Müladhàra corresponds 
with pinda, anahata with pada. ajña with гара. and sahasrdra with rūpātita. 
The first three states are planes in which duality is experienced; hence the 
symbolism of a yoni and a linga at each juncture in a physically united form, 
yet retaining their difference. This is emphasised by envisaging one pitha 
at each such juncture. In the last state, this difference disappears completely, 
and Siva and Sakti are almost merged. except for the slight distinction that 
they exist 
as the Self. and 
its awareness 
of itself. 
This 
is the 
¿uriya 
state. Sàkta philosophy of course envisages the fifth state of rurvdrira, the 
1° Kala, the cosmic Energy is in this context called nrvàna (extinction, liberation) because 
instead of eflecting emanation the Energy. 
in which the yogin’s individual energy is merged. caused 
his release. 
See Arthur Avalon, The Serpent Power. p 143 
** YHT 3, 94; see also the two commentaries Dipikà and Setubandha thereof

--- PAGE 200 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC ЅАРНАМА : YOGA 
179 
Absolute, undifferentiated state 
But whilst alive the yogin does not enter 
that fifth state, so that he may still return to mundane life for the benefit of 
other beings, without however having to forfeit communion with the Divine.?* 
It is said that the lowest cakra, miladhdra, is where prakrii predominates; 
in all other intermediary cakras both prakrti and Siva have equal influence; 
put in the seventh (i.e. the ѕаһаѕгага), only Siva Nirafjana (Siva of flawless 
purity) dominates. Yet even here Siva is still saguna gr sakala, that is 
in union with the cosmic Energy. (SN. with Visvanatha’s commentary 
p. 129). 
13, Mantra Yoga 
As explained by Arthur Avalon (Serpent Power, p. 186), Mantra-yoga 
recommends worship of the mantra and its deity. By concentrating 
оп the 
mantra, the yogin contemplates deeply on the origin of speech, the letters 
(татка). Going back to the source of manifest sound (vaikhari), he proceeds 
to understand the unmanifest original sound, and to experience it. The 
system is based on the concept of sabdabrahman as the supreme reality 
in the form of absolute sound (see p. 52f.). Another name for this reality 
is nadabrahman. This is the neutral and ineffable state. Before creation 
started, nddabrahman becomes aware that it is impending, and this awareness 
becomes his potential sound-form (sodasi-kalà), which is called bindu or Pasy- 
anti. It is also identified with the cosmic Energy (Sakti). In the Tantric 
view, пайа and hindu are identical with Prakása- and Vimarsa-Sakti — 
the cosmic Energy 
in respectively 
her ineffable conscious 
aspect, and 
in her potential, dynamically creative aspect. In the third state of the cosmic 
primordial source, the sound-principle is called Madhyama, unmanifested 
sound manifesting itself in vaikhari sound. Mantras are the highest forms 
of manifest sound and are the perfect media for experiencing the Supreme 
sabdabrahiman. By constant contemplation on the true nature of his müla- 
mantra, the Tantric realizes the very essence of the mantra, and by practising 
pranayama, he closes all the doors of his senses from functioning and forces 
his two breaths prana and арапа into his two ‘veins’ іа and pingalà, and 
thus blocks the flight of mind out of his inner self. Thus, restricted, the 
mind is then forced to enter his middle ‘vein’ susumna, where its natural 
propensity causes 
it to rise to a higher spiritual level until it passes 
from the manifest world to the world of unmanifest sound. 
28 Premananda Sarasvati, Pajatattva, Ed. Gopinath Kaviraj, Varanasi samvat 2014, p. 55.

--- PAGE 201 [DIRECT] ---

k sty 
` 180 
` 
. SANJUKTA GUPTA 
Kundalini is roused by Mantra Yoga. If properly conducted, japa can 
évoke the mantra's power (Sakti) and, through devotion and devotional 
acts, that power can be persuaded to help the yogin to rouse Kundalini. It 
is indeed the sounds of the mantra — 
especially of its seed-mant a 
and the lengthened impression of its final nasal sound — that u!timately, as 
mentioned before, manifest ndda. The greatest of all seed-mantra is om 
(pranava), though for some Sakta yogins seeds like aim or hrim, remain 
supreme. The greatest of all mantras is the hamsa, the mantra of the self. 
While performing its japa, its deity, atman, is envisaged in the heart. At 
the same time, the yogin slowly immerses his mind in that mantra, which 
ultimately results in merging both his mind and his pràna in it. This is the 
first achievement of what is called ajapa-sadhana. After long practice of the 
hamsa-mantra, its letters or rather its sounds are reversed and the mantra 
becomes so ‘ham (I am He). At the end of this second stage, distinctions 
between pràna, the mantra and its deity fade away. In the final stage, all 
discriminatory impressions have disappeared and, with them, so has the mind. 
This is in effect the same as the last part of the Kundalini Yoga. The 
ajapà japa continues automatically and the yogin experiences total union 
with the supreme Reality. Вһаѕкагагауа in his Varivasyarahasya, part two, 
gives an excellent account of how Tripura’s fifteen-lettered mantra, divided 
in three clusters, is assimilated with Kundalini Yoga and how the meditation 
on this mantra culminates into the merger (/aya) of the yogin in the 
undifferentiated supreme Reality. 
Similarly, japa and meditation on om, observed in the same way lead to the 
acquisition of great yogic power (siddhi). Following the method of merger 
(laya), the yogin, especially the Hatha-yogin, experiences the true nature 
of nàdabrahman, which is Kundalini’s own true nature. 
14. Hatha Yoga 
The aim of Hatha Yoga is to acquire perfect knowledge through a perfected 
body and mind, which eventually leads to immortality devoid of any kind of 
physical or mental ailment. The method followed is very strenuous; but if 
successfully carried out enables the yogin to supersede the processes of nature 
and overcome all psycho-physical limitations. Such a yogin conquers the 
limitation of time, and can see the past, present and future; he is no 
longer subject to the limitation of space and can reach any place at unpreceden- 
ted speed; he can fly or float in any posture and can assume any form. 
This mastery over his pnysical body finally enables him to experience 
supreme knowledge (mahdbodha) of his identity with the Absolute Being — 
the supreme reality. In this respect Hatha-yoga differs from Mantra Yoga

--- PAGE 202 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA : YOGA 
181 
jn what it ultimately achieves, since in the case of the latter the result attained 
is not an experience (bodha), but the supreme state of being (mahabhdva). 
However, the distinction is somewhat subtle, since the Hatha-yogin too 
achieves the state of Siva, only he achieves 
it through knowledge. The 
PrT records that, at the end of his sadhanà when suddenly illuminated, the 
Hatha-yogin is transformed into the state of Siva. Since Hatha-yoga yields 
perfection (siddhi), the Siddhas (certain religious denominations) follow this 
system (PrT p. 433); whereas the method of Mantra Yoga depends more on the 
grace (karund) of the divine acting through the mantra and its deity. Hence 
it involves the element of self-dedication, i.e. throwing oneself completely on 
the mercy of the divine. This is the main characteristic of devotionalism. 
15. The role of the cosmic Sound principle, Nàda 
In all disciplines of Yoga nàádabrahman or sabdabrahman plays a great 
role. In the case of Mantra Yoga the yogin concentrates on the most subtle 
form of his mantra, the seed-mantra (bijamantra), (YHT 3, 172-178). In 
meditation the yogin transcends even this monosyllabic sound and gradually 
reaches the level of pure sound without any syllabic representation. The 
Kundalini in this context is of course identified with the sonic emanation of 
пада and with the divine consciousness (cit kala) (see Ch. IV p. 93ff.)* When 
he practises pratyahara and stops the senses from functioning, his inner sense 
becomes aware of ndda, the supreme sound, the origin of all creation. 
At the beginning of the process of sat-cakra-bheda, when Kundalini starts 
entering the susumna, the yogin becomes aware of a ringing sound inside 
himself.?? In the next stage, he steadies his vital airs in the susumna. 
When he passes the barrier of the visnu-granthi, the sound changes into that 
produced by a kettle-drum. In the third stage, the sound appears to resemble 
the beating of a tom-tom. In the fourth stage, when he has pierced: the 
rudra-granthi and perfect bliss flowing from the supreme bliss seeps into 
his mind, the sound resembles that of a vinà. 
* |t may be worth mentioning that the yogins amongst the musicians' circle employ a 
separate method to experience the supreme sound nadabrahman, through Kundalini Yoga. 
They utilize special musical notes and modes of melody to rouse their Kundalini, thus 
using music in place of mantra. (From an unpublished paper by T. L. Rana). 
2° He must at this stage close his nose, ears and eyes with his fingers as prescribed in the 
bodily posture called yonibandha, to shut out any unvoluntary contact of the senses with 
external sense-objects. See the illustration in the Serpent Power, plate XV.

--- PAGE 203 [DIRECT] ---

182 
Ч 
SANJUKTA GUPTA 
These four stages are described as:  drambha (preliminary), ghaja 
ghaja (jug 
filled with only air), paricaya (introduction), 
and ni 
nispatti (achievement). 
In the 
Mirst three of these, the yogin experiences #йлуа (emptiness), atisünya (great 
ptiness) and mahásünya (supreme emptiness) respectively. Obviously a 
t deal of practice is necessary before even a slight degree of proficiency 
is achieved in any of these stages. 
Dháàraná and sat-cakra-bheda are two separate phases of the same step of 
yoga. In the beginning the yogin's attention is fixed on the five cosmogonical 
elements, solids etc. (mahàbhütas), as identified with different parts of his 
body. Next, his attention is fixed on the sat-cakra-bheda where the identifi- 
cation is much more detailed and concerns the yogic body concentrated 
within the susumna. 
Dhyàna is practised all the time. Beginning with the mantra and its 
deity, where the yogin concentrates on embodied beings and manifest sound 
(sākāra dhyana), dhyàna passes on to the next stage in which concentration 
is fixed upon illumination (jyotis) and on the sound that is not produced 
by friction between two objects. Incidentally, all dhydnas of Kundalini 
* describe her as a flash of lightning that amounts to dazzling illumination. 
But Laya Yoga goes beyond that and recommends dhyana on the bindu. 
In Tantric lore the word bindu has multivalence. Bindu is a point or 
drop, a point is the minutest manifestation of any form and might be 
the starting point of a complicated pattern. Alternatively, it might represent 
а centre, the centre of All. Bindu in this sense denotes the centre of creation, 
the source of both sonic and phenomenal creation, the original sound. 
Taking it to mean a drop, the analogy is based on the drop of semen 
which developed into cosmic vitality and started phenomenal creation. 
It is the primary, apprehensible form of Reality on the verge of creation. In 
a somewhat grosser sense, bindu denotes just semen. Thus, the cosmic fecundity 
is experienced on a lower, individual level. Yogins engaged in Laya Yoga, 
which is the same as bindusadhana, hold that just as pranayama steadies 
the vital airs it also steadies bindu. Bindu (semen), like prana and the mind, 
is ever restless and causes distraction and bondage. By steadying it and 
putting it under restraint, the yogin obtains control over prana and the mind. 
Waste of semen 
on objects of desire is as ruinous to an individual 
as waste of his vital airs in useless endeavour. 
Along with the vital 
airs, Kundalini-yoga envisages sending semen, symbolizing the individual 
self, up the susamna duct to the sahasrára that represents the supreme 
$elf. In other words, in living beings the sexual excitement behind intense 
physical and mental drives is transformed into a drive to reach one's 
| 
source. 
|

--- PAGE 204 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA: YOGA 
183 
16, Sexual practices 
Laya-yoga claims to achieve various spiritual results, of which withstanding 
the attraction of beautiful objects and of delectable food are two examples. 
The technique adopted seems to be to expose oneself to the allurement 
without the least reserve and, at the same time, to try to merge one's 
mind іп the subtle elements (tanmátra) of form (rüpa) and taste (rasa). When 
the yogin succeeds in doing this, the attractions of beauty and of gluttony no 
longer have any hold over him. Similarly, he identifies his semen with 
Siva and the menstrual flow with Sakti — the dual source of creation. By 
sexually uniting these two, he symbolically achieves the union of Siva and 
Sakti within himself. In Hatha-yoga the practice of vajroli?? enables him 
to retain both semen and menstrual flow discharged during coitus in his 
own body. Regardless of that however, the mingling of these two in actual 
coitus, or even the mere envisaging of it, suffices to give him. the vivid 
experience of the cosmic union of Siva and Sakti, and enables him to 
derive the blissful relaxation that is his natural disposition. Once he realizes 
the ultimate Truth and his identity with it, he is said to be perfectly relaxed 
(sahaja). Moreover, he experiences the temporary suspension of his own 
sexual urges, which is what he desires to achieve for good. Finally, by 
withholding his own orgasm, he directs his sexual drive towards awakening 
Kundalini and dispatching her upon her journey towards sahasrara. Thus, 
by using limited pragmatic experiences as models for glimpsing the sublime 
and by using these as 'spring-boards' for spiritual advancement and for 
sublimating finite sensations, Laya-yoga recognizes the value of sexual acts. 
3° See HYP 3, 82-89.

--- PAGE 205 [DIRECT] ---

өнү 
184 
З 
ЅАМЈОКТА СОРТА 
CHART OF THÉ 
^ 
Shape of 
Cakra 
Alphabets on 
Cosmic ‘creative 
the symbol 
Nodes 
(its colour) 
petals of lotus 
principle 
of the 
j 
principle 
QL U 
UU U UU UU u 
EÑT 
TRADE 
sahasrara 
Unmani 
(White) 
Samani 
Vyapika 
Sakti 
mahanada ог 
nadanta 
£ 
nàda 
Bodhini or Rodhini 
bindu 
C 
UU, U 
——————————————= 
== 
ајћа 
ha and ksa 
mind (citta) — 
circle, flame 
Rudra-granthi 
(white) 
manas, ahamk?ra 
and point 
and buddhi 
h 
vi$uddha 
16 vowels, 
ether and the 
circle 
(smoky) 
. 
from a to ah 
subtle eiement 
of sound 
+ L 
ЖЕНЕН 
Ya 
anāhata 
the first 
air and the 
six-pointed 
Visnu-granthi 
(tawny) 
12 consonants : 
subtle element 
hexagon 
ka to tha 
of touch 
e 
manipüra 
the next 
fire and the 
triangle 
(dark cloud) 
10 consonants: 
subtle element 
da to pha 
of form 
í— 
UU UU 
l 
OL 
svadhisthana 
the next 
water and the 
ha!f-moon 
(vermilion) 
6 letters : 
subtle element 
ba to la 
of taste (rasa) 
2 U 
 — R 
mülàdhàra 
va, ša; sa, sa 
earth and the 
square 
Brahma-granthi 
(red) 
subtle element 
of smell 
—————————————————————————————(À

--- PAGE 206 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRIC SADHANA : YOGA 
185 
KUNDALINI YOGA 
— H 
— n — 
 ...__'_' 
The bija-mantra 
pitha, 
linga and yoni 
of the 
Yogini or the 
The cosmic 
the special seat 
representing 
cosmic element 
presiding Sakti 
deity 
of the cosmic 
the creative 
and its vehicle 
Š 
Energy 
Energy 
А 
—————— 
uddiyana 
s 
ee 
< —T 
Th 
om or hrim 
Hàkini 
Paramasiva 
jalandhara 
itaralihga 
soma $akti 
kham 
Sakini 
Sadasiva 
white elephant 
> 
DIENEN 
MEME 
M L 
u 
i KC 
yam 
Kakini 
Iia 
pürnagiri 
bànalihga 
antelope 
sürya šakti 
_—_——————————-————-—-——-—— 
ram 
Lakini 
Rudra 
vam 
Какіпі 
Visnu 
” 
makara 
Se 
lam 
Dakini 
Brahma 
kümarüpa 
svayambhü- 
elephant 
(also Kandarpa) 
lihga 
agni šakti 
——— 
—— 
———— 
M ————

--- PAGE 207 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 208 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPH Y 
L. SOME TEXTS ON TANTRISM IN SANSKRIT 
Ahirbudhnyasamhità, ed. M. D. Катапијасаӣгуа, Adyar 1916; 2% ed. revised by V. Krishnama- 
charya, 2 vols., АЧуаг 1966 (ALS, 4). — See also Schrader, Introduction. 
Akulaviratantra, ed. P. Ch. Bagchi, in his edition of the Kaulajfána-nirpaya, Calcutta. 1934, 
p. 84-106. 
Anandalahari, ed. and trsl. A. Avalon “Wave of Bliss", Madras 1961. — See also Saundaryala- 
hari. 
Bhairavapadmàvatikalpa, ed. K. V. Abhyankar, іп : Jhavery, Mantrashastra, p. 1-74 (Skt. figures). 
Bhávand-upanisad, ed. Sitarama Shastri, in : Kaula and Other Upanisads, Calcutta-London 1922 
(Tantrik Texts, XI), p. 37-65. 
Brühmanasarvasva by Halayudha, ed. D. Bhattacharyya, Calcutta 1960. 
Brahmavidyd-upanisad, ed. N. R. Acarya, in: léadiviméatyuttarasatopanisadah, Bombay 51948, 
as No. 42 (p. 292-297). 
Y 
Brahmayamalatantra, discussed by Bagchi, Studies, p. 102-105. 
Dattátreyatantra, ed. В. M. Pandey, Varanasi 1963. 
$ 
Devibhagavatapurana, ed. R. Pandey, Varanasi, V.S. 2019 (1963 A.D). 
Devimáhátmya, ed. Е. E. Pargiter, in: Markandeyapurana, Calcutta 1904; ed. and trsl. (in 
French) J. Varenne, "Célébration de la Grande Déesse", Paris 1975. 
Е 
Devi-upanisad, ed. A. Mahadeva Sastri, in : The Sàkta Upanisads, Adyar 1950 (ALS, 10), р. 53-60; 
trsl. A. Daniélou, ALB Vol. 
19, 1955, р. 77-84; trs. A. G. Krishna Warrier, The 
Sakta Upanisads, Adyar 1967 (ALS, 89). 
Dhyánabindu-upanisad, ed. N. R. Асагуа, in: lsàdiviméatyuttaraéatopanisadah, Bombay *1948, 
as No. 41 (p. 286-292); trsl. J. Varenne, in: "Upanisads du Yoga", Paris 1971, p. 71-92. 
Gayatritantra, ed. Tarakanatha Вһацасагуа, Varanasi 1946 (Kasi Skt. Ser., 143). 
Hajhayogapradipikà by Svātmārāma, ed. Swami Digambarji and Pt. Raghunathashastri Kakaje, 
Lonavla (dt. Poona) 1970. 
t 
Iśānaśivagurudevapaddhati by Véánasiva, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, 4 vols., Trivandrum 1922-25 
(Triv. Skt. Ser., 69, 72, 77, 83). 
Jayākhyasamhitā, ed. 
È Krishnamacharya, Baroda 21967 (GOS, 54). 
JRünaküriküh, ed. P. Ch. Bagchi, in: Kaulajñananirnaya and Some Minor Texts of the 
School of Matsyendranātha, Calcutta 1934. 
р 
Јяёпагпауаіатга, ed. С. S. Gokhale, Poona 1952 (AnSS, 69). 
Jüünasiddhànta, trsl. Haryati Soebadio, їп: Jñānasiddhānta. Secret Lore of the Balinese Saiva 
Priest, Amsterdam 1971. 
Küdambari by Bana, ей. and 
trsl. M. R. Kale, Bombay 41968; trsl. C. M. Ridding, 
London 1896, repr. 1974. 
zi 
Kalikdpurdna, ed. Bišwanarayan Sastri, Varanasi 1972; see also van Kooy, Worship of the 
Goddess. 
Kalivilasatantra, ed. P. Ch. Tarkatirtha, London 1917 (Tantrik Texts, VI). 
Kamakalavilésa by Punyananda, ed. and trsl. A. Avalon, Madras 21953; repr. in Woodroffe, 
TT and KKV. 
pm 
—"
|

--- PAGE 209 [DIRECT] ---

188 
1 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Karpürádistotra, ed. and trsl. A. Avalon "Hymn to Kāli", Madras 21953. 
/ 
Karpūramañjari by Rajasekhara, ed. S. Konow, with trsl. by C. R. Lanman, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1901, repr. Delhi 1963. 
Kathásaritságara by Somadeva, ed. J. L. Sastri, Delhi а.о. 1970; trsl. C. H. Tawney, 2 vols., 
Calcutta 1880-84; repr. Delhi 1968; trsl. C. H. Tawney, reed. with notes by N. M. Penzer, 
10 vols., London 1924-28. 
Kaulajfiananirnaya, ed. P. Ch. Bagchi, "Kaulajfánanirnaya and Some Minor Texts of. the 
School of Matsyendranátha", Calcutta 1934. 
Kaulàvalinirnaya by Jiànananda Paramahamsa, ed. A. Avalon, Calcutta 1928 (Tantrik Texts, 
XIV). 
Kramadipikà by Kesava (a Vaisnava work), ed. D. P. Shukla, Varanasi 1917 (Chowkhamba 
Skt. Ser., 49). 
Kubjikdmatatantra, still unedited. Cf. NCC IV, 199, 
Kulaciidamanitantra, ed. G. Ch. Vedantatirtha, Calcutta/London 1915 (Tantrik Texts, IV); ed. 
' 
and trsl. A. Avalon, Madras 1956. 
i 
Kulárnavatantra, ed. T. Vidyaratna, Calcutta/London 1917 (Tantrik Texts, V); ?Madras 1956; 
- ef. G. Carlstedt, Till Kulas Lov. Kulamahatmyakathana ur Kuldrnavatantra, Uppsala 
1974; the same, Studier i Kularnava-Tantra, Uppsala 1974 (contains i.a. a critical ed. 
of Chs. 1 and 2). 
Kumáratantra ascribed to Ravana, ed. and trsl. (in French) J. Filliozat, Paris 1937 (with a 
study of its numerous versions in Indian and other languages). 
Laksmitantra, ed. V.-Krishnamacharya, Madras 1959 (ALS, 87); trsl. Sanjukta Gupta, Leiden 
1972. 
A 
Layayogasamhitā, ed. by the Association of Publishers of Mahamandala-sastra, Varanasi, 
V. S. 1970 (1914 A.D.). 
\ 
Mahdnirvanatantra, ed. and trsl. A. Avalon, "The Great Liberation", Calcutta/London 1913 
(Tantrik Texts, XIII); 51952, repr. 1963. 
Mahdrthamafjari by Mahesvarànanda, ed. M. R. Sastri, Srinagar 1918 (KSTS, 11); trsl. into 
French by L. Silburn, Paris 1968. 
Málatimádhava by Bhavabhüti, ed. and trsl. C. R. Devadhar/N. G, Suru, Poona 1935. 
Malinivijayatantra, ed. M. К. Sastri, Srinagar 1922 (KSTS, 37). 
Mantramahodadhi by Mahidhara, ed. Kh. Srikrsnadas, Bombay 1962. 
Matrkabhedatantra, ed. Ch. Bhattacharya, Calcutta 1933; ed. Bhadrasila Sarma, Allahabad 
š 
V.S. 2017 (1960-61 A.D.). 
Mrgendratantra (Vidyapada and Yogapáda), ed. M. K. Sastri, Srinagar 1930 (KSTS, 50). 
Netratantra, ed. (with comm. Uddyota by Ksemaraja) M. K. Sastri, 2 vols., Bombay 1926-39 
(KSTS, 46 and 61). Cf. Brunner, Netra Tantra. 
Ni- ог Nihsvásatattvasamhità, discussed by Bagchi, Studies, p. 93-96. 
Nityásodasi 
ava(tantra), ей. V. V. Dwiveda, Varanasi 
1968 (with 2 Skt. commentaries 
Rjuvimarsini and Artharatnávali); ed. Poona 1908 (AnSS, 56) with Skt. comm. Setubandha 
by Bhaskararaya. 
Nityotsava by Umanandanatha, ed. A. M. Sastri, Baroda 1923 (GOS, 23), revised ed. by Swami 
Trivikrama Tirtha, Baroda 
1948. 
Pádukápancakat 
stotra ) 
in 7 stanzas, ed. T. Vidyáratna, Calcutta-London 1913 (Tantrik Texts, 
Ш) p. 95-108; trsl. 
A. Avalon, in: The Serpent Power, New York 1974, p. 481-500. 
Paramárthasára by Abhinavagupta, ed. 
(with French trsl.) L. Silburn, Paris 1957 
/ Parasurámakalpasütra, ed. (with Skt. comm. 
by Ràmesvara) А. M. $азиї and S. Y. Dave, 
Baroda ?1950 (GOS, 22)

--- PAGE 210 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
189 
Pardtrimsikd, ed. (with Skt. comm, Vivarana by Abhinavagupta) M. К. Sastri, Bombay 1918 
(KSTS, 18). 
Pingalàmata, discussed by Bagchi, Studies, P. 7 and 106. 
^Prànatosini(tantra) by Ramatosana Vidyalamkara, ed. by the Vasumati Sahitya Mandira, 
Calcutta, 1335 Bengal Era (1928 A.D.); ed. J. Vidyasagar, Calcutta 1898. 
Prapancasáratantra ascribed 
to Sahkarücárya, ed. T. Vidyáratna, Calcutta/London 
1914 
(Tantrik Texts, III); the Skt. comm. Vivarana by Padmapada has been edited Calcutta 
1935 (Tantrik Texts, XVIII-XIX). 
Püjàtattva by Premánanda Sarasvati, ed. G. Kaviraj, Varanasi, V.S. 2014 (1957-58 A.D.). 
Püjàvidhinirüpana by Trimalla, ed. and trsi. F, Nowotny, in: Indo-Iranian Journal, I, 1957, 
p. 109-154. 
Rámapürvatüpaniya- Upanisad, ed. N. R. Acharya, їп: Téádiviméatyuttarasatopanigadah, Bombay 
51948, as No. 57 (о. 395-400). 
Rauravdgama, 
ed. №. R. Bhatt, 3 vols., Pondicherry 
1961-72 (Publ. de Inst. Français 
d'lndologie, 18) — 
У 
Rudrayámalatantra. ( Uttaratantra), ed. J. Vidyasagar, Calcutta 21937. 
Saktisangamatantra, ed. (in 3 vols.) B. Bhattacharyya, Baroda 1932-47 (GOS 61, 91, 104). 
Vol. 1: Kalikhanda; Vol. 11: Tarakhanda; Vol. Ш: Sundarikhanda. Vol. IV, Chinna- 
mastakhanda, is still unpublished, 
Sammohanatantra, discussed by Bagchi, Studies, p. 96-101. 
Sáradàtilaka by Laksmanadesika, ed. M. J. Bakshi, with the Skt. comm. Padérthddarta by 
Raghavabhatja, Varanasi 1963 (Kasi Skt. Ser., 107). 
Satcakranirüpana by Pürnünanda (= 
ch. 
6 of his Tattvacintámani), 
^d. T. Vidyaratna, 
Calcutta/London 
1913 (Tantrik Texts, 
II); trsi, А. Avalon, 
in: The Serpent. Power, 
Madras *1958 (new ed. New York 1974). 
Ci 
Satkarmadipikà by Krsna Vidyavagisa Вһацасагуа, ed. J. Vidyasagar, in: Indrajálavidyüsam- 
graha, Calcutta 1915, p. 179-264. 
Saundaryalahari ascribed to Sahkarücürya, ed. and trsl. W. N. Brown, Cambridge, Mass., 
1958 (Harvard Or. Series, 43); 
ed. and trsl. R. Anantakrsna Sastri and K. R. Garu, 
with three Skt. commentari 
. the Laksmidhará by Laksmidhara. 
Setubandha, cf. Nityasodasikarnava. 
Siddhandgarjunakaksapuja (also called Kaksapujatantra or Rasaratndkara), ед. J. Vidyasaga:, in : 
Indrajalavidyasamgraha, Calcutta 1915, p. 264-390. 
Siddhasiddhdntapaddhati by Goraksanütha, ed. K. Mallik, in: "S. and Other Works of the 
Natha Yogis", Poona 1954, p. 1-44 (Devanagari figures; summary of contents in the 
Introduction, p. 35-43), 
SB мам 
Subhagodaya by Sivánanda, ed. V. V. Dwiveda in his edition of the Nityagodadikürn 
p. 284-296. 
Svacchandatantra, ed. (with the comm. Uddyota by Ksemaraja) M. К. Süsti, 7 vols, 
Srinagar 1921-35 (KSTS 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, 56). 
$уатағаһазуа by Pürnánanda, publ. P.Ch. Pal & Bros., Calcutta V.S. 1948 (A.D. 1891-92); 
ed. J. Vidyasagar, Calcutta 1896. 
Tantráloka by Abhinavagupta, ed. (with comm. by Jayaratha) M. K. Sastri, Srinagar 1921-38 
(KSTS, vols. 27-39); trsl, (into Italian) R. Gnoli “Luce delle sacre scritture”, Torino 1972. 
Tantrarájatantra, Part 1 (chs. 1-18) ed. Laksmana Sastri, London 1918 (Tantrik Texts, VIII); 
Part II (chs. 19-36) ed. Sadashiva Mishra, Calcutta/London 1926 (Tantrik Texts, XII); 
see also Woodroffe, TT and KKV. 
Ç 
Tantrasamuccaya by Narayana, ed. V.A.R. 
Sastri and К.5.М. Sastri, Trivandrum, Triv. 
Skt. Ser., vols. 151 and 169.

--- PAGE 211 [DIRECT] ---

190 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Tantrasára by Abhinavagupta, ed. M. R. Sastri, Srinagar 1918 (KSTS,17); trsl. (into Italian) 
R. Gnoli “Essenza dei Tantra", Torino 1960. 
Tantrasára by Krsnánanda, ed. in the Chowkhamba Skt. Series, Varanasi, as No. 88; by 
the Vasumati Sáhitya Mandira, Calcutta 1341 Bengali Era (1934 A.D.). 
Tantrasdrasamgraha by Narayana, ed. M. Duraiswami Aiyangar, Madras 1950. 
Tàrübhaktisudhárnava by Narasimha, ed. Рапсһапапа Bhattacharya, Calcutta/London 1940 
(Tantrik Texts, XXI). 
s 
Todalatantra, ed. Bhadrasila Sarma, Allahabad V.S. 2018 (A.D. 1961-62); ed. G. Kaviraj, in: 
Tantrasamgraha, Vol. 11, Varanasi 1970, р. 53-94. 
Tripurdtapini-upanisad, ed. A. Mahadeva Sastri, in: The Sakta Upanisads, Adyar 1950 (ALS, 
10), p. 11-52; trsl. A. G. Krishna Warrier, 
in: The Sàkta Upanisads, Adyar 1967 
(ALS, 89). 
Tiipulá-upanisad, ed. A. Mahadeva Sastri, in: The Sakta Upanisads, Adyar 1950 (ALS, 10), 
р. 1-10; trsl. A.G. Krishna Warrier, in: The Sakta Upanisads, Adyar 1967 (ALS, 89). 
Varivasyárahasya by Bhaskararaya, 
ed. and trsl 
S. Subrahmanya 
Sastri, Adyar ?1968 
(ALS. 28). 
Vidyárnavatantra by Vidyaranya Yati, ed. Bhadragila Sarma, Allahabad V.S. 2023 (A.D. 1966-67), 
Vijfiànabhairavatantra, ed. and (French) trsl. L. Silburn, Paris 1961 (Publications de l'Inst. de 
Civilisation Indienne, série in-8, fasc. 15). 
Yogacüdámani-upanisad, 
ed. N. R. Acharya, in : Téadivimsatyuttarasatopanisadah, Bombay *1948, 
as No. 48 (p. 339-346). 
Yogasikha-upanisad, ed. N. R. Acharya, in: IsadivimSatyuttarasatopatiljadah, Bombay 1948, 
as No. 66 (p. 455-473). 
Yogatattva-upanisad, 
ed. N. R. Acharya, їп: Téádivimsatyuttarasatopanisadah, Bombay *1948, 
, 
as No. 43 (p. 297-303); trsl. (French) J. Varenne, in: “Upanisads du Yoga", Paris 1971, 
p. 49-70. 
Yoginihrdaya( tantra), ed. G. Kaviraj, Varanasi 21963 (Sarasvati Bhavana Granthamala, 7), with 
the Skt. commentaries Dipikà by Amrtünanda and Setubandha by Bhaskararaya. 
Yoginitantra, ed. (with a Hindi paraphrase) Pt, Kanhaiyalala Misra, Kalyan-Bombay 71956. 
i 
Nau 
П. MODERN AUTHORS 
Altekar, Ràshtraküfas : 
А. S. Altekar, The Rashtrakitas and Their Times, Poona 1934 (Poona 
Or. Ser., No. 36). 
“Amnaya”: Anonymous survey of the Amnayas, in: Candi, Vol. 35, 5-6, Prayag 1976. 
Arbman, Rudra: E. Arbman, Rudra. Untersuchungen zum altindischen Glauben und Kultus, 
Uppsala 1922. 
`. 
Avalon, Garland: Atthur Avalon, The Garland of Letters (Varnamala), Madras 31955. 
Avalon, Principles.:af атта: Arthur Avalon, Principles of Tantra. The Tantratattva of 
Sriyukta Siva Сапёға Vidyàrnava Вһацасагуа Mahodaya. Madras ?1960 (11914). 
Avalon, Serpent Power: Arthur Avalón, The Serpent Power, Being the Sat-Cakra-Niripana 
and Paduka-Paficaka. Text and Translation with Introduction and Commentary. Madras 
1958. 
Paperback edition: New York, N.Y., 1974 (Dover Publications). 
Awasthi, Rahasya: Sh. Sh. Awasthi Shastri, Mantra aur Mátrkàó kā Rahasya (“Significance 
of Mantras and Matrkas according to Tantrism"), Varanasi 1966 (in Hindi). 
Bagchi, Evolution : P, Ch. Bagchi, Evolution of the Tantras. In: CHI, Vol. IV, The Religions, 
Calcutta 71956, p. 211-226. 
# 
Bagchi, Studies : 
P. Ch. Bagchi, Studies ia the Tantras, Vol. I (all published), Calcutta 1939.

--- PAGE 212 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
191 
Banerjea, Iconography : 
J. №. Banerjea, The Development of Hindu Iconography, Calcutta 
21956. 
N 
Banerjea, Religion: J. N. Banerjea, Pauranic and Tantric Religion, Calcutta 
1966. 
Basu. Assam: N. К. Basu, Assam in the Ahom Age, 1228-1826, Calcutta 
1970. 
Beane, Myth, Cult and Symbols : W. Ch. Beane, Myth, Cult and Symbols in Sakta Hinduism. V 
A Study of the Indian Mother Goddess. Leiden 1977. 
Beyer. Cult of Таға: S. Beyer, The Cult of Тага. Magic and Ritual in Tibet. Berkeley/Los 
Angeles. Cal., 1973. 
Bhandarkar. Vaisnavism etc.: R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
V 
Systems. Strasburg 1913 (Grundriss der Indoarischen 
Philologie und Altertumskunde, 
HI, 6); reprinted Varanasi 1965. 
pos 
Bharati, Tantric Tradition: Agehananda Bharati, The Tantric Tradition, London 1965: 
Bhattacharya, Religions Brahmaniques: 
К. Bhattacharya, Les religions brahmaniques dans 
| 
l'ancien Cambodge, Paris 1961 (Publications de l'École Française d'Extréme-Orient, t. 49). 
Bhattacharyya, Sàkta Religion: N. N. Bhattacharyya, History of Sakta Religion, Delhi 1974: 
Bodewitz, Jaim.Br : H. W. Bodewitz, Jaiminiya Brahmana I, 1-65, Translation and Commentary ; 
with a study Agnihotra and Pranagnihotra, Leiden 1973. 
Bolle, Elements: К. W. Bolle, Tantric Elements in Sri Aurobindo, in: Numen, vol. 9, 1962, 
р. I28ff. 
Bolle, Persistence: K. W. Bolle, The Persistence of Religion. An Essay on Tantrism and Sri 
Aurobindo's Philosophy. Leiden 1965 (Studies in the History of Religions, VIII). 
Bosch, Dinaja: F. D. K. Bosch, Het Lingga-heiligdom von Dinaja. In: TBG, vol. 64, 1924, 
p. 227-286. 
Bose, Sahajiyà Cult: M. M. Bose, The Post-Caitanya Sahajiyà Cult of Bengal. Calcutta 1930. 
Bose/Haldar, Tantric Philosophy: 
D. N. Bose and H. Haldar, Tantras, their Philosophy and 
Occult Secrets. Calcutta 21956. 
Briggs, Gorakhnath : 
С. W. Briggs, Gorakhnath and the Kanphata Yogis. Calcutta 1938. 
Brunner, Netra Tantra: Hél. Brunner, Un Tantra du Nord: Le Netra Tantra, in: BEFEO, 
vol. 61, 1974, p. 125-197. 
Capwell, Bàuls: C. Н. Capwell, The Esoteric 
Belief of the Ваш of Bengal, in: JAS, 
vol. 33, 1974, p. 255-264. 
Carlstedt, Studier i KT: G. Carlstedt, Studier i Kulàrnava-Tantra, Uppsala 1974. 
Carlstedt, Till Kulas Lov; G. Carlstedt, Till Kulas Lov, Kulamahatmyakathana ur Kulárnava- 
tantra, Uppsala 1974. 
Chakravarti, Linguistic Speculations : P. Chakravarti, The Linguistic Speculations of the Hindus, 
Calcutta. 1933. 
Chakravarti, Tantras : Ch. Chakravarti, The Tantras. Studies on their Religion and Literature. 
Calcutta 1963. 
Chattopadhyay, Lokdyata : D. P. Chattopadhyay, Lokayata, a Study in Ancient Indian Materia- 
lism, New Delhi 1959 (p. 269-358: The Tantras). 
5 
Coedés, États Hindouisés : G. Coedés, Les états hindouisés d'Indochine et d'Indonésie. Paris 1948 
(Histoire du Monde, tome VII). 
а 
l 
|| | 
L 
£ 
Dasgupta, Obscure Cults: S. B. Dasgupta, Obscure Religious Cults as Background of Bengali 
Literature, Calcutta 1946. 
£ 
: 
Dasgupta, Tantric Buddhism: S. B. Dasgupta, An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism. Calcutta 
1950. 
) 
Dasgupta, Philosophy : S. N. Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy, 5 vols., Cambridge 
1922-1955. 
Desai, Erotic Sculpture: Devangana Desai, Erotic Sculpture of India, A Socio-Cultural study. 
New Delhi 1975. 
acy 
Diehl, Instrument and Purpose : C. G. Diehl, Instrument and Purpose, Studies on Rites and 
Rituals in South India. Lund 1956.

--- PAGE 213 [DIRECT] ---

192 
` 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Dimock, Hidden Moon : 
E.C. Dimock, The Place of the Hidden Moon. Erotic Mysticism in 
the Vaisnava Sahajiyà Cult of Bengal. Chicago 1966. 
Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus : L. Dumont, Homo hierarchicus, essai sur le systéme des castes, 
Paris 1966. 
Dwiveda, Introduction to the NST : See Nityüsodasikürnava Tantra. 
Eliade, Yoga: M. Eliade, Le Yoga, immortalité et liberté, Paris 1954. 
Eliade, Forgerons: M. Eliade, Forgerons et alchimistes, Paris 1956. 
Eliot, Hinduism : 
Ch. Eliot, Hinduism, London 1921. 
Farquhar, Outline : J. N. Farquhar, An Outline of the Religious Literature of India, London 
1920, reprinted 1968. 
Frauwallner, Geschichte: 
E. Frauwallner, Geschichte der indischen Philosophie, 2 vols., 
Salzburg 1953-56. 
Geldner, cf. Rgveda. 
Ghosh, Spirit and Culture: A. Bh. Ghosh, The Spirit and Culture of the Tantras. In: CHI, 
vol. IV, 21956, p. 241-251. 
ç „боп, Change and Continuity: J. Gonda, Change and Continuity in Indian Religion. The 
Hague 1965 (Disputationes Rheno-Trajectinae, IX). 
Gonda, Mantra: J. Gonda, The Indian Mantra. In: Oriens, vol. 
16, 1963, p. 244-297. 
Reprinted in: Selected Studies, Leiden 1975, vol. IV, p. 2487. 
Gonda, Medieval Literature : J. Gonda, Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, Wiesbaden 
1977 (A History of Indian Literature, Il, 1). 
Gonda, Mudrà, in Studia Geo Widengren, Leiden 1972, Il, p. 21. 
Gonda, Rel. Indiens : J. Gonda, Die Religionen Indiens. Band 1: Veda und älterer Hinduismus, 
Stuttgart 1960; Band II: Der jüngere Hinduismus, Stuttgart 1963 (Die Religionen der 
Menschheit, Bd. 11 und 12). 
Goudriaan, Balinese Religion: T. Goudriaan, Some Recent Publications on Balinese Religion. 
_ 
In: RIMA, Review of Indonesian and Malayan Affairs, Vol. 10, 1976, p. 121-132. 
Goudriaan, Tumburu: T. Goudriaan, Tumburu and His Sisters. In: WZKSO, Vol. XVII, 
1973, p. 49-95, 
Goudriaan/Hooykaas, Stuti and Stava: T. Goudriaan and C. Hooykaas, Stuti and Stava 
(Bauddha, Saiva and Vaisnava) of Balinese Brahman Priests. Amsterdam 1971 (Verhan- 
delingen der Kon. Ned. Akad. van Wet., Afd. Letterkunde, N. R., Deel 78). 
Gupta, cf. Laksmi Tantra. 
Gupta, Sanjukta, Visvaksena The Divine Protector. In: WZKSO. Vol. XX 1976, p. 75-89. 
Hazra, Purdnic Records : R. C. Hazra, Studies in the Purànic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 
Dacca 1940. 
Heesterman, Royal Consecration: J. C. Heesterman, The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration. 
The Rajasüya Described According to the Yajus Texts and Annoted, The Hague 1952 
(Disputationes Rheno-Trajectinae, Vol. II). 
Hoens, Santi: D. J. Hoens, Santi, Thesis Utrecht 1951. 
Hooykaas, Agama Tirtha: C. Hooykaas, Agama Tirtha. 
Five Studies in Hindu-Balinese 
Religion, Amsterdam 
1964 (Verhandelingen 
der Kon. 
Ned. Akad. 
van 
Wet, Afd. 
Letterkunde, N.R., Deel 70-4). 
Hooykaas, Cosmogony and Creation: C. Hooykaas, Cosmogony and Creation 
in Balinese 
Tradition, The Hague 1974 (Bibliotheca Indonesica, Vol. 9). 
- 
Hooykaas, Religion in Bali; C, Hooykaas, Religion in Bali, Leiden 1973 (Iconography of 
Religions, Section XIII, Facs. 10). 
Hooykaas, Sürya Sevand: C. Hooykaas, Sürya Sevana. The Way to God of a Balinese 
Siva Priest, Amsterdam 1966 (Verhandelingen der Kon. Ned. Akad. van Wet, Afd., 
Letterkunde, N.R., Deel 72-3).

--- PAGE 214 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
- 
193 
Inde Classique : 
L. Renou/J. Filliozai, L'Inde Classique, Manuel des Études Indiennes. 2 vols., 
Paris 1947-53. 
Isherwood, Ramakrishna: Ch. Isherwood, Ramakrishna and His Disciples, London 1965. 
Jhavery, Mantrashastra : M. B. Jhavery, Comparative and Critical Study of Mantrashastra (With 
Special Treatment of Jain Mantravada), Ahmedabad 1944. 
Kane, History: P. V. Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra, 5 vols., Poona 1930-1962. 
Kaviraj, Digdarsan : G. Kaviraj, Tantra o Agama-Sastrer Digdaréan, Calcutta 1963 (Calcutta 
Skt. College Research Series, No. XXV; Studies, No. 12; in Bengali). 
Kaviraj, Saktadrsti: G. Kaviraj, Tantrik Vāħmay më Saktadrsti, Patna 1963 (in Hindi), %^ 
` Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya: G. Kaviraj, Tantrika Sahitya, Lucknow 1972 (in Hindi). 
van Kooy, Worship of the Goddess : 
K. R. van Kooy, Worship of the Goddess According to the 
Kalikapurana. Part I: A Translation With an Introduction and Notes of Chapters 54-69, 
Leiden 1972. 
Kosambi, History: D. D. Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Ancient Indian History, 
Bombay 1956. 
y 
> 
Kosambi, Myth and Reality: D. D. Kosambi, Myth and Reality, Bombay 1962. 
Kramrisch, Temple: St. Kramrisch, The Indian Temple, Calcutta 1946. 
Lévi, 
Doctrine 
du 
Sacrifice: 
S. 
Lévi, La doctrine 
du 
sacrifice 
dans 
les Brahmanas, 
Paris 21966 (11898). 
Lorenzen, K. and К: D. N. Lorenzen, The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas, Two Lost Saivite 
Sects, New Delhi 1972 (Australian Nat. Univ. Centre of Oriental Studies, Or. Monographs 
Series, Vol. XII). 
Majumdar, Ancient Bengal: R. C. Majumdar, History of Ancient Bengal, Calcutta 1971. 
Mallmann, Enseignements: 
M.-Th. de Mallmann, Les enseignements iconographiques de 
l'Agni-Purána, Paris 1963 (Annales du Musée Guimet, Bibl. d'Études, Tome LXVII). 
Mishra, Religious Beliefs ; V. B. Mishra, Religious Beliefs and Practices of North India During 
the Early Mediaeval Period, Leiden 1973 (Handbuch der Orientalistik, Пе Abt., Ergānzungs- 
Band Ш). 
Mookerjee, Tantra Art: A. Mookerjee, Tantra Art; Its Philosophy and Physics, New Delhi 
а.о., 1968. 
Nandi, Institutions : 
R. N. Nandi, Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan (c. A.D. 600- 
A.D. 1000), Delhi a.o., 1973. 
Neog, Saikaradeva : 
M. Neog, Sahkaradeva and His Times, Gauhati 1365. 
Oberhammer, Yámuna : G. Oberhammer, Yamunamunis Interpretation von Brahmasütram 2, 2, 
42-45. Eine Untersuchung zur Paitcaratra-Tradition der Ramanuja-Schule, Wien 1971 (Ost. 
Ak. d. Wiss., Ph.-Hist. КІ., Sb., 274. Band, 4. Abh.). 
O'Flaherty, Asceticism : W. Doniger O'Flaherty, Asceticism and eroticism in the mythology of 
Siva, London 1973. 
O'Flaherty, Hindu Myths: W. Doniger O'Flaherty, Hindu Myths; A Sourcebook. Translated 
i 
from the Sanskrit, Harmondsworth 1975 (Penguin Classics). 
Padoux, Parole: A. Pedoux, Recherches sur la 
symbolique et l'énergie de la parole dans 
certains textes tantriques, Paris 1964. 
Pandey, Abhinavagupta: K. C. Pandey, Abhinavagupta, An Historical and Philosophical 
Study, Varanasi 21963 (11935). 
х Payne, Saktas : 
E. A. Payne, The Saktas, Calcutta 1933. 
Pensa, Considerazioni : C. Pensa, Considerazioni sul tema della bipolarità nelle religioni indiane. 
їп: Gururajamaiijarika, Studi in onore di Giuseppe Tucci, Vol. li, Napoli 1974, p. 379-409. 
|

--- PAGE 215 [DIRECT] ---

194 
: 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Pott, Yoga en Yantra: P. H. Pott, Yoga en Yantra in hunne beteekenis voor de Indische 
archaeologie, Leiden 1946. 
Pratyagat“1ananda, Realization: Swami Pratyagatinananda, Tantra as a Way of Realization. 
In : CHI, Vol. IV, ?1956, p. 227-240. 
Rangachari, Sri Vaishnava Brahmans : K. Rangachari, The Śri Vaishnava Brahmans, Ma^ras 
1931 (Bull. of the Madras Govt. Museum, New Series, Gen. Section, II, No. 2). 
Rao, Iconography : 
T. A. Gopinath Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, 2 vols., Madras 1914. 
Rawson, Art of Tantra; P. Rawson, The Art of Tantra, London 1973. 
Ray, Tantric Buddhism : 
R. Ray, Understanding Tantric Buddhism. Tn : 
JAS, Vol. 34, 1974-75, 
_ 
p. 169-175. 
Renou, Destin du Veda : L. Renou, Le destin du Veda dans l'Inde, Paris 1960. 
Renou, EVP: L. Renou, Études védiques et páninéennes, 17 vols., Paris 1955-69. 
Ruben, Entwicklung der Religion: W. Ruben, Die Gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im alten 
Indien, Band III : 
Die Entwicklung der Religion, Berlin (DDR) 1971. 
Ruegg, D. S. Contributions à l'histoire de la philosophie linguistique indienne. Paris 1959, 
Sastry, Sidelights : T. V. Kapali Sastry, Sidelights on the Tantra, Pondicherry 1971. 
Schomerus, ^aiva Siddhdnta: H. W. Schomerus, Der Caiva-Siddhanta, eine Mystik Indiens. 
Leipzig 1912. 
Schrader, Introduction : F. O. Schrader, Introduction to the Pāñcarātra and the Ahirbudhnya 
. A Samhità, Adyar 21973 (11916). 
Sharma, Sakti Cult : P. Kumar Sharma, Sakti Cult in Ancient India (With Special Reference 
to the Ригапіс Literature), Varanasi 1974. 
Silburn, cf. Maharthamaiijari; Vijfianabhairava Tantra. 
Singer, Krishna: M. Singer (ed.), Krishna: Myths, Rites and Attitudes, Honolulu 1966. 
Sircar, Sakta Pithas : 
D. C. Ѕігсаг, The Sàkta Pithas, Calcutta 21973 (11948). 
Sircar, Sakti Cult : 
D. C. Sircar (ed.), The Sakti Cuit and Tara, Calcutta 1967? 
Sircar: D. C. Sircar, Text and Translation: Tantrasaradhrta dhyanamala. JAIH, vol. VI, 
parts 1-2, 1972-73. Calcutta. 
Soebadio, cf. Jàànasiddhànta. 
Übach, Nepálamáhütmyam : Н. Übach, Das Nepalamahatmyam des Skandapuranam. Legenden 
um die hinduistischen Heiligtümer Nepals, München 1970. 
Venkataraman, Sakti Cult; K. R. Venkataraman, Sakti Cult in South India. In: CHI, 
7 
vol. IV, 71956, p. 252-259. 
Vidyarthi, Aspects of Religion: L. P. Vidyarthi (ed.), Aspects of Religion in Indian Society, 
Meerut 1961. 
Winternitz, Geschichte: M. Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Literatur, 3 vols., Leipzig 
1908-1922. 
Woodroffe, Garland, see : 
Avalon, Garland. 
Woodroffe, $. $.: Sir John Woodroffe, Shakti and Shakta. Essays and Addresses on the 
Shàkta Tantrashastra, Madras a.o., 21929. 
Woodroffe, (Analysis 
of) TT and KKV : Sir John Woodroffe, Tantraraja Tantra, A Short Analysis, 
and Kàmakalàvilàsa, Translated with Commentary, Madras 21971. 
Zoetmulder, Hochreligionen : P. J. Zoetmulder, Die Hochreligionen Indonesiens. In : 
W. Stóhr/ 
P. J. Zoetmulder, Die Religionen Indonesiens, Stuttgart 1965, p. 223-354 (Die Religionen 
der Menschheit, 5, 1). 
Zvelebil, Murugan: K. V. Zvelebil, The Smile of Murugan. Or, Tamil Literature of South 
India, Leiden 1973. 
Zvelebil, Poets of Powers: K. V. Zvelebil, The Poets of the Powers, London 1973.

--- PAGE 216 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
a (syllable) 
42, 55, 78 
abhasa 
51 
abhicára 
159. 
abhimantrana 
131 
Abhinavagupta 
11, 12, 41, 47, 83, 97, 
116, 128 
abhisecana 
108 
abhiseka 
see consecration 
dcamaniya 
145, 148, 151 
ücára 
15, 44, 73, 78 
— acàrya 
33, 74f.; see teacher 
Adhara (àmndya) 
42 
üdhára (cakra) 
see mülàdhàra 
ādhāraśakti 
142, 148 
adhikàra 
33 
adhvan see sadadhvan 
adhvasodhana 
81, 83 
adhyátman 
96 
Adivasi 
17 
Advaita 
40, 48, 79 
Agama (Saiva) 
10f., 20, 22, 29, 40 
Agama (tradition) 
13 
Agastya 
14, 33 
ages of the world (four) 
14 
aghamarsana 
132, 135 
Aghamarsana sūtra 
133 
Aghora 
58 
Aghora 
56 
dgneya-yantra 
Agni (Fire) 
54, 59f., 80, 90, 105, 133, 
144, 148 
agrarian 
36 
agriculture(-al) 
17 
aham 
55 
$ 
ahamkāra 
49, 52, 59, 99, 176f. 
ühnikakarma 
11, 125, 127f. 
aim 
131, 180 
Ajapamantra 
51 
Ajapásádhanà 
180 
ајйасакға 
171, 174f. 
ājya 
81 
ükàra 
92 
ükarjana 
35 
akhra 
28 
aksara 
(letter) 
85, 179 
(syllable) 
92 
Alambusà 
168 
alphabet 
8, 65, 108; see 
also mdirkd 
evolution of 96,98 
> 
; 
ат 
109 
dmalaki 
134 
Ambika 
96 
ambivalence 
8. 64 
ümnàya 41 (. 
amrta 
59n., 62, 94, 130f., 135. 
Amrtananda 
12, 47, 95 
anühata 
86 
anáhata(cakra) 
172 f. 
ünanda 
see bliss 
Anandabhairava(-i) 
59, 147 
Gnandakanda(padma) 
59, 177 
dnandamaya 
73 
Anandalahari 
12 
anàsrita 
13 
ànavamala 
53 
anavasthà 
see ullàsa 
Andhra 
38 
ahga 
131, 135, 150 som 
collective form (Sádángi or Sadañga- 
yuvati) 
140, 149 
anganyadsa 
109; see nydsa 
animal sacrifice 
-153 
ahkurürpana 
80, 82 
antarapüjà (уй 
а) 127f., 139f., 145 
anugraha 
51, 62 
anusvara 
174,177 
anuttaram 
50, 52 
anvaya 
41 
apàna 
59, 128, 168, 173, 176, 179 
application of letters to .the body, see 
nyása 
йрудуапат 
108 
ürambha 
182; see ulldsa 
ardhacandra 
17; 
Ardhanarisvara 
arghya 
143, 147, 152 
3 
aristocrats) 
24, 30, 35 
Aryan(ism) 
18, 36, 37 
Aryavarta 
37 
üsana 
140, 165f. 
asaucabhanga 
108 
ascetic(s) 
6, 24 f., 29, 31, 39, 66 
ashram 
30

--- PAGE 217 [DIRECT] ---

196 
INDEX 
Asitáhga 
65 
bhr- 
90 
Assam 
24, 27, 36f. 
bhügrha 
112, 115 
as{anga(yoga) 
see yoga: classification 
bhukti 
6, 63, 84 
astramantra 
131, 138, 141 
bhümikà 
61 
astrology 
7, 17, 30, 34, 127 
bhüpura 
112, 116 
asurandhaka 
86 
Asvakranta 
44 
asvattha 
134 
Atharvaveda(-ic) 
atisinya 
182 
dtman 
51, 56, 59, 61 
atmapránapratisthà 
140 
Gimasuddhi 
136 
Atmatattva 
142, 148 
‘attendant deities 
see dvaranadevatà 
Aurobindo Ghose 
28 
avadhüta 
121 
Avalon 
4, 101, 104, 117 
ávaranadevatà 
65, 132, 140, 151 
avatdra 
13 
Gvesa 
62 
avyaktam 
52 
аууйкиіа 
76 
axis mundi 
58, 171 
Bagala(mukhi) 
38, 65f. 
bahutantravid 
76 
bahyapuja 
1271. 140 
baindavacakra 
95 
baindavásana 
95 
Bala—65-— — 
mem е 
.Bali 24, 39, 60п., 148 ; 
Вапа 24, 25 
pl 
banalinga 
174 
bath (sndna) 
131, 132, 135 
Baul 
27, 60 
Bengali) 
7, 10, 12, 20, 24, 27, 28, 31, 
37, 38, 46 
Bhagavata 
21 
bhagini 
66 
Bhairava 
37, 41, 52, 63 
Bhairavas 
59 
Bhairavas (eight) 
22, 41, 65 
Bhairavapadmavatikalpa 
12 
Bhairavi 
65 
Bhairavicakra 
see cakrapüjà 
bhakti 
8, 49, 61, 75, 79, 107 
bháratisthàna 
174 
Bhartrhari 
92 
Bhaskararaya 
bhava 42, 71. 
Bhavabhüti 
25 
Bhiksatanamürti 
66 
Bhisana 
65 
16, 30 
12, 13, 26, 30, 47, 67 
bhüta 
99,152 
bhütabali 
137 
bhütalipi 
106 
bhütasuddhi 
136f., 143 
bhuvana (adhvan) 
61, 83, 87, 100, 
101 
Bhuvanesvari 
65 
hija 
8, 33; see also letters 
meaning of 
104f. 
kinds of 
110f., 130, 144, 171 
bilva 
134 
bindu 13 52, 55, 58, 86, 98, 105, 112, 
114, 174, 177, 179, 182 
primordial speech 
94 
an 
bindusa@dhana 
182 
bliss 
49, 64, 98 
bodhanam 
108 
Bodhani 
174, 177 
bonds of existence 
see pasa 
Brahma (god) 
58, 66, 76, 86, 94, 141, 
143; see also Trimirti 
brahmacárini 
65 
brahmagranthi 
see granthi 
Brahman 
49, 55, 76 
ten manifestations of 
9, 51 
ananda aspect of 64 
brahman (member of first estate) 
24, 27, 30, 32, 36 
Brahmanas 
16, 57 
brahmanda 
54 
Brahmani 
65 
brahmarandhra 
45, 58, 145, 168, 170f, 
178 
breath, see also prana 
central duct of 86 
control of 
107; see pranayama 
five breaths 
151 
vital breath 
59, 101, 107; see prána 
buddhi 
49. 52, 59. 176f. 
-indriya 
99 
Buddhism 
6, 18, 23, 39 
Buddhist Tantrism 
9, 20f., 23, 38 
bulb (kanda) 
173 
Burma 
39 
Caitanya 
27 
cakra 
8, 60, 78, 80, 86, 88, 95, 106, 112, 
“443, 164, 1721. 
in the body 
7, 16, 39, 60, 65, 86, 87, 
14, 18, 
96. 97, 107, 172.

--- PAGE 218 [DIRECT] ---

сакғапудѕа 
see nyàsa 
cakrapüjà 
see puja 
cakravartin 
93 
Calukya 
20 
Cambodia 
22, 29, 39 
Cimunda 
64, 65, 159 
Cada 
65 
Candaghantà 
65 
Candala 
32 
Candesvari 
66 
caste 
27, 31 f. 
causal state (kdrandvastha) 
174 
Central Asia 
24 
INDEX 
- 
197 
damanárohana 
125, 158 
Dàmari 
66 
dandavat 
82 
Dandin 
25 
deity 
Agni 
80, 90, 105; see Agni 
Devi 
86, 96, 105; see Devi 
Dharma 
80 
Indha 
105 
Indra 
80, 105 
Tvara 
94 
Laksmi 
103, 105 
Мауа 
105 
centre of energy in the body 
see cakra 
Paramesvara . 
101 
(in the body) 
cetana 
86,111 
China(-ese) 
25, 36, 38 
Chifhamastà 
65 
chinnapāpa 
87 
chosen deity 
see isfadevata 
Cina 
43 
cit 
49, 55, 59 
citkalà 
181 
cit$akti 
98, 107, 172 
code language 
see sandh(y)abhdsa 
conduct (dcára) 
rules c^ 44, 73, 78 
seven kinds of 
15, 44 
daksina 
73 
kaula 
73 
vama 
73 
consecration 
71, 88; see also suddhi 
kinds of 88 
royal (rdjasiya) 
71 
corpse (its use in ritual) 
161f. 
cosmic energy 
171, 175 
cosmic gods 
171 
cosmological diagrams 
78, 112 
meaning of 
112 
kinds of 88, 96, 112, 113 
creation 
51 
Creator 
173; see Brahma 
cremation ground 
59, 60n., 134, 161 
cryptical style 
10, 104 
da 72 
daily ritual 
see dhnikakarma 
dakini 
65 
Dakini(s) 
65, 66, 173 
daks- 
71 
daksina 
40f., 44f. 
daksinà 
34, 151 
Daksinacara(-in) 
16, 27, 44, 75 
damanaka 
158 
Parasiva 
86 
Pavaka 
80 
Prajapati 
91 
Raudri 
57, 94, 96 
Ravi 
94, 95 
Rudra 
51, 52, 58, 94, 143, 173 
Siva see Siva 
Śri 46, 103, 105, 128, 135 
Varuna 
105 
Visnu 
14, 58, 76, 94, 103, 143, 174 
deities of the quarters 
152 
demons 
51 
Devadáru 
66 
Devadatta 
14 
Deyaditi 
65 
Devaraja 
39 
devatüsuddhi sec śuddhi 
Devi 
see Durga, Tripurš(sundari), Kali, 
Tàrà 
enlightened by Siva 
13 
manifestations of 28, 33, 37, 64f. 
manifestations of (three) 
43 
five functions of 43 
cult centres of 30 
images 
of 39 
letters as symbols of 42 
Devimahatmya 
12, 19 
dhàranà 
163f., 167, 182 
dharani 
20 
` 
dharma 
80 
Dharma literature 
25 
dhenu(mudrà) 
131, 135, 138 
Dhimavati 
65 
dhvani 
92 
dhyana 
8, 116, 136, 140, 165, 166, 169, 
182 
digbandhana 
137 = 
dikşā 
see initiation 
dipana 
108

--- PAGE 219 [DIRECT] ---

198 
Dipanatha 
138 
dipani 
108, 138, 159 
divine trad 
153 
divyabháva 
72, 73, 86 . 
divyaugha 
140 
dosa 
108 
dra- 
116 
dravyasuddhi see $uddhi 
drgdiksé 
88 
drug(s) 
36 
Drupada 
133 
Durga 
18, 19, 32, 64, 135, 153, 160; 
see also deity, Mahisamardini 
durlabha 
74 
Durvasas 
14 
йш 
33 
dütipüjà 
see püjà (of woman) 
Dütis 
66 
dvadasanta 
58, 130 
Dvaita 
40, 48 
dvipa 
65 
economy(-ic) 
17, 19, 35, 64 
eight steps of yoga 
see yoga: steps 
Ekajata 
21n. 
Ekavira 
40f. 
š 
elements 
171, 182; see also tanmátra 
(four) 
38 
(five). 
53, 55 
(ten) 
52 
emanation 
51f. 
embryology 
95 
Energy (divine Šakti) 
7, 54f., 86, 94, 106 
awakens the bindu 
13 
cosmical functions 
51 
= Brahman 
16 
different kinds 
94, 98, 116 
unity of Siva and Sakti (Yamala) 
43, 
46, 56, 62, 98 
united with Siva 94 
š 
certain kinds of Kalà 
85, 86, 98 
mantrakalà = nirodhini 86 
triad of Siva, Sakti, nada (Kamakala) 
95, 96 
of the letters: 
78 
erotic(ism) 
8, 17, 25 
erotic sculpture 
36 
exorcism 
31 
experience (bodha) 
181 
faith in the teacher (sraddhd) 
75, 159 
fertility symbolism 
17 
festival. 
32, 36 
fire 
51, 59n.; see Agni 
four seats (of the deity) 
143 
INDEX 
Gadadhar Singh 
27 
gam 
109 
Gan.pati 
59 
Gandhàra 
37 
Gàndhàri 
168 
GaneSa(s) 
65, 135, 141 
Сайра 
59, 141 
Сашї 
64 
Gayatri 
33 
Сауаігїтапіта 
111, 123, 1271. 
Sodasigayatri 
12 
Tārāgāyatri 
1231. 
geography (religious) 
9, 36f., 54 
gestures, symbolic (mudrd) 
8, 38, 107, 
115f.; see mudra 
meanings of mudrá 
1151. 
derivation of the word mudré 
116 
mudrà as body postures 
117 
gesture of flame, see mudrd : 
lelihd 
mudrà as efficacious as mantra 
116 
mudrà as manifestation of active force 
of Šakti 
116 
; 
mudrà as a female partner 
117 
kinds of gestures 
107 
gham 
109 
ghantikà 
169 
ghata 
182 
ghora(tarad) 
56 
gifts (upácàra) 
150, 153 
Gopala (a king) 
24 
Goraksa(natha) 
26 
grace 
62, 63, 141 
graha 
54 
granthi 
170, 175f., 181 
guardian deities of the seat (pithatakti) 
149, 152 
guha 
90 
Guhyesvari 
19 
Gupta (dynasty) 
20, 22 
Gurjara-Pratihára 
20 
guru 
74f., 129: see teacher 
his role in worship 
142 
gurupahkti 
168 
ha (syllable) 
42, 55 
Hadimata 
42f. 
Hakini 
174 
ham 
110 
hamsa 
43, 51, 110 
x 
hamsamantra 
110, 132, 180 
Hastyihva 
168 
hathayoga(in) 
9, 23, 117, 164f., 180 
heart 
8, 51, 57, 58 
i 
heaven 
57, 58

--- PAGE 220 [DIRECT] ---

i 
INDEX 
199 
Heruka 
21n. 
Himālaya 
37 
Hinglāj 
38 
Holi 
32 
homa 
123, 129, 136, 140 
householder 
6, 27, 29, 46 
hrdaya 
see айа 
hrdayacakra 
96, 97 
hrd-mantra 
135 
hrim 
105, 107, 111, 151, 180 
hsauh 
142, 144 
human sacrifice 
25 
hymn of well-being (sdntistotra) 
156 
locha(sakti) 
$4, 56f., 98 
iconography(-ical) 
10, 19, 25, 39 
Idā 
54n., 59, 72, 168, 179 
illusion (тйуй) 
83, 99, 111, 112, 173 
im 
144 
Indha 
105 
individual energy 
164 
individual self 
163 
Indonesia(n) 
39, 49 
Indra 
80, 105 
indrajala 
28, 66 
Indrani 
65 
indriyadevi(s) 
59 
Indus culture 
17 
initia.on 
71, 72, 78, 80-89 
importance of 9 
Vedic, 
as preliminary rite 
71 
as part of Rájasüya 
71 
as introductory rite for a young man 
(upanayana) 
71 
the word diksa 
71, 72 
Tantric initiation 
80f. 
course of the ritual 
80Г. 
no moksa without it 76 
no diksà without teacher 
76 
kinds of dikşā 
39, 73, 74, 80, 83-88 
inscriptions 
19f., 21, 22 
intuition 
164 
Тапа 
58 
istadevata 
78, 81, 83, m 123 
istamantra 
131, 135, 138, 143, 152, 161 - 
Tsvara 
13, 50, 52, 58, 94, 143, 174 
itaralinga 
174 
Jaina(-ism) 
6, 12, 42, 43 
wrJālandhara (pifha) 
38, 174 
jananam 
108 
japa 
106f., 126, 127, 129, 136, 140, 146, 
152г. 
meaning of the word 
106 
\ 
Jayaratha 
42, 102, '16 
jihvasodhanam 
107 
jiva 
51, 53 
jivanam 
108 
jivanmukta 
62 
jivatman 
104 
jhàna(sakti) 
56, 62, 98 
Jyesthà 
57, 94, 96, 160 
ka (syllable) 
42 
Kabbàla 
103 
Küdimata 
42f. 
Kakini 
174 
кай 
52, 146, 149, 178 — 
kala (path or adhvan) 
61, 81, 83, 87, 
87, 100, 101 
mantrakalà 
86 
nirvànakalà 
178 
| 
kala: one 
of the Kañcukas 
99 
kaladiksa 
73 
Külacakra 
54 
Kalagni 
58 
Kalaratri 
65 
kalavati diksà 
73 
Kalhana 
25 
Kali 
43f., 46, 56, 64, 105, 128, 129, M. 
139, 153, 160 
Kalidasa 
19 
Kalighat 
37 
° 
Kālikāpurāņa 
12 
tog 
Kàlikula 
46 
Jua 
kalpanà 
100 
kam 
109 
Kam 
43, 66 
Lkamakala_J31, 95, 96, 145f., 152, 184 
12. 
Kamakhya 
36f., 64 
Kamala 
65 
' 
. 
Kimaripa(pitha) 
24, 38, 174 
Kümesvara and Kümesvari 
95, 154 
kamya (karma or püjà)  124f., 159f. 
kaücuka 
53, 86, 
99 
kanda 
173 
Kandarpa 
173 
Kankàálamürti 
66 
kanthacakra 
96 
Kapalika 
2' 
Kapalin 
65 
karana 
111 
karasuddhi 109 
karatalaprstha 
131 
karma (rites) see рӣјӣ 
karman 
53 
karmani 
19

--- PAGE 221 [DIRECT] ---

200 
karmendriya 
99 
Karpiradistotra 
12 
Kartavirya 
160 
Kashmir 
14, 21, 24, 25, 37, 38 
Kashmir Saivism 
11, 21, 41, 47, 63 
Kasinatha (Bhatta) 
12, 27 
Kaémira (sampradáya) 43 
Katyayani 
65 
kaula(s) 
15, 23, 32f., 44f., 104 
каша worship 
131, 147, 151f., 154, 157 
Kaulajfiananirnaya 
11, 23 
Kaulayogini 
26 
Kaumari 
65 
Kausiki 
153 
kavaca see anga 
Kerala 
38, 43 
Khagendra 
14 
kham 
109, 174 
khecara 
62, 117 
khecari(mudrd) 
144 
king(s) 
25, 35, 39 
klim 
107 
kosa 
54 
Krama (system) 
41, 48, 53, 59, 100 
krāntā 
43 
krim 
42, 105 
Kriya(sakti) 
56f., 98, 116 
kriyavati diksà 
65 
Krodha 
65 
krom 
134 
Krsna 
18 
, 
© 
А 
Krsnünanda 
12, 26, 27 
krtaka 
46 
krürakarma see kamyapiija 
ksa- 
78 
Ksatriya 
32 
Ksemaraja 
12, 74, 96, 101, 117 
ksetra 
37 
Ksetrapala 
66, 135, 137, 141-53 
Ksetrapati 
59 
kgi- 
72: 
ksobha 
100 
Kubjikámata 11, 22, 42 
kula 
23,32,41 
kulacakra 
84 
kulācāra 
15 
kuladipa 
138, 151 
Kulālikāmnāya 
42 
Kulārņava 
11 
kulina 
32 
kullukā 
154 
kumári 
139, 157 
kumáripüjà 
157 
INDEX 
kumbha 
80 
kumbhaka 
169 
kunda 
80, 143 
‹ 
Kundalini 
7, 39, 45, 60, 95, 96, 117, 130, —= 
164 апа раѕѕіт 
-yoga 
6, 23, 51, 57, 145, 16380 
— 
Кагта 
14 
kusa 
141 
Kiismanda 
65 
kita 
60 
Lakini 
173 
Laksmanadesika 
11, 23 
Laksmi 
103, 115 
Laksmidhara 
12, 26, 44 
Lakuliéa 
21 
Lalità 
54, 122 
lam 
173 
lambikà 
169 
laya 
171, 180 
3 
layayoga 
163f., 170, 171, 175, 182, 183 
letters, see also varna 
different expression 
85, 179 
vowels (svara) 
98 
considered to be seed (bija) 
99 
considered to be the womb (yoni) 99 
consonants (vyafjand) 
98, 99 
semivowels as origin of the kañcukas 
99 
garland of letters (varnamdla) 
97, 110 
as Sakti or kala 
98 
liberation (moksa, mukti) 
6, 60f., 62f., 
76, 85, 87, 104 
kinds of 84, 86, 87 
life-breath 151; 
see prána 
linga 
39, 51, 58, 104, 178 
lipi- 85; see bhütalipi 
locus power, see ddhárasakti 
lokadharmin 
85 
lokasaksin 
135 
Lokayata 
49n. 
Lopamudra 
33, 43 
lotus 
59, 60 
Lui-pa 
26 
Macchanda 14, 46 
madhuparka’ 
148 
£ 
madhyamā (vic) 
92, 97, 179 
Madras (people) 
18п. 
magic 
7, 17, 23, 24, 30, 35 
books of 
10, 12, 23, 24, 28 
deities of 66 
Mahabharata 
18 
mahábháva 
181 
mahdbodha_ 
180

--- PAGE 222 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
Маһадеуа 
59 
Mahikala 
15 
Mahalaksmi 
65, 141 
muhamandaladiks@ 
39 
ü 
99 
177 
Маһапада 
Mahanirvana(tantra) 
11, 28 
Mahdpreta 
144 
тлаһариғиѕа 
57 
Maharastra 
19 
mahásetu 
107 
PIA 
182 
Mahavidyas (ten) 
65 
mahavyahrti (sacrifice) 
Mahendra (a pitha) 
38 
Mahesvara 
59 
MaheSvari 
65 
Mahidhara 
12 
Mahisamardini 
19, 51, 64, 66 
makaras (five) 7, 45, 73, 117, 
173 , 
152 
mala 
127, 154 
Malini 
97, 127 
manana 
102 
manas 
49, 52, 59, 91, 99, 171, 174 
manasakarma 
127 
mánavaugha 
`0 
mandala 
8, 38, 78, 88, 106 
mandapa 
80 
manuika 
112 
manodiksa 
87 
— таһоптапї 
174 
mantra 
in Vedic scriptures 
90Г., 101 
the word 
102 
its liberating aspect 
102 
frequency of 
8, 34 
subtle form of the divine 
50 
related to speech 
102 
= vwidyà 
81, 83, 102 
its difference from vidya 
103 
its effective power 
78, 107. 
definition of 
101 
difference of Vedic and Tantric mantra 
101 
+ correct utterance 
93 
samskdra of 
108 
consecration of 
154 
different kinds of 81, 91f., 103, 107, 
110, 111 
muttering of mantra (japa) 
106, 107; 
see also japa 
mistakes in mantra 
108, 109 
one of the four pithas 
38, 143n. 
one of six adhvans 
61, 83, 87 
201 
mantracaitanya 
107 
Mantramahodadhi 
12 
mantramátrkà 
see така 
mantranyása 
109; see also nydsa 
mantrasddhana 
89 
mantrasástra 
103 
mantrasiddhi 
106 
mantrasndna 
see bath 
mantrasodhana 
107 
mantrasuddhi see suddhi 
mantrayoga 
164, 165, 170, 180, 181 
márana 
35, 159 
márga 
43 
marxism 
5 
másapüja 
125 
mata 
421, 
Matangi 
64n., 65 — 
math(s) 
24n., 26, 28, 30 
mátrà 
93 
matriarchy(-al) 
17, 56 
matrka 
97, 100, 107, 127, 143, 172, 179 
Matrkas 
sce Mothers 
mátrkàmantra 
138 
mátrkàünyása 
109; see also nvdsa 
Matsyendranatha 
14, 26, 46 
máàyá 
52, 53, 83. 99, 105, 111, 112, 173 
māyāvāda 
48 
meat 
8, 44,62 
meditation 
see dhydna, yoga 
-' 
Meru 
54, 58, 154, 171 
Mesa 
14 
t 
microcosm(ic) 
8, 57, 60, 6: 
microcosm-macrocosm 
symbolism 
8, 
16, 39, 57f., 85, 86, 100, 101, 163, 
170, 171 
Minaksi 
64n. 
misrapaja 
124 
moksa- 
see liberation 
moon 
54п., 59f. 
Mother Goddess, see also Devi, Energy 
9, 18, 19, 33, 56 
Mother worship 
17, 18 
Mothers | 
19f., 39, 41, 59, 65 
Mrgendra 
11 
mriyuljaya 
35 
mud- 
116 
mudrà 
78, 129, 144; see also gestures 
ahkusamudrà 
131 
avagunjhanamudrà REN 
Ыјатийга 
144n. 
dhenumudrà 
38 
lelihàmudrà 
150 
nàrücamudrd 
133, 144 
samháramudráà 
136

--- PAGE 223 [DIRECT] ---

202 
nirbija 
85 
Nirmályadhürini 
66 
nirmályapüja 
141 
nirvàna 
107, 154 
nirvànadiksà 
84, 88 
nirvikalpa 
62 
nis$calatà 
98 
niskalapüjà 
nispatti 
182 
Nitya (goddesses) 
57, 60, 65, 150 
nityakarma, | 
see Ghnikakarma 
Nityaklinna 
64 
nityapüjd, , 
see 
рӣја: 
classification 
and 
Ghnikakarma 
Nityàsodasikárnava 
11 
nivid 
82 
see püjà : classification 
INDEX 
sarvakarsanimudra 
144п. 
nivrtti 
61, 85, 100 
sarvamahàkkusámudrà 
144п. 
niyama 
see yoga: steps 
загуйпа! lanimudrá 
144n. 
Niyati 
52 
sarvasamksobhinimudrà. 
144n. 
nodes 
see granthi 
| 
sarvavasamkarimudra | 
144n. 
Nrsimha 
160 
sarvavidrávanimudrá 
144n. 
numbers, symbolism of 9, 16, 40, 59, 60 
trikhandamudra 
144 
nyása 
yonimudra 
131, 144 
meaning and place in the ritual 
129, 
mukhacakra 
97 
136f., 140 
mukhasodhanam 
107 
kinds of nyàsa : 
mukti 
see liberation 
anga- 
131, 135, 150 
mülàdhàra 16, 45, 60, 86, 96, 107, 130, 
cakra- 
144 
145, 168, 175f., 178f. 
1 
kara- 
136 
mülamantra 
81, 
84, 
103, 
107; 
see 
mahdsodha- 
137 
istamantra 
. 
mantra- 
101, 109, 136 
Muslim (rule) 
20, 27 
mātrkā- 
136, 143 
mystic linguistics 
103 
müladevi- 
136 
mystic syllables 
151 
pitha- 
144 
myth(s) 
19n., 66 
rsi- 
16, 144 
Nàáda(brahman) 
87, 92f., 97, 105, 174, 
sadahga- 
136, 154, 174 
177, 179f. 
siddhi- 
136 
nádànta 
87, 177 
sodha- 
137, 143f. 
t 
nádi 
59, 164, 168 
ууйраКа- 
143 
х 
Nagarjuna (Siddha) 
23 
n. of the deity's four seats 
143 
naimittikapüjà 
see püjà 
of the attendant deities 
144 
naivedya 
151 
of the four dtmans 
144 
nam 
109 
of kaldtattva 
144 
Narayana 
103 
of máyátattva 
144 
Nütha (cult or sect) 
14, 26, 31 
of vidyátattva 
144 
` nayanábhamandala 
113 
to protect the worshipper 
143 
Nepal 
19, 22, 59, 60n. 
Odra 
14 
netra, see айва 
offering of shoots 
see ankurdrpanam 
netramantra 
81 
ogha 
140; see also guru 
Nigama 
13 
om 
33, 58, 91f., 100, 103, 107, 108, 111, 
nigraha 
63 
149, i74, 180 
nijestasiddhi 
85 
oral tradition 
3, 9, 10 
Nilasarasvati 
54, 66 
Orissa 
25, 38 
«Райа 
61, 90, 178 
pada (adhvan) 
61, 82, 87, 100, 101 
paddhati 
12 
paduka(mantra) 
110 
рӣйикарайсака 
130 
pàdya 
148 
Pala (dynasty) 
24 
paficabjamandala 
1\3 
райсаваууа 
141 
райсатг'а 
142 
Pificardtra 
9, 10, 15, 20, 21, 29, 48, 53, 
61 
pantheon 
58, 59, 63f. 
pápapurusa 
133 
para 
74, 100, 128 
Рага (Sakti) 
56

--- PAGE 224 [DIRECT] ---

| 
l 
I 
INDEX 
203 
parakiyā 
127 
paramašayin 
M3 
Paramasiva 
50. 58, 174 
paramátman 
51, 110 
paramesthiguru 
154 
Paramesvara 
101 
parampara 
6, 14, 75, 122, 124, 155 
parüpara 
128 
Рагар! 
paricaya 
182 
pariks 
7 
parinama(vada) 
49, 52 
Parnasabari 
64 
parthivayantra 
115 
parts of body related to cosmos 
85, 86, 
100, 101; see also microcosm 
parva 
125 
parvapüjà 
see puja: naimittika 
Parvati 
19, 64 
раќа 
53, 84, 87 
Tpaüahara 
73 
paiu 
72, 153 
pasubhava 
73, 74 
Pasupata 
21, 26 
pasupata (weapon) 
141 
Pasupati 
19 
pasyanti 
92, 96, 100, 174, 179 
Patafijalayoga 
see yoga 
Patanjali 
92 
patra 
80 
patrasadana 
147 
patronage (royal) 
24 
Pavaka 
80 
pavilion of worship 
80 
pavitráropana 
125, 158 
payasvini 
168 
persecution 
27 
phala 
35 
phat 
105, 141 
philosophy (of Tantra) 
47f. 
philosophy (of grammar) 
30 
piercing (the cakras) 
175, 181f. 
pilgrimage 
9, 37, 60 
pinda 
57, 61, 178 
pingalà 
54n., 59, 168, 179 
Pingalamata 
26, 42 
рйһа 
37f., 59, 60 
polarity 
54f., 60, 62 
practice 
see sadhana 
pradaksina 
140 
Prajapati 
91 
puja 
prakasa 
50, 54 
prakrti 
49, 52, 99, 171, 177, 179 
praksobha 
100 
prana 
99, 151, 154, 164, 168, 179f.; see 
also breath 
pranagnihotra 
151 
pranahuti 
140 
Z: 
prānapratişțhā 
_ 136, 139, 150 >= 
Pranatosini 
12, 2 
pranava 
see om 
pranayama 
50, 130, 143, 165, passim 
pranayoga 
107 
Ргарайсазага 
12 
pratisthà 
61, 85, 100 
pratyahdra 
see yoga: steps and nada 
praudha 
see ullasa 
praudhanta 
see ullasa 
Prayag 
26, 28, 33 
prediction 
31 
preliminary rites 
see purascarana 
priest 
29f. 
prognostication 
35 
prthivi 
173 
general remarks 
8, 44, 78, 121f. 
in cadre of dks@ 
78 
its importance 
121 
relation to normative Hindu ritual 
123 
classification of 
124f.—= 
daily (nitya) 
134-53 
internal (antara) 
128, 145f. 
physical (bahya) 
148f. 
cakra- 
141, 147, 155f. 
kàmya- 
125, 159f. 
kaula- 
131, 147, 154, 157 
naimittika- 
124f., 157f. 
of teacher 
16, 49 
of woman 
139, 141, 154f. 
of virgin (kumári) 
139, 147, 157 
of the place 
80 
of the door 
82 
of the seat 
148 
- 
sadangapüja 
140 
use of image and symbol 
139 
use of corpses (Savasádhand) 
161 
f. 
place of paja 
134 
vessels of puja 
80 
Punyánanda 
47 
pupil (sisya) 
74 
his qualification 
77 
ready to undergo diksé 
78 
his tasks 
75, 99 
püraka 
169

--- PAGE 225 [DIRECT] ---

204 
Puránas 
12, 18, 19n., 25 
purascarana 
105, 106, 126, 134, 146 
purification 
32 
pirnabhiseka 
88, 155 
Pürnagiri (pitha) 
38, 174 
Pirnananda 
12 
purohita 
30 
Purusa 
49, 52 
pusa 
168 
Б 
puspañjali 
140, 151 
pusti 
35 
putraka 
84, 85 
putrikübhiseka 
88 
rà 
116 
raga’ 
52 
Raghavabhatta 
ragin 
77 
rajasa see püjà : classification 
Rajasekhara 
25 
rajasiya 
71 
rajayoga 
see yoga: classification 
Rakini 
173 
У 
ram 
105, 173 
Ramá 
160 
Ràmakrsna 
28,31 
Ramanuja 
103 
Rameévara 
96 
Ramprasad Sen 
28 
rasa 
92, 176, 183 
12, 26, 95, 96 
Rathakranta 
144 
Rati 
66, 160 
Raudri 
57, 94, 
96 
Ravi 
94,95 
recaka 
169 
Rodhini 
see Bodhani 
rosary (mala) 
127, 154 
rsi 
14, 16, 43 
see rginyása under пуйѕа 
Rudra 
51, 52, 58, 94, 143, 173 
Rudras 
59,65 
rudragranthi 
see granthi 
Rudrayamala 
11 
rüpa 
61, 178, 183 
rüpátita 
61, 178 
Ruru 
65 
sa (syllable) 
43 
Sabarotsava 
32 
зарда 
see sound 
Sabdabrahman 
52, 92, 96, 179, 181 
$abdaràsi 
95, 96, 100 
sabija 
85 
. 
sacrament 
123, 152 
sadadhvan 
61, 100f. 
jyadahga see ай а 
INDEX 
sadahganyása 
109 
sadahgayuvati 
see ahga 
şādāħgi 
see айа 
Sadašiva 
13, 50, 52, 58, 63, 86, 100, 
143, 179 
` 
sádhaka 
6, 28, 33, 34, 84, 85, 116 
sadhakabhiseka 
88 
_ sadhana 
6, 29, 47, 48, 63, 74, 89 
“Sadyojata 
58 
sahaja 
46, 62, 183 
Sahajiya 
10, 27 
sahasrüra(cakra 
or -padma) 107, 
130, 171f., 183 
Sailaputri 
65 
Šaiva 
37, 44, 51, 56 
Saivas 
20, 21, 30, 63 
Saiva Siddhanta 
48 
Saivism 
10, 37, 39, 61 
sakala 
see puja: classification 
sakalaniskala 
see püjà : 
classification 
sakalikarana 
138, 149 
Sakini 
174 
Sakta 
6, 11, 31, 33, 44, 48, 50, 55, 
63f. 
Sakta Sammelana 
28 
Sakti 
see Energy 
šakti (human) 
31,33 
Saktis 
16, 31, 56, 64 
united with Bhairavas 
Saktipdta 
62, 126, 129 
Saktisamgama 
11 
Saktism 
6f., 15, 16, 18f. (history), 27, 
31, 33, 37 
Saktivada 
48 
samādhi 
165f., 170, 172 
samána 
see prana 
samani 
177 
sāmānyārghya 
samarasa 
62 
sāmarasya 
94, 95, 104 
samaya 
4l, 72 
Samaya (school) 
33, 45, 53 
Samayācāra(in) 
16, 26, 44° 
samayadiksà 
84, 88 
Sambhava 
43 
Samharin 
65 
117, ab 
37 
135, 141 
Samhita 
10f., 20, 22, 29 
Samkhya 
49, 103 
sampatti 
82 
sampradáya 
6, 14, 40, 75, 134, 158, 165 
samsára 
54, 102 
samskdra 
108 
samvid 
55,85

--- PAGE 226 [DIRECT] ---

INDEX 
205 
Sanatkumüra 
14 
sandh(y)abhasd 
9, 104 =~ 
sandhyarcana 
123, 132f. 
sandoha 
37 
Safjivini 
154 
Sankara 
12, 25f., 48 
Sahkaradeva 
27 
Sankhini 168 
sannyásin 
36 
Sanskrit 
10, 18, 29, 30 
хата 
61 
$üntátità 
61 
заті 
35, 159 
Süntyatita 
86, 100 
saparyd 
see püjà 
Saradatilaka 
11, 12,23... 
Sarvabhüta SZ 
sarvaraksakera 
1\4 
sarvarogahara 
115 
sarvasamkalpahina 
71 
sarvasamrddhi 
85 
sarvatobhadra , 113 
Sdstras 
76 
sat 
49 
Sati 
38, 67 
satkarman _1, 35, 159, see also harhayoga 
Ѕацума 
21 
sáttvikakarma 
see püjà : 
classification 
Saun.aryalahari 
12, 26 
Saura 
40 
$avasüdhand 
161. 
Scholem 
103 
schools (Tantric) 
40f. 
seed (bija) 
its meanings 
104 
mantra of one syllable 
104 
kinds of 
110f. 
sense organs 
49, 52, 59 
setu 
107, 154 
sex cult. 
17 
sexual intercourse 
147, 154 
. 
sexual practices in yoga 
27, 183 
shamanism(-istic) 
17, 36 
siddha 
9, 14, 21, 23f., 26, 27, 31, 60, 
67, 106 
Siddha 
65 
siddhània 
72 
siddhaugha 
see ogha 
siddhi 
7, 34, 72, 89, 106, 116, 146, 161, 
180f. 
Siddhidütri 
65 
siddhiprada 
114 
śikhā 
see ал а 
чка 
93 
firas 
sce айда 
fisya 
see pupil 
Siva, see also Paramasiva, Sadasiva, Rudra 
first of the thirty-six tattvas 
52, 88 
one of three tattvas 
61, 143, 148 
five-headed 
40, 58 
his linga 
29, 58 
represented by the bindu 
86, 94, 98, 
105 
source of phonic energy 
94 
identical with the guru 
76 
Tantras originate from Š. 
13, 15 
becomes conscious of the Energies 
100 
union of Š. and Sakti 
19, 43, 46, 56, — 
62, 95, 98 
his role in diks@ 
86(. 
myths of $. 66 
. 
Sivadharmin 
85 
Sivadüti 
65 
Sivakaivalya 29 
Sivapada 
84 
Sivatattva 
61, 143, 148 
Skandamatar 
65 
` smária 
41, 123, 134 
smrti 
7$ 
sndna~ 
see bath 
social (position of Taatrics) 
29. 
Sodasi 
65, 128 
sodasikalà 
179 
so'ham 
see hamsamantra 
ma 
54, S9f., 94, 133, 144, 148 
Somadeva 
25 
sorcery see abhicdra 
sound (араа) 
91f. 
three levels of speech 
92, 96f., 100 
mass of s. (Sabdarasi) 
95, 96, 100 
phonic emanation 
81, 93, 94 
stages of phonic emanation 
96, 97 
polarity іп the realm of s. 55 
symbolism of s. 
91f. 
sources (of the tradition) 
9 
South East Asia 
 38f. 
spanda 
105 
speech (vàc) 
evolution of 38 
goddess of (Vic) 
90, 91 
related to mantra 
102 
combination of words 
93 
order of words 
93 
intentional s. (sandh(y)àbhágd) 
9, 104. 
related to mind 
91 
| 
| 
|

--- PAGE 227 [DIRECT] ---

signifying s. (vacaka): vowels 
97, 99, 
100 
3 
signified 
object 
(vdcya): 
consonants 
97, 99, 100 
* 
stages of speech 
92, 96f., 100 
sphota 
92,93 
spirits (evocation of) 
25 
$raddhà 
75, 159 
Sraddhàvàn 
77 
" 
Sri 46, 103, 105, 128, 135 
Sricakra (Sriyantra) 
38, 44, 54, 57, 60, 
95, 114f., 142f., 149 
Srikantha” 13, 26 
Srikula 
13, 26 
Stim 
105, 107 
Sripatra 
139, 148 
Sriiaila 
38 
Srivaisnavas 
84, 103 
Srividya 
14, 26, 33, 42, 43, 60 
Sriyantra 
see Sricakra 
srotas 
41 
srstikrama 
84 
$ruti 
74 
stambhana 
35, 159 
sthairya 
98 
sthüla 
73, 74, 100 
stotra 
12 
stuti 
140 
iat 
| 
subtle elements 
see tanmátra 
Sudarsana 
141 
Suddhabhava 
74 
Suddhavidya 
52 
«—-uddhi (consecration) 
134f., 155 
of place (sthana) 
134, 137 
of deity (devatà) 
134, 138 
of utensils and objects (dravya) 
134, . 
137 
of mantra 
134, 138 
of worshipper's self (Gtman) 
134, 136 
Sidra 
33 
i 
Süfi 
27 
süksma 
74, 100 
sun 
54п., 59f., 111 
Sundari 
65 
$ünya 
58, 104, 182 
Sürya 
40, 59, 80, 94, 
132, 
133, 
135, 
144, 148 
süryürghya 
132 
Süryavarman 
39 
susumnd 
51, 59, 86, 145, 149, 168f. 
susupti 
178 
Svacchanda 
13 
svddhisthdna 
86, 96, 97; see also cakra 
(in the body) 
206 
Ў 
INDEX 
svaha 
91 
svapna 
178 
svara 
93 
svayaribhülinga 
173 
symbolic gestures 
see gestures 
symbolism 
8, 9, 62; see also fertility, 
numbers, speech 
tádanam 
108 
lümasa 
see püjà: classification 
tambila 
151 
Tamil(nádu) 
19, 60n. 
tanmátra 
99, 171, 183 
tantra (word; text) 
5, 10f., 15f.; 20, 2 
Tantraloka 
11 
Tantrarāja 
11 
Tantraśāstra 
103 
tantriki 
see pūjā: classification 
Tantrism 
5f., 9, 16 and passim 
antiquity of 
20f. 
later history of 
25f. 
geographical aspects of 36f. 
Tara 
21п., 43, 46, 54, 65, 107, 122, 128 
Taragayatri 
123 
tarka 
166 
tarpana 
108, 123, 132f. 
taruna 
see ullàsa 
Tatpurusa 
58 
tattvas (categories) 
49, 52f., 77, 87, 101, 
103, 14 
tatfvas (three). 
61, 148 
Gimatattva 
138, 148 
vidyátattva 
142 
tattva (adhvan) 
61, 83, 87 
teacher (acárya, guru) 
74f. 
indispensability of 
10 
no diksd without 
9,76 
` 
agod 
76 
worshipped 
16, 49 
his role in worship 
142 
testing of his qualifications 
76, 77 
his tasks 
77., 107 
lineages of teachers 
see ogha 
his daksind 
34 
requirements of 32 
temple worship 
11, 20, 25, 26, 29, 66 
. 
Tibet 
14, 21, 36f., 44 
Tirumülar 
23 
tithipujà 
see püjà : naimittika 
tivra(tara) 
87 
triangle «of three saktis) 
98 
tribe(-al) 
31, 37 
Trika 
21, 22, 47£., 57 
trikhanda 
144 
trikuta 
60

--- PAGE 228 [DIRECT] ---

| 
| 
| 
Trimürti 
51, 52 
tripundra 
131 
Tripura 
66 
Tripurá(sundari) 
11, 12, 14, 30, 43, 44, 
54, 64, 65, 95, 122, 129, 142f., 150, 153, 
180 
tulasi 
134 
Tumburu 
4l 
turiya 
178 
turyatita 
178 
two-in-one 
143 
uccajana 
35, 159 
Ucchistabhairava 
156 — 
udàna 
168 
Uddiyàna 
14, 37, 38 — 
ullasa (ecstasy) 
156 
ultd-sddhand 
172 
Uma 
64 
Umiananda(natha) 
12, 26 
unmanà 
see ullàsa 
unmani (Sakti) 
62, 87, 177 
Unmatta 
65 
unmesa 
98 
untouchable 
32 
upadesa 
78, 106 
upaksetra 
37 
upanayana 
71, 75 
Upanisads 
12, 16, 22, 31, 49, 57 
upapitha 
37 
upavita 
123 
upaya 
61 
Urdhvamnaya 
42 
ürmi 
MI 
üsman 
99 
utkilana 
154 
uttaramálini 
97, 172 
uttarasüdhaka 
162 
Vagalümukhi 
see Bagalàmukhi 
Vahikas 
18n. 
vaidiki 
see püjà : 
classification 
vaikhari 
92, 97, 179 
Vaisnava 
20, 27, 40, 42, 44° 
Vaisnavi 
65 
Vaisnavism 
6, 10, 27 
vajra 
104, 142 
Vajrayana 
23, 24 
vajroli 
183 
vam 
105, 173 
vama 
40f., 44f. 
Vama 
57, 65, 94, 96 
уатасӣға(-іп) 
27, 44, 73 m 
Vamadeva 
58 
Vàümakesvara 
11 
65 
a 
vāranā 
168 
Varanasi 
26, 27, 34 
Varivasyārahasya 
12 
varma(mantra) 
141 
varna 
32f., 85, 93, 100; see also letters 
varna(mayi)diksà 
73, 85 
Varuna 
105 
Varunayantra 
115 
vasat 
105 
vasikarana 
35 
Vasistha 
14, 36 
vástudevatá 
141 
vastupurusa 
140, 112 
vastuydga 
80 
Vüsudeva 
21 
vasya 
159 
Vatuka 
59, 66, 135, 137, 151f. 
vausat 
105, 141 
vdyaviva 
114 
Veda 
6. 13n., 14, 15f., 30, 40 
_ 
Уедасага 
15, 44 
Vedanta 
49 
Vedantadesika 
102 
vedhakabhiseka 
88 
vedhamayidiksà 
86 
vedi 
112 
Vedic 
7, 24, M 
veins 
see nddi 
vidvesana 
35, 159 
vidyà 
38, 52, 61, 81, 83, 102, 103 
vidydkala 
100, 102 
vidydtattva 
148 
Vidyesvara 
13, 14 
vikalpa 
100 
vikdra 
92 
Vilisa 
43 
village god(dess) 
19, 36, 64 
vimaria 
50, 54, 59 
Vindhyas 
37, 43 
Vindhyavasini 
38, 64n. 
vira 
72 
Virabhadra 
65 
virabhàva 
50, 73 
virasádhana 
74 
virya 
51, 78, 107 
2 
visarjana 
141 
visesárghya 
139f., 147 
Visistadvaita 
48 
Visnu 
14, 58, 76, 94, 103, 143, 174; see 
also Vaisnava 
Visnus 
65

--- PAGE 229 [DIRECT] ---

vignugranthi see granthi 
Visnukrüntà 
43 
viguddhacakra 
86; see also cdkra 
Visvodar& 
168 
vital air 
see präna 
ушна 
52 
viyad(yantra) 
vrata 
146 
vyahrti 
152 
vydna 
see prüna 
vpdpaka 
156 
Vyapini (jak). 
177 
vydpti 
16, 57 
ууйһа 
53 
water chestnut (#rñgdiákú) 
‘wheel see сайта 
` 
widow . 33 
wine 
8, 25, 44, 62 
woman 
6, 25, 31, 33f., 39, 63, 154f., 
157 
low-caste 
8, 32, 33 
Woodroffe 
4, 94, 96, 103f., 114 
"word 
see speech 
worship вее рӣја 
Yajus 91 
і 
"66 
"уат 
108, 174 
114 
173 
TNDEX 
yama 
165, 167 
Yamala 
11, 22, 26, 40f. 
Yamuna 
59, 141 
yantra (three- ог two-dirhensiondl instru- 
ment with geometrical form) 
'8, 34, 
78, 113 
sometimes = mandala 
113 
more worshipped than meditated upon 
113 
forms of 
Yaska 
93 
Yasovati/Yasasvini 
168 
yauvana 
see ullàsa 
yoga 
7, 9, 17, 22, 117, 163f. (ch. VI) 
definition of 
163 
classification of 
164f. 
steps (айда) of 
165-70 
yogic body (mystic physiology of) 8, 16, 
57f., 164, 172f., 184f. (chart) 
yogin 
30, 31, 36, 62, 67 
Yogini 
25, 31, 59, 66, 137, 151f. 
Yoginihrdaya 
11, 12 
Yoginikaula 
46 
yoginiviramelana 
63 
yoni 
105, ]13L.173. 
yonimudrà 
107, 108 
114, 115

--- PAGE 230 [BLANK] ---


