# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1979-gunawardana-robe-and-plough-monasticism-sri-lanka.pdf
# Total Pages: 200 | Direct: 199 | OCR: 0 | Blank/Sparse: 1
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:09:01
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 2 [DIRECT] ---

[ce 
meneame 
ee 
Robe and Plough

--- PAGE 3 [DIRECT] ---

XXXVI. 
“XV. 
XXXIV, 
XXXII. 
“XXXII 
XXXL, 
XXX, 
XXIX, 
XXVIII. 
XXVIL. 
XXXVI. 
XXV. 
XXIV. 
<XTIE, 
XXIL. 
XXI. 
XX. 
XIX. 
XVIII. 
XVH. 
XVI. 
XV. 
XIV. 
MONOGRAPHS OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR ASIAN STUDIES 
Published by and available from: The University of Arizona Press 
Box 3398, Tucson, Arizona 85722 
Burmese Sit-tans 1764-1826: Records of Rural Life and Administration, 
by Frank N. Trager and William J. Koenig with the assistance of Yi Yi. 
© 
1978. $9.50 cloth; $5.95 paper. 
: 
Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval 
Sri Lanka, by R. A. L. H. Gunawardana. 1978. $9.50 cloth; $5.95 paper. 
Code and Custom in a Thai Provincial Court, by David M. Engel. 1978. 
$10.50 cloth; $4.95 paper. 
Philippine Policy Toward Sabah: A Claim to Independence: by Lela Gar- 
ner Noble. 1977, $10.50 cloth; $4.95 paper. 
Political Behavior of Adolescents in China: The Cultural Revolution in 
Kwangchow, by David M. Raddock. 1977. $8.95 cloth; $4.50 paper. 
Big City Government in India: Councilor, Administrator, and Citizen in’ 
- 
: 
Delhi, by Philip Oldenburg. 1976: $9.50 cloth; $4.95 paper. 
The New Jerusalem: Aspects of Utopianism in the Thought of Kagawa 
Toyohiko, by George B. Bikle, Jr. 1976, $8.95 cloth; $4.95 paper. 
Dégen Kigen—-Mystical Realist, by Hee-Jin Kim, 1975. $8.95 cl, $4.95 p. 
Masks of Fiction in DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER: Myth, Mimesis, 
and Persona, by Lucien Miller, 1975. $7.95 cloth, $3.95 paper. 
Politics and Nationalist Awakening in South India, 1852—1891, by R. 
Suntharalingam. 1974, $7.95 cloth; $3.95 paper, 
The Peasant Rebellions of the Late Ming Dynasty, by James Bunyan 
Parsons. 1970. $7.50. 
Political Centers and Cultural Regions in Early Bengal, by Barrie M, Mor- 
rison, 1970. $7.50: 
: 
The Restoration of Thailand Under Roma I: 1782-1809, by Klaus Wenk. 
1968. $7.50. 
oe 
K’ang Yu-wei: A Biography and a Symposium, translated and edited by 
Jung-pang Lo. 1967. 541 pp. $14,50. 
A Documentary Chronicle of Sino-Western Relations (1644-1820) by 
Lo-shu Fu. 1966. xviii + 792 pp. $14.50. 
Before Aggression: Europeans Prepare the Japaense Army, by Ernst L. 
Presseisen, 1965. O. P. 
Shinran’ s Gospel of Pure Grace, by Alfred Bloom. 1965. $2.50 paper. 
Chiaraijima Village: Land Tenure, Taxation, and Local Trade, 1818-1884, 
by William Chambliss. 1965, $5.00. 
The British in Malaya: The First Forty Years, by ‘Tregonning. 1965. O. P. 
Ch’ oe Pu’s Diary: A Record of Drifting Across the Sea, by John Meskill. 
1965. $4.50. 
Korean Literature: Topics and Themes, by Peter H. Lee. 1965.0. P. 
Reform, Rebellion, and the Heavenly Way, Benjamin Weems. 1964. $3.75. 
The Malayan Tin Industry to 1914, by Wong Lin Ken, 1965. $6.50. 
The Association for Asian Studies: Monographs and Papers, No. XXXV, 
Frank E. Reynolds, Editor 
Paul Wheatley, Series Editor 
ROBE AND PLOUGH 
4 
Monasticism and Economic Interest in 
Early Medieval 
Sri Lanka 
by 
R. A. L. H. GUNAWARDANA 
HAR 
A 
2669358 
a ¢ 
Published for The Association for Asian Studies by 
THR 
UNIVERSITY 
OF 
ARIZONA 
PRESS

--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

About the Author... 
R. A. L. H. GUNAWARDANA ‘took, his first degree at the 
University of Sri Lanka and his doctorate at the University 
of London. He did post-doctoral research in Cambridge as 
a Commonwealth Fellow affiliated to Gonville and Caius 
College and, subsequently, in Oxford as Visiting Fellow 
at Corpus Christi College. He is at present Associate 
2rofessor of History at the Peradeniya Campus of the 
Jniversity of Sri Lanka. 
The publication of this volume has been 
largely financed from a revolving fund 
initially established by a generous grant 
from the Asia Foundation to the Association 
ni 
¢ 
for Asian Studies to assist in the publication 
of works by distinguished Asian scholars. 
THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA PRESS 
Copyright® 1979 
io 
The Arizona Board of Regents 
‘ALL Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Gunawardana, R. A. L. He 
Robe and plough, 
(Monographs of the Association for Asian Studies; no; 35) 
Based on doctoral dissertation submitted to the University 
of London. 
te 
. Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
: 
e 
1, Monasticism and religious orders, Buddhist—Sti 
" 
* 
Lanka—History. 2. Buddhism and state—Sri Lanka— 
History. 3. Sri Lanka—History—To 1505, I, Associa- 
tion for Asian Studies, II, Title. III. Series: 
Association for Asian Studies. Monographs of the 
Association for Asian Studies; no. 35. 
BQ6I60,S72G86 
294.3'65’095493 
78-26090 
TEDNI A-R1AS.NEAR-A 
For 
FDS 
TGS 
and 
a 
. 
VGS

--- PAGE 5 [DIRECT] ---

gt ale ET Na th ie ah bin 
| 
Contents 
Page 
PLO. eirehiad isha 
a cba io adda 
tseceu 
ee 
Ce ner me nb 
es 
ix 
Abbreviations 
xi 
| 
Tntroductlow:coxsvilecdaw 
oak 
doa 
a eae Pas PERRY Se 
1 
Chapter 
1: 
The Structure of the Sangha 
7 
2 
Chapter 
2: 
The Satgha and Monastic Property ..........04. 
53 
Chapter 
3: 
The Management of Monastic Property ......... 
95 
Chapter 
4: 
Monastic Life and Relations with the Laity...... 
137 
Chapter 
5: 
The Satgha and the King .......... 
cece evens 
170 
Chapter 
6: 
Cults and Ritual . 
i 
eves 
212 
Chapter 
7: 
Relations with Forsigt Centers of 
“Buddhism ‘ 
242 
Chapter 
8: 
The Structure of the Sangha in Transition : The 
’ 
Rise of the “Bight Fraternities’! ............5. 
282 
Chapter 
9: 
A .New 
Organization 
for 
the Sangha: The 
Unification and its Significance ...........80 0s 
313 
Chapter 10: 
Conclusion ....... 6. ccc enc edee ene ete nent 
ene 
338 
Bibliography 0.0... cece ce cece 
eect eee teen 
eee eS 
351 
Chronological Chart .. 0... ccc cece 
c cree ener 
ren een need 
362 
Index ...... Si alate’ Weaisne Maialod Maen ah wurgmal 
ae um 
paeG dois 
Tepe AE 
365 
MAPS 
1. Map of Anuradhapura showing the location of the principal 
MOMNASLETIOS. 0c cece 
e ce n perenne nee 
e tee et 
nee enee 
15 
2. Map of Early Medieval Sri ‘Lanka showing the distribution 
of monasteries affiliated to the three nikdyas and the location 
of estates belonging to the principal monasteries at the capital 
GHEY. shia gpa ssie viecapele Sls whacesdyg Sonar wa teaca lathes. aujhen Bee Diw'6 a) ec 3 
52 
3. Map of Polonnaruva showing the location of the principal 
monasteries and shrines .......c.. 
cece cere t 
eee e 
ene neces 
331

--- PAGE 6 [DIRECT] ---

Contents 
| 
Page 
} 
Preface vise csecvecsvev cent eee e sense ete 
e eee reer ener ees Ky ie 
ix, 
Abbreviations ...... cc cece ec ee eee 
eee teeter eee nt nee eee anes 
Xi 
r 
Introduction oo... ccc 
e eee 
eee eee 
eee 
teen ee gts 
1 
| 
Chapter 
1: 
The Sheaoture Of the Sangha 
vo cceccecvvceveree 
; 
| 
Chapter 
2: 
The Sargha and Monastic Property ........ hated 
53 
: 
Chapter 
3 
The Management of Monastic Property .....:... 
95 
Chapter 
4: 
Monastic Life and Relations with the Laity...... 
137 
Chapter 
5: 
The Sangha and the King ..... Ba teehee 
ations 
170 
- 
Chapter 
6: 
Cults and Ritual . 
ia 
Fave 
212 
Chapter 
7 
Relations with Foreign Contes of 
rsuddieth ‘ 
242 
Chapter 
8: 
The Structure of the Satgha in Transition : The 
Rise of the ‘Bight Fraternities’ ..........6.4- 
282 
Chapter 
9: 
A New Organization 
for the Sargha: The 
Unification and its Significance ......6... 
cece ee 
313 
Chapter 10: 
Conclusion 
338 
Bibliography ........-+065 
a 
351 
Chronological Chart .... 
362 
Wades 55 
yc ages dha bias ob 
a 
eeia yee aan Bee ees ESE 
365 
MAPS 
1. Map of Anuradhapura showing the location of the principal 
; 
MONASCTICS. 
cee eee nee 
eee eee 
Ee 
eats 
1%) 
2. Map of Early Medieval Sri Lanka showing the distribution 
of monasteries affiliated to the three nikéyas and the location 
of estates belonging to the principal monasteries at the capital 
A 
52 
3. Map of Polonnarnva showing ‘the location of the principal 
monasteries and shrines ............ Sa huaseren aetna seb aie 
331

--- PAGE 7 [DIRECT] ---

Preface 
This book is based on a doctoral dissertation submitted to the 
University of London. 
It was at the insistence of several colleagues, 
particularly Professor Gananath Obeyesekere, that I began after a long 
delay to prepare it for publication. 
The original dissertation has-now 
been substantially revised. 
In this book there is a considerable amount 
of new material (especially from inscriptions which have been published 
in more recent times) and certain problems of theoretical interest are 
discussed in much greater detail. 
' 
‘The method used in this book for transliterating terms and phrases 
- 
from South Asian languages is well known to scholars studying this 
region, but there are certain notations which have to be explained since 
they are perhaps peculiar to Sti Lanka studies. 
The @ is pronounced 
as in “mat” while 4, the longer form of this vowel, is pronounced as in 
“lad.” 
The two signs % and % are used to indicate the nasalization of 
the consonant which. follows as in vb and id. 
Problems involved in the use of terms denoting ‘regions also de- 
serve mention here. Hxactitude in the ‘use of such terms has ‘not always 
been possible since modern political divisions’ only rarely approximate 
early medieval political and cultural’) regions. For iristance the term 
India has been used in this book in the sense of the Indian subcontinent 
and: not to. denote the: area wine comes within the current. political 
division. 
I owe a debt.of gratitude 't 
to.a number of scholars who helped me in. 
numerous ways, in particular.to. Professor Padmanabh. S. Jaini whose 
“guidance. was, most: valuable for ‘ascertaining the meanings: of difficult 
Pali- passages; Professor. Hla Pe whio: showed a. great deal of: patience

--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

meanings of difficult passages from secondary sources in the German 
language; Dr. Lily de Silva who directed -my attention to relevant 
information in the Dighanikdyatthakathé Linatthavannané; 
and Dr. 
Bandula Karunatilaka who undertook the tedious task of preparing the 
index. 
Tam specially grateful to Professor Paul Wheatley for the keen 
interest he showed in the publication of this book. 
Dr. J. G, de Casparis of the School of Oriental and African’ Studies,. 
London, guided me in the preparation of my dissertation and helped. 
greatly through constructive criticism to improve its quality. 
Professors. 
Gananath Obeyesekere and W. J. F. La Brooy who read earlier drafts 
of this book and Professor Frank Reynolds who edited the book for the 
Association. for Asian Studies made many useful suggestions for im- 
provement. 
Ms. Elizabeth Shaw of the University of Arizona Press 
took great pains in patiently reading through the manuscript and helped 
to effect further improvements. 
While recording my profound appre-- 
ciation of the enthusiastic assistance I received from all these individuals 
I wish to emphasize that I alone am responsible for any errors that a 
reader may detect: sometimes my obstinacy prevailed over their advice. 
T had access.to the extensive resources of the Libraries at the Uni- 
versities ‘of London, Cambridge and Oxford and at the British Museum 
when I was collecting material for this book. 
Mr. Ian Goonetileke and 
his colleagues at the University Library, Peradeniya, took enormous 
trouble to help me in many ways. 
The courteous assistance I received 
at all these institutions is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr. E. V. Christian helped me to prepare the three maps which 
appear in this book. My wife shared the tiresome task of reading 
proofs. 
The University of Arizona Press and the Wesley Press handled 
the publication of this book expeditiously and efficiently. 
I am most. 
grateful to them. 
Such quality as this book may possess will have been 
adversely affected and its publication long delayed but for the keen. 
interest shown and the willing assistance given by all these and many 
more besides. 
R. A. B. H. Gunawardana. 
Peradeniya, 
17 April 1978. 
Abbreviations 
_ AIC 
Ancient Inscriptions 
in Ceylon by Eduard Miiller, 
Art. As. 
Artibus Asiae. 
ASC 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. 
ASCAR 
Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. 
ASI 
Archaeological Survey of India. 
ASTAR 
Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of 
India. 
Abdhyk. 
Abhidhammatthavikasini, 
~ 
Abdhvt. 
Abhidhamméavatara. 
Abhsngsny. 
Abhidharmirthasahgrahasanyaya. 
Atths. 
Atthasélini, 
BEFEO 
Bulletin de 'licole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 
CALR 
Ceylon Antiquary and Literary Register. 
CCMT 
Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times by Wilhelm Geiger. 
cn 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 
CHI 
Ceylon Historical Journal. 
CIHSS 
Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies. 
CISG 
Ceylon Journal of Science, Section G: Archaeology,, 
Ethnology ete. 
Cy. 
Calavamsa. 
DAG 
Dhampiya Atuva Gdfapadaya, 
EI 
Epigraphia Indica, 
EZ 
Epigraphia Zeylanica. 
- 
JA 
Journal Asiatique. 
JAG 
Jataka Aluvé Gitapadaya. 
JRAS 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
‘ 
Ireland. 
: 
JRASCB 
Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
JRASCBNS — Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
New Series. 
, 
Linattha. 
Dighanikiyatthakatha. Linatthavaynand. 
Cxil

--- PAGE 9 [DIRECT] ---

x 
PREFACE 
and Tibetan sources; Dr. ¥. Kanapathipillai 
and Dr. Cc PD. 
- 
Jayawardana who gave generously of their time to help me to unravel 
meanings of difficult. passages from ‘secondary sources in the German 
language; Dr. Lily de Silva ~who directed “my attention to relevant 
information in the Dighanikiyatthakathé Linatthavannané; 
and Dr. 
Bandula Karunatilaka who undertook the tedious task of preparing the 
index. 
Iam specially grateful to Professor Paul Wheatley for the keen 
interest he showed in the publication of this book. 
3 
Dr. J. G. de Casparis of the School of Oriental and African Studies,. 
London, guided. me in the preparation of my dissertation and helped. 
greatly through constructive criticism to improve its quality. 
Professors. 
Gananath Obeyesekere and W. J. F. La Brooy who read earlier drafts 
of this book and Professor Frank Reynolds who edited the book for the 
Association for Asian Studies made many useful suggestions for im- 
provement. 
Ms. Flizabeth Shaw of the University of Arizona Press 
took great pains’ in patiently reading through the manuscript and helped 
to effect further improvements. 
While recording my profound appre- 
ciation of the enthusiastic assistance I received from all these individuals 
I wish to emphasize that I alone am responsible for any errors that a. 
_ reader may detect: sometimes my obstinacy provailed over their advice. 
I had access to the extensive resources of the Libraries at the Uni- 
. 
versities of London, Cambridge and Oxford and at the British Museum 
when I was collecting material for this book. 
Mr. Ian Goonetileke and 
his colleagues at the University Library, Peradeniya, took enormous 
trouble to help me in many ways. 
The courteous assistance I received 
at-all these institutions is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr. E. V. Christian helped me to prépare the three maps which 
appear in this book. 
My wife shared the tiresome task of reading 
proofs, 
The University of Arizona Press and the Wesley Press handled 
the publication of this book expeditiously and efficiently. 
I am most. 
grateful to them. 
Such quality as this book may possess will have been 
adversely affected and its publication long delayed but for the keen 
interest shown and the willing assistance given by all these and many 
more besides. 
R. A. i, H. Gunawardana. 
Peradeniya, 
47 April 1978. 
* 
Abbreviations 
AIC 
Ancient Inscriptions in Ceylon by Eduard Miiller. 
Art, As. 
Artibus Asiae. 
ASC 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. 
ASCAR 
Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. 
beer 
Archaeological Survey of India. 
: 
Annual Reports of the Archaeological 
Surve 
i 
Abdhivk. 
ihn 
ea es 
Abdhvt. 
Abhidhammavatara. 
Abhsngsny. 
Abhidharmarthasahgrahasanyaya. 
Aiths. 
Atthasalini, 
: 
BEFEO 
Bulletin de Uibcole Francaise d’ Extréme-Orient. 
CALR 
Ceylon Antiquary and Literary Register. 
CCMT 
Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times by Wilhelm Geiger 
CIT 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 
. 
CHI 
Ceylon Historical Journal. 
CIHSS 
Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies, 
CISG 
Ceylon Journal of Science, Section G: 
Archaeology, 
Ethnology etc. 
: 
Cy. 
Calavamsa. 
DAG 
Dhampiyé Atuvé Gdfapadaya. 
ET 
Epigraphia Indica. 
EZ 
Epigraphia Zeylanica. 
JA 
Journal Asiatique. 
JAG 
Jétaka Aluva Gétapadaya, 
FRAS 
- Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland. 
: 
JRASCB 
Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
JRASCBNS — Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
New Series. 
‘ 
Linattha. 
Dighanikayatthakatha Linatthavannand. 
[xi]

--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

iy 
tt 
xii 
MASC 
MASI 
MRE 
Mult. 
My. 
Niks. 
Pjy, 
Shsvp. 
Sihvp. 
SIT 
Smhvnd. 
Smp, 
SSS 
Sdhmpyn. 
Sumy. 
TL 
UCHC 
UCR 
Vap. 
Vimty. 
Ving. 
Vsm. 
Vsmsn. 
Vsmnt. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. 
Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
Annual Reports on South Indian Epigraphy, Madras. 
Malaika. 
Mahdyamsa. 
Nikayasahgrahaya, 
Pijavaliya. 
Sahassavatthupakarana. 
Sihalavatthupakarana. 
South Indian Inscriptions. 
Sammohavinodani. 
Samantapésidika. 
Sri Sumahgala Sabdakosaya by Valivitiye Sorata. 
Staddhammopiiyana. 
Sumangalavilasini. 
Tamil Lexicon. 
University of Ceylon History of Ceylon. 
University of Ceylon Review. 
Vamsatthappakdasini, 
Vimativinodani. 
Vimuttimagga. 
Visuddhimagga. 
Visuddhi. nérgamahdsanyaya. 
Visuddhi: 1geatikd, 
Introduction 
A: detailed and continuous history of Buddhism is of particular 
. 
importance for the proper understanding of the culture and history of 
Sri Lanka. 
For Buddhism has been closely linked with the social, cul- 
tural and even the political history of the vast majority of the inhabitants 
of this Asian island. 
The short historical accounts of Buddhism which 
appeared in the Histoire du bouddhisme dans I’ 
Inde by H. Kern, published 
in 1903, and in Charles Eliot's Hinduism and Buddhism, published 
in 1921, are among the most noteworthy pioneer works in this field. 
G. P. Malalasekera dealt with an important aspect. of the activities of the 
Sinhalese saigha in his Pali Literature of Ceylon, published in 1928. 
In a paper on “'Mahayanism in Ceylon” published in the same year in the 
Ceylon Journal of Science, 8, Paranayitana examined the evidence from 
literary sources and the archaeological material available at the time on 
‘the prevalance of Mahayana and Tantric ideas and practices in the island. 
This study remains one of the most valuable contributions on the subject. 
The task of writing a systematic history of Buddhism was begun by 
E, W. Adikaram, whose doctoral thesis, the Early History of Buddhism 
in Ceylon, was published in 1946, He based his research mainly on the 
commentarial works on the Pali Canon, datable to the fifth century 
A.D. 
Ten years later the work was taken up by another scholar, Walpola 
Rahula. 
His History of Buddhism in Ceylon (3rd century B.C.—\0th 
century A.D.), though handicapped, by his attempt to cover such a vast 
span of time, demonstrates research into a greater variety of sources and 
a more comprehensive treatment ofthe subject than is evident in the work 
of his predecessor, 
The last two decades did not, witness the publication of any other 
systematic history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, but the subject has received 
the attention of some scholars. In a paper published in 1955 in a special 
issue of the Ceylon Historical Journal V. Pandita outlined the history of 
11]

--- PAGE 11 [DIRECT] ---

2 
INTRODUCTION 
Buddhism in the “Polonnaruya Period.” In his excellent work, Les sectes 
bouddhiques du petit véhicule, published in the same year, André Bareau, 
made a detailed exposition of the main tenets of the Mahavihira and 
investigated certain aspects of the doctrinal differences which were found 
among the three nikayas of Sinhalese Buddhism. Five years later Heinz 
Bechert brought out a posthumous publication of a study by Wilhelm 
Geiger entitled Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times. This work contains 
asection on “Religion and Culture’’ in which Geiger brings together a fair 
amount of material from a variety of sources, 
In the sections devoted 
to Buddhism in the History of Ceylon sponsored by the University of Sri 
Lanka, S$. Paranavitana outlined the main developments in the history 
of Buddhism up to the sixteenth century. 
In 1967 N. Mudiyanse pub- 
lished a monograph entitled Mahdydna Monuments in Ceylon in which 
he examined archacological materials which reflect the influence of 
Mahayana Buddhism. 
More recently, in a work entitled Sri Lamkavé 
Saiigha Samvidhinaya (1974), M. Rohanadheera has attempted to trace 
the history of the organization of the Buddhist satgha in the island 
from the thirteenth century to the fifteenth. 
In addition to the works mentioned above, there are some unpub- 
lished monographs which have a direct bearing on the history of the 
sangha during the period covered in the present study. 
The IJnsii- 
tutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions (3rd century B.C.—l0th century 
_ A.D.) by L. . Perera, a doctoral thesis presented to the University of 
Ceylon, is of particular importance, 
In this useful work Perera examines 
in considerable detail some of the institutional aspects of Buddhism. 
In her doctoral thesis, The Age of Parakramabihu I, Sirima Wickrema- 
singhe assesses the contribution of this king to the development of 
Buddhism and gives an account of the religious buildings erected 
under his patronage. 
W. M. K. Wijetunga investigated the social and 
religious conditions during the period of Cola rule ina dissertation enti- 
tled The Rise and Decline of Cola Power in Ceylon. 
Though it was beyond 
the scope of these works to make a detailed examination of the history of 
the saigha, they form a reliable basis for further research and outline 
many interesting problems. 
. 
Most works on the ancient and medieval history of Sri Lanka have 
adopted a scheme of periodization based upon the location of the capitat 
of the Sinhalese kingdom; the pre-colonial history of the island is thus 
divided into eight périods: Anuradhapura, Polonnaruva, Dambadeniya, 
Kurundgala, Gampola, Kotte, Sitavaka and Kandy. The present writer 
began his research with the intention of writing a history of Buddhism. 
in the ‘‘Polonnaruya Period,” but, during the course of his work, he be- 
came convinced of the inadequacy of this scheme of periodization. 
It 
Fc. 
i 
Ah AD Rta 
a 
NR 
A 
al
} 
t 
‘ 
INTRODUCTION 
3 
became increasingly clear that some of the significant changes in the or- 
ganization of the Buddhist satgha in the twelfth century would become 
understandable only when examined in the context of developments 
noticeable in the latter part of the ‘‘Anurddhapura Period.” 
Hence, in 
defiance of the traditional chronological categories, it was decided to 
include the last two centuries of the Anuradhapura kingdom and the 
period of the Polonnaruva kingdom within the chronological limits of 
the present study. 
The period covered in the present work ranges from the reign of 
Sena I (A.D. 833-853), which witnessed an event of considerable signi- 
ficance in the history of Buddhism in the island, to the invasion of Magha 
in the thirteenth century, an event which marked a turning point in the 
history of Sri Lanka. 
The Sinhalese civilization in the “Dry Zone” did 
not recover from the effects of the troubled times which followed the in- 
yasion of Magha. 
The consequent shift of the centers of political and 
cultural activity to the “Wet Zone” also meant a radical change in the 
methods of agricultural production. 
This change entailed a shift from 
_ 
cultivation. dependent on large-scale irrigation works to rain-fed agri- 
culture in the high-rainfall areas. 
The fortunes of the sangha were 
seriously eroded during the tinte of political turmoil following the invasion, 
of Magha. 
The chroniclers give moving accounts of the destruction 
wrought by the invaders and of their persecution of Buddhism which 
forced many monks to flee from the island. 
During the four centuries between the reign of Sena Land the invasion 
of Magha, the hydraulic civilization of Sri Lanka reached its zenith. 
The irrigation complexes completed during this period turned the plains 
of the “Dry Zone”’ into an intensively cultivated region which 
produced 
a surplus capable of supporting a mature and complex civilization. 
The 
prosperity of the period is reflected in the munificient patronage that the 
satgha received from both the royalty and 
the nobility. 
During this 
period the influence of Buddhism was generally decreasing in South Asia. 
Particularly in South India, Buddhism, like Jainism, was losing ground 
to a dynamic and militant type of Hinduism. 
It continued to thrive at a 
few centers in India, but even these were subsequently overwhelmed by 
the tempestuous sweep of Islam. 
It was only in the two small kingdoms 
of Nepal and Sri Lanka that Buddhism remained dominant. 
In both 
these areas the strong patronage it received, from ruling groups was a vital 
factor behind Buddhism’s capacity to survive and flourish. 
In Sri Lanka the patronage which Buddhism received enabled the 
monasteries to become more independent. 
From as early as the second 
century B.C., monasteries in the island had benefited from grants of land, 
irrigation works and other sources of income made by their many wealthy

--- PAGE 12 [DIRECT] ---

4 
INTRODUCTION 
patrons, and, by the ninth century, they had accumulated considerable 
holdings of land and property of other sorts. 
Inscriptions from the ninth 
and tenth centuries in particular reveal an extremely important develop- 
ment, 
At this time the fiscal rights and the administrative and judicial 
authority that the king had traditionally enjoyed over the property of the 
sangha were transferred to the monastic authorities. 
As a result of these 
grants of “‘immunity,”’ many monastic estates became out of bounds to, 
royal officials. 
The autonomy, that monasteries began to enjoy in. 
the administration of their estates gave rise to certain new features 
in Sri Lankan: society which attain their mature form in the later 
medieyal period. 
The present study examines the extent and nature of 
the sangha's ownership of property, the organization evolved. to carry 
out the functions that the possession of property ‘and administrative 
authority involved, and the changes that these new developments brought 
to the life of the sangha and. to their relations with the laity. 
It brings to 
light the organizational and, particularly, the economic aspects of 
Buddhism which have not received adequate attention in previous works. 
on the religious history. 
of the island. 
The ninth and the tenth centuries also witnessed the later stages of an. 
‘ 
important development in the history of Buddhism in South and Southeast 
Asia. 
This was the expansion of the Tantric teachings propounded. and. 
systematized primarily at centers of Buddhist learning in the Eastern re- 
gions of India. 
- Similarly, the twelfth century marked an important. 
stage of another equally if not more significant moyementin the expansion 
of Sinhalese Theravada which brought Sri Lanka into prominence as a. 
source of inspiration to the Buddhists of Southeast Asia. 
In the context 
of these developments, the relations that the Sinhalese saigha maintained. 
with the Buddhist communities in lands bordering the Bay of Bengal 
form a very important aspect of their history. 
: 
Perhaps the most significant event in the history of Buddhism in the 
‘island during this period was the establishment, for the first time in the 
Buddhist world, of a unified order of the savgha for the whole country. 
‘This reform, which received enthusiastic assistance from King Parikrama- 
bahu I (A.D. 1153-1186), brought under a common leadership the clerical 
community which had remained divided. into several independent factions 
for more than a milfennium.. 
In the ninth and tenth centuries the 
three nikdyas of the Sinhalese sangha were at the highest point of their 
organizational development. 
The nikdya division cut across the structure 
of the saigha to create three groups of clerics who accepted the leadership: 
of three monasteries at the capital—the Mahavihara, the Abhayagiri 
and the Jetavana. 
This study examines the organization of the satgha 
in the ninth and tenth centuries in order to ascertain the bases of these 
INTRODUCTION 
5 
divisions and to inquire into the subsequent developments which made 
unification possible. 
On the basis of these investigations an attempt will 
‘be made to assess the nature and the significance of this unification. 
The study of these problems is based primarily on material derived 
from the Pali and Sinhalese chronicles and from archaeological sources. 
The chronicles provide a fairly detailed and continuous account of the 
history of the satgha which, at times, is supplemented by inscriptions. 
The commentarial and sub-commentarial works on the Pali Canon and 
‘contemporary literary works provide additional information and help 
to clarify some of the problems raised by these sources, 
Almost all these 
literary sources, being works of monks, concern themselves with the his- 
tory of the saigha. 
Yet, it is noteworthy that they represent, with only 
two exceptions, the works of the Mahavihara, 
In compiling the history 
of the other two nikdyas, one is placed in the unenviable position of 
dependence on the incidental references and prejudiced remarks in these 
works, 
: 
Inscriptional evidence only partly compensates for deficiencies in the 
literary sources, and furthermore, a large number of inscriptions still 
await publication. Also, many of the published records await careful edi- 
ting and much-needed interpretation. This has been attempted wherever 
possible, and the aid of contemporary literary sources has been sought 
as an aid to interpretation. 
In addition to these sources, Tibetan, Bur- 
mese and Chinese chronicles, certain manuscripts found in Tibet and 
Nepal, and epigraphic records from India, Burma and Java proyide 
yaluable information on Buddhism in Sri Lanka and on the relations that 
the Sinhalese satgha maintained: with other Buddhist communities, of 
South and Southeast Asia. 
The historian who tries to utilize the infor- 
mation available in this variety of sources finds it an exacting but 
. rewarding task; it is remarkable, for- instance, that in the whole of 
South and Southeast Asia, it is only in Sri Lanka that detailed . 
information is available on the organizational and economic aspects of 
the history of the Buddhist saigha during the period under consider- 
ation,

--- PAGE 13 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 
1 
’ 
The Structure of the Sangha 
The division of the Sinhalese saigha into three groups called nikdyas 
led by three large monasteries at the capital—the Mahavihara, the Abha- 
yagirivihara and the Jetavanavihara—had become, by the ninth century, 
one of the most important features of Buddhist clerical organization in 
Sri Lanka. 
Vinitadeva, the Indian Buddhist scholar who lived in the 
eighth century, was aware of this threefold division. 
The lists of Buddhist 
nikdyas in his work and in the Varsdgraprechasitra, translated into Tibetan 
~ in the eleventh century, refer to the Mahiviharavasins, the Abhayagiri- 
visins and the Jetavantyas as the three divisions of the Theravada.! 
The 
schisms which led to the emergence of the three nikayas had taken place 
many centuries earlier; in fact, the first schism in Sinhalese Buddhism 
was in the reign of Vattagamani (89-77 B.C.), 
But, for a long time, the 
nikdyas represented little ‘more than rival factions of monks within the 
capital. 
From about the fifth century monasteries in different parts of 
the island are described in inscriptional and literary sources as belong- 
ing to one of the three nikdyas, and in the ninth and tenth centuries, the 
authority and. the organizational strength of the nikayas reached a hi gh 
point. 
The term nikéya originally meant “group’’ or “collection’’ and was 
specifically used to denote classified groups of sitras in the Buddhist 
Canon. 
Later on it acquired the secondary meaning of “‘a group of 
monks who subscribed to a particular interpretation of the teachings of 
the Buddha.” 
In this sense the terms ‘“‘school"' and “‘sect’’ have been 
used to translate nikdya. 
In Sri Lanka the term seems to have acquired 
some additional meanings. 
Two of its derivatives are found in inscript- 
ions, and of these two, naka and nakay, the former has been sometimes 
used to denote larger monastic complexes like the Cetiyagirivihara at 
1, See André Bareau, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit véhicule, Saigon, 1955, pp. 24-7 
[7]

--- PAGE 14 [DIRECT] ---

8 
THE STRUCTURE 
OF THE SANGHA 
Mihintale.? 
But all three terms were more often used in the records of 
the ninth and tenth centuries to refer to a collection of monasteries which 
accepted the leadership and, in certain instances, the supervisory contre} 
of one of the main monasteries at the capital. 
The Mahdavihéra Nikaya , 
The Mahavihara or the “Great Monastery,”’ renowned in legend for 
its association with Mahinda, had within its precincts a number of objects 
and monuments held in great veneration by all Buddhists. 
The foremost 
among these were the Bo Tree brought from Buddha Gaya and the Maha- 
thiipa which was built by the warrior-king Dutthagimani and his succes- 
sor Saddhitissa. 
A. series of commentators, the most well known being 
Buddhaghosa, codified and systematized interpretations of the Pali 
Canon as propounded. by teachers of the Mahavihara. 
Since both the 
Canon and the Commentaries of the Mahavihira have surviyed to the 
present day, its teachings have beon studied in detail by modern scholars. 
André Bareau has selected two hundred, and thirty-two theses as repre- 
sentative of the doctrinal position of the Mahavibara,? 
It was the con- 
tention of the followers of the Mahavihara that they alone represented 
the true Theravada tradition and that the followers of the other two 
nikdyas were schismatics. 
In their chronicles the Mahavihdravasins 
usually refer to themselves as Theriyé and Theravidino. These names are, 
however, equally applicable to the members of the other two nikdyas.4 
In the ninth and tenth centuries, the Mahavibira received consistent 
patronage, 
Substantial additions were made to the number of buildings 
within its precincts during this period. 
Chronicles and inscriptions also 
record many instances of restorative work undertaken by the patrons of 
this monastery. 
Sena I (833-853) built the Sanghasenaparivena.5 
His 
successor, Sena II, restored the LohapAsadda and made sufficient endow- 
ments to maintain thirty-two monks. 
He also repaired the conduit which 
conveyed water to the Bo Tree.6 
Sena, a general under Kassapa IV 
(898-914), built the Samuddagiri-parivena, while the Chief Scribe, also 
called Sena, built the Mahalekha-pabbata-parivena.? 
The next king, 
Kassapa V, restored 
the Ganthakara-parivena,® and his, sister Sangha 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 92, 1. A20; Vol. 
Uf, p. 61, #.A23-4; Vol. IU, p. 222, 4 BIL. 
Bareau, op. cit., pp, 205-41, 
See supra p. 7. 
Cy, 50. 70. 
Cy. 51. 69, 71, 78. 
Cv. 52. 21, 33, 
Cy, 52. 27. 
PAAYRAYYN 
THE STRUCTURE 
OF THE SANGHA 
9 
repaired the Lohapisada and crowned it with a pinnacle.” In an inscript- 
ion at the Abhayagiri monastery, a king, identified as Mahinda IV (956- 
972), claims to have constructed the Mara wall near the Mahathtipa and 
to have repaired the bronze work of the Ruvanpaha (Ratanapasida) 
at 
the Mahavihara.!9 
Kutthaka, a general serving under Sena V (972-982), 
built the Senasendpati-parivena.’' 
The term parivena originally meant 
“cell” but, by the period under consideration, it had acquired an extended 
meaning. 
In the Sdrattha-dipani, it is defined as a group of residences 
for monks, enclosed within its own boundary wall but situated within the 
precincts of a large monastery (mahavihara).'* 
Sometimes the parivena 
was situated not within the boundary of the main monastery to which it 
was affiliated, but at a considerable distance from it. From the contexts 
in which the term occurs it would seem that the parivena denoted an in- 
stitution comparable to the monastic college of medieval Europe. 
Pro- 
lific building activity, indicated by the evidence cited above, is convincing 
proof that the Mahavihara received patronage from both the royal family 
and the nobility during the ninth and tenth centuries. 
Unfortunately, archaeological evidence from the site of the Maha- 
vihara adds very little to our knowledge of its history."? 
The ruins of 
this monastery suffered heayily during the latter part of the nineteenth 
century and the early decades of this century when it was plundered as a 
source of building material for a growing urban settlement. By the begin- 
ning of this century, H.C. P. Bell, the pioneer archacologist, had unearthed 
thirteen groups of buildings within the monastic precincts. 
Though it 
seems likely that these ruins represent buildings which were in use in the 
period not long before the transfer of the capital to Polonnaruva, it is 
extromely difficult to arrive at a precise dating for them. 
Together, the 
groups of ruins at the Mahavihara form an impressive collectiori, but they 
seem to be less extensive than the ruins of the Abhayagiri monastery. 
- Three other monasteries at Anuradhapura, the Thiparima, the 
Mariccavatti-vihira and the Issarasamana-vihara, looked to the Maha- 
vihara for leadership. 
The Mahdévamsa mentions that'in the reign of 
Mahisena the opponents of the Mahavihira attempted to destroy the 
Thiparama, presumably because of its partiality towards the Mahavihara. 
It was only through resort to intrigue and even assassination that it was 
9. Pjv. p, 103. 
10, EZ, Vol. I, p. 222, 7.23, 
AL, 
Cy. 51, 88. 
12, Sdérattha-dipani, ed. B. Devarakkhita, Colombo, 1914, p. 510. 
13. ASCAR, 1898, pp. 1-3; 1899, pp. 1-2; 1900, pp. 1-4; 1901, pp. 1-5 For 
a 
dis- 
cussion about the identification of the sites of the three monasteries, see H. Parker, 
Ancient Ceylon, London, 1909, pp. 291-311 and -ASCAR, 1954, pp. 11-2,

--- PAGE 15 [DIRECT] ---

10 
. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
saved.'4 
In the reign of Aggabodhi I (A.D. 571-604), the renowned 
Jotipila of the Mahavihara faction, who vanquished its opponents in 
debate, was responsible for persuading Aggabodhi I to repair the stipa 
at this monastery."5 
In the ninth and tenth centuries, the Thipairama. 
was enthusiastically patronized. 
Udaya 11 (887-898). as well as Sena and 
Rakkha, generals of Kassapa IV and Dappula IV (924-935) respectively, 
built new dwellings for monks. 
Under the patronage of Udaya II 
and Mahinda IV the stdpa. at the Thiparima was covered with strips 
of gold and silver,)7 
The ruins of the Thiparima are found immediately to the south of 
the old city, between the city wall and the Mahathipa. 
In 1895 Bell 
discovered a wall enclosing a modest area where the main shrines of this. 
monastery were situated. 
Apart from the stipa and a shrine known to- 
day by the misnomer Dalada Maligava (Temple of the Tooth), a monas- 
tic residence was found within these precincts. 
Immediately to the south 
of this group there is another enclosed precinct with a pond and the ruins 
of several buildings. 
‘Judged by its basement ruins,”’ Bell commented 
on one of these buildings, ‘‘no more bandsome specimen of this type of 
shrine was ever erected at Anurddhapura.’’!® 
It is noteworthy that the 
exact boundary between the Mahavihara and the Thiipirama. cannot easily 
be traced. Bell seems to have thought that both these groups formed 
one complex: he called them “the Thiparama-Ruvanviili ruins.”'!9 
Yet, 
it is clear from literary evidence that the Thiparama maintained its own 
identity and held its own ceremonies such as the uposatha, the monthly 
rite of confession for the community of monks.?° 
It is not certain when the Mariccavat¢i monastery accepted the 
leadership of the Mahivihara. 
However, the detail and care with 
which the Mahdvamsa ‘describes its foundation suggests that it was 
attached to this nikdya, at least by the time this chronicle was 
written.’ 
Certainly by the tenth century it was within the Mahavihara 
nikdya, 
The Cilavamsa states that this monastery was renovated by 
Kassapa V (914-923), who found it in rains (naifham), and that he 
14. 
My. 37. 26-8, 
15, Cv. 
42, 51-9, 
16, 
Cv. $1,129; 
$2, 165 53,11. 
17. 
Cy. 51.128; 54.42. 
48. ASCAR, 1897, p. 2. 
19. 
ASCAR, 1895, pp. 2-4; 1896, pp. 1-3; (897, pp. 1-3; 1898, pp. 1-3. 
See also 
“Plan to 
Ruvanveli Area”, ASCAR, 1901, 
20. 
Seee.g. Mv.34,39; 35:4; 36.107, 
21. 
My. ch. 26, 
THE STRUCTURE 
OF THE SANGHA 
H 
granted it to five hundred monks of the Mahavihara (theriya) faction.” 
The testimony of the chronicle is confirmed by an inscription set up: 
by this king at the Abhayagiri monastery.23 
According to the chronicle, 
the Hair relic of the Buddha also was at the same monastery, and 
Mahinda TV built the Candanapasida to house it. 
At present the ruins of the.Mariccavatti monastery cover an area of 
about fifty Acres, -They comprise, apart from single buildings scattered 
~ 
over the precincts, fourteen groups of monastic residences arranged on 
three sides of the stijpa-with the north side left open. 
Bell surmised that, 
according to the original arrangement, there were four groups of buildings 
on each of the three sides and two other groups which were added later, 
and he suggested that the central structure in one of these later groups 
was the dwelling which, according to the Ca/avamsa, was erected by 
Kassapa II in the seventh century.?> 
It seems reasonable to infer, on the 
basis of the evidence in the Ca/avamsa and. the inscription cited above, 
that the main ruins of the monastery are a fair indication of its extent 
after its renovation in the tenth century. 
An inscription records an interesting episode which occurred in the 
ninth year of the reign of Mahinda IV (964) when the chief preceptor of” 
the Mahavihira nikdya led a deputation of monks from the Isuramenu. 
Bo-Upulvan-Kasubgiri monastery to bring before the king a dispute 
which the monastery had with royal officials concerning its right to irri- 
gate its fields with water from the Tissa reservoir. 
This inscription was 
found at a group of ruins to the east of the Tissa reservoir.?” 
It is evident 
from the information 
in this record that these ruins, known at-present by 
the misnomer Vessagiri, must be identified with the Issarasamana (Isu- 
ramenu) monastery. 
It is also clear that this monastery, represented today 
by ruins of unpretentious proportions (varying from caves bearing Brihmi 
inscriptions from pre-Christian times to buildings which, like the. in- 
scriptions from the site, may date from the ninth and tenth centuries), 
belonged to the Mahavihara nikdya. 
It is only in the fifth century that we find a monastery outside the 
environs of the capital being granted to any one of the three nikayas. 
The Calavamsa records that a monastery built at the Dhimarakkha 
22, 
Cv. 52.45-6, 
23, EZ, Vol.I,p. 4616, 
24. 
Cv, 54,40, 
25. ASCAR, 1902, pp. 3-6; 1903, pp. 1-5; 1906, pp. 2-7 and plans. 
26. EZ, Vol. I, p. 33, //. 8-13. 
27, ASCAR, 1906, pp. 8-10; 1907, pp. 1-7.

--- PAGE 16 [DIRECT] ---

n 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
mountain on the southern bank of the river Mahavali was granted by 
Mahanéma (406-428) to the Mahavihira.?® 
The chronicle also states 
that Dhitusena (455-574) granted thirty-six monasteries to the same 
faction. 
Eighteen of those were small (khuddake), and only the larger 
ones are mentioned by name. 
These are Kalavipi, Kotipassiva, Dak- 
khinagiri, Vaddha, Pannavallakabhita, Bhallataka, Dhatusenapabbata, 
Mangana, Thipavitthi, Dhadtusena, Pacinakambavitthi, -Antaramegiri, 
Attalidhitusena, Kassipitthika, Diyagama, Salavina, Vibhisana and 
Bhillivina.2® 
As is evident from its name, the Kalavapi monastery was 
most probably in the vicinity of the well-known reservoir of this name in 
the Kalagam 
Palita of the Anurédhapura District. 
Geiger located it at 
Avukana where the gigantic standing image of the Buddha has been 
found.2° 
Since the inscriptions at the Avukana monastery testify to the 
existence of a monastery at the site even in the first century A.D., C. W. 
Nicholas was more inclined to identify the Kalavapi monastery with the 
ruins at Vijitapura, situated at the northern end of the embankment of the 
Kalavipi reservoir! 
Geiger also suggested that Dakkhinagiri be 
identified with Mulkirigala in the Southern Province.? 
However, it is 
more likely that it was in the Matale District. 
The Kaludiyapokuna 
inscription from this district identifies a ruined monastery found there as 
the Dakinagirivehera.3> 
‘Nicholas has located the Pannavallakabhita 
monastery in the Polonnaruva District and the Dhatusenapabbata and 
Pacinakambavitthi monasteries in the Anuradhapura District, but he has 
not provided a reasoned argument to support this conclusion. 
He also 
suggested that three other monasteries—Mangana, Thapavitthi and 
Dhatusena—should have been in the Jaffna District since the chronicle 
states that they were “in the north” (uttare).25 
On the other hand, it is 
also possible that by this phrase the chronicler merely meant the area to 
the north of the capital. 
Diyagima, Salavina, Vibhisana and Bhilli- 
vana are described as monasteries in Rohana. 
If the fast is the same as 
the Bilivana monastery which occurs in a fourth-century inscription from 
Karathbagala, it should be located in the Hambantota District.° 
It is 
28. 
Cy. 35,213, 
29, 
Cv. 3845-51, 
30. 
Cy. tesl., Vol. I, p. 33, n. 3. 
31. JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 166. 
32, 
Cy. trst., Vol. J, p. 33, n. 3. 
33. 
EZ, Vol. 
III, p. 258, tH, AS6; p. 264, f. 10, 
34, JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, pp. 154,159, 
35, Ibid. p. 
84. 
36. 
Ibid. 
p. 67; AIC, No. 21a. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
13 
not possible to locate or to identify the other monasteries listed in. 
the Calavamsa. 
Though the Célavamsa would. have us believe that all these monas- 
teries were built by Dhatusena, there is evidence which suggests that 
some of them, were merely rebuilt by him. 
The Mahdvamsa states that 
the Dakkhinagiri monastery was built by Saddhatissa (137-119 B.C.);°7 
and the Bilivana monastery was flourishing in the time of Sirimeghavanna 
(A.D, 301-328), 
If the Kotipassiva monastery is the same as the Koti- 
passivana monastery which was granted by Mahanima. to the Abhayagiri 
nikdya, it raises a question of special interest, for it would imply that 
Dhatusena renovated a monastery belonging to the Abhayagiri nikaya 
"and gave it over to the followers of the Mahavihara. Such an act on the 
part of Dhatusena would not be very surprising since he tried to do some- 
thing similar with regard to the Cetiyapabbata monastery? 
However, 
it is also possible that by this time the monastery had been abandoned 
by the followers of the Abhayagiri nikaya. 
Another possible, though not 
very convincing, explanation would be that these references are to two 
different monasteries within the same village. 
The chronicles provide yet another instance of a monastery being 
granted to the Mahavihara nikdya. 
During the reign of Kassapa IV, 
his general, Rakkha, built a monastery for the Mahiviharavasins in the 
village Savaraka.*? 
Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine the 
location of this village. 
More evidence on the geographical distribution of monasteries be- 
longing to the Mahavihira nikdya is found in epigraphic records, 
In- 
formation in an inscription of Mahinda IV suggests that there was a 
monastery at Sigiri which accepted the leadership of the Mariccavatti 
monastery." An inscription from Polonnnaruva, dated in the eighth 
regnal year of Mahinda IV, refers to the Kuju Tisarad monastery in the 
Eastern Region (pddum pas) as being affiliated to the Mahavihara nikaya 
(mahaveherd nak@hi bad). 
It is probably identical with the Kiitatissa 
monastery patronized by Sena II.° 
The record goes on to add that a 
hermitage in the village Kinigam belonged to the Kulu Tisarad, monas- 
tery. 
Nicholas has pointed out that there is a village by this name in. 
37. Mv. 33,7, 
38. 
Cy. 37,212. 
39. 
Sea infra p. 19. 
40. 
Cy. 52.31. 
41, EZ, Vol. I, p. 222, 1. 28. 
42. 
Ibid. Vol\.JT, pp. 49-57, 
43, 
Cy, 51.74,

--- PAGE 17 [DIRECT] ---

14 
‘THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
the Laggala Pallesiya Pattu, a territorial division within the Polonnaruva 
District.“ 
A tenth-century record from Mayilagastota in the Hambantota 
District refers to a hermitage of the Mahavibira nikdya called Uda Tisa 
Pirivena.*® 
It was situated on the left bank of the Kirindi river. 
Another inscription from Detagamuva, near Kataragama, dated in the 
reign of Dappula IV, records an award of privileges to a hermitage 
called the Kapugam Pirivena.** 
It was located on the right bank of the 
river Kapikandur which is known now as the Manik Gafiga. 
The 
phrase mahaveher naké uvanisé pihiti is used in this inscription to describe 
this hermitage. 
Paranavitana, translated this phrase as ‘‘situated in the 
vicinity of Mahaveher."” 
The term uvanisd (Pali upanissdya) could be 
translated as “‘near’’ as well as “‘dependent on.’’ Hence it is possible to 
suggest that mahaveher naka in this record denotes the Mahavihara 
nikdya and that the Kapugam hermitage was one of its dependent 
institutions, 
It is eyident from the preceding discussion that monasteries owing 
allegiance to the Mahiayihara nikdya were spread over many different 
parts of the island. 
They can be traced to places as far apart as the en- 
virons of Polonnaruva in the east, Dakkhinagiri and Kinigam in the 
Matale District, and Kapugam, Udatisa and Bhillivana in the far south. 
Tt is clear that monks of the Mahavihara, who in an earlier period had 
been merely one of the rival factions of monks at the capital, had, by 
this time, become a fraternity with an jsland-wide influence. 
The Abhayagiri Nikiya 
The Abhayagiri monastery, founded. ap Vattagamanti (89-77 B.C.), 
was situated near the northern gate of the inner city. 
Hence it was also 
known by the name Uttaravihira, ‘the Northern Monastery.’’ 
The 
origin of the term Dhammarucika, frequently used to designate its fol- 
jJowers, is uncertain. 
According to the Nikdya-satgrahaya disciples of 
Dhammaruci, a monk of the Vajjiputtaka (Vatsiputriya) school, came 
from Pallararama in India to live at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
The 
monks of this monastery, who had by this: time broken away from the 
Mahavihara, accepted his teachings and consequently were called Dham~ 
marucika.47 
However the authenticity of this account, which appears 
44. JRASCBNS, Vol. VI. p. 184, 
45, 
EZ, Vol. II, pp. 57-63, 
46. 
EZ, Vol. IU, pp. 219-25, 
47, 
Niks.p. 13, Though Pailarérama may well be a corrupt version of Pallavarama, 
this incident is of too early a date to connect this name with the Pallavas. 
ANURADHAPURA 
ANCHAINS 
VISAYARAMA 
Y 
ABHAYAGIRI VIHARA 
: 
- ene 
x 
om @k 8 
aot 
Be 
MARIGGAVATT! = * 
VIHARA 
ISSARASAMANA, 
VIHARA 
ZW 
WW 
Fig. 
1. 
principal monasteries. 
Gridgo 
QETAVANA 
\\ VIHARA 
WS, 
an 
4A0,4B4 
KADT 
CMALVATU 
OYA) 
PUBBARAMA 
i ees 
-- 
Lf noclon sridge & 
f 
Ss 
PAOTNATISBAPARBATA 
a. 
tale 
\ 
NUVARAVAYA, 
MONASTERIES AFFILIATEG TO THE MAHAVIHARA 
ABHAYAGIAL AND AFFILIATED MONASTERIES 
UETAVANA -ANQ AFFILIATED MONASTERIES 
OTHER MONASTERIES(AFFILIATIONS UNKNOWN) 
Map of Anuradhapura showing the location 
of the

--- PAGE 18 [DIRECT] ---

16 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
only in a fourteenth-century chronicle, 
is by no means certain. 
It is. 
also possible, as Bareau has pointed out,4* 
that Dhammarucika was an. 
epithet adopted by the members of this nikdya since it means “those 
who take pleasure in the dhamma.” 
By the fifth century, the Abhayagiri monastery had surpassed, the 
Mahavihira in membership. 
Fa-Hian states that at the time of his visit 
there were five thousand monks at this monastery while there were only 
three thousand at the Mahavihira.”” 
_ The important cult objects and 
monuments within its precincts had elevated Abhayagiri to the position 
of one of the pre-eminent centers of Buddhist cultic activity. 
It had been, 
vested with the custodianship of two important Buddhist relics—the 
Tooth relic and the Alms Bowl of the Buddha. 
According to Fa-Hian, 
the Bo Tree at this monastery was an offshoot of the Bo Tree in Mid- 
India. or Madhyadesa and had been brought, like the better-known, 
tree at the Mahavihara, by a deputation sent especially for this purpose. 
The main stapa at this monastery, which, according to legend, had been. 
built over a foot-impression of the Buddha, was larger than the Mahd- 
_thiipa at the Mahivihara.%? 
It is evident from this description that the 
objects of mass religious activity at the Abhayagiri monastery rivalled. 
those at the Mahavihara; moreover, it is likely that the liberal attitudes 
of the Abhayagiri monks towards the teachings of the non-Theravada 
schools of Buddhism attracted. many men of intellect from both the 
laity and the clergy. 
The reputation of the Abhayagiri monastery as a center of Buddhist. 
scholarship spread far beyond the shores of the island. 
In addition to. 
the description of this monastery by Fa-Hian, the Chinese chronicles 
contain an account of a visit by another Buddhist scholar, 
Vajra- 
bodhi, the famous teacher of the Vajrayana, spent six months at 
Abhayagiri on his way from India to China.5' 
It is likely that Abhaya- 
girivisins were among the monks who, according to the Sung Shi, 
arrived in China in A.D.-428 with an epistle from the Sinhalese king. 
T’sa-li Mo-ho-nan, identified as Mahanama.** 
(This is implied by the 
fact that the deputation is said to have taken with them “a model 
of the shrine of the Tooth” as a present for the Chinese emperor.) 
48, 
Bareau, op. cit. p. 242. 
49, 
Samuel Beal, Chinese Accounts of India, Calcutta, 1957, Vol. I, pp. 46, 49, 
50. 
Ibid. pp. 46-7 
51. JRASCB, Vol. XXXIV, 1915-6, p. 88. . 
52. 
Sung-Shi, ch. 97. See JRASCB, Vol. XXXIV, 1915-6, p. 107, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
“47 
In A.D. 505 the Vimuttimagga, identified by P.C. Bagchi as a. work 
of the Abhayagiri nikdya, was translated into Chinese by Seng-chie-po-lo 
(Sanghapala), a monk from Funan.5? 
The existence in Central Java 
of a monastery named after the “Abhayagirivihara of the Simhalas,’”’ 
as evident from an eighth-century inscription found in the Ratubaka 
plateau, is clear testimony to the fame that this monastery enjoyed in 
the Buddhist world.>* 
! The community of monks at the Abhayagiri monastery is described 
in glowing terms in two royal edicts from the tenth century, found within 
the precincts of this monastery.** 
According to those records, these 
monks constantly strove to conquer passion and to carefully observe’ the 
precepts, avoiding even the most trivial of transgressions, 
They were 
ready to lay down their lives for the preservation of the Buddhist order 
(sasun). Among them were scholars of great wisdom, endowed with the 
virtues of temperance, contentment and religious austerity, who were 
’ always engaged in literary pursuits. 
According to one of these edicts, a 
monk called Mahadimi was the primate of the Dhammaruci nikdya at 
the time. 
; 
Both the chronicles and the inscriptions testify to the extensive 
patronage that the Abhayagiri monastery enjoyed during the ninth and 
tenth centuries. 
Sena I built the Virahkuraraéma within its precincts and 
extended his patronage to the two fraternities Uttaralha and, Kappfira.56 
The queen and the courtiers followed the king’s example, and, as a result, 
four new colleges—Mahindasena, Uttarasena, Vajirasena and, Rakkhasa 
—were added to the monastery.’ 
Sena IL restored the shrine of the 
stone image of the Buddha,** and Sangha, his queen, offered a diadem- 
jewel for this image and also built the Sanghasenapabbata college.*? 
Kassapa IV repaired the stépa and built a residence for monks, named 
after himself,’ and his general built the Dhammarama,®! 
The next 
_ king, Kassapa V, erected the Silameghapabbata and Bhandika colleges 
53. 
P. GC, Bagchi, On the Original Buddhism, its Canon and Language,” Sino- 
Indian Studies, Vol, IL, p. 113. 
See also Bagchi, Le canon bouddhique en Chine, Paris, 
1927, Vol. I, p. 418, 
54. 
J. G, de Casparis, “New evidence on Cultural Relations between Java and 
Ceylon in Ancient Times,” Artibus Asiae, Vol, XXXIV, 1962, pp. 241-8, 
55, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 21,1, 9-15; 
p. 
237. Hl, 
56-60, 
56, 
Cy, 50, 68, 77. 
57. 
Cy, 50. 79, 83-4, 
38. 
Cy, 51,77, 
59, 
Cy, 51. 86-7. 
60, 
Cv. 52.13; Pyv. p. 103, 
61, 
Cv. 52.17,

--- PAGE 19 [DIRECT] ---

18 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
and repaired the shrine ofthe Bo Tree, and Sena III (938-946) paved 
the courtyard, around the stipa. 
Both the stapa and the shrine of the 
- 
Bo Tree had to be restored once more in the time of Mahinda IV. 
This king claims that he also repaired the roof of a mansion erected at 
this monastery by an earlier king called Kassapa, built the Pusarba 
dwelling, and adorned the image of Mahinda with rubies for the eyes 
and a net of gold for the feet.“4 
This reference to the presence of an 
image of Mahinda at the Abhayagiri monastery suggests that, like 
the monks of the Mahavihara, the followers of this monastery claimed 
a close association with Mahinda including,- perhaps, direct pupillary 
descent. 
: 
The popularity of the Abhayagiri monastery and the extensive pat- 
ronage it received, which is indicated by literary and epigraphic. sources, 
finds further confirmation in evidence brought to light by archaeological 
excavation and exploration.’ 
The monastic complex at Abhayagiri is 
certainly the most extensive among all ruined monasteries in the island; 
its grounds extended over more than three hundred acres. 
A multitude 
of buildings, grouped around the main stipa and situated close to each 
other, covered this entire area. 
Though for the most part, only their 
foundations remain, these foundations reyeal a complex arrangement of 
many groups of symmetrically placed buildings. 
Each group is enclosed 
within its own boundary wall and has an attractive stone porch situated 
at the entrance, and pathways which traverse the monastic grounds 
connect these conclaves with one another. 
This layout reminds one of 
the definition of a parivena in the Sarattha-dipani and it would seem rea- 
sonable to identify these groups of buildings as the colleges of the Abha-— 
yagiri monastery. 
: 
The techniques adopted in the archaeological excavations carried 
out in the grounds of the Abbayagiri monastery do not enable one to 
distinguish different levels of occupation or to fix their chronological 
limits. 
But it is possible to form a rough idea concerning the date of the 
ruins on the basis of evidence from epigraphic records found at the site. 
A number of granite tablets bearing Sanskrit writings in a script of the 
Nagari type, datable to the ninth century, were discovered in the area to 
the southwest of the main stéipa.“ 
Two more Sanskrit inscriptions, 
which have been assigned to the first half of the ninth century and to the 
62. 
Cv, 52. 58. 
63, 
Cy, 53, 33, 
64, EZ, Vol., p. 221, H. 13-5, 
65. 
See ASCAR, 1891, p. 21; 1894, p.3; 1910-11, pp, 6-16; 1911-2, pp. 1-28. 
66. ASCAR, 1940-5, p. 41, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
; 
19 
tenth century, were found among the ruins to the north of the Twin 
Ponds, which have been identified as representing the site of the ancient 
Kapira fraternity.’ 
Scribblings on some of the voussoir bricks found 
at a hermitage to the north of the main stipa belong to the tenth cen- 
tury.** 
Two inscriptions datable to the second half of the tenth century 
were found near the “Stone Canoe" by the Outer Circular Road to the 
west of the sipa. 
To the north of this site, by the ‘Stone Canopy,” 
anedict of Kassapa V was found.” 
Another tenth-century inscription 
was discovered at yet another site.”! 
The distribution of these inscript- 
ions over a wide area of the monastic grounds leads one to suppose that 
most of the ruins unearthed reflect the extent of the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery during the ninth and tenth centuries, 
Though there is a wealth of information reflecting the extent of the 
Abhayagiri monastery and its influence at the capital, evidence on the 
geographical distribution of monasteries which accepted its leadership is 
disappointing. 
The most important monastery which came under the 
influence of this nikdya was the Cetiyagiri at Mihintale. According to the 
Calavansa, the Dhammarucikas occupied this monastery during the time 
of the persecution of the Mahayihara by King Mahisena.”? 
The es- 
tablishment of its influence over one of the oldest centers of Buddhism in 
the island, hallowed by its association with Mahinda, would have marked. 
a very important stage in the rise of the Abhayagiri nikdya. 
In the fifth 
century an attempt was made by King Dhatusena to hand back the Am- 
batthala stupa at Cetiyagiri to the Mahavihara nikaya, but the Dham- 
marucikas successfully dissuaded him from doing so. 
The ruins of 
the Cetiyagiri monastery spread over three hills—Ambatthala, Rajagiri 
and Anaikutti—and into the valley below. 
At the time of Fa-Hian’s 
visit the number of its inmates was estimated to be two thousand.74 
The monastery was patronized during the period under consideration by 
Seria II who built a hospital within its premises and by Kassapa IV who 
61. EZ, Vol.1, p. 1; Vol. 
V, Pt. 1, p. 162, 
68, ASCAR, 1894, 
p. 3. 
69. EZ, Vol.1, pp, 213, 230, 
70. 
fbid. p. 41, 
71. ASCAR; 1940-5, p. 41. 
12. mahavihire papena mahdsenena nasite 
vasimsu dhammarucika bhikha cetiyapabbate. Cv. 38, 75. 
Geiger's translation which does not take into consideration the significance of the 
locative absolute construction of this strophe, does not seem to be accurate. 
Cv, 
trsl., Vol. 1, p. 37, 
73, 
Cv, 38. 76. 
74, Beal, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 48.

--- PAGE 20 [DIRECT] ---

20 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
added another hermitage to its many residences for monks,”> 
In epi- 
graphic records of the tenth century Cetiyagiri is mentioned as a monas- 
tery within the Abhayagiri nikdya. 
t is clear from these records that 
by this time the administration of Cetiyagiri had come under the close 
supervisory control of the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery.’¢ 
While royal admirers of the Mahavihara like Dhatusena sometimes 
attempted to transfer control of monasteries belonging to the Abha- 
yagiri to the former nikéya, there were followers of the Abhayagirivihira 
who wished to extend the same sort 
of patronage to their favourite monas- 
tery. 
According to the Ca/avamsa, Dathopatissa 
11 (659-667) built the 
Tiputthulla monastery within the grounds of the Mahavihara and gave 
it to the Abhayagiri nikdya. 
This was done amidst vehement protests 
from the monks of thé Mahavihira who decided to censure him publicly 
by not accepting alms from him.” 
The only other monastic residences 
in the vicinity of the capital which are known to have been affiliated to the 
Abhayagiri nikdya are the Pubbirama and the “college’’ attached to it 
called Uda Kitagbo. 
‘The site of these dwellings can be identified with 
the Puliyankulam ruins, to the east of the Abhayagiri monastery.” 
Mahanama built three monasteries—Lohadvira, Ralaggima and 
Kotipassavana—for the Abhayagiri nikdya,” but it is not possible to 
- 
Jocate them. 
Apparently there was another center of the Dhammaru- 
cikas at Sigiri. 
Kassapa 1 (473-491) who moved the capital to Sigiri 
granted them a monastery built in the Niyyanti park at this place.®° 
The Dalha and Dathakondatifia monasteries were built at Sigiri-by Mog- 
gallina I for the Dhammarucikas and the Sagalikas.®! In a tenth-century 
inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery, the Sigirimahasd is ment- 
ioned as belonging to the Mirisavitivehera(Mariccavattivihara),® which, 
as we have seen, was associated, with the Mahavihara. 
This raises two 
possibilities. 
One is that the monastery, after a period during which it 
had been abandoned, was granted to the Mahavihara by a later king. 
The other explanation is more acceptable. 
It is very likely that in addit- 
ion to the monasteries built for the other two nikdyas, there was also a 
718. 
Cy. 51.73; 52. 18. 
16. See infra p. 131. 
77. 
Cv.45, 29-33. 
, 
78. EZ, Vol.I, pp. 182-190; ASCAR, 1891, p. 3; 1896, p.3; 1897, pp 4-6; 1898, 
19. Cv. 37.272, 
80. Cv. 39. 14-5. 
Bl. Cv.39.41. 
82. EZ, Vol. 1, 
p. 222, |. 28. 
OATES 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
24 
monastery of the Mahavihara nikdya at Sigiri. 
A ninth-century record 
makes it clear that there were also monasteries which accepted the leader- 
ship of the AbDhayagiri nikdya at Lahasika and Hunéla and, possibly, 
at Kira, Pallaya and Sunagrama as well;® but it is not possible to deter- 
mine in which part of the island these places were to be found. 
The 
only other monastery known to have come within the fold of this nikaya 
was at Buddhannehiila, forty-five miles to the north of Anuradhapura. 
It was @ dependent institution under the control of the Cetiyagiri monas- 
tery at Mihintale.*4 
But in spite of the occasional references which 
can be gleaned from. the sources, the information on the geographical 
distribution of monasteries belonging to the Abahyagiri nikaya is much 
more scanty than that which is available concerning the Mahavihara. 
The Teachings of the Abhayagiri Nikaya 
The pioneer work of André Bareau® is the only systematic attempt 
made so far to determine the doctrinal position of the Abhayagiri nikdya. 
References to the teachings of this school are found scattered in at least 
nineteen literary works, but Bareau was able to utilize only a few of these. 
The present study attempts to bring together all these references in order to 
determine the points on which this important branch of the Sinhalese 
Theravada differed from the Mahavihara. 
The sources can be grouped chronologically under three headings. 
Five works attributed to Buddhaghosa, the Visuddhimagga, 
the Sumangala- 
vilésini, the Atthasdlint, the Sammoha-vinodani and the Samantapasd- 
dikd, may be grouped together with the Abhidhammavatira of Buddha- 
datta who is said to have been a junior contemporary of Buddhaghosa 
(ca, fifth century). 
The Miélatikd, a sub-commentary on the Abhidh- 
amma, the Visuddhimagga-tika, the Linatthavannané which is a sub- 
commentary on the Digha Nikdya, and the Vamsatthappakdsini which 
is a commentary on the Mahdvansa, fall into another somewhat later 
group. 
These two groups contain reports and comments of writers who 
lived at a time when the Abhayagiri aikd@ya was still in existence and thus 
they constitute the most valuable sources for the study of the subject. 
Four of the works which belong to the third group—the Sérattha- 
dipani, the Vinaya-vinicchaya-sangaha and its commentary, and the Abhi- 
dharmartha-saigraha-sanyaya—were written by Sariputta, the hierarch who 
lived in the time of Parakramabahu I. ‘The Vimati-vinodani which, like 
83. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 4, fl. 8-10. 
84.. Ibid. pp. 141-200. 
85, Bareau, op. cit., pp, 241-3,

--- PAGE 21 [DIRECT] ---

22 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
the Sérattha-dipani, is a sub-commentary on the Samantapdsadika, was 
written by Kassapa. 
The Abhidhammatha-vikdsini, a commentary on the 
Abhidhammavatéra, was written by Sumangala who was a disciple of 
Sariputta. 
These writings, together with the Saddhammopdyana, a gene- 
ral work on Buddhist teachings which has been assigned to the twelfth 
century,®° and the Visuddhimarga-mahd-sanyaya, a Sinhalese sub-com- 
mentary on the Visuddhimagga which was written in the thirteenth 
century, form the third group. 
All the works in the third group seem to have been written after the 
unification of the satgha in the reign of Parakramabahu I. They refer to 
those teachings of the Abhayagiri nikdya which were evidently current at 
the time they were written, 
The fifth and sixth works in this group 
are of particular significance. The Vimati-vinodani reveals that some of 
the views of the Abhayagiri nikdya had later come to be accepted by the 
teachers of the Mahiivihara. 
The Abhidhammattha-vikdsini contains 
references to certain views of the Abhayagiri nikdya which are not found 
in any of the other sources; some of them may have been propounded by 
the teachers of this nikdya after the period represented by the second 
group of literary works. 
The author of the Saddharmalankdra who lived 
in the time of Bhuvanekabahu V (A.D. 1372-1408) quotes from the Sad- 
dhammopiyana which he attributes to Kavicakravartti Ananda of the 
Abhayagiri monastery.*7_ 
Thus, of all the sources mentioned above, the 
Saddhammopayana is the only work which may be regarded as a product 
of the Abhayagiri nikdya itself. 
But the ideas expressed in this work do 
not differ from those in the works of the Mahavihara writers except on 
one minor point,*® 
The Vimuttimagga of Upatissa and its relationship to the Abhaya- 
giri nikdya desorves special consideration. 
Subsequent to the discovery 
of the Chinese translation of this work by M. Nagai,® G. Ratana- 
joti and K. Ratnapala published an edition of a Pali version which 
they had discovered at the Asgiri monastery at Kandy.°° 
That section 
. 
of this compendium, which deals with ascetic practices, was translated 
into Tibetan under the title 
Vimuktimdrga-dhutaguna-nirdesa 
(Rnam 
-par grol-bahilam-las 
Sbyaks-pahi 
yon-tan 
bstan-pa zes bya-ba) by 
a scholar named Vidyakaraprabha, who had been invited to Tibet by 
86. 
G. P. Malalasekera, Pali Literature of Ceylon, London, 1928, p. 212. 
87, 
Saddharmilankara, ed. Bentara Saddhatissa, Panadura, 1934, pp. 603-4, 
88. 
See No. xiv on p, 29, 
89. 
M. Nagai.‘*The Vimuttimagga, 
the Way to Deliverance: The Chinese Counter- 
part of the Pali Visuddhimagga,” 
JPTS, 1917-9, pp. 69-80, 
90. 
Vimuttimagga, ed, Galkatiyagama Siri Ratanajotiand Karaliyadde Siri Ratana- 
pala, Colombo, 1963, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
23 
King Ralpa-chan in the ninth century. 
It differs in certain respects 
from the Pali and Chinese versions, and it is likely, as the editor ‘has 
remarked, that it contains many interpolations.® 
‘Nagai identified the 
author of the Vimuitimagga with the thera Upatissa who is mentioned 
in the Samantapasddika as a teacher of the Vinaya. 
He also suggested 
that the Visuddhimagga was a revised version of the Vimuttimagga. 
Malalasekera criticized this view because he believed it.to be based 
on inadequate evidence.?? 
Subsequently, in a detailed comparative 
study of the Vimuttimagga and the Visuddhimagga™ P. V. Bapat has 
pointed out that, though these two works differ in the treatment of 
certain points of doctrine, there is a strong similarity between them in 
regard to the manner in which they classify their subject-matter, their 
use of common similes and examples, and even quotation of common 
doctrinal views. 
In the Visuddhimagga, Buddhaghosa discusses and. 
rejects nine doctrinal points which tally with views expressed in the V7- 
muttimagga. The Visuddhimagga-tika and Visuddhimarga-mahd-sanyaya 
attribute one: of these views to ‘“Upatissa, the author of the Vimutii- 
| 
magga,”’ and specifically mention that in this particular passage Buddha- 
ghosa was considering Upatissa’s views.°5 
Four of the views are attri- 
buted to the monks of the Abhayagirivihara; the remaining four receive 
no commentsin the Visuddhimagga-tika or the later commentary. 
Bapat 
has suggested that the Vimuttimagga was the earlier work, that Buddha- 
ghosa would have used it as a model in writing the Visuddhimagga and 
that “‘Upatissa must be supposed to have advocated the yiews which were 
later accepted by the Abhayagirivasins.''°° 
P. C, Bagchi advanced the suggestion that the Vimuttimagga and the 
Visuddhimagga represent respectively the Abhayagiri and the Mahavihara 
recensions of a common original work.’ 
The idea that the Vimutti- 
magga is a work of the Abhayagirivasins seems to have found accep- 
tance among a number of scholars, and it is quite likely that this was so. 
Nevertheless, 
in the present study, we have listed only. those views 
which our soutces have specifically attributed to the Abhayagirivasins. 
91... 
Vimuktimarga-dhutaguna-nirdesa, ed, P. ¥. Bapat, Bombay, 1964. 
92, Ibid, pp. 111-6. 
93, Malalasekera, op. cit., pp. 86-7. 
94, 
P. V. Bapat, Vinurttimagga and Visuddhimagga, Poona, 1937. 
95. 
Vsmt., p. 113; Vsmsn., p. 246, 
96. 
Bapat, op. cit., pp. xlix, Ivi-lix. 
See also Vimuktimargga-dhutaguna-nirdesa, 
97. P. C. Bagchi, “On the Original Buddhism, its Canon and Language,” Sino- 
Indian Studies, Vol. 1, p. 113. 
98. Sce Bareau, op. cit. p. 242; UCHC, Vol. I, Pt, 1, p. 3905 Encyclopaedia of Bud- 
: dhism, Fasc, A-Aca, pp. 26-8,

--- PAGE 22 [DIRECT] ---

24 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
None of the nineteen works mentioned earlier gives a systematic ex- 
position of 
the views of the Abhayagiri nikaya; therefore evidence has to 
be drawn from incidental references in these works which cover a period * 
of about eight centuries. 
It is natural that, over the course of such a 
long period, certain views of the school would change and become in- 
consistent with those which it had professed earlier, 
Moreover, all the 
major sources at our disposal are works of the rival school—the Maha- 
vihara, and in almost all these instances the views of the Abhayagirivasins 
have been cited solely in order to show their defects. 
Hence, the possi- 
bilities of omission and even distortion cannot be ruled out. 
The origin of the Abhayagiri nikaya can be traced to disagreements 
on points of discipline. 
Mahatissa, for whom Vattagimani built the 
Abhayagiri monastery, was accused by the monks of the Mahavihara of a 
breach of discipline and consequently was expelled from the Order. 
It 
is not improbable that Mahatissa’s popularity and the favored. treat- 
ment he received from the king aroused the jealousy of his fellow monks. 
It is noteworthy that the accusation levelled against him stated that he 
“frequented lay families’ (kulasamsaggadosa). 
At least there were some 
monks who disagreed with the general decision at the Mahavihira 
to expel Mahatissa. 
His disciple, also known as Mahiatissa, left the 
Mahavihara in protest against the treatment meted out to his teacher, 
and this led to the formation of the rival faction at the Abhayagirivi- 
héra.® 
The nature of this schism leads one to suppose that, at 
least in the initial period,the disagreements between these two factions 
centered on matters pertaining to interpretation of disciplinary rules. 
Commenting on this schism, the Vamsatthappakdsini states that the 
monks of the Abhayagiri monastery 
gave 
‘“‘variant 
readings and 
variant, interpretations” to the Khandaka and Parivara sections of 
the Vinaya Pitaka.!" This would imply that the Abhayagiri nikéya 
not only adhered to a different interpretation of the rules of monastic 
discipline, but also that it had its own recension of the Vinaya Pitaka. 
the Mahavihiira recension of the Suttavibhanga section of the Vinaya 
Pitaka and that of the Abhayagiri monastery. 
It is significant that the 
passage concerned dealt with a.case of an expulsion from the Order. 
In the story of the nun Mettiya, who is said to have unjustly accused the 
99. 
My. 33,95-8; Niks. pp. 14-5, 
It is not possible to trace kulasanesaggadosa in 
the Vinaya. 
The closest to this in meaning would be gikisamsatiha (Vinaya Pitaka, 
Vol, IL, p. 4). Severe admonition (tajjantyakamma) was prescribed for this particular 
violation 
of the codes of proper behaviour. 
Another 
more 
serious 
offense, 
kuladiisakakamma, was punishable by expulsion (Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. 111, pp. 184-5). 
100. 
bhagavato éhacca-bhasita-vinayapitakato khandakaparivaram atthantara pétha- 
ntara-karana-vasena bhedam katva, Vap., Yol.1, pp. 175-6, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
25 
gnonk Dabba Mallaputta of having violated her chastity, the Vinaya 
Pitaka of the Mahavihiira states that the Buddha questioned Dabba 
Mallaputta and, on his denial, ordered that Mettiya be expelled from the 
Order, 
Clearly this account presents a problem. 
It implies that Mettiya 
was punished before she was given a chance to defend herself or to con- 
fess her guilt, The Abhayagirivasins possessed a version which stated 
that she was expelled ‘‘on her confession’’ (sakdya patiitdya ndsita). 
In 
the reign of Bhatikatissa (A.D. 143-167) a dispute concerning the authenti- 
city of the two versions arose among the monks of the two monasteries. 
The Samantapasidikd records that the minister Dighakarayana, who 
was appointed to inquire into the dispute, gave his verdict in favor of the 
Mahavihara, though the reasoning behind this verdict is not clear, 
During the reign of Mahasena (A.D. 274-301) the monks 
of the 
Abhayagiri monastery accused the residents of the Mahavihira of being 
“undisciplined,” citing their use 
of 
ivory fans, their practice of conferring 
the Ordination by messenger and their practice of reckoning the qualifying 
age for Ordination 
from the date of conception to back up their charge.1 
They also disagreed with the monks of the Mahivihara on the method of 
fixing ceremonial boundaries (simd) and the propriety of spitting on the 
ground during morning ablutions. The Vamsatthappakésini cites the 
authority of the Mahavagga and Cullavagga sections of the Vinaya Pitaka 
to vindicate the Mahavihira’s position.’ 
Presumably the Abhaya- 
giri’s recension of the Vinaya Pitaka differed on these points. 
The propriety of using a stand (ddhdraka) to accept offerings of food 
was another point of controversy between the Mahivihara and the Ab- 
hayagirivihira. 
According to the Samantapasddiké and the Sdérattha- 
dipani, the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery believed that the use 
of a stand limited physical participation in the act of acceptance and, 
therefore, considered this practice inappropriate.’ 
At least in one case it seems that the views of the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery on matters of discipline came to be accepted by some of the teachers 
of the Mahavihira. 
The author of the Vimdati-vinodani cites the ruling 
given by Siriputta'’ that a novice who inadvertently consumes liquor 
does not commit a breach of discipline and attributes this decision to the 
influence of the Abhayagiri school. 
He devotes a long section of his 
work to the refutation of this view.'* 
101. 
Smp., Vol. 111, 1930, pp. 582-4, 
. 
102, 
My.37, 3-5; Vap., Vol. ll, pp. 676-7. 
103. 
Vinaya Pitaka., Vol, 1, pp, 93, 106; Vol. If, pp. 130, 277. 
104. 
Smp., Vol. LV, 1934, p, 846; Sarottha-dipant, p. 851. This is confirmed by the 
Vinaya-viniechaya-saigaha (p. 120) and its commentary, Vinaya-vinicchaya-sangaha- 
tika (p, 62), 
105, 
Sdratpha-dipani, pp. 425-6, 
106. 
Vimtv., pp. 94-100,

--- PAGE 23 [DIRECT] ---

26 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
Some differences between the Mahavihara and Abhayagiri traditions 
pertained to matters of textual exposition. 
For instance, the Linattha- 
vannand quotes variant interpretations given in the commentarial tradit- 
ion of the Abhayagirivihara on certain terms in the Brahmajila, Mahiani- 
dana, Samafifiaphala, Mahiipadiana and Janavasabha 
Suttas.'°7 
In 
certain cases the differences in exegesis reflect differences in doctrine. In 
the Samafifiaphala Sutta, Ajatasattu goes to see the Buddha and asks 
Tivaka, who accompanied him, which person was the Buddha. 
Accord- 
ing to the commentarial tradition of the Abhayagiri nikiya, Ajatasattu 
was only a child when he had last seen the Buddha and could not recog- 
nize him after the intervening lapse of time. 
But the Mahavihara tradit- 
ion maintained that the Buddha, who emanated six-fold rays and possessed 
a body marked with special characteristics, could not be mistaken for 
anyone else and that Ajatasattu was merely pretending not to recognize 
: 
him.'°8 
It is thus evident that, unlike the Abhayagirivasins, the com- 
mentators of the Mahivihara insisted on the superhuman characteristics 
of the Buddha. 
Buddhaghosa and other authors of works in the first category of our 
sources do not refer to the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery by name 
when they discuss differences of opinion on matters of doctrine. 
In- 
stead they invariably use the term keci, ‘‘some,"' and it is only with the 
help of works in the second and third categories that it is possible to iden- 
tify who exactly is being referred to. 
This contrasts with the method 
107. 
Most of the differences were on the meanings of words: 
i, sdciyogo, vetilam, uddalomt, ekantalom and deya in the Brahmajala Sutta, 
suave Vol. L, pp. 80, 84, 87, 164; Linatthayannana, Vol.1, pp. 160, 163, 164, 
207, 
ii, ubhatobhagavimutto in Mahanidéna Sutta, Swmyv., Volt, p. 514; Linartha., 
Vol. 1, pp, 155-6... 
iii. paicakammani and sampajénakart horiti in Simafitaphala Sutta, 
Sumy, 
Vol. I, p. 162; Lanattha., Vol. 1, p. 316. 
iv. 
aseécanaka in the Samyutta Nikiiya (SN, Vol, V, pp. 321-2; Veni, D. 221; 
Vemt., p. 284; Vsnisa., p. 647). It is interesting that the Therigathé Atthakathé. 
(PTS, 1891, p. 168) follows the Abhayagirivasins in its explanation of 
thisterm. 
Some of 
thedifferences between the two commentarial traditions 
pertained to the explanation of certain incidents... When describing Jivaka’s 
visit to the Buddha, for instance, the Janavasabha Sutta states that he was 
frightened on the way. 
The Mahaviharavasins held that it was the silence 
which frightened him, while the Abhayagiri tradition explained that it was the 
darkness which caused him fright. 
(Sumy., Vol.1, p. 1503 Linartha, Vol. 
p. 280), 
Similarly, while explaining the passage in the Mahapadana Sutta 
which describes how the Bodhisattva was received by the gods when he was 
born, the Mahavihara tradition stated that they appeared. in their normal 
form while the A bhayagirivasins held that they appeared disguised as servants 
(Sumy., Vol. If, p. 437; Linattha., Vol. U. p. 36). The author is indebted to 
Dr, Lily de Silva for drawing his attention to the refereces in the Linattha. 
108, 
Sumv., Vol. I, p. 152; Linattha., Vol. 1, p. 280. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
ar 
adopted to deal with differences of opinion over interpretation of disci-.- 
plinary rules. 
As noted earlier, the Samantapdsddiké unambiguously 
explains the position taken by the Abhayagiri nikaya on certain questions 
of discipline, 
A fair amount of material on the doctrinal teachings 
of the Abhayagirivasins lies scattered in our sources, and it is possible to 
distinguish fourteen of the theses which differentiated their teachings 
from those ofthe Mahivihira. 
These theses are classified below accord- 
ing to the types of sources which reveal this information. 
j. 
VIEWS 
MENTIONED 
IN 
THE 
FIRST 
CATEGORY 
OF 
SOURCES 
1a. Views mentioned in the Vimuttimagga and in a work of the first 
category of sources, and attributed to the Abhayagirivasins in a 
work belonging to the second category: 
(i) Ascetic practices (dhutanga) are outside the Profitable Triad. 
(kusalattikavinimuttam); they are merely nominal (ndma- 
pafifiatti); in an ultimate sense they do not exist (asantan), 
and being so, they cannot rid one of defilements.1 
‘(ii) Purity of Progress (patipada-visuddhi) means Access and its 
constituents (sasambhdriko upacdro); the development of 
Equanimity (upekkhinubrahana) means 
Ecstasy (appani) ; 
and Thrill (sartpahamsana) means Reflection (paccavekkhana). 
This is the Abhayagiri nikdya's interpretation of a passage: 
from the Patisambhidé. 
The monks of the Mahavihara. 
believed that Purity of Progress is a constituent of Ecstasy.'!? 
(iii) The Abhayagirivasins added Inertia as Matter (middhardpa) 
to the Mahavihara list of material qualities.'" 
(iv) A‘Stream-winner (sofépanna) who sets up Insight (vipassana) 
thinking, “I shall enter upon the Fruition Attainment (pha- 
lasamépatti),’’ becomes a Once-returner (sakadagdmi); and 
similarly, a Once-returner becomes a Non-returner (andgami).. 
The teachers of the Mahavihara maintained that such a per- 
son would attain the Fruition (phala) of the same stage but 
not the Path (magga) of the next stage and that by developing: 
the Path one attained the Fruition of the next stage.!! 
109. 
Ving., p. 24; Vsin., p. 64; Vsmt. p. 87; Vamsn., p. 194. 
. 
110, 
ing., p. 495 Vsw1., p. 120; Vsmt., p, 144, Abhdhvk., p, 352, Vemsn. p. 358. 
11, 
Vmg., p.95; Vem., p. 381; Vsmt., pp, 455-6; Vsmsn., p. 1070, 
112, 
Ving., p. 127; Vsm., p. 603; Vsmt., p. 898; Vsmsv,, p. 1726.

--- PAGE 24 [DIRECT] ---

_ 28 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
‘1b. Views mentioned in a work of the first category of sources and 
attributed to the Abhayagirivasins in a work belonging to the second 
category: 
(v) 
Wi) 
The teachers of the Abhayagiri nikaya maintained that the 
“consciousness of the momentary present’ (kKhanapaccuppa- 
nnacittam) was the object (@rammana) of the “knowledge of 
discerning others’ thoughts" (cetopariyatdna) because cons- 
ciousness arises simultaneously in the possessor of psychic 
powers (iddhima) and in the other whose thoughts are discerned. 
This was explained by means of a simile: “Just as when a 
handful of flowers is thrown in the air, one flower undoubtedly 
hits another, stalk to stalk, and so too, when.with the thought 
‘I will know the mind of another,’ the mind is adverted to the 
minds of a multitude as a mass, then the mind of one pene- 
trates the mind of another at the nascent moiment. (uppadak- 
khana), the static moment (thitikkhana) or the cessant moment 
(bhangakkhana).” 
The teachers of the Mahavihira believed that the object of 
cognition was the continuous present (santatipaccuppanna) 
and the durational present (addhd-paccuppanna).' 
Psychic Powers (iddhi) are ‘“‘undetermined’’ (anipphanna); 
the Bases of Psychic Powers (iddhipada) are ‘‘determined" 
(nipphanna). 
The Mahavihara school held that both Psychic powers and the 
Bases of Psychic Powers are ‘‘determined’’ and subject to the 
properties of the phenomenal world (tilakkhanabbhahato).!"4 
Ac. Views.mentioned in a source of the first category and attributed to the 
Abhayagirivasins in a work of the third category: 
(vii) The Mahivihirayasins held that the three Abstinences (virati) 
are invariably found together in the Transcendental Cons- 
ciousness (lokuttaracitta). 
(a) The monks of the Abhayagiri nikdya held that they 
existed separately (tividhatta) and that they were not 
invariably (aniyatatta) found there. 
(b) It is also suggested that the Abhayagirivasins believed 
in a fourth Abstinence which was invariably found 
113. 
Vom., v, 363; Atths., p. 421; Vomt., pp, 424-7; Malt, pp. 194-7; Abhdhyt., 
p. 109; Abhedhyk., p. 387; Vsmsn., pp. 1015-8. 
114. 
Smhvnd., p. 308, Sumv. .Il, p.642, Mult. (Vbhg.) p. 169; Linattha., Vol. Il, 
"p. 268. 
(viii) 
(ix) 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
99 
(catuttham niyatam viratim)' > in the Transcendental 
Consciousness. 
Matter and other things (rdpadayo) which, owing to the limi- 
tations in duration and spatiality (khanavatthuparitiatta), 
- are not subject to the field of 
the senses, belong to the category 
of the Objects of Ideation (dhammarammana).'6 
Eye is the sentient surface of phenomena (bh@ta) which have 
the Heat-clement (tejo) in excess; the ear, nose, tongue and 
the body are the sentient surfaces of those who have Space- 
elements (vivara), Mobility (vayw), Cohesion (@pa) and Ex- 
tension (pathavi) in excess. 
The followers of the Mahdvihata pointed out that there was 
no scriptural evidence to support this statement.!!7 
2. A VIEW ATTRIBUTED 
TO THE ABHAYAGIRIVASINS IN 
SOURCES OF THE SECOND CATEGORY: 
(x) The Visuddhimagga-tiké and the Milajikd 
state that the 
Abhayagirivasins did not accept the ‘‘static moment” (thitik- 
khana). The Abhidharmartha-saigraha-sanyaya adds that they 
argued that the ‘‘static moment’’ does not find mention in the 
Canon. 
The Mahaviharavasins pointed out the contradiction 
between this and an earlier view (y) of the Abhayagirivasins. 
This view is similar to the Sautrantika teachings on the subject 
though this does not necessarily imply that one school was 
influenced by the other.'? 
3, VIEWS ATTRIBUTED 
TO THE ABHAYAGIRIVASINS 
IN 
SOURCES OF THE THIRD CATEGORY: 
(xi) 
(xii) 
U5, 
Abdhvt,, p. 21., 
The Abhayagirivasins did not include ‘“‘the correction of false 
views’ (difthujjukammam) 
in their list of ten meritorious 
actions (pufitakiriya). 
The Mahavihdravasins pointed out that they agreed with the 
Mahisifiighikas in this respect." 
Envy (iss#) and Meanness (macchariya) 
may 
by chance 
(yadicchdévasena) rise together. 
Abdhyk., pp. 128-9, 
116, 
Abdhvr., p. 45; Abdhyk,, p. 169. 
117. 
Vsmt., p. 376; Vsmsn., p. 1050. 
118, 
Vsmt., p. 484; Miilt., p. 194; Abhsngsity., p. 70; Vamsn., p. 1015, Bareau,, 
op, cit., p, 157. 
119. Abdhvk., p. 46.

--- PAGE 25 [DIRECT] ---

ed 
ea 
ites 
eee 
30 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
The Mahavihiira school held that this could never happen.?° 
(xiii) The Abhayagirivasins held that from the sixth stage of the 
jhanas, the Sphere of Infinity of Consciousness (vitifdnancdya- 
tana), the seventh stage, the Sphere of Nothingness (Gkifica- 
yatana), is attained by reflecting on the “non-existence’’ of the 
Sphere of the Infinity of Consciousness. 
The Mahaviharavasins maintained that the seventh stage goes 
beyond the use of objects of concentration.'?! 
(xiv) The Saddhammopayana states that there were three apayas. 
The writings of the Mahavibara list four, 12? 
“The thirdcategory represents viewswhichwere propounded by the Abhaya- 
-giri nikdya probably in the last phasé of its existence as a separate group. 
It may be suggested that the need to criticize them arose because some 
monks continued to hold such views even after the unification of the 
sangha in the reign of Parakramabahu I. 
The manner in which they are 
cited and discussed in works like the Abhidhammattha-vikdésint also sup- 
ports such a supposition. 
The foregoing examination of the teachings of the Abhayagiri school 
‘ 
cof the Theravada reveals that they had, apart from a commentarial tra 
dition of their own, a separate recension of the Pali Canon or of some of 
its parts which was different from that of the Mahavihara, 
Itis clear that 
the monks of the Mahavihara were aware of the views propounded by the 
Abhayagiri nikéiya, 
The works of the Abhayagiri aikaya should have 
been in existence even in the time of Sumangala, the author of the Abhi- 
dhammattha-vikdsini. 
since 
this commentator 
quotes from them.13 
Though it is likely that some of 
these works were destroyed in the reign of 
Magha (A.D. 1215-1236) when, according to the Calavamsa, “many books 
known and famous were torn from their cords and strewn about’’ by his 
retainers,'24 it is also noteworthy that the Visuddhimarga-mahd-sanyaya, 
which was written subsequently, identifies and discusses some. of the teach- 
ings of the Abhayagiri nikaya. 
Further, the recent discovery of the 
Vimuttimagga calls into question the supposition that all these works have 
been irretrievably lost. 
The scholastic tradition of the Abhayagiri nika@ya was not restricted 
to.the teachings of the Theravada. 
The Vinaya Pitaka of the Mahisasaka 
120, 
Abdhvk., p. 136. 
121, 
fbid., pp. 364-5. 
122. 
Sdhmpyn., IPTS, 1887, p. 36. 
123. 
Abdhvk., pp. 46, 128-9, 
124, 
Cv, 80. 69, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
at 
schoo] that Fa-Hian obtained in Sri Lanka was probably from the Abha- 
yagiri monastery.’ 
The teachers of this nikaya are supposed to have 
been influenced by ‘the Vajjiputtakas (Vatsiputriyas) 
though it is not 
possible, at the present stage of our knowledge, to trace even one of their 
theses to any of the well-known teachings of this school. 
It is clear from 
the preceding discussion that the Abhayagirivasins held views similar to 
some of those propounded by the Mahasaighikas and the Sautrantikas. 
‘More items of evidence, to be cited later, reveal that the monks of the 
Mahiasaighika school, and probably those of the Sarvastivadin and the 
Sammitiya schools as well, lived at this monastery and that an attempt was 
made to undertake a comparative study of their teachings.’?* 
From about the third century the Abhayagiri monastery took an 
interest in the teachings of the Vetullavida. 
In spite of the fact 
that kings like Voharika Tissa (A.D. 214-236) and Gothibhaya (A.D. 
253-266) 
attempted 
to suppress 
the Vetullavada, 
these teachings 
continued to find adherents at the Abhayagiri monastery even up to 
the time of Parakramabahu 
TI, Kern and Paranavitana have rightly 
identified Vetullavada as a term used to refer to the Mahayana,'?7 
Hiuen-tsang recorded that the teachings of both the Therayada and 
the Mahayana 
were 
studied 
at the Abhayagiri monastery in his 
time.2® A number 
of copper 
plaques, 
some 
of ‘which contain 
quotations from the Pancavimésati-sahasrikaé 
and the Satasahasrika 
versions of the Prajidparamité, have been found at the Lidikatusdya 
stipa situated 
at the foot of the Mihintale 
hill and within 
the 
precincts of the Cetiyagiri monastery." 
It is evident from archaeo- 
logical material at the site of the Abhayagiri monastery that Tantric 
teachings had become influential by the ninth century. 
Slabs bearing 
Tantric formulae dating from this period have been found there,!%° 
and 
further, 
the tenth-century 
record from Buddhannehila, cited 
earlier, records that the practice of initiating novices according to the 
rite of abhiseka was known and practiced at some of the institutions 
125, 
Beal, op. cit., Vol. J, p. 51, 
126, 
See infra p. 256. 
127. 
Kern, “Vaitulya, Vetulla, Vetulyaka,” Verst. en Med. der K. 
von Wetens- 
chappen, Letter K, 4e R, D. VIIL, pp. 312-9, reported by de la Valié Poussin in JRAS, 
1907, pp.422.4; also C/SG, Vol, TL, pp. 35-6. 
Sec also W. Rahula, History of Bud- 
dhismin Ceylon, Colombo, | 956, p.89. 
More evidence to support this identification is 
found in the Abhidharmarttha-samuccaya (Santiniketan, 1950, p. 79) and the Vibhapa 
Brableenelty quoted by P.S.Jaini in the Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fasc. A-Aca, 
Pp. 
20-7, 
128, 
Beal, op. cit., Vol. LV, p. 443. 
129. 
EZ, Vol. TU, pp, 199-212; 
Vol. IV, pp. 238-42, 
130, 
See éafra p. 255,

--- PAGE 26 [DIRECT] ---

2 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
belonging to this nikdya.'! 
According to the commentary 
on the 
Mahavairocana Siitra, the abhiseka was an essential rite which had to 
be performed before a teacher of the Tantra began to instruct 4 
disciple. 
Though followers of both the Mahayana and the Tantra lived at the 
Abhayagiri monastery, this nikdya was primarily a division within the 
Theravada and was recognized as such by contemporary Buddhist writers 
in India.'33 
It was remarkably tolerant of non-Theravada teachings 
and even encouraged its members to study them and allowed followers of 
the Mahayana and the Tantra to reside within its monasteries. 
1t would 
seem from the foregoing discussion that the Abhayagiri nikdya fostered a 
variety of scholarly and philosophical opinions, and it is unlikely that 
the cohesion of such a nikdya depended on a strict adherence being de- 
manded of its members to a systematized body of doctrinal teachings, 
though the difference of their teachings from those of the Mahavihara 
would have given them a clear identity of their own. 
ft is remarkable that in the commentarial works of the Mahavihira 
nikéya no mention is made of Mahayana and Tantric ideas held by 
the followers of the Abhayagiri nikdya even 
though they discuss 
their disagreements 
with 
their rivals 
over 
variant 
readings 
and 
interpretation of the Pali Canon in minute detail. 
One reason for 
this attitude may be that, at least in the latter part of the period 
under review, the monks of the Mahavihira 
also borrowed 
some 
Mahayana and Tantric ideas and practices which were not in actual 
conflict with their own teachings.'*+ 
One might 
also suggest that 
adherents of the Mahayana and Tantric traditions within the Abhaya- 
giri nikaya constituted only a small minority and, as such, were 
considered to be inconsequential. 
The main challenge to the position 
of the Mahavihara came from the Theravada faction of the Abhaya- 
girl nikaya, who gave variant readings and interpretations 
to the 
texts on which the followers of the Mahavihira based their teachings. 
Hence, they devoted much time and effort to combat these “‘revisionist’” 
views which they would 
have regarded 
as 
the more formidable 
threat. 
The Jetavana Nikaya 
: 
The origin of the Jetavana nikéya can be traced to three hundred 
monks who did not want to associate themselves with the teachings of 
131, 
EZ, Vol. 
1, p. 196, i. 
B 
7-8. 
132, 
See the article on Abhigeka in the Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fase. A-Aca, 
pp. 125-330. 
133. 
See supra, p. 7. 
134, 
See infra p. 326. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
33 
the Vetullavida and therefore broke away from the Abhayagiri monastery 
to take up residence at the Dakkhinéraéma. 
Chronological information 
concerning this schism, found in the Vamsatthappakasini, dates this 
event in the year A.D. 249.135 
According to the Nikaya-sangrahaya 
the followers of this faction came to be known as Sagalika because of 
the fame which a member of the group named Sagala had gained 
as an expositor of the dhamma.3° 
The same point is reiterated in a 
tenth-century inscription found 
in the premises 
of the Jetavana 
monastery which refers to a certain Saguli as the monk after whom 
the nikéya was named,37 
Mahisena (A.D. 276-303) built the Jetavana monastery, together with 
its stapa which is the largest ever built in Sri Lanka, and bestowed it on 
the thera Tissa of this nikéya.'38 
From the time of its construction this 
monastery remained the main center of the activities of the nikdya, and 
the nikaya itself came to be known by the name of the monastery. 
When 
building the new monastery on the grounds of the Mahavihara, Maha- 
sena ignored the protests of the Mahaviharavasins, and this no doubt 
increased the hostility of the Mahavihara towards this rival nikdya. Tissa, 
the first abbot of this monastery, is reviled in the Mahavamsa in the 
most opprobrious of terms. 
He was accused of a serious violation of 
disciplinary rules (antimavatthu), and the minister who held an inquiry 
into it is said to have expelled him from the Order, thereby even, 
disregarding the wishes of the king.’ 
Later followers of this nikdya 
obviously did not share the chronicler’s views concerning the character 
of the first abbot of their leading monastery. 
Tissa is commemorated 
in the’ tenth-century inscription at this monastery, cited earlier, as a 
virtuous monk who had led a frugal and contented life,!4° 
Since the original founders of the Jetavana nikdya were hostile to 
the Vetullavada and had broken away from the Abhayagiri nikaya, most 
- 
probably the relations between the two groups were 
not very cordial 
at the beginning. 
Buta distinct change of attitude seems 
to have 
taken place during the reign of Silakala (518-531). 
According to the 
Calavamsa, & young merchant who visited the city of Kast brought 
135, 
According to this work the schism took place 558 years after the establishment 
of Buddhism in theisland. 
This would be equivalent to the year 795 of the Buddhist 
era known at the time or A.D. 249, 
Vap., Vol. I, pp. 175-6. 
136. -Niks., p. 14. 
137. 
EZ, Vol. Til, pp. 226-9. 
Geiger believed that the name Sagala was possibly 
connected with the city ‘of this name in Northwestern India, but no definite evidence 
Pointing to any such relationship is available. 
See CCMT, p. 185. 
138. 
Mp. 37, 32-5, 
139. 
Ady, 37.38-9, 
140. 
EZ, Vol. WU, p. 227, Hl. 5-7.

--- PAGE 27 [DIRECT] ---

34 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
back the dhammadhatu in the twelfth year of Silakila’s reign. 
The 
king received it with great honour, placed it in a shrine close to the 
- 
palace and instituted the practice 
of taking 
it to the Jetavana 
monastery once every year for a festival which was in its honor.'4! 
The term dhammadhatu is suggestive of Mahayana connections; in 
fact, the Nikdya-sangrahaya states that the book 
brought by the 
merchant contained the Vaitulyavada. 
It goes on to add that the 
monks of the Jetavana monastery at first were hesitant about accepting 
the teachings of the Vaitulyavada but eventually were persuaded to do so 
by the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery.!42 
This is an important 
development in the relations between the nikéyas since it seems to imply 
that the monks of the Jetavana monastery had moved closer to the 
Abhayagiri nikaya. 
The reverses suffered by the followers of the Vaitulyavada during the 
reign of Aggabodhi I (571-604) brought about another change in the 
attitude of the Jetavana nikdya, 
The Vaitulyavadins were worsted in a 
public debate and, consequently, their opponents, led by an Indian 
monk called Jotipala, gained the king’s favor.’3 
According to the 
Nikitya-saigrahaya, the defeated monks continued to wield influence over 
the king through the viyatnd, an official at the court. 
But after this 
official died, they no longer wielded any influence, and, in the words 
of the chronicler, the monks of the Jetavana monastery “became 
meek and humble and accepted the leadership of the Mahivihara."’\4 
If indeed the monks of the Jetavana nikdya changed their allegiance 
as the Nikd@ya-saigrahaya asserts, they accomplished yet another volte: 
face before long. 
The 
Vamsatthappakdsini 
mentions a noteworthy 
event which took place duting the reign of ‘Dathopatissa L] (659-667). 
Two monks, who were both known by the name Dathaveda, collaborated 
to make a compilation of the Vinaya Pitaka, 
They incorporated the two 
Vibhanga sections of the Dhammarucika recension and the Khandaka 
and Pariyara sections of the Sagalika recension in their compilation, and, 
after adding their own interpretation and comments, claimed that their 
version was ‘more ‘torthodox" than that of the Mahavihara. 
One of 
these monks was a resident of the Kurundaculla-parivena of the Jetavana 
141, 
Cv. 41. 37-40, 
142, 
Niks., p. 19, 
143, 
Cv. 42, 35-7, 
144. 
ohu mala 
pasu 
dendnakayehi bhikgithu 
nihatam@dnava 
mahdvihdvavdstnta 
avanataya vistiha, 
Niks., 
p. 19, Jetavana monastery is referred to as Denavehera in 
this work. 
Apparently Rahula (op.cit. p. 103). misunderstood this passage when he 
stated 
that “the monks of the two nikdyas, namely, the Abhayagiri and the 
Jetavana, dismissed pride and lived in submission to the Mahavihira.” 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
35 
monastery while the other was from the Kolambahilaka-parivena,’ 
Kolambahalaka occurs in the Mahdvamsa as the name of a hermitage to 
. 
the north of the city, close to the Abhayagiri monastery.'*° 
The author 
of the passage from the Vamsatthappakasini assumes that, like the other 
two nikdyas, Jetavana also had its own recension of the Vinaya Pitaka 
and, probably, a commentarial tradition of its own. 
The joint venture 
on the part of these two scholars was evidently an attempt to. prepare an 
edition of the Vinaya Pitaka and of its commentaries which would be ac- 
ceptable to both groups. 
Though the stands taken to date by the Jeta- 
yana nikdya on doctrinal issues had been ambiguous and variable, it is 
likely that this development brought them closer again to the Abhayagiri 
nikaya. 
By the reign of Parakramabahu I they had become enthusi- 
astic about the Vaitulyavada, for, according to the Ci/avamsa, they 
were preaching these teachings as the word of the Buddha,'4? 
During the ninth and tenth centuries the Jetavana nikdya was 
patronized by several kings though not to the same extent as the other 
nikdyas, Sena I rebuilt the Mahaparivena which had been burnt down 
and also erected a new mansion where he installed a gold image of the 
Buddha.'4* 
Sena IT placed figures of Bodhisativas in the Manimekhali- 
pasida which was destroyed later by the Cola invaders. 
The task of its 
restoration was undertaken by Udaya IV and completed by Mahinda 
LV.“ 
The latter was also responsible for the restoration of the Diyasen 
house which was used for the performance of the uposatha ceremony, !50 
An important addition to the monastery was the Kassapa-parivena built 
by the general Sena Ilanga during the reign of Kassapa IV.45! 
Also 
four offiicals of Mahinda 1V added four more colleges.'s? 
A site enclosed within a boundary wall, containing the ruins of about 
fiftecn. groups of buildings in addition to an alms-hall and a number of 
image-housés, all arranged around the main stépa, are what remains of 
the Jetavana monastery today.53 
The main ruin in one of these groups 
145, 
Vap., Vol, I, p. 176, 
146, 
Mv.21, 5:25, 80333, 42; 35.94, 
147, 
Tt has been suggested that the Jetavana mikaya was connected with the Saut- 
rantika school of Buddhism. 
See D. J, Kalupahana, “Schools of Buddhism in Early 
Ceylon,” The Ceylon Journal of the Humanities, Vol. i, 1970, pp. 159-90, 
But there is 
absolutely no evidence to show that any of the well-known theories of the ‘Sautrantika 
school had been accepted by this nikdya. 
148, 
Cy, 50, 65-7, 
149. 
Cv, 51. 77; 53, 51; 54. 48; EZ, Vol. 1, p. 227. 
150. 
EZ, Vol.I, p. 227. 
US! 
Cy. 52.47, 
152, 
Cy, 54. 49, 
153, ASCAR, 1892, pp. 1-3; 1893, pp. 1-5; 1894, pp. 1-2.

--- PAGE 28 [DIRECT] ---

36 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
shows that the Jetavana monastery possessed one of the most impressive 
image-houses found at Anuradhapura.34 
Two inscriptions, one from 
the fourth century and the other from the tenth, have been found within 
these monastic grounds.'5> 
On the whole, the Jetavana monastery 
compares poorly with the Mahivihara and the Abhayagirivihara ; 
it does 
not seem to have occupied a position comparable to the other two 
monasteries in the religious life of the city. 
Very little information is available concerning the monasteries affi- 
liated to this nikdéya. Apart from the Dakkhinaérama, only two other 
monasteries are mentioned in our sources. 
Moggallina I built the 
Dathdkondaiifia monastery at Sigiri;'5* during the reign of Aggabodhi IL 
(606-614) the Veluvana monastery was built for this nikdya,'5’ but its 
location is not known. 
it is clear from our study that, though there is a-fair amount of in- 
formation on the geographical distribution ‘of monasteries belonging to 
the Mahavihara nikdya, data which would increase our knowledge about 
monasteries affiliated to the other two nikdyas, particularly Jetavana, are 
extremely 
scanty. 
There 
is, however, some circumstantial 
evidence 
which suggests that the influence of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikdyas 
had spread to the far south by the beginning of 
this period. 
Charms with 
mystic Tantric formulae, written on clay tablets in a script datable to 
about the ninth century, have been unearthed at Monaragala in the Uva 
Province, at Duntbara in the Central Province and at Tangalla in the 
Southern Province.'5? 
Also, colossal figures of Bodhisattvas have been 
found at Buduruvegala in the Uva Province and at Viiligama in the 
Southern Province! 
It seems not unreasonable to suppose that the 
penetration of the Mahayana and Tantric influences into Rohana and less 
accessible terrain in Malaya came in the wake of the expansion of 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana influence rather than that of the Mahavihara ; 
but no concrete evidence linking these sites with either of these nikayas 
has been discovered. 
, 
There is clearer evidence for the presence in Rohana of religious 
establishments affiliated to all the three nikayas, at least in the eleventh, 
century. 
The Célavamsa records that the relic shrines of all the three 
nikdyas at Mahigama had been destroyed by the Cola invaders and were 
154, 
ASC, Tenth Report, PA. VIL 
155, 
EZ, Vol. LIT, pp. 226-9; Vol, LV, pp. 273-85, 
156, 
Cy, 39.41. 
157, 
Cv. 42.43. 
158, CJSG, Vol. I, p. 47. 
159. 
Ibid. p. 49, See also infra p. 223. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
37 
restored by Vijayabahu, 1 ((055-1110).' 
There is little doubt that the 
influence of the three nikdyas was definitely established in Rohana after 
the mass exodus af monks.from Polonnaruva during the reign. of Vikra- 
mabahu 1 (L111-1132).' 
In the time of Parékramabahu 1 monks of the 
three nikdyas dwelling in Rohana were among the religieux invited by this 
king to participate in the synod convened under his sponsorship, !¢2 
The Order of Nuns 
The interesting history of the nuns of Sri Lanka, who proved to be 
extraordinarily zealous missionaries and who were responsible for the 
establishment of the order of nuns in China, received very little attention 
from the local chroniclers. 
The Dipavamsa, which provides more inform- 
ation than the Mahavamsa, describes the early nuns as well accomplished 
in the scriptures and lists the names of those who were prominent in the 
order of nuns from the earliest times until the reign of Bhatikibhaya. 
(22, B.C.-A.D. 7)." 
Many of them were drawn from the upper strata 
of society. 
Anula, who had been the consort of Mahanaga, Mahila 
and Samanta who were the daughters of Kakavannatissa, and Sivalé and 
Samudda, who probably were the daughters of Bhatikabhaya, were all 
prominent nuns in their times. 
Later on, we hear of the queen of Jet- 
thatissa LI becoming a 
nun upon the death of hor husband.! 
. Similarly 
a daughter of Agghabodhi VI became a nun to escape maltreatment at 
the hands of her husband.16 
3 
According to the Chinese annals, eight Sinhalese nuns arrived at” 
Nanking in A.D. 426 and their presence “inspired the Chinese women for 
the first time to seek to enter the ‘Holy Orders,’"’ 
But ten nuns were 
required to form a chapter to perform the ceremony of admission. 
In 
429 three more nuns arrived from Sri Lanka, and women were admitted 
into the order of nuns for the first time in the history of Buddhism in 
China, 
'6 
There are clear refererices from the tenth century concerning two 
nunneries’ belonging to the Mahavihara nikaya. 
During the reign of 
Kassapa. V, Vajira, the wife of the official Sakkasenipati, built a dwelling 
160. 
Cv, 60. 56. 
161. 
Cv, 61, 58-61, 
162. 
Cv. 78, 10. 
163. 
Dy. ch. 18. 
164. 
Cy, 44, 144, 
165, 
Cy. 48. 57, 
166. 
Seng-che-lio, 
Kao-seng-tchouan and Fo-tsou-t'ong-ki, 
quoted by Pelliot in 
BiePaen Vol, LV, p. 356. 
Translated into English in summary form by John M, Sene- 
ne in JRASCB, Vol. XXIV, 1915, pp. 107-8.

--- PAGE 29 [DIRECT] ---

38 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
at Padalaiichana for the nuns of this nikéya.'©7 
Mahinda IV built the 
Mahdmallaka convent for the same sorority.1% 
It is likely that at least 
two other nunneries, the Nalarima and the Tissirima, also came under 
the leadership of the Mahiavihara. 
According to an inseription from. 
Mahakalattive, datable to the reign of Kassapa IV, the Nalérama_ was 
built by Sena, the Chief Scribe. 
He endowed this convent with an estate 
consisting of the village of Gitelgamu and charged its members with the 
task of watering and maintaining the Bo Tree at the Mahiaivihara. 1° 
There is little doubt that this convent came under the Mahavihara nikdya. 
The Calavamsa records that Sena Manga built the Tissirama during the 
same reign.!7 
It seéms reasonable to believe that this nunnery also 
housed adherents of the Mahavihara nikdya since they were entrusted 
with the responsibility of looking after the Bo Treé at the Mariccavatti 
monastery. 
Z 
r 
During the reign of Moggallana I a convent named Rajini was built 
for the nuns of the Sagalika nikdya.!7! 
This is the only such institution 
affiliated to this nikaya which is mentioned in our sources. 
It is certain 
that there were nuns in the Abhayagiri nikéya too. 
In one’ of his 
inscriptions Kassapa V refers to nunneries (mehenivar) belonging to 
this nikdya but not a single one of these institutions is known by 
name.!” Several other convents like those named after Uttara, Abhaya,. 
Silimegha, Mahinda and Jetthd occur 
in’ the chronicles and the 
epigraphic records,}”} but no information is available on their affiliations, 
It is tempting to suppose that the Abhaya and Uttara convents, built by 
Mahasena, were given over to the Abhayagiri monastery which was also 
known by the two names Abhayavihara and Uttaravihara. 
Similarly, 
it is also possible that the Sildmegha nunnery, which received a gift 
ofa silver image of a 
Bodhisattva from Mahinda. 1 (777-797), belonged 
to the Abhayagiri or the Jetavana nikaya.' 
But it must be admitted 
that the evidence is not adequate to confirm either of these hypotheses. 
Even if there is little information about nunneries from places 
outside the capital, it is fairly clear that nuns were by no means rare at 
167. 
Cv. 52. 63, 
168. 
Cv, 54,47, 
169, 
AIC, No. 110, 
170. 
Cv. 52, 24. 
171, 
Cv. 39, 43. 
172, 
EZ, Vol. {. p.47, 1. 16, 
173, 
Mv, 37. 45; Cv. 46, 27-8, 48, 139; EZ, Vol. H, pp. 19-25. 
174, 
Cv. 48.139,” 
{sein 
lait 
koh 
hain 
cere 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
39 
Anuridhapura. 
Some of the convents built for them seem to have been 
quite extensive. 
For instance, the Jetthirinia, built by the queen of 
Aggabodhi IV, had a hundred employees attached to it.17° 
It is also 
evident from the preceding discussion that all the three nikdéyas had 
followers within the community of nuns. 
Nuns left the stage of history as quietly as they had occupied it, and 
there are no clues to help the curious historian to determine the causes or 
the circumstances of their disappearance, 
It is during the reign of 
Mahinda LV that they are heard of for the last time. 
It has already been 
mentioned that this king built the Mahamallaka convent. 
In an in- 
scription at the Abhayagiri monastery he states that he built an alms-hall 
for nuns and that he repaired dilapidated buildings at nunneries of poor 
means.!7° 
Perhaps the troubled years of the Cola occupation made a 
life in robes particularly difficult for women. 
: 
ven if the order of nuns had become extinct in Sri Lanka 
by the end 
of the period of Cola rule, nuns are mentioned in later inscriptions from 
Burma, 
The nun Uiw Pam, for example, is said to have witnessed a cere- 
-mony of the dedication of a monastery in A.D. 1196177 
Two inscript- 
jons from the thirteenth century refer to nuns of slave parentage. 
'”® 
According to an inscription from the Minwaing Kyaung enclosure at 
Minnanthu in Pagan, Uiw Chi Taw, presumably a nun, was among the 
cight dignitaries present at a recital of pavitta in A.D. 1261.!79 
Than 
Tun suggests that it was probably the same person who is mentioned as 
the chief incumbent of a nunnery in A.D, 1279.18. 
It appears strange 
that no attempt was made to restore the order of nuns in Sri Lanka with 
help from the Burmese. 
Perhaps the Burmese nuns were not considered 
by the Buddhists of Sri Lanka to- be sufficiently “orthodox” in their views 
- 
and practices, 
It is also possible that the revival of the order of nuns 
was not considered to be particularly conducive to the well-being of the 
sasana, 
The belief that the existence ofan order of nuns had a harmful 
effect on the clerical community can be traced back to the Canon, '*! 
Owing to the inadequacy of 
information bearing on this problem it is not 
possible to give a satisfactory explanation of this surprising lack of clerical 
orlay interest in reviving the order of nuns. 
175. 
Cy, 46, 27-8, 
176. 
EZ, Vol.1, p. 222, H, 32-3. 
177. 
G.H. Luce and Pe Maung Tin, Inscriptions 
of Burma, Pl, 576A. 
178. 
Ibid. Pl. 89. 92. 
179, 
Ibid, Pl. 200, 
: 
180. 
Ibid, PI. 268; 
Than Tun, The Buddhist Church in Burma during the Pagan 
Period, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, pp. 285-6. 
181. 
Vinaya Pitaka,Vol. II, London, 1964, p. 238.

--- PAGE 30 [DIRECT] ---

40 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
The Ascetic Sects 
An interesting phenomenon noticeable in the period under discussion 
is the growth in popularity of ascetic sects. 
Though Buddhism clearly 
expressed its aversion to extreme forms of asceticism, eight types of as- 
cetic practices, vatiously called dhutaiga, vatta, and yoga, were known to 
early Buddhist texts.'8 
In the Vimuttimagga and the Visuddhimagga, 
the list is extended to include thirteen practices. Two of 
the practices 
recommended in these texts, pamsukilikatga and drafitikatga, were the 
most popular in Sri Lanka. 
The followers of the first of these ascetic disciplines, the Pamsukili- 
kas, were expected to depend solely on discarded rags for material to make 
their robes. 
Evidently not all the members of this sect adhered strictly 
to the rules and principles of this asceticism. 
Buddhaghosa refers to 
three types of Pamsukilikas—the“‘strict”’, the “moderate” and the ‘soft.’ 
According to him, ‘‘He who picks up a rag thrown away at the cremating 
ground is a strict man. 
He who picks up a rag which had been placed 
with the utterance, ‘A monk will pick it up,’ is a moderate man. He who 
accepts a rag placed at his feet is a soft man.184"" 
Araittikahga was an ascetic discipline which enjoined the contempla- 
tive life in the seclusion of the forest. 
It seems that by the time of Bud- 
dhaghosa there were liberal interpretations of the precepts pertaining to 
this ascetic discipline. 
According to these interpretations, it was ade- 
quate if the Arafifiika ascetic was in the forest before the break of dawn, 
i.e., he need not live there all the time. 
And for this purpose, “forest’’ 
was defined as what lay beyond a stone’s throw from the gates ofa village 
or even a city."8 
: 
/ 
If, as bas been suggested by Bagchi, the Vinuttimagga was a work 
of the Abhayagiri nikdya, it would seem that the Abhayagirivasins ex- 
pected their ascetics to strictly adhere to the precepts in both principle and 
detail. 
The Vimuttimagga lays down that it would be a transgression of 
precepts for a Pamsukilika to accept a present of robes or for an Arait- 
Rika to live close to a village8 
While this work insisted on strict 
adherence to ascetic ideals, it was equivocal as far as its stand on the 
usefulness of asceticism was concerned. 
It propounded the view, speci- 
fically attributed to the Abhayagirivasins in later Commentaries, that 
182, 
Mahiiniddesa, ed. L. de la Vallée Poussin and E, J. 
Thomas, 
PTs, 
London, 1916. Vol. I, p, 188. 
183. 
Vmig., pp. 16-25; Vs. ed. Warren and Kosambi, p. 56, 
184. 
Pe Maung Tin, The Path of Purity, p. 72, 
185. 
Ibid, pp. 82-3, 
186, 
Vmg., pp. 17,20. 
aan 
ea 
eae 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
at 
asceticism was outside the Profitable Triad (kusafattika), and such a stand 
would not have been attractive to monks who took to ascetic practices. 
Itis likely that the Mahavibira, with its more liberal interpretations of the 
precepts and a doctrinal stand which stressed the importance and validity 
ofascetic practices, would have had more followers among ascetic groups, 
even if they were, to use Buddhaghosa’s turn of phrase, men who preferred 
the ‘soft’ forms of asceticism, 
The Pamsukiilikas 
Though monks who practiced the asceticism of wearing robes made 
out of rags were known in Sri Lanka from at Jeast the second century 
B.C.,!87 it is in the seventh century that they came into prominence. 
From the seventh century to the tenth they are frequently mentioned in 
the chronicles. 
Méanavamma (684-718) builta hermitage for them at the 
Thiipairdma;'®® his successor, Agghabodhi V, built four monasteries for 
this sect.'8 
Of these, the location of the Girinagara and Rajamatika 
qnonasteries cannot be determined, 
The Kadambagona monastery was in 
Mahathala, roughly the present Matale District, and the Deva monastery 
was at Antarasobblia, a ford over the river Mahavali to the north of 
Mahiyangana, 
Vajira, a general of Dappula II (81 5-831), built a monas- 
tery for this sectat Kacchavala,!”° probably identical to the Kaccha ford 
over the river Mahavili, 
Another large monastery for the Pamsukilikas 
was built by Sena Tat Aritthapabbata, the present Ritigala range of hills 
in the Hurulu Palata of the Anuradhapura District." 
A ninth-century 
inscription from this area, which refers to the Ritigala monastery built 
by King Salamevan, confirms the statement in the chronicle.’ Although 
some of the Pamsukiilikas lived in the environs of. the capital, it is 
clear that monasteries belonging to this sect were spread over a wide area. 
The instances cited above also suggest that groups of Pamsukilikas 
tended to live separately even if they were affiliated to a particular 
monastery or a nikdya. 
This concern 
for individuality was further strengthened in the 
latter half of the ninth century which witnessed a significant development 
in the history of the Pamsukiilikas and their relations with the Abhayagiri 
i he See Sahassa-vatthi-pakarana, p.49 and Manoratha-parant, PTS, Vol. 1, pp. 
188. 
Cv. 47, 66. 
189. 
Cy, 48, 3-4, 
190. 
Cy, 49, 80, 
191. 
Cv, 50, 63-4; JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, pp. 171-2. 
192. £Z, Vol, TI, pp. 289-94.

--- PAGE 31 [DIRECT] ---

aa 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
nikéya. 
The Calavamsa states that during the reign of Sena [ a separate 
kitchen was constructed for the Pamsukélikas of the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery.3 
The separatist tendencies implicit in this statement had deve- 
loped to such an extent by the twentieth regnal year of Sena TL(A.D. 872) 
that the Pamsukiilikas left the Abhayagiri monastery to form a school or 
sect (gana) of their own.!% 
The relevant passage in the chronicle is too. 
brief to enable one to make an adequate assessment of this incident, but 
there is no doubt that the loss of 
this faction would have been detrimental 
to the prestige of the Abhayagiri nikaya since, as is evident from the gene- 
rous patronage they enjoyed well into the tenth century, the Pamsukii- 
likas seem to have been immensely popular, 
: 
This leads to a problem of immediate concern. to the subject of this 
survey—the extent of the influence that the three nikdyas wielded on the 
monks belonging to the Pamsukiilika sect. 
It is quite clear that there 
were Pamsukilikas in the Mahavihira nikaya. 
The hermitage built by 
Manavamma was at the Thiparima. 
About three centuries later Sena 
Tlaniga, a general of Kassapa IV, built the Samuddagiri hermitage at the 
Mahavihara for the Pamsukilika monks.'%° 
This shows clearly that the 
Pamsukiilika fraternity at the Mahavihara remained within the fold of 
its 
nikdya right into the tenth century, 
Hence it is not unreasonable to 
suppose that the nikaya division cut across the Pamsukiilika sect, though 
there is no clear reference in the sources to a Pamsuktilika faction within 
the Jetavana nikdya, 
; 
In this connection, it is significant that in the reign of Vikramabahu I 
(1111-1132) the Pamsukiilikas were divided into two factions (kotthasa- 
dvayanissita).!° 
On the basis of this information it is possible to ad- 
duce two explanations of the withdrawal of the Pamsukiilikas from the 
Abhayagiri monastery which took place during the reign of Sena II. 
The Pamsukilikas who left might have joined either those of the Jetavana 
nikdya, or less probably, the Mahavihara nikéya, but the term ganihesum 
used by the chronicler in this context suggests that they formed an in- 
dependent group of their own, hence it is possible to suggest a second 
explanation—that it was this independent group and the Pamsukilikas 
of the Mahavihara who formed the two factions in the time of Vikrama- 
bahul. 
The second explanation would imply that there was no Pamsu- 
kilika faction within the Jetavana nikaya. 
193. 
Cy. 50, 76, 
194, 
tassa visatime vasse vihdre abhayuttare 
nikkchamitva ganahesum pamsukilika-bhikkhavo, Cy. 51.52. 
195, 
Cy, 52, 21, 
196. 
Cy. 61.59, 
: 
‘ 
t 
z 
i 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
43 
Paradoxically, the lavish patronage that the Pamsukilikas attracted 
through their popularity had a mellowing effect on the very severity of 
the austerities which had earlier brought them such fame. 
It is ironic 
that these monks, who were expected to wear robes made from rags, were 
presented with royal garments during the reign of Aggabodhi V. '"7 
Agpabodhi VII (772-777) decreed that food fit for royalty be given tothem 
regularly. 18 
Their monastery at Aritthapabbata was endowed with 
extensive resources 
(mahabhogam) and equipment worthy of royalty 
(pavikkhéram rijéraham), 
Furthermore, attendants, slaves and work- 
men. were appointed to look after their needs. °° 
These donations are 
an indication of the changes that were taking place in the life and atti- 
tudes of the Pamsukilikas, 
Even though the Pamsukilikas were getting used to a ‘‘soft’’ life, 
far beyond even what Buddhaghosa considered permissible, they con- 
tinued to receive enthusiastic patronage. 
They were held in such high 
regard that even their kinsmen were honored. 
Sena Ilanga, for example, 
distributed rice and clothing among the mothers of Pamsukilika monks,? 
Immediately after his successful campaign against the Colas, Udaya IV 
(946-954) distributed monastic requisites which he bought at considerable 
cost, among Pamsukilika monks. 7°! 
Mahinda IV regularly presented 
them with alms as well as with bowls filled with garlic, black pepper, long 
pepper, ginger, molasses, myrobalan, clarified butter, oil and honey 
(presumably for use as medicaments), blankets, carpets, robes and other 
- 
amenities. 9? 
Their popularity is best exemplified by an incident which 
took place during the reign of Udaya IIT (935-938) when the citizens of 
Anuradhapura rose in revolt against the king for having violated the 
traditional 
privileges enjoyed 
by the Pamsuktilika monasteries 
at 
Tapovana,?0% 
E. R. Ayrton has identified the so-called Western Monasteries at 
Anuridhapura, situated in the area traversed by the Outer Circular and 
Arippu roads, with the Tapovana hermitages.?°*| 
There are several 
groups of buildings amongst these-ruins; each of these groups is enclosed 
within a double-wall of stone and has a porch of handsome proportions 
197, 
Cy, 48, 61, 
198, 
Cv, 48, 73, 
199, 
Cy. 50, 63-4. 
200. 
Cv, 52. 27. 
201, 
Cy. 53, 48, 
202. 
Cv, 54, 18-9, 23-5, 
203. 
See infra p, 208 
aot Ayrton’s papers were edited by A, M. Hocart in the Memoirs of the 
rchacological Survey of Ceylon, Vol, 1, Colombo, 1924, 
See pp. 18-48,

--- PAGE 32 [DIRECT] ---

44 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
at the entrance. 
The characteristic feature which distinguishes this 
type of hermitage from the monastic residences described earlier is 
that at its center there were one or more specimens of 4 structure consi- 
sting of two platforms which were faced with stone and connected by 
a monolithic “bridge.’ 
Ayrton surmised that the first of 
these plat- 
forms would have been left open, without a roof, and was perhaps 
sutrounded by a half-wall. 
The second platform was invariably situated 
on the hummock of a rock and,, presumably, had a flat roof, 
Its 
foundations were built in such a manner that a moat surrounded the 
platform which rested on the bare face of the rock. 
Surrounding 
these double platforms are an assortment of buildings the functions of 
which ate recognizable only in the cases of image-houses and privies. 
The whole monastic complex is noteworthy for the severe austerity of 
its execution. 
Dressed 
slabs, sometimes sparsely ornamented, 
were 
used in its construction. 
Curiously enough, the only instance of lavish 
ornamentation is seen in the workmanship of the urinal slabs of the 
privies,2¢5 
It has already been pointed out that these ruins, situated about two 
to three miles from the city, differ considerably from the usual type of 
monastery in style and layout. 
It is also significant that ruins of the. 
double-platform type have been found. among the Ritigala hills where 
Sena I built the monastery for the Pamsulctilikas. 
These facts add’ 
strength to Ayrton’s identification, although there is no direct evidence 
to substantiate it. 
Ruins of a similar type have been found at Mullegata, Manakanda, 
Veherabiiidigala, Sivalukanda, Galbaiidivihire, Manikdena and Nu- 
varagalkanda.29° 
As Ayrton remarked, all these sites need not neces- 
sarily have been associated with the Pamsukilika sect,?°7 and, one 
might add, the Pamsukilikas were not necessarily confined to monasteries 
of this type. 
The Pamsukiilikas are last heard of during the reign of Vikrama- 
bahu I. 
Along with the monks of the eight milavihdras of Polonna- 
ruva, they left for Rohana in protest against the confiscation of mon- 
astic property by this king.2°° 
But once they walked out of 
the capital 
they never again appeared in the historical records of Sri Lanka, 
205. 
Hocart’s explanation (MASC, Vol. I, p.56) that the excretory functions of the 
monks were considered 
to be a holy rite amounts to nothing more than highly 
fanciful and weird imagination. 
206, 
MASC, Vol.I, p. 43. 
207, 
Ibid. p. 47. 
208, 
See infra p. 92 
Haare 
cadets 
iinem 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
48 
The Arathikas 
Not before the tenth century do we find any reference to the Araii- 
ftikas in the chronicles, and even in other sources, earlier references 
to 
- 
them are mostrare. 
During the reign of Kassapa IV the general Sena 
Llanga built a hermitage in the woods for. the Arafitiika monks of the 
Mahavihira nikdya2” who were held in very high regard by the author 
of the Calavamsa. When recording that Deva, the queen of Kassapa IV, 
built another hermitage for the Araififikas, he refers to them as ‘lamps 
unto 
the Theravamsa.”?'° 
Like the Pamsukiilikas, 
the Arafitikas 
benefited from the zealous patronage of-Mahinda 1V. 
He regularly sent 
them wholesome food, molasses heated in clarified butter, essence of 
garlic 
(presumably for medicament), and betel. 
He also delegated physicians 
toattend to the sick among them.?"! 
It is noteworthy that while there are 
several references to Arafitiika monks of the Mahavihara nikdya, there is 
no such information on those affiliated to the Abhayagiri and Jetavana 
nikayas. 
It would seem that the Araiiftikas flourished even in times when the 
main Buddhist establishments at the capital suffered reverses. 
The settle~ 
ment of monks at Ditibulagala, ten miles to the southeast of Polonnaruva, 
was patronized by, Vikramabihu’s queen, Sundaramahadevi.2"?_ 
It is 
evident from an inscription issued in the sixth year of her son’s reign that 
there were five hundred monks living at Dithbulagala. 
This monastery, 
renowned as a place.which housed the corporeal relics of the Buddha, 
attracted many pilgrims. 
The queen was moved at the sight of these 
pilgrims, particularly old folk, who climbed up to these shrines with 
strenuous effort. 
She had a path constructed between the two caves, 
Hiru-mahalena and Saiida-mahalena, placed images inside one of these, 
probably the Hitu-mahalena, built a.stdpa, planted a Bo Tree at the site 
and renamed the cave Kaliiigulena, after her own clan. 
It is also in- 
teresting that the. same record refers to a mansion at the monastery which 
was called Demalapah’ (Damilapasida). 
Sundaramahadevi claims to 
have made endowments for providing boiled rice and gruel to the inmates 
of this mansion. 
As in the case of Kaliigu-lena, the name Demalapiha 
probably ‘indicates that the monks of Dimbulagala received patronage 
from the Tamil community. 
- 
Literary sources, especially those in Pali, refer to a place called 
Udumbarapabbata 
or Udumbaragiri. 
The 
Sahassa-vatthu pakarana 
209, 
Cv, $2, 22, 
210, 
Cr. 52, 64, 
211. 
Cv, 54, 20-2, 
212, 
EZ, Vol. UW, pp. 194-202,

--- PAGE 33 [DIRECT] ---

46 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
mentions the Candamukhalena at the Udumbarapabbata where the ‘hera 
Maliyadeva once discoursed on the dhamma. 
It also refers to a certain 
_ 
Udumbaravihara where the Ariyavamsa was preached,?!? but it is not 
-clear whether this is the same as the Udumbarapabbata. 
According to 
the Rasavéhini monks used to go to Udumbaragiri to practice medita- 
tion.2!4 
: 
Udumbarapabbata or Udumbaragiri is an exact translation into 
Pali of the Sinhalese name Dihbulagala. 
The Sahkassa-vaithu-pakarana 
mentions that the Udumbarapabbata was situated on the way between 
Anuradhapura and Mahagiima and suggests that it was close to the river 
Mahavali. 245 
The name Candamukhalena is strongly reminiscent of 
Saiida-mahalena. 
Hence it seems quite probable that all three terms, 
Udumbarapabbata, Udumbaragiri and Dithbuligala, denoted the same 
place. 
One might argue that this identification is not tenable since the 
Nikaya-saigrahaya mentions a monk called Kassapa as belonging to the 
Audumbaragiri fraternity but refers to another monk, Medhankara, as a 
member of the Dithbulagala fraternity.2"° 
However, this does not really 
invalidate our identification since the author of the Nikaya-satigrahaya 
tended to use both Sanskrit and Sinhalese forms of a name rather indis- 
criminately.217_ 
Also, in the Padasddhana Sannaya the same Medankara 
is described as audumbarahita-pabbata-vasika,*"* a fact which leayes little 
doubt as to the yalidity of this identification. 
Dithbulagala was pethaps 
the most important center of the Arafifiika sect during this period and it 
produced some of the leading scholars and hierarchs among the sarigha 
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 
Perhaps it is not merely accidental that the ascetic sects rose into 
prominence at a time when monasteries were becoming increasingly 
wealthy. 
In the eyes of the masses the self-denying life of the ascetic 
would have been a refreshing contrast to the ease and comfort of the life 
of the monk at the larger monasteries. 
Even if the life style of the Pam- 
sukiilikas was becoming less austere, the Arafifiikas appear to have in fact 
lived in the woods in accordance with their precepts without taking ad- 
vantage of the liberal interpretations allowed by Buddhaghosa. 
They 
advocated withdrawal from both economic 
and social ties to the “world” 
in order to follow a life of total devotion to philosophical contemplation 
and scholarly endeavour. 
Also, the fame that some Aranaika monks 
213, Shsvp., 
pp. 120, 183. 
214. 
Rasavahini, Colombo, 1920, Vol. 1, p. 183. 
215, 
Shsvp., pp. 120, 183. 
216. 
Niks., pp. 25-6. 
217, 
Cf. for instance the use of Palabatgala and Putabhattasela on p. 27. 
218. 
Padasadhana-sannaya, ed. Dhatminanda, 1932, p, 303, 
posSusscdrmiee 
oprsiviranentien 
ite 
i L 
| 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
aT 
gained through scholarly achievement would have attracted the attention 
and respect of the discerning laity; some of the better-known teachers 
and exegetists of this period belonged to this sect. 
But there is little 
doubt that it was the ascetic charisma which enabled the Aratiiikas 
easily to surpass the city-dwelling leadership of the nikdyas in popularity 
and to acquire the influence they later came to wield. 
The Dravidian Monks 
If Geiger’s reading and interpretation of a strophe in the Cilavamsa 
are accepted, it would appear that there was yet another separate group 
within the satigha in Sri Lanka. 
He has given this strophe, which occurs 
in the description of the meritorious deeds of the queen of Udaya I, the 
following reading: 
kéretvé jayasenam ca pabbatam dimilassada 
bhikkhusabghassa sé gémarh mahd-ummaram ca tassada?'® 
In six of the manuscripts Geiger consulted, the last word in the first 
pada occurs as damissadé and in a seventh as damisassadd. 
It is evident 
from the case endings that this term was meant to qualify bhikkusan- 
ghassa in the second pada, but damibhikkhusatgha ov damisabhikkhu- 
sangha carries little sense. 
Hence it was emended to read gémikassa 
by Sumangala and Batuwantudawe in the first edition of the Calavamsa,?° 
Buddhadatta, accepted this emendation in his more recent edition of the 
chronicle,2?" but Geiger's emendation of the phrase to read damilassada 
is closer to the original text and yields a more meaningful translation than 
the phrase gamikassada. 
He translated the strophe as follows: 
“And 
having built the Jayasenapabbata (vihara), she granted it to the Damila- 
bhikkhu community. She also made over to them the village Maha- 
ummiara.’'?22 
; 
The acceptance of Geiger’s reading, however, catries the implication 
that the community of Dravidian monks existed as a separate group, 
For they were, as a group, the beneficiaries of a 
grant of a 
monastery and 
and. 
Nicholas believed that Mahé-ummara should be located between 
Anuradhapura and the river Mahavali in the area known today as the 
Hurulu Palata.223 
However, the location of this village is not a neces- 
sary indication of the whereabouts of the monastery. 
219, 
Cv, 49, 24, 
220, 
The Mahavansa, ed. H. Sumangala and H. A. deS. Batuwantudawe, Colombo, 
1908, p. 298. 
221. Unapiiranaschito Mahavamso, ed. A. P, Buddhadatta, Colombo 1959, p. 284, 
222. 
Cy, trsh, Vol. #, p. 128. 
223, JRASCBNS, Vol, VI, 
p. 173.

--- PAGE 34 [DIRECT] ---

48 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
An inscription from Vevilkatiya in the Kanda Korale, twenty-one 
miles to the northeast of Anuradhapura, also hints at the possible exist- 
ence of a separate community of Dravidian monks. 
This tenth-century 
record mentions a certain Demelvehera at Kibinilam which was situated 
in the district of Angam in the Northern Division.224 
It is possible that 
the Demelvehera was a 
monastery where Dravidian monkslived, and if so, 
the assumption that there were separate monasteries for the community 
of Dravidian monks may be valid. 
But one cannot rule out the possibility 
that the monastery received this name for some other reason, for instance, 
because it had been built by a Dravidian. 
The Dravidian monk was a familiar figure in ancient Sri Lanka. 
Some monks came from South India to make a significant contribution to 
the development of Buddhist thought in the island.?*5 
However, the 
assumption that there was a community of Dravidian monks leading a 
separate existence entails the grave implication that the community of 
monks was divided on racial grounds. 
Such an assumption would be 
based, as has been demonstrated above, on weak and questionable 
evidence, 
7 
The Place of the Nikaya in the Structure of the Sangha 
Though most sources are in accord as to the number of nikdyas in 
the island, there are certain passages in the chronicles which seem to sug- 
pest that there were more than three nikayas. 
One such passage occurs 
in the description of the meritorious deeds of Aggabodhi LV (A.D. 667- 
683) in the Ciilavansa: 
Having heard and seen that the monasteries of the two nikayas 
were poorly endowed, he granted them many maintenance villages. 
What need is there for many words? To the three nikéyas he gave 
a thousand villages yielding undisputed and abundant revenues,?*¢ 
The crucial question here is whether the two nikdyas mentioned first are to 
be considered as distinct from the three nikdyas mentioned subsequently. 
Bvidently Geiger believed that they were distinct, for he suggested that 
they should be identified with the Thuparima and Mariccavatti monas- 
teries.227. 
This would imply that there were five different nikdyas among 
the Buddhist saigha in Sri Lanka; however, this is not the only possible 
224, 
EZ, Vol.1, p. 246, Ul. 6-7. 
225, 
See infra p. 264. 
226, 
 tath’ dvinnam nikayanam vikdre mandapaccaye 
disvapi ca sutvd v& bhogagdme bahit ada 
bahuad kim nu vuttena nikdyesu pi 
tis 
pi 
ada gémasahassam so bahuppadam nirdkulam, Cv. 46, 15-6. 
227. 
Cv., trsl., Vol. I, p. 99, n. 2. 
ep 
nest 
psig 
alg 
cine 
ean 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
49 
interpretation of this passage. 
It is also possible that the first reference 
is to the two better known of the #ikdyas, the Mahavihadra and the Ab- 
fiayagiri, while all the three nikdyas are referred to in the second strophe. 
The two monasterics cited by Geiger are nowhere mentioned as inde- 
pendent nikéyas, and it is certain that they were institutions attached 
to the Mahavihara nikdya. 
Two fourteenth-century chronicles, the Dalada-pijavaliya and the 
Nikaya-saigrahaya, refer to the Dhammaruci, Sagali and the Vaitulya- 
vadi as the nikdyas which were reformed by Pardikramabahu 1.228 
This 
testimony would imply that, together with the Mahavihara, there were 
four nikdyas in Sri Lanka at this time. 
However, these two works are 
clearly at variance with more reliable sources like the Galvihara inscript- 
jon. 
- (nits description of Parakramabahu’s reforms this record mentions 
only the three nikdyas and none other.22? 
Though the teachings of the 
Mahayana, the Tantra and some other schools of Indian Buddhism were 
known in Sri Lanka, it does not seem likely that their local followers had 
separate organizations, The Mahavamsa and the Calavamsa refer to the 
Vaitulyavida merely as a body of ‘theretical teachings’? accepted by 
certain monks of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikdyas.° 
The Vam- 
satthappakésint categorically states that the Mahavihara, the Abhayagiri 
and the Jetavana were the only nikdyas constituting the Buddhist sagha 
of Sri Lanka,?3! 
. 
It becomes clear from this examination of the groups which con- 
stituted the Buddhist satgha in Sri Lanka that in the ninth and tenth 
centuries the nikdya formed the main element in its structure. 
Unlike 
the divisions in Tibetan Buddhism, the three nik@yas of Sri Lanka did not 
represent provincial interests: they existed side by side in various locatities. 
The influence of the Mahavihara seems to have been, more widely spread 
in the island while the stréngth of the other two nikdypas lay mainly in the 
capital. 
It would also seem that among the ascetic sects the Mahavihara 
enjoyed far greater support than the other two nikdyas. 
The liberal attitude adopted by the Abhayagiri nikdya towards non- 
Theravada schools of Buddhism and the ambiguous stance of the Jeta- 
vana aikdya in doctrinal disputes make it unlikely that these two nikdyas 
attempted to enforcé rigid adherence of their members to specific bodies of 
doctrinal teachings. 
On the other hand, in almost all the commentarial 
228. 
Niks., p. 25; Dalpjv., p, 61. 
229. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 269, 4, 13. 
230, 
For a detailed discussion, see supra p. 3l. 
231, 
ite vidattayo idhatitam vadantaram natthiti ca datthabbam, teneta yatta: 
dhammarucikd sagalikid lankadipamhi bhinnakati. 
Vap., Vol. & pp. 175-6, 
:

--- PAGE 35 [DIRECT] ---

50 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA 
works of the Mahiivihara one notices the emphasis on the “purity” of its. 
doctrinal traditions. 
It is likely that this nikdya expected a more rigid 
adherenice to its traditions from its followers, but there is little information 
on institutional provisions enabling any such control. 
An inscription issued by Kassapa V, found at the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery, alludes to the practice of assigning monks who were trained in 
scriptures at the main monastery to fill vacancies at dependent institut- 
ions.232 
Such arrangements would have been conducive to greater 
ideological unity within a nikaya. 
In matters of doctrinal teachings the 
" 
telationship between the main monastery and its affiliated institutions 
would come into force mainly in instances of dispute. 
Consultations 
with neighbouring monasteries was one of the means recommended in 
the Vinaya for the solution of disputes regarding the doctrine or the 
disciplinary rules.23> 
It would have been usual to refer such disputes 
either to the main monastery or to other monasteries within the nikaya 
for solution. 
However, distance would have been one of the limiting 
factors on the functioning of the relationship between the main monas- 
tery and the other constituents of anikdya. 
Itis doubtful that the leading 
monasteries at the capital were successful in maintaining their supervisory 
influence over affiliated monasteries and hermitages in the far corners of 
Rohana and Dakkhinadesa. 
: 
Nevertheless, it is evident from the commentaries of Buddhaghosa 
that some form of consultation did prevail between monasteries situated 
at considerable distances from each other. 
The Atthasalini, for example, 
qoutes extensively (and tacitly approves of) the interpretation of the 
Dhammasangani professed by Mahadammarakkhita 
of Rohana and 
Mahidatta of Moravapi, though it purports to be an exposition of the 
views held by the Mahavihara.234 
Further, the Visuddhimagga tecords 
an instance of a monk from Anuradhapura going to Rohana to acquaint 
himself with the interpretation of the Canon propounded by the thera 
Mahi Dhammarakkhita mentioned above.2*5 
Such. evidence suggests 
that, at least in the early days, it was not simply a case of the main monas- 
teries of Anuradhapura giving the lead and impressing their views on the 
rest. 
The provincial monasteries came into prominence when they 
produced men of scholarly attainment, and their views were accepted 
even by the monks at the capital. 
ie 
232, 
EZ, Vol.t,p. 48,14 
233, 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. iI, p. 94, 
234. 
Aithasdlint, PTS, 1897, pp. 230, 278, 284-6. 
Moravépi has been jocated in 
the Kurunigala District. JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 94. 
235. 
Vom, pp. 77-8. 
| 
| 
q | 
boop 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE. SANGHA 
SL 
Finally, it has to be emphasized that, though the three nikdyas were 
held to be representative of the satgha as a whole by the chroniclers 
this does not necessarily mean that all the monasteries in the island came 
within their fold.. 
Buddhism had penetrated throughout the island well 
before nikiiya divisions arose and it is possible that some of the ancient 
monasteries continued to fead an independent existence and avoided 
affiliation with any one of the nikdyas. 
Perhaps it is a similar independ- 
ent institution that finds mention in the Cé/avamsa when it records that 
the Kurunda monastery built by Aggabodhi I (574-604) was for the whole 
order of monks (sabbasanghikam).2°® 
If any importance is to be at- 
tached to the last phrase, this particular monastery, unlike many monas- 
teries constructed or given grants during this period, would seem to have 
been devoid of affiliation to any one of the nikdyas. 
It has already been 
suggested that the Pamsukilikas who broke away from the Abhayagiti 
nikdya in the ninth century existed as an independent group. 
Hence it 
would seem that the three nikdéyas represented the satigha only in a cons 
ventional sense; their rise into prominence did not bring about a sharp 
division of the entire clerical community into three groups. 
236. 
Cv, 42, 15,

--- PAGE 36 [DIRECT] ---

BARLY MEDIEVAL 
SRI LANKA 
1 MILES 
BUDDHANNEHALA J 
MORAGODA & 
as 
1-_ 
@PADAVIYA rRIVRYL 
QRLINDURU GOMARRALA g 
e 
@ sul anniany, 
LONOLUVILA @ —- VELGAMVEHERA @ 
#AVELANGAMA 
ag Manackervova 
TIATINIGANA 
GOLAPANUGAMA, 
POL 
oe SS KALAVAPLVIHARA e¢ 
“AUN ne 
Beam 
Oc 
Me 
SRBEERUVA 
© piMoULAGaLa 
wr 
KOK 
AUN 
Mn aIniviti 
< 
DAKKHIYAGIA! 
}@ DANBULLA - 
~ 
on @ ATARAGAULAVA 
ESTATES BELONGING TO 
MONASTERIES AT ANURADHAPURA 
© = 
Moabavinira Nikiya 
A Abhayagirl Nikbya 
: detavana Nikaya 
MONASTERIES AFFILIATED 
TO THE THREE NIKAYAS 
© Mahavihara Nikfya 
A Abhayaglri NikBya 
5 detavana Niktya 
bution of monasteries affiliated to the three nikdyas and 
the location of estates’ belonging to the principal monas- 
tories at the capital city. 
Fig, 2. Map of Early Medieval Sri Lanka showing the distri- - 
CHAPTER 
2 
3) 
yf 
The Satigha and Monasti¢ Property 
ge) 
: 
a 
jo 
The ideal of the early Buddhist monks, like that of most other as- 
cetics, represented an attempt to stand aloof/from the economic and 
social bonds of normal lay life. 
It prescribed the rejection of wealth 
and all forms of economic activity. 
The monk was to lead a life of 
poverty and of total dependence on, the voluntary donations of the Jaity. 
However, with the rise in number of clerics and monasteries, adherence 
to such an ideal ceased to be practicable. The total dependence of a large 
number of monks and nuns on voluntary donations for their food and 
clothing was an unsatisfactory arrangement. 
It became increasingly 
clear that the monastery needed a stable source of income in order to 
regularly provide for the essential requisites of its inmates, the performa- 
nce of its ritual, and the maintenance of its buildings. 
Meanwhile, the 
capacity of the royalty and the nobility to make substantial endowments 
grew with developments in the technology of food production. 
This 
Paved the way to the growth of monastic property and brought about 
a Path herd in the ‘attitude of the saigha towards wealth. 
ad 
ahd. 
: 
The Accumulation of Monastic Property 
. The practice of endowing monasteries with property in land and irri- 
gation works can be traced back to a period as early as the latter part of 
; aad century B.C. 
The Diivegala and Na-ulpota inscriptions of © 
., 
Lanjatissa (119-109 B.C.) record a grant of tracts of land and of an irri- 
Na ey to a monastery. 
It has also been suggested that the 
a 2 fa and Gaigamuva inscriptions, which mention donations of 
Poth 
agricultural and irrigation property to monasteries, date from the 
=. 
» 
Ceyh 
Snes 
y 
; 
ok eat Antiquary and Literary Register, Vol. Wt, Pt. 3, 918, pp. 204-5; EZ, 
{53 ]..

--- PAGE 37 [DIRECT] ---

34 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTI : PROPERTY 
ae. 
reign of Vattagimant (103-102, 89-77 B.C.).? 
With the reign of Vasabha } 
(A.D. 76-111) begins a period of intensive hydraulic enterprise which | 
lasted for about seven centuries, and it would seem that the monasteries 
benefited from the extension of the cultivated area and the increase of|, 
agricultural produce it brought about. The inscriptions as well as the 
chronicles abound with references to donations of property in both land 
and irrigation works which \ ere nse 
iQ Ane Sangh during this period. 
saldte 
Vasabha presented the rights (3 dues from his major irrigation enter- y a" 
ryoir which could irrigate a thousand kartsas to a monastery at Gala- 
mbatittha.? Mahanaga (569-571) granted three hundred ‘“‘fields’’ to the 
Jetavana monastery and a thousand “fields” to the Mahavihara.* Agga- 
bodhi I endowed the Kurunda monastery with a coconut plantation 
which was ‘three yojanas in extent.” 
His yuvaraja gave two hundred 
“fields” to another monastery.5 The use of such vague terms as“‘field”’ in 
the chronicles makes it difficult to form a clear idea of the extent of 
the properties granted to monasteries. Further, there is no means of ve- 
rifying the figures given by the chroniclers, But, even if one were to make 
allowances for possible exaggerations, it would seem from these ins- 
tances that the donations made during this period progressively incre- 
ased in both extent and value. 
Though the wealtli that the monastery 
acquired was mainly in Jand and irrigation works, there are occasional 
references 
to other types of property. 
For instance, Moggallana UI 
(618-623) is said to have donated moré than three hundred salterns,* @-4 § 
Perhaps the most common type of property granted to monasteries 
during this period was the gama. 
It is loosely rendered into English as 
“village.” 
The problems involved in the translation of this term have 
already attracted the attention of several scholars,” but, in the absence of a 
suitable alternative, the term ‘‘village’’ has been retained in this study. 
oot 
Ica 
ree 
nonin 
regen 
OTE 
SI 
2, 
EZ, Vol. L, p. 148; C/SG, Vol. II, p. 123. 
3. 
My, 35.47. Karisa=kiri, 
The Saddharma-ratndvali (ed. D. B, Jayatilaka, 1928,. 
p. 135) translates the Pali term aifhakarisa in the Dhammapadatthakatha (2.T.S, 
ed., Vol. 1, pt. 1, p. 94) as ekayila dolosamuna, Since a 
yaja.ts equivalent to twenly 
amunu, 
this means 
that a karisa of cultivable land amounted to four ain 
in sowing extent. 
According to Clough, an aniuna is equivalent to about 2 to 24, 
acres. 
Codrington estimated it at | acre. 
See EZ, Vol. iL, pp. 189-90. 
4, 
Cy. 41. 98-9. 
5. 
Cv. 92.9, 15-6, 
6. 
lonakhetta. Cv. 44, 49, 
B 
7. 
See for instance Julius de Lanerolle, “An Examination of Mr. Codrington’s 
Work on Ancient Land Tenure and Revenue in Ceylon,” JRASCB, 
Vol. XXXIV, 
1938, pp, 199-219; Codrington’s rejoinder (Ibid. pp, 220-5) and de Lanerolle’s 
reply (bid. pp. 226-30). 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
"$5 
It is used, however, not in its strict English sense but, as Baden-Powell 
used it in his well-known work on land tenure in India,* to mean ‘‘a group 
of landholdings aggregated in one place.” 
The villages gcanted to the main monasteries of the Mahavihira 
nikaya formed a fairly substantial collection. 
Buddhadasa (337-365) 
endowed the Moraparivena at the Mahavihara with two villages—Sama- 
Lay. 
prise, the Ajisdra canal, to the Mucela monastery. He also granted a rese- Both eo 
and 
tenth centuries,!! but it is clear from the evidence in the Ci/avamsa 
that the growth of monastic property continued unabated. “Sena I 
(853-887) granted villages called bhogagama to the Lohapasada.'? Geiger 
rendered bhogagdma into English as ‘‘maintenance’ village,'"'? 
During 
the reign of Kassapa IV (898-914) his general, Sena Tanga, assigned 
“maintenance villages” to the hermitages he built, some of which were for 
the monks of the Mahavihara nikdya.'4 
Kassapa V (914-928) presented 
two “maintenance villages’? to the Mariccavatti monastery;'* 
Dap- 
pula IT (923-924) gave it another village ;"* Dappula LV (924-935) granted a 
village to the shrine of the Bo Tree at the Mahavihara,!? and finally 
Mahinda 1V (956-972) assigned ‘‘maintenance villages’ to the Candana- 
pasida at the Mariccayatti monastery.’ 
The other two nikdyas do not figure so‘ prominently in the lists of 
donations found in the chronicles. 
Sena I fixed “large revenues" (mnahd- 
bhoga) for the residence he built at the Jetavana monastery.!? 
Sena II 
and his queen made endowments for colleges within the Abhayagiri 
monastery,2° and Kassapa IV granted a village to a residence for monks 
he built within the same monastery.2! 
The Bhandika and Silamegha 
8. 
B. H. Baden-Powell, Land Systems of British India, Oxford, 1896, Vol. I, p. 21. 
9. 
Cy 37. 173. 
. 
10. 
Cy. 45, 27-8, 
'f. 
L. S, Perera, Justitutions of Ancient Ce 
iptic 
i 
S 
era, 
| 
5 
eylon from Inscriptions, 
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Ceylon, Peradeniya, p. 1327, 
Hee 
ORES 
12. 
Cy, SITLL. 
13. 
Cv. trsl., Vol. J, p. 153. 
14, 
Cy. 52, 26, 
15. 
Cv. 52. 46. 
16. 
Cy, 53, 2, 
17. 
Cy, 53. 10, 
18. 
Cy, 54, 10. 
19. 
Cv. 50. 66, 
20. 
Cv. 51, 86. 
21, 
Cv. 52, 13,

--- PAGE 38 [DIRECT] ---

Mf. 
| ganization of the saigha. 
made “‘to the satgha of the four directions, present and absent” or, in 
36 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
colleges of this monastery received a grant of two villages during the reign 
of Kassapa V.?2 
It was not only the monasteries at the capital that benefited from 
grants of land ducing the period under consideration. The Cilavamsa 
records grants of villages and ‘‘maintehance villages’? made to the Sena- 
ggabodhi shrine at Polonnaruva, the Kitatissa, Mandalagiri and Nila- 
rima monasteries in Rajarattha, the Buddhagima monastery in Malaya 
and the Mahiyaigana monastery in Rohana.?) 
Inscriptions from a 
ruined site at Kaludiyapokuna reveal that_a large well-endowed monas- 
tery existed there in the tenth century.24 
The preceding account of dona- 
tions to the community of monks makes it clear that the main monasteries 
at the capital as well as hermitages from various parts of the island had, 
by this time, come to own varied types of property which included irri- 
gation works, fields, plantations, salterns and villages. 
. 
The acceptance of property introduced a new concept into the or- 
The earliest donations, mostly of caves, were 
other words, to the entire saigha.> 
It is very likely that donations of 
other types of dwellings, situated in parks, were of a similar character, 
but donations of sources of income were made from the start to individual 
monasteries. 
As a result of this practice the monastery came to represent 
not merely 
a 
grou 
i 
s but also a corporate 
property- 
owning 
institution. The boundary disputes between the major monas- 
teries at the capital and, in particular, the objections raised by the Maha- 
vihdra to other monasteries being erected on what it considered its own 
grounds reveal how strongly the inmates of these monasteries felt that the 
land attached to their monasteries belonged to them alone.2® 
It is note- 
worthy that some of these grants were made not merely to a monastery but 
to a particular institution within a monastery such as a college or a shrine. 
Such. grants reflect the expansion of the monastery and the consequent 
rise in importance of sub-units within its organization. 
‘Certain grants 
make a further specification; for instance, the village Kotthagéma was 
granted by Udaya [ (797-801) for the purpose of meeting the cost of 
guarding an image-house. 
Similarly, the village Mahigama was donated 
22, 
Cv. 52, 58. 
23. 
Cv. 49, 17; 51. 74-5. 
24, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 253-69. 
25. 
agata anagata catudisa sagasa. 
26. 
Chronicles record three instances of such disputes, i.c., during the reigns of 
Kanittha Tissa, Mahasena and Dathopatissa Il. My. 36. 10-3; 37. 32-3; Cv. 45. 29-30, 
er 
a 
ae 
a 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
57. 
by the same king in order to meet the expenses of festivals pertaining to 
the Kholakkhiya Buddha image.?? 
; 
The Nature. of Property Rights 
The problem of the nature and extent of the rights that the monas- 
teries enjoyed over their property has to be examined in detail at this stage 
particularly because it has been suggested that these donations of property 
jnvolved merely the transfer of taxes or income due from them and not of 
the complete property rights. 
If indeed this was the case, the taxes due 
to the king or a share of the income would have been turned over to the 
_monastery which would, however, have no real control over the manage- 
ment of its property. 
Two statements in the Mahdvamsa shed light on the nature of at least 
some of these grants, 
Gajabahu I is said to have granted the Maricca- 
vatti monastery a tract of land which he had bought for a hundred thou- 
sand (kahdpanas?); his mother bought another plot of land from the 
Mahavihara in order to build a dwelling for monks.”® 
It seems most 
likely that it was a proprietary right rather than a right to royal dues that 
Gajabahu purchased at such cost for the Mariccavatti monastery. 
The 
second reference makes it clear that even as early as in the second century 
A.D. monasteries could, at least. theoretically, dispose of their lands, 
In certain inscriptions, grants of property are made after exempting them 
from kara which most probably denoted a tax (kara kadaya or kara 
kadavaya).2” 
Hence it is possible to suggest that at least some of these 
grants involved the transfer of property rights which were more extensive 
than the rights to royal dues. 
Inscriptions and chronicles prove to be of limited use in determining 
the nature of the relationship which prevailed between the monastery and 
its tenants and in investigating the ways in which the monastery exerted 
its rights of ownership during this period, 
However, the Samantapasa- 
diké throws some light on the nature of the property rights of the monas- 
tery. 
In one passage Buddhaghosa lays down the procedure to be fol- 
lowed in the exchange of property: 
This is the procedure to be followed in exchange of property: 
A coconut plantation belonging to the sangha is situated at a dis- 
tance from the monastery. 
Kappiyakdrakas*© consume much of 
21. Cv, 49, 14-6, 
28. Mv, 35.121, 
29. For S, Paranavitana’s interpretation of these terms, see EZ, Vol. LIT, pp. 117-8. 
30. For an explanation of this term sce infra pp. 97-8. 
:

--- PAGE 39 [DIRECT] ---

38 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
the produce. 
And when whatever is. left is brought from thither, 
it would amount to little once the charges of the.carts are paid. 
Some people from a village close to the plantation own a planta- 
tion close to the monastery. 
They come and suggest that the 
plantations be exchanged, 
In such a case, the suggestion should 
be accepted, if it is agreeable to the savgha, without hesitating on 
the thought that the plantation belongs to the satigha and as such 
should not be exchanged.*! 
The reference to exchange of property and the realistic manner in which 
the problems that the landowners have to face, like misappropriation by 
employees and cost of transporting produce, are described in the Samanta- 
pasadika leave little doubt that the monastery was in fact enjoying pro- 
prietary rights over its lands. 
’ 
: 
‘ 
In the course of commenting on the word udake in the second section 
on Pardjikd, Buddhaghosa grades various offenses connected with irri- 
gation and recommends penances for each offense.>? 
This suggests the 
possibility that monasteries were involved in irrigational activities. 
The 
‘Rajasikkhdpadavannana subsection 
of the Timsakavannani 
further 
clarifies this relationship. 
It provides some rules to guide monks in their 
relations with cultivators who use 
irrigation water from reservoirs. 
belonging to the monastery: 
: 
: 
If people, bent on helping the saagha, construct an irrigation re- 
servoir on the land belonging to the sangha, and thenceforth pro- 
vide “allowed articles’’®?. from the proceeds of the crops raised 
with the water from the reservoir, it is permissible to accept them. 
And when it is requested, “Appoint a kappiyakaraka** for us," it 
is in-order to appoint one. 
And if these people, being oppressed 
by the tax demands of the king, were to give up the land and go 
away, and if others who occupy their land do not give anything to 
the monks, it is permissible to stop the supply of water; but this 
should be done in the ploughing season and not in the crop season, 
And if the people were to say, “Reverend sirs, even in the past 
people raised crops with water from this reseryoir,”’ then they 
should be told, “They helped the saigha in such and such manner, 
‘and provided the samgha with such and such articles.’ 
And if 
they say, “We, too, shall do so,”’ it is permissible to accept what 
they offer.>5 
31. 
Smp. Vol. VI, 1947, p. 1238. 
32. Smp. Vol. Il, 1927, pp. 343-6. 
33. kappiyabhanda, “utensils allowable to the monks." 
See Finava Pitaka, PTS. 
Vol. I, p. 192. 
" 
34, 
For an explanation of this term, see infra pp. 97.100, 
35. 
Smp. Vol, IL, 1930, p. 679. 
Serene 
ee 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
39 
Similar: procedures are recommended for the collection of dues from: 
canals, fields and forests belonging to the sangha.** 
It-is quite clear that these rules have been drafted with consideration 
for the interests of the tenant. 
Even the coercive measures designed to- 
make him pay his dues were to be executed in a manner which would 
not cause him excessive losses. 
"The regulations also imply that the rights 
of the satgha were limited and regulated by precedent. 
It is on the 
strength of precedent, i.e., that the previous tenant had been paying dues 
that the monastery demanded dues from the new tenant. . 
The monastery: 
was not to demand dues from the first tenant; payment was left to his 
discretion.>”7 
In actual practice, however, this would hardly have been a 
hindrance ora limitation..A donor of a field, acanal or a reservoir would 
sce to it that the income and the rights that were his due were transferred 
to the monastery after donation, and this would create the necessary pre- 
cedent for the monastery to establish its rights. 
The most important 
fact that emerges from this passage is that the rights of the satigha in both 
land and irrigation works were not restricted to taxes or to a share of the 
income turned over by a third party, 
They were in actual possession of 
at least some of these donations and were in a position to enforce the 
right to their legitimate share by gentle yet effective means. 
; Exactly what was involved in the transfer of villages to the monas- 
teries remains to be examined. The grant of a village could involve the 
right to taxes, to labor from its inhabitants, to proprietary right over its 
land, or a combination of these, In addition to gama, terms like ara- 
mikagama, labhaggima and bhogagdma have been used to describe grants 
of villages made to the satgha up to and during the period under consi- 
deration. 
An drdmikagéma would be a “‘service-village’’ which supplied’ 
men, to perform various specified functions at the monastery.°* 
Geiger 
translated the term /abha as “‘revenues”’ and a passage which reads /abha-. 
gegdmam....mahesiyé as “the village the proceeds of which had belonged 
to the makesi."89 
In his valuable paper on ‘‘Proprietary and Tenurial’ 
- 
Rights in Ancient Ceylon,” L. S. Perera commented that /abha “does 
not appear to be a technical term as such though it carries the general 
‘ 
meaning of ‘profit’ or ‘advantage’ 
or ‘gain.’ 
Whether villages were: 
called bhogagima or not,” he further adds, ‘‘most if not all the grants 
of. this 
period 
fall 
into 
the 
same 
type.’*? 
This 
interpretation 
36. Smp. Vol, UL, p. 682. 
37, Ibid. p. 680. 
38, See infra pp. 98-9. 
39, 
Cv. 42. 61. 
40. CJHS, Vol. TI, No. 1, 1960, 
pp. 16, 18-9.

--- PAGE 40 [DIRECT] ---

60 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
would imply that though three different terms, labhaggdma, bhogagima 
and gama, were used in the chronicles; they in fact denoted the 
same type of grant. 
This, however, does not seem, likely. 
Though in early Pali literature the term /abha carries the genetal: 
meanings given above, it seems to have acquired a special connotation 
jn the tenth-century inscriptions, and it is even-likely that it possessed 
similar connotations in the chronicles. 
The slab inscription of Kassapa 
¥ lists labha laduvan (recipients of labha) as one of the three types of 
monks who lived at the Abhayagiri monastery.44 
The Kapararima 
Sanskrit inscription of Satghanandin refers to vasalabhartha to which the 
inmates of a monastery were éntitled.4? 
Paranavitana translated vasa- 
lébhartha as “residence, income and welfare.” 
He suggests that /abha 
would have been the stipend that an inmate of a monastery received.” 
The stipend could have covered the right to board as well. 
But most 
probably it denoted something more than the right to board. 
If this 
were not so, the reference to a category of monks called recipients of 
dabha would be meaningless. 
The payment of special emoluments to 
monks of scholarly attainment and to those who performed adminis- 
trative duties at the monastery is mentioned in many of the contemporary 
sources.44. 
The two instances of the occurrence of labha in the Citla~ 
vamsa agree with the interpretation of the term as a stipend. 
It was the 
learned monks who were honored by Moggallana ILI with assignments 
° 
of especially high /abha.‘* 
Aggabodhi 11 granted a labhaggama belong- 
ing to his queen to the men who were to guard the relic-shrine at the 
Thaiparama.** Labhaggdma in this context may be interpreted as a 
village granted in lieu of a stipend. 
The term bhoga occurs in Sanskrit in a wide variety of meanings 
including “enjoyment, usufruct, food, income, revenues and wealth.” 
Yn Indian inscriptions it appears as 4 technical term connoting a special 
type of “‘royal dues” as well as in a general sense of “enjoyment, 
possession and wealth” to quote only a few of its connotations.‘ 
“The Pali dictionary gives the following explanation of bhogagdma: 
‘village of revenue,’ a tributary village i.e. a village which has to pay 
tribute or contribution (in food etc.) to the owner of its ground.” 
M1, EZ, Vol.1, p. 48, 1. 29-30, 
42, 
EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 1, p. 169, £13, 
43, 
Ibid. n. 7. 
. 
44, 
See infra pp. 101, 148. 
45. 
Cy. 44.47. 
, 
46. 
Cv. 42. Gt. 
47. 
Monier Williams, Sanskrit Dictionary, 1872, p. 722. 
48, 
Pali-English Dictionary, PTS. 
' 
: 
: 
: ‘ 
oe 
f 
; 
| 
: 
t 
| 
t 
E 
| 
t 
4 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY. 
OL 
; Tn the Pali chronicles, too, the term bhoga has been used in a wide 
variety of meanings. 
The first and the third kings who bore the name 
Mogga lana gave bhoga when they gave their sisters and daughters i 
marriage.” 
Here it could mean either ‘‘wealth’’ or “revenues,” a 
Geiger has chosen the second meaning. 
Dhatusena restored to his pe 
ther Kumarasena his pubbabhoga which consisted of two hundred fields 
and half the income from Kiéilavapi5 
In this context the term most 
probably meant proprietary right rather than royal dues. 
But the term 
bhoga has been used in the chronicle to denote some type of royal dues 
too. 
In one particular strophe the term occurs in both the senses of 
“tax” and of ‘“‘property.’’?, While describing the meritorious works of 
Mahin alv, the chronicler mentions a decree of this king appealing to 
future kings not to charge bhoga from satghabhoga®' 
These exam les 
reveal, as Perera has pointed out, that bhoga was a general term whieh 
had a variety of meanings: it has to be interpreted in accordance with 
the context in which it occurs.5? 
It may be added that even in inetanees 
where the king makes grants of bhoga, the word is liable to any one of 
these interpretations and does not necessarily connote the transfer of 
“revenues” or “revenue-yielding villages.’’ 
The term bhogagdéma occurs in the Sahassa-vatthu-pakarana.> 
In 
the Calavamsa it occurs for the first time in the account of the reign of 
Kassapa { (473-491) and is found in numerous instances up to the reign 
of Parakramabahu UW. (1236-1270).54 
These instances reveal that the 
practice of granting bhogagdmas was widely prevalent in different. 
parts” 
of the island throughout the period under consideration, 
le 
It is also 
. hoteworthy 
that in all these instances the grants of bhogagdmas concern 
the maintenance of people, whether they be monks or laymen. 
Though 
villages are granted for such purposes as meeting the cost of daily rial 
at shrines and of festivals, the term bhogagdma is never used in such a 
context, 
The validity of this observation is confirmed by description 
of some of the grants found in the Célavamsa, 
Sena Il granted i : 
giimas to the Lohapasada which he had renovated, and he decreed cre 
thirty monks should live there.55 
Some grants are more specific. Udayal 
350. 
Cv, 
38, 53, 
raja so” ndgate bhogam rajano sanghabhogat 
na ganhdtiti pasdne likhapetva nidhapayi. ¢; 
. 34. 28. 
52. 
See CJHSS, Vol. WI, No. 1, p. 18. 
53. 
Shsvp., p. 158, 
Cv, 30, 103 44, 51, 97-101; 
ad: 
: 
; 
ape ae 
1, 97-101; 46, 12-4; 49, 215 51, 74, 795 61, 54-53 84.3-4,

--- PAGE 41 [DIRECT] ---

62 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
renovated the Giribhanda monastery and granted bhogagiémas to the 
monks tiving there.5* 
Kassapa V restored the Mariccavatti monastery 
and granted bhogagamas to the five hundred monks whom he had settled 
there.5? 
Similarly, it was to the monks of the same monastery that 
Mahinda IV assigned bhogagamas.** 
According to a statement made in 
the Calayamsa in connection with the reign of Kassapa IV it appears that 
bhogagamas were distinct from the villages of the employees of the monas- 
tery (Gramikagdmas); thus this king is said to have endowed the monas- 
teries he built with both bhogagamas and Gramikagamas. 
It is probable 
that bhogagémas were assigned to provide the monks with their priestly 
requisites. 
Such an interpretation would gain strength from a strophe 
in the Calavamsa according to which Aggabodhi IV, on hearing that the 
monks of the two nikayas were in need of “requisites,”’ granted them 
bhogagamas.° 
It is probably through consideration of these facts that 
Geigor rendered the term into English as “maintenance village.”’ 
In certain instances the grants of “maintenance villages’’ probably 
involved the transfer of rights other than royal dues. In one case Kassapa I 
is said to have purchased the “maintenance villages’ he granted to the 
Jssarasamana monastery.*' It seems unlikely that by the fifth century taxes 
from all the villages in this area had been granted away so that the king 
had to buy some back to make a regrant. Further, if it was only the royal 
dues which were being transferred, the location of the villages would have 
been of no great. importance, and in that case the necessity to buy the 
villages would not have arisen. 
But this action of the king would. be 
more understandable if he intended to transfer the proprietary rights over 
the villages. If this were the case, all the landholdings in the village were 
being donated to the monastery as an estate. 
Further evidence is available in an inscription from Rambava in the 
K&idé Korale, which dates from the reign of Mahinda IV and refers to a 
grant of certain tracts of land to be enjoyed by a person called Kalifigurad 
Pirivat Hémbuvan and by his descendants. 
Among the lands trans- 
ferred were fields and unirrigated high land from the sambhogagamu 
Vangurupiti, excluding what had been previously dedicated to the 
sangha. Lt is clearly a transfer of tenurial rights. 
The grant implies 
56. 
bhogagdme ca dapest bhikkhinam tam nivdsinam. Cy. 49, 29. 
57. 
Cv. 52.46, 
58. 
Cv, 54, 40. 
59, 
Cv. 52. 26, 
60. 
Cv. 46. 15. 
6). 
issarasamandrdmam karetva pubbavatthuto 
adhikam bhogagame ca kinitva tassa dapayi. Cy, 39, 10. 
62. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 65-70. 
pit 
ae 
SO Serena 
ete 
‘ 
\ 
i 
f 
i 
! 
4 
t 
t 
, 
i 
& 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
63 
eee oe ee right over the village except in the 
s 
nh had 
already 
been 
given to th 
ae 
i 
i 
termed sambhogagamu. 
The Pali 
S iivelent a ae eo : 
does not occur in the chronicles, and it is very tempting to bas 
with bhogagiima and to cite it as further evidence 
i 
Ce 
interpretation given above. 
preteens 
There is, however, one 
passage 
int 
i 
i 
i 
in refutation of this Teeotetatibne ee 
o ae 
made a donation of bhogagaémas to the three Gena 
atach re 7 
Mabiyangana and Kiitatissa. 
But in the very next strophe he 
‘is tie 
have granted sagdmake to the monastery of Mandalagiri.® 
The p % 
sais sometimes used in the sense of Pali saha, “with,” but it 
is 
not a 
able in this particular context. 
It can also be an abridged pie on 
saka and Skt, sya, and instances of its use in this sense can be asia 
from the Caélavamsa itself.°+ 
Hence the term sagdémake is 
pr ‘ Sate 
equivalent of Pali ‘sakagamake. 
Geiger translated it as ‘til is 
a i a 
ing to himself.’ On the basis of this interpretation one oulie : that 
the term sagdmake was used to describe the grant to the Mavala i 
monastery to distinguish it from the grants of the former grow 3 hich 
did not fall into this category. 
This would imply that de hee 
Res i. least in this case, was more probably a ae 
of 
revenue 
the 
i 
i 
i 
i 
aC 
and 
that the interpretation given above 
is inappropri- 
* Bhuttagama, a term similar in form and derivation to bhogaga 
occurs in the Sahassa-vatthu-pakarana. In one instatice a villa, seal 
ted by the king as bhuttagdma to a lady,® but in another eee - lis 
gtants the whole diyision of Rohana as bhuttagama, 
Obviouy, nis 
peek a grant of proprietary rights, and the use of this term in ah Pi 
sli could cast doubts on the interpretation of bhogagdima given 
In considering these objections it may 
be 
point 
sagamake need not necessarily have te 
Paine ee 
bhogagama, for it could have been used, as is common in poetry Mae f 
see ici al the second objection, it is not clear whether Waid 
5 
cal in meaning with bhogagdéma. 
In fact, it is 
pr 
as were different in meaning since both these terms ie Habeas 
‘ahassa-vatthu-pakanana, Yet, since it is safer to draw a conclusion 
63. 
Cv. 51. 74-5, 
64. 
See eg. Cv. 39. 58. 
65, 
Shsvp, p. 64, 
66. Ibid. p, 69.

--- PAGE 42 [DIRECT] ---

64 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
hich makes allowance for these objections, the interpretation es ae 
whi ay be modified: Atleast some of the grants of EE 
aria agama, involved the transfer of the proprietary rights of 
the ve 
Pater in these villages, and sonietimes the monastery a ah 
i 
A clear instance of a 
ights over these monastic estates. 
ar 
¢ 
pelt ‘both these rights is found in the Mihintale Tablets eee: 
aac Cetiyagiri monastery separately assigned ages eh a 
‘ote from the two villages Gut& and Karandé to the offte: 
a 
int 
oF 
orkmen in its employ. 
Sree 
; 
. gee evident from certain other inscriptions of the ninth =i ls 
turies that there were types of grants which entitled the monas os o 
cee ‘of the ‘produce without involving it in the aah yeoectls oe 
Hi 
ale 
inscription, which 
dates 
fro. 
_ 
The Gonnilya Devale inscription, 
ne 
Peet or of Dappula IV, records the grant of a tract of eaten 
MahamnietlBleley to Agbo Mugayin owaacte ee paul 
. 
ied the proviso that a share 
(64 
na 
tenure. 
The grant carrie 
; 
Aliana 
air 
iri of fi 
to be paid at each 
ha 
¢ 
 naddy for each kiri of field was 
eerie 
! 
Sauna of the Mahavihira.’ 
Inan inscription eae 
dated the seventh regnal year of a king identified as means main 
Me mahaya Kitambavé was granted the village ow - enerpe 
i 
: 
dition that 
i 
munu tenure on con 
of Tanabim to be held on pamuy 
is 
Mae a 
i monastery. 
“tithe? 
(badu)” to- the Abhayagit 
a 
eee ae of the record, it is not possible to al 
ir t of this payment. In. the Ramb4va inscription of the 
firs set 
chs of Mahinda IV which presents a list of aad ae ad 
fail 
fi 
he donee was to supply ol 
in 
d Pirivat Hambuvan, t 
: 
i. 
Pree year, at the rate of one /aha a week, for the Stes 
nae a 
the abrine of the Bo Tree at the Mahavihara. 
ee 
fa ced the immunities usually associated with direct gran 
gran 
tk 
Jand to monasteries. 
a 
67, 
EZ, Vol.1, pp. 94-6, il. A37-8, B33-6, B 38-40. 
68, 
See EZ, Vol. 3, p. 187. ask 
. 
re, See iv, ve 
. 
° 
. 
a sah 
1 See 
ana meant of grain amount he ate ‘ 
trans Saeeiee Aaa a aes 
tne 
equival 
ali 
(ndli). 
The ndli is app 
; 
past 
heey equivalent 
ec amounts to about two pounds in weight. 
“measure. 
M, 
EZ, Vol. SV, pp. 186-91. 
72, 
Baduis used in the sense o' 
pei, p. 186, 1. C8. 
. 14-9, 
; 
_ 
a ee a a as 65-70, 
For an explanation of (aha, see n. 70. 
, 
Vol. 
Ll, 
pp. 
{ royal dues in the Radulla inscription, 
EZ, Vol. V+ 
iene 
aE 
eR 
PERE 
EI 
eI 
EE 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
65 
The grants recorded in these inscriptions obviously belong to a new 
type according to which the donee evidently enjoyeda permanent tenurial 
right over the land. 
In the first two cases pamunu.tenure was actually 
transferred while in the third it was specified that the land was to be 
enjoyed in hereditary succession by the descendants of the donee. 
The 
donee also enjoyed exemption from the usual royal dues. 
The monas- 
tery was not the owner of the land, but it enjoyed certain specified rights, 
which in a sense restricted the rights of ownership enjoyed by the donee, 
A portion of the incomes termed “share” in the first inscription, had to be 
turned over to the monastery, but it does not seem to have amounted to a 
substantial part of the yield.” 
‘ 
The third inscription carries another condition: ‘Should there arise a 
dispute concerning this (grant), the apifisarana monks of the Mahavihara 
shall settle it."'"° 
This seems to suggest that the monastery wielded a 
certain amount of influence and authority over the administration of these 
grants, but the extent of this influence and authority would have varied 
according to the circumstances. 
The lands mentioned in the Gonnfya 
inscription were situated in the Kurundgala District, and such a remote 
situation would naturally ensure freedom from excessive intervention by 
monastic authority for the donee. 
The donee in the N&gama inscription 
bore the title mahaya, while his counterpart in the Ramblva slab inscript- 
ion. was termed Kaliiigurad (Kalingaraja). 
Both were important mem- 
bers of the nobility. 
The power and the position of these donees would - 
have restricted the authority that the monastery could wield over the 
management of these lands, but these grants, reminiscent of similar en- 
dowments made to monasteries in Java, ensured for the monastery. a 
source of income without the attendant responsibilities of landowner- 
ship. 
Certain inscriptions of the ninth and tenth centuries contain grants 
of exemption from royal dues on land held by monasteries. 
Most pro- 
bably these grants of immunity merely amounted to the transfer of revenue 
to the monasteries. 
In this connection a statement which occurs among 
the regulations for the guidance of monks and officials in the adminis- 
tration of the monastery is of particular interest: ‘Taxes in excess of, or 
less than (what is due according to) former practices are not 
to be 
care Seer: SAP 
75. The Saddharmalatkdra (ed. Bentota Saddhatissa, 1934, p, 10) states that a good 
field was exp 
etd 
ected to yield a ydla or 20 anunu for each pdla sown, 
At this rate a 
Kiri or field would yield a harvest of 320 amiunu of paddy. 
f£ven if the yield of the 
field is placed at half this rate, the share of the monastery was not substantial, 
16. 
smeyat van viyavulak dita mahavehera apilisarana’ satigun sdhd deunu kot. 
EZ, 
ie lt bp. 68, ff, 29-30, 
For an explanation of apilisarana safigun, see infra pp.

--- PAGE 43 [DIRECT] ---

66 
2 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
levied.” 
It clearly reveals that the monasteries were not only entitled 
to the royal dues but also that their officials actively. participated in their 
collection. Apart from these taxes, some of the monasteries derived an 
income from the administration of justice in the villages which came 
under their control,” 
5 oe Soe 
: 
An important question regarding the nature of the property rights 
that the monasteries enjoyed would be whether these grants to monasteries 
were revocable. 
A passage in the Samantapadsadika seems to suggest 
that a grant made by a royal personage was yalid only till the end of his 
lineage: 
: 
- 
When the continuity of the lineage (of the donor) is severed, if 
whosoever becomes the lord of the province (janapada) does not 
hinder the enjoyment (of the grant) but regrants it, like the queen 
of Alandandgaraja in the case ‘of the reservoir enjoyed by the 
monks of the Cittalapabbata monastery, it is in order.” 
This passage points to the prevalence of the practice of making regrants 
and suggests by implication ‘the possibility of the withdrawal of a grant 
by a new ruler. 
A passage in the Cilavamsa suggests the same possibility when the 
chronicler, while describing the reign of Udaya I (797-801), states that 
this particular king honored the decrees and edicts of previous kings and 
maintained and safeguarded the donations made by his father.®" The 
possibility of withdrawal of grants gains further strength from a passage 
in the. Anuradhapura slab inscription.of Kassapa V in which the king 
decrees that his successors should not “confiscate in anger the land 
granted on pamunu tenure with: full reliance in the efficacy of the 
Buddhist order." 
However, 
actual cases 
of withdrawal of grants are rare. 
The 
Colombo Museum pillar inscription of Kassapa IV can be cited as a record 
of one such instance if its present interpretation is accepted, 
The in- 
scription records an endowment made to a timbirige (maternity home). 
Immunities were granted to this property after “having excluded pera 
kusalan."8? 
Paranavitana translated this term as “previous religious 
gifts." Bell interpreted the term kusalan as “a benefaction given and 
ee 
771. pere sivitin vada kina karavuvara nobandnd isd, EZ, Vol. WL, p. 265, I, 39 
78. 
See infra pp. 190-6. 
79, 
Smp. Vol. III, 1968, pp. 679-80, 
80. 
Cv, 49, 21-2. 
81. 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 47, J, 26. 
82, 
EZ, Vol. II, p. 275, H. D12-4, 
83, EZ, Vol. Ml, p. 277. 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
67 
received by the pouring of water.’’®+ More recently W. S. K: 
has attempted to trace the origin of the term of kusala Wed ade 
eae it oa ae of a meritorious benefaction."* He ne 
ur 
ointed out that in modern parlance the ter: 
j 
we giles oe kusalan kala, is used to phn nianictoees nel 
e 
sangha, 
, on this basis, Paranavitana’s interpretati 
i 
a 
Ht, 
j 
ita 
‘pretation 
is ac- 
oneal possibility of withdrawals of religious donations seems rather 
Two more inscriptions. contain information. 
; 
under discussion. Of these, the ie ie 
king, identified as Udaya II (887-898), has not been very ait sate 
and yields a controversial text. . 
It seems to imply that certain ie 
es 
lh 
two villages, Nagala and Naranvita, had been originally ae ae 
Bodhisattva shrine at the Abbhayagiri monastery but were subse 
ity 
withdrawn.®® 
The: other inscription dates from the tenth rentih oe 
records the transfer of what has been interpreted as an allotment : He 
which had belonged to the Ruvanvili stdpa at the Mahdavihir. 
ge 
establishment attached to the Kalani monastery.®7 If the Hoa ana 
the interpretations of these two inscriptions are accepted, they ae 
imply that at least some of the grants made to monasteries er fa 
revocable and that in such instances the property rights of the 
aie 
jes did not amount to absolute ownership. 
maaan 
In actual practice, however, the withdrawal of grants made to 
teries would have been by no means an easy task. 
Further, a fox 
cee 
of a new dynasty, with his eye on the means to consolidate his Coat 
would hardly have deemed it wise to estrange the sympathies Of the 
saigha by withdrawing the land held by them. 
The reaction 
hi ‘ 
greeted the attempts of Mahisena and Dathopatissa IT to reallo i ie 
property claimed by one monastery to another shows how diffu it ri 
task would have been.®® Apart from instances of plunder of ti 
‘ 
h 
accumulated in monasteries by kings at war, no attempt to c vibe : 
the land granted to monasteries 
is evident until the aul te 
es Be 
the Anuridhapura kingdom. 
ia 
m the other hand, it is not certain whe 
granted land 
to monasteries 
had paid 
tead aah oe 
them. 
Doubts are particularly strong regarding grants made iy 
ofticals 
84, CALR, Vol, X, 
Pt. 
85, See EZ, Vol. V, on Yaa” me 
86, EZ, Vol. VI, pp. 12-20. 
87, EZ, Vol. VI, pp. 2-7. 
88, My, 37, 32-3; Cv, 45, 29-30,

--- PAGE 44 [DIRECT] ---

68 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
and lesser employees. 
A fourteenth-century ee 
2 
stery of divel land 
belongin: 
refers to a grant made to a mona: 
obs 
i 
t have been permanent. 
1:39 such a grant could no’ 
ie 
oe whether the meaning of the term divel had changed by the fou 
( 
entury. 
; 
paar Laveee quite probable that most of the grants to the ate 
re intended to be permanent. 
The inscriptions from Ayitigeviiva ra 
Tearhacslllyns dated in the reign of Kassapa V, eats Loa 
ranted to lands belonging to monasteries. 
At the “ a ne - 
nies aretwo disc emblems identified by ee VAR 8s OF canaie 
ions 
moon. 
ese 
‘esentations of the sun and the moon.?? 
ipa expressed in detail in later peel ee ies the ane hie 
’ 
i 
he moon lasted. 
is wou 
das long as the sun and the 
: 
aes least some of the inscriptions dealt with permanent grants of 
de to the saigha. 
; 
_ 
estes if the donations made to monasteries were sea ee 
ossible that their estates were alienated by sale and motes 
e : 
ne 
nie laid down by the kings of the period danas sale an ae aes 
ti 
i 
the prevalance of these practices. 
- 
nastic 
property point to 
; 
f 
ate to ie Mihintale Tablets of eee ak a, 
inner 
mor 
"91 or the “relic shrine’ wa: 
ing 
to the “inner monastery’’”" 
or 
{ 
i 
oe ace to be purchased if offered for sale by a art 
t 
i 
i 
nging 
ti 
i 
s 
that no land or villages 
belong 
me edict also dictates tha : 
ena should in any way be given away on parnunt or ukas oa 
ie old given in payment by those who acquired the land i to 
be oe 
fi : a and given over to the monastery, and those who wer ee 
fi ths transaction were to be banished from the country. 
L. 8. ae 
att r examining the various instances of this term, has observe: 
: 
: ath of land as pamunu “confers to the grantee the most comp se 
ae ership possible within the tenure system.""?? ‘The pea ae 
ie the Mihintale Tablets reveals that this transaction involve! rae 2 
fae in this context, it would have amounted to a sale of Jan 
S 
ea 
oe 4 
term, asboth H.W. Codrington and Perera have shown, fase 
be 
annie » Prohibition of sale and mortgage of land belonging to 
the 
n101 
. 
EZ, Vol pp. 90-110, 
For an explanation of dive, see infra p. 122, 
90. 
EZ, Vol. ii, pp. 34-8, ve 
| 
1 i ei Weebl kavari vatakeud Ee fire janes kami ia 
m kin nag a 
eau meveherhl bad ta it navata gaia yuu isd danuvan des yavani kot. BZ, 
en 
92, 
Ht, 429-30; p. 97, Nt sae oe 
. 
ot ti 
i pe 262-04 8. We Codrington, Ancient Land Tenure and Revenue 
in Ceylon, 1938, pp- 13-4, 
caren 
inencnens 
sei 
erect 
RE 
| 
4 
2 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
69 
satigha on pain of such severe punishments should have helped to con- 
serve monastic wealth. 
But it is not certain whether these regulations 
were in forca throughout the period under consideration nor whether 
they were enforced as severely as they were expressed. 
The Extent of Monastic Property 
The possibility of the withdrawal of grants which had been made to 
monasteries and the possibility of the disposal of property by monasteries 
thomselves through sale and mortgage make it difficult to determine the 
extent of property under the control of the larger monasteries at Anura- 
dhapura. 
Further, the chroniclers are less than precise in theit descrip- 
tions ofdoriations; nor can they be expected to have recorded all the 
grants that were made. 
In all, the chronicles make specific references to grants to the Maha- 
vihira of Samanagima, Kasagima, Panneli, Golapanugima, Tintini- 
gama and at least seven other villages, a tract of land worth a hundred 
thousand (kahapanas?) and thousand fields,°’ and to grants tothe Abha- 
yagiri monastery of the villages Anganasilaka and Diiratissa, more than 
four other villages including a weavers’ village, the reservoir Kolavapi 
and the Rahera canal,°° 
They also mention grants to the Jetavana 
monastery of three hundred fields and the villages Gondigama and 
Vasabhagama’’ and a grant to the Cetiyagiri monastery at Mihintale 
of ten amunu of fields.°® 
Inscriptions provide more reliable evidence on the subject, though on 
the whole the information available in them is meagre. As noted earlier, 
the ‘inner monastery’’ of the Mahavihara had interests in land in the 
vicinity of Gonniiva, a village to the south of the river Daduru,?? 
According to the Mannar Kacceri inscription, the Bahadurusen college 
of the Mahavihéra owned the villages Pepodatuda, Kumbalhala and 
Tumpokun which were located in the Kudakadavuka division of the 
Northern Coast. 
The Sen Senevirad college at the same monastery 
owned Posonavulla (probably the name of a tract of land) in the village 
Sulinnaru, twelve 
Kiri in Mahamaidala, 
and four paya in Gilin- 
duru Gomaidala. 
Another college at the Mahavihara held five 
95, 
Cy. 37, 172-3; 41, 96-7; 42. 17; 45. 28; 53. 10. 
96, 
Cy. 41.31, 96-7; 42.63; 44.68-9; 46, 19-22; 48. 2; 52, 13, 58. 
97. 
Cy. AL, 96-8, 
98. 
Cy. 38, 77. 
99. 
See supra p, 64. 
100. 
£Z, Vol. III, pp. 100-13. 
: 
10l. EZ, Vol. I, pp. 163-71, 172-5. Pa, pada, and paya seem to be synonymous and 
denote a fourth of a Kiri, 
It is not certain that payala meant the same, 
It may be 
Cquated with péla which amounted to a fourth of an amuna and hence a sixteenth of a 
Kiri, 
Bor Kiri, see supra p. 54, n, 3.

--- PAGE 45 [DIRECT] ---

70 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
payala. of land close to Polonnaruva while the village Mahagipiyova 
in the district of Pirivatubima in the. Southern Quarter belonged to the 
Kasub Senevirat college. The Mariccavatti monastery owned an estate 
called Muhunnaru, situated on the southern borders of the river Dadu- 
ru.!3 
The nunnery Tissirama, an affiliate of the Mahavihara, owned 
land at Loholuvila (See fig. 2).104 According to the Mahakalatttiva 
inscription, 
the Nalérama, 
another convent which most probably 
belonged to the Mahavihara nikaya, possessed the village Gitelgamu. ?% 
The so-called Jetavanarama Sanskrit inscription suggests that the 
villages. Lahasika, Urulugonu, Ambilagrima, Hunala, Ulavannasikhan- 
tigrama, Kira, Pallaya and Sunagrama belonged to monasteries attached 
to the Abhayagiri nikéya 
The Moragoda and Nigama inscriptions, 
both dated in the reign of Kassapa LV, reveal that the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery had interests in Jand near Padaviya in the Northeast and at Kola- 
yunu, neat Dambulla in the South.1°7 It is evident from an inscription of 
Kassapa IV that the Mahindasena college of this nikaya possessed a 
tract of land at Hiiginiviti in the division of Digikuliya in the modern 
Puttalam District.1°¢ 
Nagala and Naranvita, two villages near Patidu- 
vasnuvara, were for some time held by the Abhayagiri monastery.’ 
Also two paya of land from Valigamu were assigned to the employees at 
the Kapararama.!! Evidence concerning the property of the Jetavana 
monastery is restricted to a single record. 
This inscription, found at 
Ataviragollva in Kadavat Korale, reveals that the village Velangama 
< 
belonged to the Sirisatigborad college of the Jetavana group. 
Information of a more specific nature is available concerning the ex- 
tent of the temporalities of the Cetiyagiri monastery. 
However, this too 
is by no means complete. 
The Plinth Course inscription copied by Miil- 
Jer seems'to refer to payments due to the monastery from the officials of 
the ‘four districts’ (setar rate 412 
{tis not clear whether the monastery 
possessed any property rights over these areas, and the fragmentary nature 
——— ee 
402, 
EZ, Vol. U1, pp. 38-43; Vol. IV, pp. 59-67. 
103, EZ, Vol. 1V, pp. 180-6. 
104. EZ, Vol. II, pp. 34-8. 
105. EZ, Vol. V, pp. 334-45. 
406, 
EZ. Vol.I, p. 4, Hl. 4, 8-9. 
107, 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 200-7; Vol. WU, pp. 14-9. 
108. 
EZ, Vol. V, pp. 355-65, 
109, 
See supra p. 67. 
110. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 49, HI. 50-1. 
111. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 44-9. 
It is likely that this was an annual payment. 
142, 
kaland of gold. 
AIC, No. 114, 
For an explanation of kaland, see infra p, 72. 
It brought in more than 68 
' 
i 
: 
i i 
i 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
" 
“4 i ee ees ie tein obtaining any more details. 
According 
ihintale 
Tablets'? 
this monastery 
posses: 
i 
andiigama and Gut&gama, land at pated ase mnt Hee 
vil, the Porodeni tank, the vésara''4 land at Manu, and land anine 
upper and lower parts of Lihinipavu. The monastery also held 
o 
pecs gy an 
villages Vadudevigama, Sunuboldevagama and ie 
ma. 
The physician at the monaster 
i 
i 
a 
niya paliyak and the master craftsman podpvehern pos geste 
ing—if Paranavitana’s interpretation of the various terms is sorte 3 
that the Cotiyagiri monastery possessed arable high land at Bondveh sik 
and at Detisi.1!® 
It.is rather unfortunate that the pacHatee 4 ey 
stato the actual extent of the land. In certain other instances it ae os 
specific. Land allotments amounting to eighteen Kiri from Talola: an. 
two kiri from Sapugamiya,three kiri from Maiiguliva, 
two in fra 
Algamiya and a payala from’ Damgamiya occur mone assign: 
vs 
set pie ea employees’ wages and repairs. 
Ware 
e evidence cited above stands in 
striki 
i 
grant of ton amunu recorded in the Ei menaepnon . barnes 
with some idea as to how much land the Cotiyagiri mibnasles ponies . 
Yet one cannot expect to obtain a comprehensive list of property fro 
fare iene these which are primarily administrative ae dation 
mut 
a 
ie resources of the monaster 
sidering the various commitments of the ae meas 
_ monastery maintained more than a hundred and seventy employees. 
Sean sea i oe three pa@ of land were set apart as 
ade cae of Codrington, this eee nace aia c 
scat ortho ks VilngseKcratijaua, Cltgaain: Dusaisageane, 
Sunuboldevigama and Vadudeviigama— 
ig 
ieuaioiolierenn. 
ple fas : 
rea pe handed aaa prone 
s 
. 
. 
‘ 
; 
i 
ee Saat ge as "daily lavas forty vs ea aa 
this, twenty-nine ughares" 118 sts ae or dffelsls dad acne | 
18, BZ, Vol.1, pp. 75-113. 
114; Paranavitana 
hi 
EZ, Vol. IV, pp. cw translated the term as “irrigated land below a tank.” See 
115, EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 1, pp. 130-2. 
- 
M16, Detisé could also mean “thirty-two.” 
: ie See supra p. 54, n. 3. 
=*18. 
vasag. 
For an explanation of this term, see infra pp. 148-53

--- PAGE 46 [DIRECT] ---

72 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
these constituted merely the pay- 
employed in various capacities, and 
ments made to employees. 
land of gold, ten yal (=two hundred amunu) of 
One hundred kal 
paddy and all the offerings received at the main shrines of the monastery 
together with the allotments from Algamiya and Damgamiya, mentioned 
above, were set apart to meet the cost of repairs and maintenance 
of monastic buildings. 
In gold alone the annual expenditure of the 
monastery on these headings amounted to a hundred and forty-five kaland 
and one aka. 
According to the calculations of Codrington a kaland is 
equivalent to about 70 to 72 English grains. 
If this is accepted, the 
expenditure incurred by the monastery would amount to about 10,158.75 
to 10,449 English grains of gold, 
Besides these expenses the monastery 
had to provide board for its resi 
tion of monks,!?° bear the cost of robes and pay special allowances to 
learned monks.!" 
This abstract of the finances of the Cetiyagiri monastery points to 
its ownership of extensive resources presumably ‘based mainly. on landed. 
a detailed information is available 
property. 
Ttis unfortunate that no suc 
on the resources and commitments of the three major monasteries of 
Anuradhapura, but the fact that the Cetiyagiri monastery was an adjunct 
of the Abhayagici nikaya reflects the extensive nature of the resources of 
this nikdya. 
Agricultural Production in Monastic Estates 
Our sources do not provide detailed information on agricultural 
production in monastic estates, but it is clear that certain monasteries 
possessed extensive tracts of land where coconut and areca were 
grown. 12? Since the produce of such large estates would have certainly 
exceeded the consumption needs of the monastery, it is very likely that 
a good part of such produce was intended for sale.!73 Other crops such 
as sesame (Sesamum indicum), green gram. (Phaseolus aureus) and uidu 
(Phaseolus mungo) were raised on unirrigated land,!*4 but rice was the 
major crop grown on irrigable land belonging to the monasteries. 
Ina 
tenth-century inscription, a king, identified as Mahinda LV, stipulated 
119, 
Codrington, Ceylon Coins and Currency, 1924, p. 9, 
120, 
See infra pp. 144-6, 
: 
421. 
See infra pp. 146, 148. 
122. 
See for instance Cv. 42. 15-6 and EZ, Vol. LI, pp- 202-18. 
123. 
It is likely that cocomit oil and areca 
coconut estate found in the Samantt 
The discussion of the problems of managing a 
' 
duce of the estate. 
pasddika reflects an awareness of the commercial value of the pro 
See Smp. Vol. VI, 1947, p. 1238. 
124, BZ, Vol.1, p. 33, £27; Vol. Ill, p. 477, 1.6. 
dent staff and the considerable popula- 
. 
ieee 
Fe 
RT 
HET 
R 
NET 
TE TO 
nuts were important iters in trade. 
one 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
3 
that rice alone and not 
grains 
li 
ea eee elena pretoel rina See 
neneen ae 
Evi ently it was the shortage of water which someti 
i 
peasants raise other crops on land suitable for rice, ae ae es 
f rice and sought to ensure irrigation facilities. 
A tenth. ties 
pillar pralbonte which is now at the Colombo Museum a aes 
ae : 
tract of land and also provides for the Ser te f 
He 
pe ie ese supply to the land from a nearby stream,!26 
Sian 
ney a : 
occasion to refer to many donations of iGitien 
7 
canals made to various monasteries. 
In some inst 
nae 
monastery had rights over irrigation works in the vicinit 
"The Ca ad 
a ee: which had extensive properties in land. a cee 
@ d iyabedum (share or income from water) from the Ka uy i bee : 
sar ree ene one may presume that water for its fields art it 
a) : 
a ae ay instances fields belonging to Gong 
aie 
on 
a water dues. 
The Iripinniyfiva and Ramb§va inseripti 
. 
ig respectively from the reigns of Udaya IT and Kassapa 
I aa 
as the Buddhannehila inscription cited earlier record th Hane ti 7 
ae monastic fields from the payment of water dues. aa tas i 
3 aa ae ae temples in India,'”° certain Buddhist monasteries 
ae oe He privileged access to irrigational facilities. 
When 
ae e fhe officials and the employees of the Isuramenu 
arta ny the rights to water from the Tissa reservoir was 
denotes ee of a king, identified as Mahinda IV, he decided in 
Seine Salat “ 'y and set up an edict for the future guidance of his 
ig see ae 
tind to the monastery were to be given precedence 
Se dient “ 2 ba from the reservoir. 
Water from this reser- 
eons ie ed to the monastic fields without interruption until 
one 
et up in front of the sluice-gate at a depth of four 
cubi 
above the water level. 
Ifthe crop should be destroyed ae 
the failure of royal official is to suppl 
ei teint ae the damage was to be as- 
125, 
mevehera avati bi 
32 
vel 
ad ket 
vatu(t) 
dé 
dkin 
di, 
misd muiig dfi novapurann isd, oo Gok " 
aang es aye rae aa vane) 
He ae Vol. 1V, pp. 246-52. 
+ 
Probably the Kanadaré, 
i 
oe 
@ reservoir, 
EZ, Vol.I,p. 
9 
128. See BZ, Vol. I, pp. 163-71, 17233, pom 
as a or example SUH, Vol. IV, Pt. 1, No. 18 
_ 
190. 
Vessagiri inscriptions, 
Slab A 
; 
inseripti 
r 
i 
s, 
Slab 
A, EZ, Vol. 1, 
i 
Phrase BN eat ren toma ratte that he could "nl sebesut detest sof is 
21, 
39°30, Evidently 
this is one of 
Wicktes ndsuvanatat 
‘ 
tab deme 
fol 
dole 
s 
: 
ta(ya) sama(ndra)dolen taba 
in chisa phe 
ly 
one of Wickremasinghe’s initial and 
less 
ber 
Tallon clea 
ea He deciphered the passage correct] 
roe inher, 
: 
: 
ly but faltered in 
th 
Satnaing ravislen 4 jn is done correctly, the phrase would 
‘isuva 
nat alya) 
sane 
yl 
i aden ons coment 
uld 
read ndsuva nat alya) 
ly from. Samay, 
“to settle’) by the Te ie 
eopal outa ponds Boog eanane,

--- PAGE 47 [DIRECT] ---

THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
A good portion of the land belonging to the monastery was assigned 
to its employees in remuneration, for their services. 
A statement in the 
Mihintale Tablets helps to determine how the rest was managed. Tt stipu- 
Jates that arrangements regarding the estates of the monastery should 
be made only on the basis of the kard tenure and directs that they should 
not be given away on. pafta.3t Wickremasinghe compared kara with Skt. 
Kériké and held it to be a payment on a fixed rate like the Sgithe. 7152 
Codrington equated it with Tamil karaiyidu, a term which probably con- 
. noted “temporary allotments.”}3 
Paranavitana believed that it was 
synonymous with Skt. karya and suggested that it referred to a service~ 
tenure system.1°+ 
Perera preferred the fast interpretation commenting 
that it would have been a system similar to divel,35 
but with the 
difference that in addition to service the tenant would have had: to 
pay a tithe as well 136 
‘More recently, in a fresh interpretation of the term, Paranavitana 
has compared the term with kara, derived from kr which has been used.in 
both Sanskrit and Sinhalese in the sense of “dues, tax’? or “revenue.” 
“Tp the meaning of ‘liable to yevenue’,’’ lic maintains, “we should have 
the gerundive from this root, kirya, from which the mediaeval Sinhalese 
form kari, kitra, kira can regularly develop in the analogy of Sinh. wird 
from Skt. virya.” 
Thus taking the term as connoting a tax, he has 
translated .kdrdé widdruman and kérd-pikaruman “in the Kondavatta- 
van. inscription as “inspectors of taxable land” and “assessors of taxable 
land."197 
The variety of derivations suggested ‘for the term is in itself a clear 
indication of the difficulty of arriving at a definition through etymological 
considerations. 
It may be noted that Paranavitana tries to tracé the: 
derivation of the term to kirya, a word which is not attested. There- 
fore it would seem more advisable to interpret this word on the basis. 
of the contexts in- which it occurs. 
. 
Kart has been equated with kara, but in no example can karé be de- 
finitely identified as @ tax. If Kiir were the gerundive of kara, it wo- 
uld be difficult to explain why kardé was preferred in some inscriptions, 
ee 
131. 
me veheré bad’ iuvak gamhi kardyeht banda salasat mut pafta nodiyd yutu. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 92, HE. A43-4, 
For paita, see infra pp. 107-9. 
132. EZ, Vol.1, p. 103, n. 42, 
133, 
Codrington, Ancient Land Tenure... .pp. 14-6, 
134, 
EZ, Vol. TH, p. 191 n. 3 
135, 
L.S. Perera, Justitutions, . .p. 1274, 
36. For a discussion on the term divel, see infra p. 122; see also EZ, Vol- 
1 
UI, p. 191, n. 9 
137, EZ, Vol. ¥; pp. 428-9, 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
rhe 
while kara in the form of karavuvara was used in the sense of tax in oth 
contemporary inscriptions and literary. works.'3*.. 
Moreover, 
if ad 
denoted a tax, one would expect. it to occur in immunity grants which list 
the various royal dues from which the respective properties had b 8 
exempted, 
But kdrd is never found in any of the-immunity grants aa 
On the other hand, when taken in context, the term points to 
altogether different meaning. 
According 
to the Mihintale Tablets, tho ti 
the kérd tenure was recommended as the means of organizing the mate 
vation of monastic estates, the monastic officials were prohibited fi - 
taking land belonging to.the “inner monastery’ on kérd.499 
The pee 
inscription lays down that kdrd fields held by haskaru were not to be tise 
by the monastery except in case of failure of their hereditary line. 140 
The word has occurs in the sense of “crop’’ or “yield” in the Dham, siya 
Atuvs Gafapadaya,'™ a contemporary literary work, and Sorata ded 
interpreted the term Aaskaru, probably on the strength of this referenc: : 
as 
“‘cultivator.’’'42, 
Hence it. would appear that kdrd was primaril i 
term used to denote the tenurial system according to which the teed i 
longing to the monastery was given to tenants for cultivation, 
Thess 
tenants seem to have held a hereditary right to cultivate their res ecti 
plots. 
In a secondary sense, the term would have come to nek ie 
share due to the landowner from the tenant cultivators. 
In anoth 
passage of the Mihintale Tablets, it is stated that the kérd collected thon 
the monsatic estates was to be taken to the monastery. ‘4° 
Further, if 
the Badulla inscription collectors of dues are instructed to turn over to ‘he 
monasteries the kdrd from religious benefactions.'44 
It is evider ‘ 
from the preceding discussion that the land of the monastery was 
given : 
tenant cultivators on what was perhaps a “‘share cropping"’ et a ig 
possible that Paranavitana and Perera are correct in surmising that the 
tenants, in addition to ¢: 
‘ 
‘is well: 
he share they paid, had to serve at the monastery 
138. The Dhampiyd Atuvé Gdtapadaya (p. 62) equates karavuvar 
i 
ali 
bali, 
or peal AE Leck ore 
gp 
a passage in which a king is reminded that it is 
und See rental on 
ete 
brat 
tee 
3 
ut 
iti 
just to charge karayuyara from 
people 
Iaetetion peat Nien ie 
aplgetion of maintaining law and order For 
139. EZ, Vol. 1, p, 93, Il. A 45-6 
140. EZ, Vol. L, p. 93, t, A48-9, 
141. DAG, p. 33. 
142, SsW, p. 1113, 
143. 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 93, if, A37-8. 
144, EZ, Vol. V, p. 192.

--- PAGE 48 [DIRECT] ---

76 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
B. Stein, who has made a study of the inscriptions at the Venkates- 
vara shrine of the Tirupati temple in South India,#45 has shown that the 
lands of this shrine were given out to tenants for cultivation and that 
the share of the temple from the produce of the land varied between fifty~ 
one and seventy-one per cent. ‘No such detailed information is available 
‘on the monasteries of Sti Lanka. The Mihintale Tablets, which specify 
that one third of the produce of the land should be given to the monas- 
tery,“ remind one of the statement of I-tsing that a monastery which 
he visited in Eastern India gave out its land for cultivation in, return for 
one third of the produce.'47_ 
But itis not certain whether the Mihintale 
“Tablets are referring specifically to the dues the monastery received from . 
its tenants. 
_ 
In cases where the proprietary rights over villages and large extents 
of land, particularly fields, were granted to monasteries, little change 
concerning tenure could have been made, since the land would already 
have been held by tenant cultivators with a hereditary right to till the 
Jand, 
But the cultivation and maintenance of smaller grants of fields and 
of plantations of coconut or areca could have been undertaken directly 
by the monastery. 
The -corvée labor to which the monastery was 
entitled!#® could be profitably utilized in such enterprises. 
An inscription from Buddhannehiila, which records a grant of land, 
carries the provision me raj-hi yedunavun me kumburat pet sama kot diya 
pana kot. This has been translated by Paranavitana as follows: 
“Em- 
ployees in this district shall level the beds (of fields) and lead the water to 
these (aforesaid) fields." 
If this rendering is accepted, it would mean. 
that at times the labor due to the state was used to help the monasteries 
-to cultivate their land. 
Monastic records refer to payments made for 
hired labor.1%° 
The use of hired labor to work on fields was not un- 
known in ancient Sri Lanka. 
The Sahassa-vatthu-pakaraga contains @ 
story about a man who went in search of work and was hired to harvest a 
field owned by the governor of a district (ratthika).'5! 
Tt is possible that 
‘the monastery used labor from all these sources to cultivate a part of its 
land. 
fare 
145, 
B. Stein, “The Economic Function of a Mediaeval South Indian Temple,” 
Journal of Asian ‘Studies, Vol. XIX, 1959-60, pp. 163-77. 
146, EZ, Vol. I, p. 93, 
A38- 
447, 
I-tsing, A Record of the Buddhist Religion, p. 62. 
448. 
See infra pp. 121-2. 
149, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 197, 1L,B31-C:2. 
See also p. 199, 
450, 
See infra p, 123. 
451, 
Shsvp. p. 54 
eon 
tet eR 
Cn 
i 
| 
| 
| 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
vie 
The 
isti 
se ne deat ea Capa would have, from the earliest times, 
a 
taught 
animals—buffaloes for work i 
‘ 
a 
n fields 
es an carts and caravans, The Abhayagiri inscription of soa 
eee e warning that the officials who either gave out or took for them- 
ie jas! bas of the karavalhala of the monastery would be dismissed 
Se be 
The Samantapésadikaé prescribes the proper piockdurs 
ia pting grants of oxen, but it is only in the period of Cola rut 
‘ i bei of cattle is found for the first time in Sri Lanka neearde 
‘ oT rs Siren ae 
the Velgam monastery, Atittappéraraiyan, a 
amil, 
-four cows for the maintenance of 
bios 
‘ 
: 
‘ 
h 
perpetual lamps 
ie Dy abe & 
The Galpata monastery also lists 
cattle taal 
arious 
types of property granted to 
; 
th 
j 
and refers to cowherds (efdera) among its employees. 
'54 i a 
Changing Attitudes towards Wealth 
cise ea that the monastery, assisted by its rules and regula~ 
ae sD 
i ing the sale and mortgage of its property, became the locu 
ae ee of wealth, particularly fand, in the medieval ae 
ne : 3 — This brought about a notable chango in the atti- 
ee 
angha towards wealth. According to the Samantapasadika, 
ee fans An from accepting property, but this was per. 
roperty in question was donated for 
i 
: 
if 
ty 
‘or the specific 
pur 
. on in 
Li oh 
; ‘allowable articles’ 
455 or of vaca anal 
pair, 
This was a convenient 
t 
s 
means of overcoming 
panes es to accommodate current practices, 
Buddhaghoae Wax 
pe i a = aise ee was of practical importance to the sangha 
retation 
of 
the rules could not ha 
i 
{ 
; 
¢ 
, 
ve been m 
i 
See Pee which had been current for about five es 
en ‘ac ; a 
also marks the development of a more positive attitud > 
wealth 
based on the idea that it was permissible for the pa 
gha to possess wealth if it ser 
a 
Si 
xP 
i 
, 
i 
died 
da purpose in accordance with the 
vidoe: , 
EZ, Vol. J, pp. 48-9, Ih, 45-6 
; 
BZ, 
Vol. 
1, 
9, 
Ht, 
The 
t 
e 
q 
inge a ae ane phe dias leftara sectors rere dered 
ancient Sinhalese literature and modern 
al Rik tested oi cater ae in 
ground.” 
Hence karval would mean a mga pit ait Mines 
ae 
Tee 
is reminiscent of the three hundred salterr ranted 
(Othe 
Whee Hkh Tl 
aes 
teaypting fo suppore, is ibis pase that fe 
an theseeiee ot d 
‘with he 
Sed fer eno toe ored 
or kept for sale, and that the passage referred Neen 
153. EZ, Vol. VI, p. 66. 
| 
te ae Vol. LV, p. 207, H, 19, 23, 
. 
See supra p. 58, n, 33.. 
156. Smp,, Vol, ILL, 1930, pp. 678-9.

--- PAGE 49 [DIRECT] ---

B 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
Again the practice transcended the rule. Donations of cash and pre- 
cious substances were not an unusual source of income to the monas- 
teries in the latter part of the period under consideration. 
Mahinda IV, 
Vijayabahu I and Nissanka Malla presented the satgha with quantities 
of precious substances equal to, their own weight.15? 
It is possible to 
surmise that the extensive resources in land possessed by monasteries 
like the Cetiyagiri brought in agricultural produce exceeding the require- 
ments of internal consumption. 
Similarly, as pointed out earlier, a 
good part of the coconut and areca which were produced on Jarge 
tracts of monastic land were meant for sale. 
Although there is abundant evidence pointing to the active involve- 
ment of monasteries as well as individual monks in commercial enterprise 
and usury in both Central Asia and China, evidence on this subject is 
very rare in Sri Lanka, 
A Sanskrit record from the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery prohibits monks who indulged in agriculture and commerce from 
living there.!8 
Similarly, the Mihintale Tablets: stipulate that those 
monks who took part in buying and selling forfeited their right to live at 
the monastery.'° 
This suggests that individual monks may have taken 
part in commercial activities though specific instances of such partici- 
pation are not found on record. 
Even if individual monks were discouraged from indulging in such 
profane activities, it does not seem likely that monasteries were compl- 
etely averse to commerce of usury. An inscription from Anuradhapura, 
datable to the reign of Dappula IV (A.D. 924-935), records a deposit 
of two hundred kaland of gold at a monastery with specific instructions 
as to how the income from this endowment was to be utilized. 
Tt is 
clear from this record that the donor expected a return of fifteen per cent 
per annum. 
The monastery, therefore, would have had to lend or 
invest the money on 
its own initiative in a manner which would 
enable the fulfilment of the conditions laid down by the donor. 
According to the Calavamsa, Mahinda JV built a tambitla-mandapa 
and assigned the income from it for the purchase of medicinal require- 
ments of the monks of the Theravamsa.'% 
The Badulla inscription 
157. 
Cy, 54, 27; EL, Vol. XVII, p. 336, H, 14-2; EZ, Vol, U1, p. 172, ff. 11-4. 
158, EZ, Vol. ¥, p. 5, H 16-7. 
‘ 
159, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 93, Ht A423. 
‘ 
160. 
EZ, Vol.1, pp. 23-9. 
Twenty kaland of gold were set apart so that the interest 
rj 
one aka and clarifie 
middle of each mon! 
(i, 20-2). 
From this it is clear that the donor expected a return of 24 akas=3 kajan 
on an outlay of 20 kaland (8 akas=1 kaland), 
Codrington, Ceylon Coins. .D- i. 
This would amount to a return of fifteen per cent. 
161. 
Cv. 54,46, 
f 
t 
I 
| 
aa 
t 
| 
th dk 
1 
| 
; 
t 
t 
i 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
19 
piste aaa eae madapa (Pali mandapa) for the sale of are 
: 
etel, and 
officials were to 
pre 
: 
dities outside these appointed piaber te peo escialaer oh oe 
stall where betel (¢aibitia) was sold that was donated by Mak dat 
This instance suggests the possibility that the monasteries of this ie 
were involved in commercial activities. 
ee 
A tenth-century inscription from Badulla shows that monasteri 
also received another type of income from trade-stalls. 
Thi ; Gr 
stipulates that a trader who kept his shop open ona poya da 
: Uo 
to a payment of a padda of oil for the maintenance of lamps “4 hens 
yaigana monastery. 
If he failed to do so, a fine, ‘as is ites ae 
was to be charged and used for the same purpose,!@ 
This ci id 
imme 
that it was usual to close all shops on poya days and that ices. ete 
not do so had to make a special payment to the monastery. 
On the 
- ee 
hand, it is also possible that it amounted to a mere quit-rent aid a ie a 
traders who opened stalls on monastic grounds on poya diy TH 
: nae 
possible to determine the exact nature of this source of ficome 
uk 
_The acquisitive tendencies that monasteries developed duri 
thi 
period are reflected in an inscription of Kassapa V at the fre ii 
monastery which decrees that the funds left over to the imaniuntery citer 
payment of allowances to monks and employees and the ex atts ae 
repairs and decoration should be used to ‘‘acquire land ves Thee ee 
an instance of a monastery investing money in land recorded i ine 
pea ~ ee dating from about the fourth or tie Ath 
ee 
. 
According to 
this record a monaster 
{ 
eighty Kahipanas to buy land at twenty eee 
ae ae 
Galpiita-vihara inscription, dated by Paranavitana to the id < f Para te 
ramabahu I, records that a tract of land was bought with hie oid pie 
pena aegis with areca. 
When a monastery ie ee 
of 
funds at 
the en 
of the year it implies that it had 
suffici 
xces for its maintenance. The use of these funds 
filker bai 
lation of property was, in @ sense, a transgression a RTH i 
Buddhaghosa and re; 
igni 
i 
ai 
presents a significant change in attitudes towards 
162. EZ, Vol. V, p. 187, I, C27-32. 
oe EZ, Vol. V, p. 183, Hf, B26-36, 
+ 
piriven laddan tamanat 
pirikapa 
vati 
itiri_tuvale 
dayi 
ae navam puja situvam kot v edn can sina Ina Be, 
volte isan wal 
165. BZ, Vol. V, pp. 1113. 
NS 
ites 
. £Z, Vol. LY, p. 206, Hl. 8-9. Yabadol 
i 
Jot this inscription belongs to a much Benge 
eee By ao oeaar 
e of the Galpata Vihara Rock Inscription,’ JRAS, 1971 ae laa

--- PAGE 50 [DIRECT] ---

80 
yHE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
In this connection a verse which occurs in the Cilavamsa with re~ 
ference to the queen of Udaya I seems relevant: 
gdm ye'sum pura, kita vihdre tattha sé dhanam 
datva te mocayitvana yiharass’eva dapayi.’®? 
The passage in which this -verse occurs, particularly the two verses which: 
precede it, are suspect, but this particular verse yields a fairly satisfactory 
translation: “At that monastery she redeemed, by paying money, the es- 
tates which had been bought in the past and regranted them to the same 
monastery.!68 
This passage seems to confirm the prevalence of the 
practice, referred to above, of monasteries acquiring land. 
The curious 
act of the queen in buying them back and regranting them to the monas~ 
tery was, one may surmise, a gentle means of expressing her disapproval. 
of the practice. 
Another significant development noticeable during this period was: 
the strengthening of the rights of individual monks over monastic pro- 
perty. Tlie references in the Cilavamsa to a category of monks called 
Jabhavasins ate of particular interest in this context. 
The first reference 
occurs in the account of the reign of Mahinda 1V. 
This king is said to 
have donated wealth to the labhavasin monks of all the three nikdyas.?® 
Vijayababu I assigned the villages Antavavitthi, Sanghitagimaka and 
Sirimandalagama to labhavasin monks.*"° 
Nicholas has Jocated the: 
first and the last of these villages in the modern districts of Batticaloa. 
and Kurundgala respectively; he has also suggested. that the second was 
in Rajarattha!” 
Vijayabahu I also restored to the monasteries the 
villages in Rohana which had been granted by previous kings in order to 
provide food for monks and for /abhavasin monks and in order to provide 
offerings for the stapas?’? 
No explanation of the term Jabhaviasin has 
been given so far. 
In this connection it is important to note that these 
monks were found in all the three nikayas. 
It also seems that they were 
not limited to any particular area in the island. Further, jn all three ins- 
tances mentioned above they are associated with a grant of a village or of 
wealth, 
Inthe last instance cited, villages assigned to them, are ment- 
ioned in association with others reserved to meet the expenditure for such 
ee 
167. 
Cv, 49.26. 
168, 
Geiger translates Kita as 
Pt. 1, p. 129. 
169. 
Cy. 34.27. 
170. 
Cv, 60. 68. 
171. JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, pp. 35, 99, 192. 
472. 
Cy, 60. 72-3. 
‘sold. 
Obviously this is jncorrect. 
Cf. Cy. trsl- 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
81 
commitments as the provision 
3 
of food for monk 
tale 
onks and 
payment 
- 
I ar Lassie plus the fact that the term ithe ee 
' 
e@ same period as the term /abh. 
; 
one 
a 
a 
aladuvan 
ars 
i 
se 
ree arta ie tempting to suppose that both Gas res 
roup of monks. i.e., those who 
i 
‘ 
p 
of 
5 
were entitled to 
stipent 
Hk pee to consider monks who enjoyed personal Ree aie 
fe a separate category is noticeable also in the Burmese ch : wale 
ee which. refers to three types of monks: 
forest “igeliees 
village-dwellers and 
“recipients of the taxes on the field: 
Sade 
dedicated to a monastery,’’!? 
fa 
aia 
The mention of villa, 
i 
; 
ges and incomes assi; 
dh 
: 
0 
and 
igned to th 
disil 
: 
sey question of the possibility that members of the a tohs 
fone 
$0 
property, 
Among the numerous 
inscripti 
ie 
‘ 
us inscriptions recordi 
aed ee of the patrons of the setgha are found some a 
oe ce ce An inscription from as far back as the third centu 
f Was eet plied in the Northwestern Province, records a sift 
lamakahavanu made by a monk called Sanghatissa,!7+ 
_ 
The tenth-century Sanskrit record from the Kapardrama mentions an 
ee of faye ean tatkas by a certain sthavira Sahghanandin 
ae upp: ne drinkables” (paniydrtham) to the monks of this 
ae an se haga of these religieux indicates that. they 
; 
ial means and 
idili 
i 
Rie id ela ee areca, 
suggests the possibility of their 
Pe ses erie grows stronger when. it is considered in the light of 
apr : etic of the ninth and tenth centuries. 
A regulation 
tavanatama 
Sanskrit inscription 
prohibi 
h 
i 
i 
prohibits the monk: 
{ 
sare rey from, owning even a pdéda of land in the erie ee 
ee : 
ve ikely that such a regulation would have found its wa 
int 
be list of rules in this inscription if the question had not ese t 
Hi 
re pica and relevance to those times. 
Further idence 
e in 
the 
Anuridhapura slab inscripti 
: 
i 
: 
ription of Kassapa V w 
eae [ made to various types of property belonging : the ee 
age . aigsatu putiguisatu labhayehi isd bajtuvak gambimat. 
Thi 
as . as been translated as ‘‘the villages and land connected with ths 
Pa faeries accruing to the clergy in common and to individual 
1 
e same inscription further decree 
resi 
oa 
A 
s that residences 
er to the clergy in common should not be converted into ee 
173, Sdsanavamsa, p. 92. 
mn CISG, Vol. IY, No. 381. 
ida EZ, Vol. V, pp. 162-9. 
. 
EZ, Vol. I, p, 4, Hf, 11-2.

--- PAGE 51 [DIRECT] ---

THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
property.1”7 
These two statements 
are particularly noteworthy, for 
they reveal that a distinction was drawn between the property belonging 
to the monks in common and that which belonged to individuals... 
This 
distinction seems to have been strong enough to justify the provision of 
regulations prohibiting the conversion of “common property” into ‘‘per- 
sonal property.” 
. 
Though inscriptions do not provide sufficient evidence to help deter- 
mine whether putgulsatu denoted’ ownership of property by individual 
monks or by laymen, the Samantapasidika greatly helps to clarify: this 
issue. 
In the Cullavaggavannana of the Samantapasadika Buddhaghosa 
lays down the procedure to be followed if the saigha found itself unable 
to maintain the buildings of the monasteries in good repair: 
It has been said in the Kurundi that if there is no wealth held in 
common by the satigha, one monk should be asked to look after 
the building and take the space for a bedin return. 
If he desires 
more, the preservation of the building should be ensured even 
by giving a third or a half of it to, him. 
And if he still pleads, 
«only the pillars remain; much work has to be done,” the whole 
building may be given to him as his personal property (pug- 
galikam)....Such a building would be his personal property 
during his lifetime, but would become the property of the sangha 
: 
(sanghikam) at his death. 
But if he wishes to leave it to_ his 
disciples, a third or a half may be given after examining the work 
done; it is permissible for him to leave this to his disciples.17 
Another passage from the same section of the Samantapasadika deals 
with the rights of monks who set up monastic dwellings: 
Jf a monk builds 4 hermitage for his personal use, on land be- 
longing to the sangha in common, but with his own materials, 
without taking even a gtain of sand belonging to the sangha, half 
of the building belongs to the saigha and the other half is his 
personal property... “If he builds it with material belonging to 
the sangha, collected at the monastery, he is entitled to only a third 
,.., But if he sets up a building after filling and levelling very 
rough and uneven ground and cutting steps where there were 
none, the saigha has no claims on it.” 
These passages suggest that the inability of the monasteries to 
maintain all their buildings in good repair as well as the initiative of 
individual monks 
in building activities gave rise to some form of 
ee 
177. 
satg kala avas puigul nokarana isd. EZ, Vol. I, pp. 47-8, H. 28-9 
178, 
Smp. Vol. VI, 1947, p. 1246. 
179, 
Ibid. pp. 1246-7. 
pT 
PR 
AE 
REIN 
TEE 
TTT 
EE 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
83 
personal: ownership among monks. 
But 
it 
is 
di 
i 
phen these statements of wedsiisio aes ae eae 
of 
the times or whether they were merely logical possibiliti 
i 
by a commentator. 
Perhaps they were a mixture of both 
ie hee 
conceded that they were mere logical 
possibiliti ee 
on 
during the course of this dinowies falinaen bias ihe ie 
of ownership of property 
by individual monks. 
Secondly, the rec ie ie 
of these terms in the later inscriptions show that they had seek ab 
lated into real terms at least by the tenth century. 
Buddha hae 
discussion 
brings out 
‘the significance 
of the terms 
sat, a eal 
pulgulsatu in the inscription and leaves’ little doubt ets ihe 
was being used with reference to the personal property of monks ig 
However, the evidence cited above does not indicate actual i 
stances of land being held by individual monks though they stro oh 
suggest this possibility, The Samantapdsadika discusses only the hee é 
ship of monastic buildings so perhaps the idea of ownership of land a 
not yet known. In this connection the Buddhannehila inscription, di ated 
in the third regnal year of a king identified as Kassapa V, is of ere 
nite ie an ern Soi 
record, the rights to a certain allot- 
0 six 
Kiri in ex! 
i 
Harse, the incumbent of the hermitage of Nee ae ce 
titution itself. After his demise these rights were to deyolve upon Budd. 
* hamitr 
i 
i 
itra who is described as the ‘‘son by consecration’’ (abhisekayen 
Kile of the former, and on the death ofthe latter they were to be enjoyed 
Py : Pe by the abbot of the Cetiyagiri monastery.'8° 
The 
He oa this is the only inscription of its type found so far may suggest 
. ie 
‘ ~ es an Pye ae practice, but it does not appear so uncommon 
considered 
in the 
light of the evidence of the S 
asadike 
cited earlier, 
Further, it provides a 
i 
Cal 
- 
Further, 
mn actual instance of ownership 
of 
as ades Pee 
ee as also of inheritance" by “‘spiritual oa 
: 
ence is a remarkable corroborati 
i 
i 
: 
hirer 
oration of the evidence found in the 
Further evidence is found in an 
i 
ipti 
inscription from Kottange, datin, 
aa about the early decades of the thirteenth century, according to vwiieh 
e mahathera Abhaya...of Vilagammula granted three pieces of land 
‘including the pamunu of Kalam, to the saigha.'®! An earlier inscription 
from the same place reveals that the pamunu of Kalam had been granted 
180, EZ, Vol. 1, pp..191-200. 
181. EZ, Vol. LV, pp. 82-90, No. 2.

--- PAGE 52 [DIRECT] ---

84 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
by Lokesvara (1210-1211) to his general Loke Avakména for valor shown 
in campaigns against the Colas.'8? The land in question could have come 
to be posssesed by the monk in any one of three different ways. First, 
he could have owned the Jand before he entered the Order. This would 
imply that the land had been in his possession for a long time, since he 
was a mahdathera bY the time he made this grant. 
Second, the right 
could have devolved upon him through inheritance after he joined the 
Order. 
This explanation recognizes the right of a monk to inherit pro- 
perty. Third, he could have been offered the land. Even if it were so, it 
is significant that he refers to the land as ‘that which belonged to him’ 
(tamanvahansege) and not as ‘that which he had recently received.’’ 
Corroborative evidence is found in a later passage of the Calavamsa. 
In order to restore the property of monasteries confiscated by his prede- 
cessors, it is said that Parakramabahu IT determined the villages which 
had been assigned for the provision of “priestly requisites’ (paccay'a~ 
gamaka) and those which belonged to monks in common (ganasantaka- 
gama) and to individuals ( 
puggalikagama).’®* 
This reference to puggali- 
kagima reiterates the idea of individual ownership and also suggests 
that large tracts of land were involved. 
On the pasis of this evidence it is 
not altogether unjustified to, contend that apart of the property assigned’ 
to the community of monks was enjoyed by certain monks of this 
period as personal property. 
a 
The appearance of the practice of property ownership by individual 
monks would suggest that Buddhist monks, in spite of the ideal they set 
for themselves, were, by the period under consideration, drawn into very 
close association with the lay society so that some of the salient economic 
features of lay life were introduced into the life of monks. 
But it would 
be unwise to believe that monks had the same rights over their personal 
property as the laymen did. The use of the term “ownership” raises a. 
number of difficult, and in some cases unanswerable, questions. it is 
not clear how far the rights of these ‘owners’ extended. 
The property 
owned by the mahathera Abhaya. of Vilgammula, mentioned above, is 
termed pamunt and therefore involved ‘“‘the most complete ownership 
possible within the tenure system,""184 Evidently, the right of alienation 
in the sense of transfer to the saigha was known, but it is not clear 
whether a monk could transfer his property to @ layman as a sale 
or a gift. 
482, 
EZ, Vol. 1V, pp. 82-90, No, Ll. 
183, 
Cy, 84. 3-4, 
184, 
See supra p. 68. 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
85° 
“Ownership” did not i 
; 
involve personal 
i 
ee: 
1 
al 
management; it 
- 
nee to the income from the property which Ha is 
ened 
in the usual manner by monastic officials,18 
The 
dent 
pen e pave by residence qualifications. A tenth-centur 
in a 
pie: : 
hayagiri monastery states that monks were Ne siti 
tote 
rn oe if they left the Order.“6 
Further, both this ta ip oe 
ans ! 
feat ae add that the income accruing from edie 
elonging to the monaster 
j 
; 
the pea residents of the monastery fri ea 
ii 
s pointed out earlier, the 
; 
lier, 
personal property of a. 
ace — to the satigha after his death, 
Itis serrate 
me pak nee his property to his disciples. 
This finds snare a 
a 
unt of [-tsing where he discussed the procedures for vanailer 
the property of deceased monks which were followed in the Western 
First of all an inquiry should b © made as to 
whi 
oe Poe Re aie deceased left a will,. id hae oe ised 
nila wae a :s 
eek He 
janes pete must be AWC 
thee 
WwW 
* 
property 
remaini 
{ 
e suitably divided...lands, 
houses, Lele village satan: 
buildings whic! 
i 
Peace 
h are immovable become the property of the 
Thou; 
1 
i 
sigyds alent sactcet ot actos Coaldclot ls tc ia prot yt 
- 
; 
0 
re 
e bane clench and ultimately of the Pee haar 
aie ane refer to the “property of the three nikdyas,"'1®° 
Malaya region bai Gy a Move es ary aren 
. 
gion 
OW 
siri 
nikdya, 9° and the Anuradha- 
. ae Hs 
Kassapa v records the grant of learnt ae 
ee cree ages belonging to the whole Abhayagiri nikdya.'% 
ae: nee : inistrative purposes, all the land belonging to a nikedya 
ae ear aatig one unit. 
Further, as will be discussed in 
ae 2 t, 
the main monastery of the nikdya-closely supervised 
is ration of the property of the hermitages belonging to the 
te See EZ, Vol. I, p. 239. 
» 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 235, f. 25; 
Pp. 235, /. 25; p, 236, Uf 37-8. 
tay EZ, Vol. f, p. 91, if, A15~6, 
ae 
» 
‘tsing, A Record of the Buddhis 
igi 
t Re 
188, £2, Vol IV, p. 42, ll. C134. see 
1h CISG, Vol. I, No, 635. 
, 
1, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 41-57,

--- PAGE 53 [DIRECT] ---

THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
nikdyas; these hermitages had to submit: their annual statements of 
accounts for approval. 
by the monks.of the main monastery.192. 
Hence, 
in the ninth and tenth centuries, the nikdya was not merely a frater- 
nity of monks subscribing to a particular school of thought; it was also 
a body which owned a vast extent of Jand and had supervisory control 
over these lands through institutions representing the nikaya which 
were spread over many parts of the island. 
Monastic Property and the Changing Environment 
The seventy-eight years of Cola rule over Rajarattha which followed 
the fall of Aunradhapura constituted a period of constant warfare between. 
the Colas and the succession of petty rulers who rose to power in Rohana 
and Dakkinadesa. 
In those years of political disorder monastic property 
would have been subjected: to plunder and confiscation by war leaders 
who needed funds to replenish their treasuries, and whatever 'was left 
could easily lapse into the hands of monastic officials and tenants. 
The author of the Calavamsa draws a picture of rapacious plunder 
and destruction wrought by the Colas: “They plundered many costly 
images of gold from the shrines of the three nikayas in all Lanka, vio- 
lently destroyed alt monasteries in. different parts of the Jand and like 
. 
plood-sucking yakkhas pillaged Lanka of its wealth." 
It is quite 
possible that the Colas plundered the wealth of the monasteries and that 
they transferred monastic property to the Saiva temples which they built 
in Sri Lanka and in South India. 
However, apart from the vague state- 
ment in the chronicle, quoted above, there is no concrete evidence to 
support either of these suppositions. 
Vijayabahu I is said to have res- 
tored to the saigha property granted by previous kings.!%* 
‘This would 
imply that monastic property had been confiscated or that their owner- 
ship had lapsed during the preceding period; but this was a statement 
made with reference to Rohana which was the center of the Sinhalese 
resistance to Cola rule. 
More evidence on the fate of the property of monks in Rohana is 
found in another strophe in the Calavarisa. 
Kassapa, son of Mahinda 
V, is said to have offered a boon to his genorals after a victorious 
campaign against the Colas., In this ‘connection, it is said, 
buddho so pavenigimam varam yaeittha, kittiko 
issajjetum varan 
vari, 
sadghikam gahitam bhagam 
vi 
ae 
erro 
192, 
See infra pp. 131-2. 
493, 
Cv. 55.20-1. 
194. 
See infra p.87. 
195. 
Cy. 55.31. 
nse 
pie 
SOS 
TRC 
ERD 
HED 
b 
i 
i 
H | 
' 
é 
THE SANGHA AND'MONASTIC: PROPERTY, 
87 
Geiger. rendered. this strophe into English as follows: 
“Buddha 
asked as wish for the village in which his family dwelt; Kitti chose 
wish that the part of his revenue which the bhikkhu community had 
appropriated might be remitted.’’’ The second part of this passage i 
particularly striking. 
It seems rather strange that the monks hed 
succeeded in appropriating the revenues of none other than one of th 
foremost military leaders of the Sinhalese at the time,’ 
Even if the 
Buddhist monks were audacious enough to think of an act which was 
so unworthy of their position, a general would be an unlikely victim, 
Secondly, even if this was what the chronicler meant, 
the phrase 
saighikam gahitam would have been a rather inappropriate grammatical 
form to convey this sense, hence, the second part of this strophe, it 
seems, demands a different interpretation, 
Both the words saighikam 
and gahitam in this pada qualify the term bhagam. 
In view of this 
fact, this pada can be translated without any strain on the meanin 
or the construction of the strophe as, ‘‘Kittika chose as wish that 
the incomes of the saigha which had been appropriated be restored.”’ 
This evidently refers to the area which was under Kassapa’s control 
The 
“incomes of the sangha’? mentioned in this strophe could have 
been confiscated by Kassapa or by the Colas: who had occupied 
Rohana for six months. 
One may surmise, on the basis of this 
a nia 
the dis 
asa from deprivation of their property 
- the regions outside 
Raj 
i 
is 
peri 
Gok a aaa 
during this period of constant 
The accession of Vijayabahu I to the throne of Sri Lanka and the 
establishment of peace and order ushered in a period of prosperity for the 
saigha. 
The Ciilavamsa devotes an entire chapter to the description 
of the work of the king for the welfare of the saigha and the laity. 
Res- 
torations and fresh grants of villages to about twenty-one monasteries 
are mentioned in the chronicle. 
Of these, Bhallataka, 
Jambukola, 
-Kurundiya, Mahasena, Mandalagiri, Paragamaka, Pattina and Sittala- 
on may be located in Rajarattha; Candanagiri, Devanagata, Kasa- 
pti ersied aston Rakkhacetiyapabbata and Buddha-~ 
n 
ohana; 
Panduvapi in Dakkhinadesa; and the J 
monastery in Malayadesa, 
196 
ce aac 
Fi a shrine on the mount of Samanola was another place which bene- 
a ae the generosity of Vijayabahu. 
The Calavamsa mentions that 
e village Gilimalaya and its fields of sai were donated in order to 
196. 
Cy, 60. 58-63, 81; 
£08, 183.188, 191, me JRASCBNS, Vol. V1, pp. 48, 57, 61, 70, 71, 80, 83, 86, 104,

--- PAGE 54 [DIRECT] ---

88 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC. PROPERTY 
provide alms for pilgrims visiting. the shrine.197 
The Amhbagamuva 
inscription records a grant, made to the same shrine, of a plantation of 
areca in Kehelgamuva, 4 grant of another such plantation in udu-ho 
(upper bank ofthe stream), and allotments of land in Tiniyagal, Soragoda, 
Liyavala, and in the forests of Badulla, as well as in Makulmula, Atiba- 
gamuya, Vitigampola and Ulapana.1* 
ensive donation of Vijayabahu I was’ 
Yet, undoubtedly the. most ext 
the endowment he made to the monastery he built for the. monks of the 
three nikdyas.” 
According to Geiger's translation, “he granted: to the 
community the whole district of Alisira together with the canal diggers 
dwelling there.’ 
But the original strophe runs as follows: 
sanghassa pakavattattham rattham datvajistrakam 
sakalam tam nivdsthi nettikehi saheva ca 
It may be pointed out that the occurence of.ca in the last pada precludes 
Geiger’s assumption that the term tam nivasthi qualified nettikehi. 
The 
two terms will have to be taken as separate, 
Nettika occurs in the 
Dhammapada,2” 
The Dhammapadatthakatha, commenting 
on 
this 
particular strophe, suggests that it denotes ‘a workman engaged in irti-- 
gational activities."2°! 
But it is quite possible, as Rhy Davids pointed 
out,2” that the term also meant ‘‘a conduit for itrigation.”’ 
In fact, 
Ajisdrarattha was an area with a number of irrigation works and was 
presumably named after the largest and the most important of them. 
_ 
If, therefore, the second meaning of the term is accepted, the trans- 
lation will have to be modified to read as follows: 
“For the provision 
of food, he granted to the community the whole district of Alisira 
together with its residents and canals." 
It is interesting that the residents of the district were also given overt 
to the monastery. 
(Several Indian. inscriptions record similar grants.?°) 
In practice this meant merely that the rights to labor and other dues 
usually enjoyed by the king were now transferred to the monastery, but 
the most noteworthy feature about this grant of Vijayabahu. is the 
The account of the campaigns 
vastness of the area which was involved. 
of Parakramabahu I in the Célavamsa shows that the district of Alisara 
comprised a number of villages including Talatthala, Aligama, and 
ee 
197. 
Cy. 60, 64-7, 
198, EZ, Vol. IL, p. 214, 
B38-43, 
199, 
Cv. 60, 14. 
200. 
Dhammapada, v. 80. 
201. 
Dhammapadatthakatha, PTS, Vol. UL, p. 147. 
202, 
Pali-English Dictionary, PTS. 
. 
203. 
For example, see the grant of a village together with its inhabitants (sa-prath 
vivdst-jana-sametam) in the Nirmand Copper Plate. 
CH, Vol-IIT, p, 288, #. 10. 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
89 
probably Kadditragim Kirati, 
Vilana, 
i 
J 
. 
ti, 
Vildna, Mattikavapi, Uddh: 
a 
pushes and Nasinna.7%4 Tn adidas the ee panei 
ee the right to the income from the great Alisira canal aor + 
ne eee There is ne evidence to show the exact extent of the ‘ie 
astery over the land granted to it, but there is 
li 
t 
n 
, 
there is little d 
- ne of the monastery was quite substantial. It is cians eb 
ie 
ident ity of this monastery, which was held in such high est 
BL eu I, has not been preserved in our sources 
cs 
in the strength of the foregoing account 
it 
i 
' 
; 
; 
ie 
n 
e 
nt it is clear that d: 
sha Bi cy a the Buddhist monasteries. of the three ae 
ere he en lowed even though their prosperity did not equal the 
st: a 
ards ot 
; 
Perot prior to the Cola occupation 
ee 
ith the death of Vijayabahu the 
politi 
1 
unity 
i 
political unity of the isl: 
ye a 
there began a period of protracted warfare bringing beh mvs 
ie Hon to the 
three 
independent 
kingdoms which Hain i 
x ne a, Rohana and Dakkhinadesa. 
‘These diminutive kingdo: a 
oe i ye Mess such warfare and, in the words of the chronicler theit 
. 
ueezed 
out the whole people as su 
i 
: 
; 
wW 
gar-cane in a su 
i 
bis Ba Syne taxes,’’2°5 
Under these strained pis 
leone 
bi aa ural that they would look at the wealth of monasteries With 
- us eyes. 
Further, one of the rulers who ascended the throne 
of 
olonnaruva, Vikramabahu 1 (1111-1132), son of Vijayabahu J, had 
ari to be disgruntled with the satgha. 
For, in selecting th : iin 
and the heit-apparent after the death of Vijayabahu 
I 
hed 
ignored his own claims.?° 
; 
ee 
Sa Beslan inscription of Vijayabahu from Polonnaruva records 
ween a certain mahasthavira Mugal: 
i 
me 
galan of the Ut 
~ 
ied tear tke Meine and Nagarattar sections rie 
a 
. 
accordance with this agreement th 
ikka 
pest ite men for the protection of the shrine of leat ie 
peas ; BAe themselves to protect the villages, employees and the 
! 
the 
shrine, to protect men seeking shelter in its 
i 
i 
, 
Ms all its requirements and to maintain it in ened “tepali.. Whey 
mn gave the shrine a new name: Mintu-kai-tiru-Velaikkdran-Deladiy. 
. 
Pperumpalli (i.e. the great shrine of the Tooth relic of the Velaikkaras 
of 
the three 
visions). 
It is cle 
rom 
this passage 
that 
the 
Velaikkaras 
the t 
d 
. 
ft 
ar f 
thi 
ge that the 
V 
ikki 
Virtually took complete contro! of the shrine and its properties. 
This 
204. 
Cy, 70, 106-12, 162-72, 
205. 
Cv. 61, 53, 
206. See infra p. 210. 
207, 
El, Vol. XVILL, p. 338.

--- PAGE 55 [DIRECT] ---

90 
: 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
is the first instance in Sri Lanka of the saigha seeking the help of 
mercenary troops for the protection of its property and its rights, a 
fact which suggests the dire position in which the saigha must have 
found itself at-the time. 
: 
In his edition of the inscription, Wickremasinghe comments, 
“1¢1s conceivable that between 1137 and 1153 A.D., that is to say 
either at the end of Vikkamabahu’s reign, or at the beginning of 
that of his son Gajababu, both of whom were no friends of the 
Buddhist church, Moggallana, fearing that the king might lay his 
devastating hands on the tich Tooth relic temple, then containing 
the Tooth- and Bowl- relics that were originally at Moggallana’s 
own Uttarola vihara at Abhayagiti, prevailed upon the powerful 
Velaikkaras to take over the full custody of the temple and fled 
southwards to Rohana or the Yuvaraja’s country,’’208 
In dating this inscription, Wickremasinghe was partly guided by 
his identification of Mugalan of this inscription with Moggallana, the 
lexicographer who lived in-the time of Parakramabahu I. There are 
several ‘difficulties which preclude such an identification which will be 
discussed in due course.20” 
Here it should suffice to cite certain facts 
which point to the improbability of this dating. 
. 
The Calavamsa states in very precise terms that it was Vikramabahu 
who confiscated the wealth of the shrine of the Tooth relic. 
Hence this 
record has.to be assigned to a period prior to that event; there is no basis 
for dating it to. the reign of Gajabahu II. Secondly, it appears rathes 
unlikely that Vikramababu, considering his grievances against the satgha, 
would have waited till therend of his twenty-one year long reign to take 
measures against the monasteries. 
Further, if the-record dates from 
s0 late a period it would be very strange for it to speak of the reign of 
Vijayabahu in great detail and-yet make no mention at all of Vikrama- 
bahu. 
Certain facts in the inscription, 
also support this view. 
The 
Velaikkara army, which bound itself to protect the property of the 
* shrine, in’ all probability was in the service of the king. 
It is also 
stated that they were summoned by mahdsthavira Mugalan who was 
jn the company of king’s ministers (réjamityaroduikida), “Tt is very 
unlikely that the Velaikkaras would have entered into such an agreement 
if it was the king who intended to appropriate the wealth of the shrine. 
‘Even if they did so, it is more improbable that the king’s ministers would 
have taken part in. the deliberations which led to this agreement and 
would have stated so in a public document. Moreover, if the mercenary 
208. 
EZ, Vol. IL, pp. 249-50. 
209, See infra pp. 161-2. 
sea 
NR 
AREF ES 
SEO 
OT 
ETT 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
oF 
in HA ae As opposed to the idea of confiscating monastic 
# 
ot 
likely that Vikramabahu would have suc 
in 
hi 
0 
I 
ceeded 
Pa 
an fact be On considering that only Sonera 
: 
is record, it appears that it probably 
bel 
period between the death of Vijayabahu 
ie a 
rises 
e 
aihu 
and the accession 
of Vi 
bahu. 
It may be suggested that the 
a 
on 
' 
monks were forced to t 
al een measures to ensure the protection of their lees abe 
° 
rights 
during these unsettled times marked b: 
: 
i 
u 
: 
tant warfai 
particularly when they realized the 
ibili 
ie 
ane 
P 
possibility of Vikramabahu, 
interests they had forsaken, emerging victorious. 
If the pa oof 
ee leis is apa this inscription can be precisely dated, 
for 
6 
etween the death of Vijayabahu and. 
ion 
; 
d 
the 
baa lasted only about a year, i.e, ca. AD. to-12 et 
ese precautions, however, proved to be of no 
avai 
di 
Er 
t 
avail. According 
t 
the Cilavamsa, Vikramabahu confiscated the precious stones and pase 
offered to the Alms Bowl and the Tooth relic of the Buddha. He also 
appropriated the “‘maintenance villages,’ the golden images, and the 
oe i of sandalwood, aloes and camphor belonging to the ‘sangha ce 
sie eae pee w 
any opposition offered by the Velaikkiiras 
arge of 
the shrine of the Tooth relic, 
The 
; 
: 
e 
: 
Yy may 
have 
bel- 
pie! “ 
the faction which was defeated by Vikramabahu in hie pad 
or the throne. Even if they were by this time in the employ of Vikrama- 
‘bahu, they had no reason to complain. 
According to the Calavamsa, the 
, 
ne Sapte the ‘‘maintenance villages" of the sangha among his 
‘ollowers and, converted thi 
ties 
i 
i 
a 
e monasteries into barracks for his foreign. 
The spoliation of monasteries 
i 
‘The 
was not entirely unprecedented 
aig i a ts ae the only people who had been Ppsnlible fk 
: 
8 
ures, 
e chronicles report that durin 
i 
fi 
: 
i 
g the reigns of Kufi- 
Larieeital Hee and Dathopatissa I (639-650) participants in civil 
sett iscate monastic Property in order to raise funds for their cam- 
: : 
But it was only in the reign of Vikramabahu that confisca- 
nee 
ae property was carried out’ by a Sinhalese king. on a scale 
ie hat it affected all of the major establishments of the saigha 
» 
nlike some confiscations of monastic property like the Hui Chang 
Suppression of Buddhism in China,?43. that undertaken by Viktemabiha 
210, This 
dating 
i 
itana’ 
va be is ate is based on Paranayitana’s chronological tatles. 
See UCHC 
2U1. 
Cy, 61. 54-61, 
212, Shsvp. pp. 21-2; Cy. 44, 131-4, 140. 
213. 
See K, Chen “Th 
i 
¢ Economic Background of the Hui Chang Suppression of 
Buddhism,” 
i 
f 
infta 
ee 
: Harvard Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. XIX, 1956, 
pp. 67 
See alsa:

--- PAGE 56 [DIRECT] ---

92 
HE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
does not seem to have involved any attempt to control the number of 
monks or the extent of the wealth of. the monasteries. 
Apparently no 
attempt was made to laicize monks... 
Though Vikramabahu appears to 
have patronized the Saiva faith,2**, there is no evidence which would lead 
to the belief that this action amounted to a persecution of Buddhism id, 
favor of any other faith. 
It was partly a political vendetta, but mainly a 
measure prompted by pecuniary needs. 
There is little doubt, however, 
‘that the action of the king had profound implications for the organiza- 
tion of the saigha. 
The loss of their wealth brought together the various 
fraternities of the sangha; despite the traditionaldifferences which divided 
‘them they took concerted action to censure the king. 
In the words of 
sthe chronicler, 
.., the ascetics in the eight chief vihdras looked up to as people 
worthy of honor, and the pamsuk tlika bhikkhus belonging to the 
two divisions, were wrath at the matter, and thinking it were better 
. 
to remove themselves from the vicinity of people who, like those 
erring from the faith, wrought in this way so much evil against the 
Order, they took the sacred Tooth relic and the Alms Bowl 
relic, betook, themselves to Rohana and settled themselves here 
and there where it pleased them.?'% 
«Perhaps they were thinking of an earlier instance during the reign of 
Udaya LL when the monks of Tapovana successfully took similar action 
against the king.2!6 Unlike on that occasion it was not a mere section of 
the satgha that had been affected this time. The account of the 
Ciilavamsa points to 4 mass exodus of monks from all of the main 
fraternities at the capital to Rohana. 
They took with them two relics 
which were at the time gaining increasing prominence as symbols of 
-sovereignty. 
This was indeed a situation fraught 
with calamitous 
potentialities which endangered the position and the security of the king. 
Curiously enough, no uprising which embarrassed Vikramabahu is 
recorded in the chronicles. 
It is not impossible that the growth of the 
wealth of the monasteries and the unwise participation in political affairs 
by monks had roused some resentment among the laity who, even if they 
did not acquiesce in the actions of the king, saw no reason to oppose him. 
* 
It is also possible that, contrary to the statements in the chronicle, not all 
‘the monasteries were affected by this act. 
Some monks seem to have 
stayed in the capital and its vicinity. 
A fragmentary inscription of 
Sundaramahadevi, 
the queen 
of Vikramababu, 
refers 
to Ananda,, 
214, 
See infra p. 204. 
215. 
Cy. 61, 58-61. 
216, 
See infra p. 208. 
See SRT 
meen 
erin 
THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC PROPERTY 
oe 
described as a monk of great renown, who was presumably 
pat . ized 
by her.??? Another inscription of the same lady, dated i ihe ar 
year of Gajabahu II, ‘shows that the Dihbulagala ‘fraternity a le: a 
vane prattile eee) continued to flourish. during the ah of 
king. 
‘obably 
the monastery 
was als 
i 
i 
i 
of Vikramabahu, 
Thus the flight ie oe pape Siar 
ed 
ine 
aie na repercussions which one might have. expected 
ie: 
; 
u e monks expected better tréatment i : 
disappointed. 
' Manaibharaya, who Saat ialeba eae He 
of Rohana, was as much in need of funds as Vikramabahu pee i 
to the Cilavamsa he seized the wealth assigned to the Tooth 
‘ic 
and the villages belonging to the monks.2!9 
His reign, 
hi 
cae 
was ee ae unmarked by generosity. 
In an insetiption aed 
ie ie se granted a monastery called Talaémuhundgiri thirteen 
The reign of Vikramabahu appears to be significant for two import- 
ant reasons. 
Firstly, the major monasteries seem to haye been sare f 
a considerable part of their wealth. 
Secondly, this triggered concer ed 
action on the part of the various fraternities within the satigha a it 
the differences which usually kept them apart. 
It is also Foaon 
that the account of the reign of Gajabahu in the Célavamsa contains 
no reference to any attempts by the king to grant land or to restore 
the property confiscated by” his predecessors, 
An inscription from 
Nelubiva is the only record of a grant of land to a ‘monastery made 
during his reign, 
It refers to the transfer of a tract of fields, 
one 
amuna in extent, to the Ruvanviili st@pa at the Mahavihara, 22 
, 
. The Cilavamsa records that Parakramabahu I acconimodated the 
representatives of the eight @yatanas in the Jetavana monastery 
at 
Polonnaruva.?” 
Even if their original possessions were not fain 
the king at least had to provide a source of income-for this monast 
and the seven other monasteries he built at Polonnaruva. 
The chose 
makes no mention of any such endowment, but according to the Pie 
valiya he granted these monks polonnaru varupetin vatandpasa.??3 
The 
217. EZ. Vol. IV, pp. 67-72. 
218, EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 194-202, 
219. 
Cy. 72. 304-5, 
220, EZ, Vol. V, pp. 142-6, 
221, EZ, Vol. YI, pp. 95-101. 
222, 
Cv, 78. 32-4, 
223, Pj. p. 106.

--- PAGE 57 [DIRECT] ---

94 
“THE SANGHA AND MONASTIC. PROPERTY 
relevant meanings of the-term pasa are “requisites, side and section.” 
Varupet occurs 
in the Saddharma-ratnavali: to denote -“fields,"’?”* 
hence the phrase may be translated into English as‘‘valuable allotments 
from the fields of Polonnaruva;’ of “costly requisites from (the income 
of) the fields of Polonnaruva.” 
Further, if the dating of the Galpata- 
vihira inscription to the reign of Parakiramabahu 
2% is accepted, it would 
appear that the fields and the coconut and ateca palms of the allotments 
of Siyambalépaya, 
Manadiva islands, Bolutudiva and Beravagoda were granted to the 
Galpata monastery. 
But it is very likely that this record.is ‘of much 
later 
origin and if indeed Parakramabahu 1 was responsible for 
athe restoration of the wealth of the monasteries confiscated by his pre- 
decessors, the author of the Calavamsa who made a deliberate attempt to 
present his protagonist in truly heroic proportions, would hardly have 
missed the opportunity to describe this action in allits detail. 
The fail- 
ure of Parakramabahu I to bring about such a restoration is also implicit 
jn the Bhagavalena inscription of his successor ‘Nissanka Malla, in which 
this king claims to have restored to the shrine of Samanola several villages 
including Athbagamuva whiclr originally belonged to this shrine but had 
been confiscated by his predecessors.?*° 
Evidently, he is referring to a 
confiscation which took place after the reign of Vijayabahu I, who granted 
the village Avbbagamuva “to this shrine. 
Thus it would seem that 
the reign of Parakramabahu 
I, though rightly renowned for the 
generous patronage of the sangha, did: not witness the restoration of 
monastic wealth confiscated in the preceding reigns. 
ee 
224, 
Saddharma-ratnévalt, ed. D. B. Jayatilaka, pp. 393, 712. 
225. 
EZ, Vol. 1V, pp. 196-200; 205-7, Hl, 5-23, 
226, 
CISG, Vol. Il, No. 376. 
Tingavatu, 
Tiratanayavatta, Dharmananda: 
and 
© 
re 
CE 
SEPT 
ETI 
TT 
oUF 
ro: im Max Weber, ed. H, H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, 1961, p. 332. 
CHAPTER °3 
The Management of Monastic Property 
“The paradox of all rati 
; 
ici 
ved, 
“which 
; 
; 
ional asceticism,’’? 
Weber 
4 
W 
obser: 
“whi 
os 
identical manner has made monks in all ages stumble, is that fe 
tional asceticism itself has created the very 
wealth it rejected 
Temples 
y 
: 
ip. 
and monasteries have everywhere become 
the very loci of all rational 
; 
aul 
paracta 
: 
economies. 
The accumulation of wealth by the Sinhalese satgha 
which was the result of a long period of munificent patronage by all ranks 
o 
be Sie oe them with the same paradox that Weber so 
‘ 
. 
The rules of discipline embodied i 
i 
; 
it 
i 
in the Vi 
picolinate monks to refrain from all profane cece 
a id 
ae rae 
td and enjoyment of material wealth, 
But the 
sean ue bey a ee - minor hermitages which dctepted 
their 
, 
even individual monks had ¢ 
wn, 
i 
addition to movable 
proper 
Rear pee ncm 
ee 
: 
» 
nie 
property, a vast extent of land and many irrigation 
The-need to resolve this dich tomy betw 
i 
: 
otomy 
een theory and 
y the time of Buddhaghosa, attracted the silaiiea BF tie pera 
‘a- 
al 
te 
i 
. 
tors on the Vinaya. 
The statements of Buddhaghosa reveal a liberal and 
‘60 
Pe 
: 
ps 
mpromising attitude in his approach to the problem: ‘‘It behoves the 
os Dhikk 
" 
t 
ini 
khusangha not to administer, accept or consent to the acceptance 
of 
to) 
any 
i 
r 
i 
: s 
baad pai like a field, landholding, irrigation reservoir o 
ae ie 
ey hte to accept ‘allowable’ articles? from i 
erty, if they be administered 
ippiyaka 
: 
' 
i 
stered 
by a k 
uy 
his statement: is further illustrated and clarified oe eae i 
: 
assages, 
i 
.-__.. 
1, Max Weber, “Religiou 
f the World and their Di 
+ 
“Religious Rejections o 
i 
i 
be 
I 
t 
thei 
irections,”’ in 
nomy and Society, Vol. 11, 1968, p. 586. 
See also Eco- 
ee 2 See supra p. 58, n, 33, 
{ Smp., Vol, VI, 1947, p. 1238. 
« 
See Smp., Vol. HI, 1930, pp. 677, 678, 680, 681, 691 
[95]

--- PAGE 58 [DIRECT] ---

96 
THB MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
which lay down that it was through a kappiyakaraka—a Jayman—that.a 
monk should accept and manage property donated for the maintenance 
of the saigha. 
Thus the need to reconcile ownership of wealth with the 
pursuance of ascetic ideals as prescribed in the Vinaya necessitated the 
employment of a class of administrators for the management of monastic 
property. 
. 
Apart from these theoretical reasons there were other, equally im- 
portant, practical considerations which made it essential for the satigha 
to employ a body of regular officials for the administration of the monas- 
teries. 
The possessions of the monasteries covered a wide range including, 
land, irrigation works, salterns and cattle. 
Some of the land grants were 
quite extensive and several of them were situated at considerable distances. 
from the monasteries to which they were granted. 
A college at the Mahavihara owned an allotment of land in Muhund- 
naru in the Eastern Quarter, about fifty miles from Anuradhapura> 
The Sen Senevirad Pirivena owned some land in Sulinnaru, one and a 
half miles to the east of Tittagonnfva in the Kuiicuttu Korale as well 
as in Galinduru Gomandala, three miles further away to the northeast.é 
‘The latter was about forty miles from Anuradhapura, 
The Bahaduru. 
Sen college, also of the Mahavihara, held rights to three villages by the 
coast, probably close to Mannar and more than fifty miles from the 
city.7 
A tract of land in Moragoda, irrigated by the Padaviya reservoir 
- and located more than forty miles ‘away from Anuradhapura, belonged 
to the Matigul Piriyena of the Abhayagiti monastery.® 
Similarly, the 
Sirisatigabo college of the Jetavana monastery owned Velangaina, a 
village situated eleven miles to the north of Miadhyacciya and therefore 
about twenty-five miles from the monastery.’ 
It is evident from this 
that the monastery of this period was faced with the difficult problem of 
administering possessions situated far away; the possessions of the 
Mahavihara were scattered over a wide area extending more than 
fifty miles to the east, forty to the northeast and fifty miles to the 
west, 
plicated. during the last three centuries of the first millennium which saw 
the profusion of grants of immunities exempting from taxation and offi- 
cial interference the villages and the land allotments of the monasteries. 
ig ee 
EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 59-67. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp- 463-71, 171-3. 
EZ, Vo\. IML, pp. 100-13. 
EZ, Vol. I, pp» 200-7. 
EZ, Vol. SI, pp. 44-9. 
wp 
werny 
The administrative problems of the monasteries became more com~ 
Fa 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
97 
The consequent transfer 
ini 
i 
of administrative authority 
t 
ye 
. 
9, 
th 
i 
owe i traditional officials of the village vier the eerie! 
astery. On the other hand, the monastery itself had to ae 
its administrative setup 
t 6c 
acta 
des 
ip 
arry out the new responsibilities it had 
The Origins of the Administrative Organization 
The 
practi 
: 
i 
; 
; 
Pee we Lite oF 
sorploying laymen in the monastic administration is 
te 
er sections of the Vinaya Pitaka. 
The Mahavagga 
eens me King Bimbisira who, on seeing the monk Pilinda- 
besa ttn beat erect a dwelling, was moved to offer him five 
ieee al ss 
as. They formed a village alternatively called: 
A Hh a i ndagama after the name of the monk.!° 
Similarly 
abn 
comers - to kappiyakarakas is found in the Suttavibhanga 
Nyt eves pe should not make purchases by themselves 
Baa oo eee conducted through kappivakdrakas.™! 
SIE 
of 
Sri Lanka record that local kings provided the 
Stariek ee of both these types. 
The Calavamsa refers to 
an PAS Pane i. nrc with the reign of Sirimeghavanna 
monks who propounded the ae ie tae 
ieee cre atsty nat the two terms dramika and kappiyakaraka 
harap Peas et 
The first occurs in several Buddhist Sanskrit 
Seer 
a nelae as suggested, the term kalpikéra found in the 
Srieroik 
iad ably the equivalent of kappiyakaraka.'6 
In none of 
eh paca sufficient evidence to draw a clear distinction bet- 
bees ni 
pohie pate ts context in which they occur in the Pali 
dlithiot Memntie » 
ly 
the Samantapasddikd, suggest that they had 
Pa 
. 
ncunvoncotenitohigtom lait burhesasmane 
be 
atives, 
ut 
thi 
: eon ies they were expected to hold a high eee i cane 
nsakavannand of the Samantapasddika shows that sen aan 
10, 
Vinaya Pitaka, PTS 
taka, 
> Vol. I, 
pp. 
206+ 
il. Smp. pp. 698-9, 
nen 
12, 
Cy. 37,63. 
13, 
Cy. 36.173.- 
i4, io 
trsl,, Vol. I; p. 16, n. 4. 
Edgerton, Buddhist Hybri 
5 
ybrid Sanskrit Dietii 
( 
neers 
‘ 
ictionary, Vol, 
I, p. 104, 
i ra ve 
3; Edgerton, op, cit, Vol. II, 
p. 173. 
;

--- PAGE 59 [DIRECT] ---

a i 
a 
a 
98 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
and bondsmen polonging to the monastéries were called dramikas. 
Ac- 
cording to this passage, if a dyer-slave (rajakadasa) ot @ weaver-slave 
(pesakiradisa) were offered to the saigha, he could be accepted as 
an aramika.'® 
In certain contexts ardmikas were found as minor employees and 
functionaries of the monastery. 
According to the Dugga-titthiya-vatthu 
of the Sahassa-vatthu-pakarana, a king sent for the chief aramika of the 
monastery to question him about the decorations at the monastery.'” 
The Sthala-vatthu-pakarana contains two stories in which arémikas 
figure as the employees in charge of the store of provisions and as those 
responsible for the preparation of meals.2° 
There js an interesting story 
asidika about a monk who, being dissatisfied with the 
in the Samantap 
food he received, tried by means of signs to indicate tothe aramikas 
how large his cakes should be.* 
In another story in the Calavamsa, the gods appeared before Ag- 
gabodhi TL in a dream in the guise of dramikas and threatened to take 
d relics of the Thaparama if the king did not expedite the 
away the sacre 
work of restoring the stapa2® 
This could imply that the aramikas were 
supposed to be placed in charge of the protection of the relics. 
If this 
were so, the guardians of relics and relic shrines that the kings appointed 
from time to time also belonged to this category. 
The Sarattha-dipani 
points out in a discussion: of the comparative merits of various types of 
monastic dwellings that monks living at large monasteries were liable to 
be disturbed by aramikas who brought ears of paddy to demonstrate the 
excellence of their achievements.? 
From this it would appear that even 
those who tilled the land of the monastery were called aramikas. os 
It is clear from this discussion that aramika was @ comprehensive 
term which covered a wide variety of workmen and employees attached to 
the monastery. 
The fact that they were, at times, granted in large num- 
bers also supports this observation. 
Aggabodhi I granted a hundred 
davihara,24 and Jettha, the queen of Aggabodhi IV, 
dramikas to the Kan 
granted a hundred dramikas to the Jettharama.’ 
Kassapa IV granted 
aramikagiémas to the hermitages he puilt.2° 
Such grants, when const 
dered in. the light of the passage from the Mahavagga cited earlier, would 
eee 
. 
18, 
Smp., Vol. Ti, 1930, p. 683. 
19, 
Shsvp. P- 63. 
20, 
Sihvp. p. 63. 
21, 
Smp., Vol. TH, P. 681. 
22, 
Cv.42.54-5. 
23, 
Sdrattha-dipant, D. 562. 
24, 
Cy. 42. 16. 
25, 
Cv. 46. 20, 
26. 
Cv. 52. 16, 
| 
i 
| 
‘ 
| 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
"99 
imply that the inhabitants of th 
i 
ese villages were e 
5 
areas 
xpected t 
are oe of the drdmikas, as evident from the a athe 
a a ; ei aily, the whole day or half a day, some once in rH Ae 
id 
others once in a fortnight; they were given food 
ee 
{nivdpa) accordingly.?? 
es 
The kappiyakéraka was th 
iraka 
he person whose 
primar 
peda necessities of the satgha through ee ae to 
a aoe articles. ‘allowable”’ (kappiya) by formally’ of Be 
ae “ Rieti This was a function which could be atl 
de Ag employee as and when the need arose. 
Thus ip a 
peas a : * 
the smaller monasteries even in later times the n 
oh oo sibeags is . 
kappiyakéraka did not, arise rae a eur ee 
© 
kappiyakéraka and’ those ei 
aa to lesser domestic duties was not very me 
uy he 
pee Aion pie paar became more important and eke . 
san 
o own such items 
of 
; 
; 
: 
‘ 
: 
of 
propert 
; 
Penn ae works which were not conatdeyed vvalloweble 
hes ee sed as a “business employee’’ became more and mor 
Ek Bis us ann ‘employees. 
According to the 
i, 
as 
the kappiyakéraka who acce’ 
i 
s 
At 
Wi 
‘ 
ted 
baie administered them on behalf of the aie a Alierad 
e 
hig 
s to the provision of “allowable articles.’'?® , 
oo 
wan : a fi aetna were in the habit of diverting a disproport- 
ee 
e produce of monastic lands to their own use seems t 
aaa common complaint against them? 
Some of them 
" 
Seana sete ey reservoirs belonging to monasteries. re 
, 
water 
dues. 
In this context i 
‘that, 
according to the sole passage 
i 
it 
Mion ecue 
, 
ge in the Cilavamsa in whichrthi 
0 
; 
B 
n 
beth 
Pincaeab ti were allocated to monks who had alee site 
sat 
ei ba es San because they were needed to administer the aesalt 
Ha ie be : were being transferred. 
.Thus, in the context of the 
ot We ee appears as the official placed in charge 
valth 
onastery. 
The import: 
i 
ition 
i 
us 
portance of his 
e organization of the monastery as well as his specific Cont 
lities grew pari 
i 
passu with the 
i 
f 
monastery. 
expansion of the possessions of the 
The 
izati 
iach secaaiin ee monastic administration which ‘is 
ecords of the ninth and tenth centuries undoubtedly 
27, 
Si 
2 piel ar ae ae for ani saeite of nivépa, sce infra p. 123 
., 
Vol, 
VI, 
p. 
38 
» 
123, 
29, See supra pp. 57-8. 
is aaa

--- PAGE 60 [DIRECT] ---

100 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
represents @ later stage of a long process of evolution, and its origin: 
probably lay in the simpler administrative arrangements represented 
by the. dramikas and the. kappiyakarakas. 
It is possible that some 
of these employees were appointed by monks.2°° 
Sometimes people 
with no means of livelihood found employment as kappiyakarakas ;* 
some were bondsmen donated by the lay patrons of the satgha. 
{tis also significant that in many instances monastic employees were 
appointed by kings, thus leading to the introduction of certain, features 
of the administrative institutions of the state into. the organization 
of monasteries, 
: 
‘ 
: 
The utilization. and the interpretation of the available epigraphic 
material concerning the administration of monasteries is beset with several 
difficulties. 
‘The most notable of these is the paucity of evidence con- 
cerning the organization of the Mahavihiira and the Jetavana nikayas. 
Almost all the records belong to the Abhayagiri monastery and the Ceti- 
from Mihintale are the 
yagiri monastery at Mihintale. The inscriptions 
most important since they provide a fairly detailed picture of the 
organization and the working of the administrative 
system 
of a 
jnonastery. 
The similarity of the s 
the problems with which the monasteries were 
led, one might surmise, to the growth of basically similar administtative 
organizations at all these monasteries. However, yarious factors like the 
degree of evolution of each institution, divergence in attitude prompted 
by doctrinal inclination, and differences in specific outside influences 
t of significantly different features. 
In this 
resulted in the development 
context, it is noteworthy that the Mihintale Tablets state that the list of 
selected after a comparison of 
rules and regulations they contain was 
those which had been current: at the Abhayagiri and Cetiyagiri monas- 
terjes.3? The dissimilarity of the two systems, vaguely implicit in this. 
statement, becomes more credible when a comparative study of the ad-~ 
ministrative arrangements of these two monasteries is in fact made. 
The dissimilarities which prevailed in the organization of these two: 
monasteries, in spite of the similarity of doctrinal iriclination and the 
administrative links which connected them, aptly illustrate the dangers 
which shadow attempts at generalization. 
ocial and economic milieux and, therefore, of 
confronted should have 
a 
30, 
See e.g. Simp. p- 673. 
31, 
Smp., Vol. V, 1966, P- 1001. 
32, EZ, Vol.1,p. 91,4 A6. 
33, 
See infra pp. 130 ff. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
101 
The Committee of Management 
The Mihintale Tablets, which contain a list of the 
: 
e 
piace sega with the remuneration they received oie . 
Cee cal sitiaian of administrative 
affairs, 
reveal 
a: 
jon at the head of which was a cont itt 
f 
tte ae the kamtén. 
It was composed of eight eae . 
Oe ie 
ba jolla (i) veher pirivahanuvd, 
(iii) niyam, teh 
taninier aul piss re (vi) veher leyd, (vii) karatd leya, and 
oe 
ee . 
This committee sometimes sat in session to 
iam poicratg ks 
See monastery together with a group of 
peal 
two fraternities’? (demula) of the Abhaya- 
Aétaiios 
ot 
cat fadifatal aeloas. But its ths 
iectipeon tale 
i 
; 
dl 
ince the inscripti 
i 
aA 
aah ea information on the subject one mee hee 
aula atte ese terms in order to determine what these functions 
ies tears ite was feasted by Wickremasinghe as “the monk 
oe 
oa 
e ene : 
Although naka ts derived from the Pali 
“ Nencoian as oe pointed out,>® carry the connotation 
beanie sth 
\ : Hf 
Perera questioned .Wickremasinghe's transla- 
staal 
igen 
hat t is official was entitled to remuneration for his 
ca z Pepe 
is unlikely and unusual if he was a 
ae nae oe ip that it is “most likely that he was a layman,"’*7 
isa, fe official was paid an allowance need not deter us 
Se 
aa i cha For, according to the same inscription, 
Se ean th stere the canonical texts were also paid stipends in 
eae Fi era 
It may be pointed out that he 
ae sete pte bers of the committee bears the title himiyan and 
a eo yy 
officials, he did not hold a land allotment. - 
The 
ieee Stay ue to him was paid in two instalments at the 
period of ‘retreat’ Gago eee Wate - BB Aeon oe al 
eee 
; 
$77 
ese facts show tha! 
és poe 
ene A contest Wickremasinghe’s translation, and ‘Gi 
ee 
e chief monk of the monastery had a place in the 
e of management, presumably in a supervisory capacity. 
34, EZ, Vo.4, p. 92, Ht, A21-3, 
35, EZ, Vol. I, p. 101. 
re vag 
Vol. III, p. 224, n. 5. 
» 
LS. Perera, Instituti 
a cae hear 
fons... .p. 1368. 
. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 94, i. B1-2.

--- PAGE 61 [DIRECT] ---

Uyrepnenrentantntennar 
102 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
The significance of the second term also seems to have been largely 
misunderstocd. 
The pirivahanuva, Who is the first layman to be ment- 
joned in the list of the members of the committee, was probably the pre- 
mier lay official, 
But this term does not occur in the second part of the 
inscription. which prescribes the payments to be made to each employee 
jn return for his services. 
In this section a certain pirivahanu vata kimi 
is referred to as an official who received an allotment of one kiri and two 
paya of land‘? — a meagre emolument compared with the five. kiri 
granted to each of the last six members of the committee. 
Wickremasin- 
ghe believed that both these terms denoted the same official.41. 
Parana- 
vitana and Perera, who seem to have accepted this identification, have 
gone further to conclude that the niyam jetw, the third in order in the list 
of the members of the committee, was the chief administrative official. 4” 
{t seems unlikely that one member of the committee should receive such a 
low stipend while all the other members received a higher and regular 
allowance, and thus one might question the validity of Wickremasinghe’s 
jdentification of pirivahanuva with pirivahanuvata kami. 
The term pirivahanuva occurs in its Sanskrit form, porivahana, in 
the ninth-century Sanskrit inscription found at a hermitage within the 
grounds of the Abhayagiri monastery.” 
In this record he is described 
as an official in charge of ‘the protection of the “inside and the 
. 
outside."44 
‘This term is not found in the Indian inscriptions and js not 
known in this form to Indian Jexicographers. 
It is probably derived 
from the root vah connected with a, ‘‘to carry," with the secondary 
meaning ‘‘to lead” as in the term sdrthavaha, 
The verbal form of the 
same root is found in the phrase ma(haveher piri)yahana madabiya in a 
tenth-century inscription from nearby Basavakkulam, but the reading is: 
doubtful.4° The office was not restricted to the monastic administration. 
A variant form, pirivahanna, occurs jn the Badulla inscription to denote 
a village official. 
It was his duty to direct the committees of local ad- 
ministration in such tasks as inquiring into and levying fines for offenses 
committed in the village.“° 
‘In the Sanskrit inscription from Abhayagiti 
the parivahana was the official who received the highest emolument at 
40, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 94, & BS. 
For kiri and paya, see supra p. 54, n. 3; p. 69, 0 102. 
Ai, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 108 nl, 
42. 
Paranavitana, Sigiri Graffiti, Vol. 11, p- 30, v. 49; L. 8. Perera, Institutions. 
pp. 1538, 1556. 
43, 
EZ, Vol.1,p. 5, & 32. 
44, 
antar-vahi-rakeana-kusalasya. 
Sec infra p. 131. 
, 
45, 
AIC, No. 111; the term madablyd occurs as an official title in the Sigiri grafiiti- 
See Sigiri Graffiti, 
Vol. IL, vv, 221, 391, 464,470, 570, 
46, EZ,Vol.¥, Pt.2, pp. §94-5, 
+ errant 
tm 
5 
CAE 
MER 
TENE 
ETF 
EP 
ATE 
TET oO 
pick 
e eR 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
103 
the hermitage, 
It has 6 
i 
h 
i 
een pointed out that even in 
ihi 
er he occurs at the head of the list of Jay officials pun ane 
da so ea eae the terms pirtvahanuvd and pirivahanu 
ta 
leaned 
from an analogy in the Pol 
stint 
y 
be 
‘ 
onnar 
aj 
bela ee of Mahinda IV which speaks of a Seal on 
pos : se thes ae in the service of the kudasaléndvan Rank 
; 
suggested 
on this basis that the 
pirivah 
(imi 
ae ta subordinate to the nt 
eR 
eee 
re Ye to the pirivahanuva in the second part 
t 
d, if 
not 
the result of an omission on th 
1 
he 
t 
hile as - 
attributed to another possible cause, that ete ee 
ae is sade Seay official, 
It is possible that a high-ranking dignit- 
Sane - ae 
the royal family occupied this important post “The 
rh oa iy 
a ee gives an instance of a chief minister (maha 
pointed 
to the stewardship of a hermi 
n 
tmitage.*8 
Thi 
i- 
pais 8 ae hermitage attached to the Abhayagiri monastery oe aa 
att ee he eae for each village that the hermitage peal 
uties in a satisfactory manner? 
Hi 
i 
a 
: 
lence it se 
reer to suggest that the pirivahanuya or the parivahana was a hief 
a ee official at the monastery. 
ae 
ae cea pa niyam jet, was translated as ‘tthe administrator of 
ee i 
; 
y Miller who-believed that it was derived from nigama 
ssh ra i 
ic! remasinghe associated niyam with niyama (also niyama) 
me ear ape rules in the Sanskrit inscription from the Abhaya- 
ae sik ie translated the term as “administrator of rules.’’5! 
oi ea . 
ie Sigiri is a scribbling dated to the first half of ‘the 
ich 
mentions a niyam’ 
jet 
wh 
bale 
Jet who was an 
employee 
ea pee In another graffito niyam is used ff ie Saat 
sence pee Aa of this eviderice it seems probable that Wickre- 
s correct. 
The larger 
ri 
i 
ae 
ot 
7 
get 
monasteries which 
con- 
led extensive lands and even administered justice in these areas woiild 
have had to emplo y a person who w. 
jent 
j 
A 
Jaws to help them with this work. 
a8 proficient in rules, regulations and 
47, Ez, Vo 
SoAORIIOS Tens Patanedinne codec staae Keone aI 
Tae 
ae 
tation of the term asin the service of.” strong arguments in support of his interpre: 
48, 
Sce infra p, 134, 
49, EZ,Vol.1, p.5,,l. 32-3, 
50, AIC, p. 116, 
ES pen eha POL is 3. 
. 
Paranavilana, Sigiri Graffiti, 
Soda Jee 
es. 
fiti, Vol. II, p. 30, v.49.

--- PAGE 62 [DIRECT] ---

104 
‘THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
ghe traced the derivation of & kémiya to adi kammika 
ickremasin; 
is 
en 
and bibs it as “principal workman. 
34 
However @ is a 
‘ 
ca 
i 
ali 
aya 
(Skt. dya) which mean 
“im- 
i 
rivative from Pali aya and dya ( 
; 
i 
n 
ee a 
at in the Mihintale Tablets it occurs in this sense 1n the 
Calta ey la, “receipt of income.’5> 
Therefore, the suggestion. 
n a-kala, 
ona 
Karmi and its translation as “the | 
= 
Lamivd 
ived 
from aya 
t @ kdmiya was derive 
: 
ana of income’’®® seems more plausible. 
from Sigiri dated 
- 
The 
fifth term, pasak kémiyé, occurs ™ a graffito fro h . nslated 
rhe a half of the eighth contury.°” Wickremasinghe transitct 
to the imoner’” believing that it was derived from paceaya ! 
y nan 
ace ms 
pas and pasak occur in the Mihintale inscription 
roe 
inne ae caren and accounts.» 
Pasak is most probably sti 
madara ajika which occurs in the Abhayagiri inscription to enote 
from Skt. paris 
‘he accounts and the records of administrative 
egi 
in 
which 
of 
ac 
: 
cai anes entered. 
Perhaps the pasak kémiya was the ac 
arrang 
i 
his register of the monastery. 
ak ce ena me cae of he next three terms seems 
sere 
caeaie than that of the first five. Theterm ley could ase 
: a ib or an administrative official. 
The veher leyé was thus ¢ 
os pant 
ther administrative official attached to the monastery 
ie a f 
ganas are not-known.. As an element in the conjoint ae 
NS 
an karat atsamu, the word karatd pane seek 
f 
cer 
ial 
significance use 
ae ia ie a ahonrarer pa case it connoted the casket 
eae fe 
- cords and the gold of the monastery were stored. 
The 
a ba be ‘a further states that the daily statements of eka 
ous ibs ial in a locked casket (mundu karaidu) which was to be 
ee aL . 
in the “relic shrine." The karavd leya and the ae 
ponent esumably, two officials in charge of this casket. 
: 
ane De oan translated by Wickremasinghe as “the registrar 0) 
pe aa id 
the second as “the keeper of caskets." 
‘ 
is 
avldant from the second part of the Mihintale record a t : 
a alcha himiyan was paid a nipi® of rice daily and an additional 
1. 
54, 
EZ, Voi. I, p. 10 
35. ae J, p. 94, & AS4. 
6. SSS, 
p. 114. 
7. Paranavitana, Sigiri Graffiti, Vol. 1, p. 193, v. 315 
58, 
EZ, Vol. Lp. 101. 
59. 
EZ, vol. , 
p. 94,2. AS4,. 
60, 
EZ, Vol.1,p. 5,132, 
61. EZ, Vol. Lp. ae A53-60. 
Z, Vol. 
I, p. 101. 
a re an explanation of this term, see supra p. 64, 0. 1. 
| 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
105 
allowance of three kaland“ of gold a year. 
The last six officials of the 
committee received allotments of land amounting to five Xiri each. 
The 
niyam jefu received, in addition, a daily allowance of a ndli of rice and an 
annual grant.of fifteen kaland of gold. 
The only other official to receive 
this allowance called setuvamat mal inila was the matgul jet who was 
paid three kaland and two aka® of gold a year. 
Wickremasinghe fol- 
lowed Miiller and Gunasekara in translating this phrase as ‘“‘the cost of 
whitewashing and flowers.’’67 It is clear from the context that this 
translation is unsatisfactory and inappropriate. However, it is not possi- 
ble to establish the exact significance of the term at the present state of 
our knowledge. 
In all, the payments made to the committee amounted 
io thirty Kiri of land, about four amunu and two pal of rice and eighteen 
kaland of gold, not including the payments, if any, made to the pirivaha- 
nya. 
The system of administering monasteries through committees of 
management is strongly reminiscent of the administrative organization 
of Hindu temples in South India. 
On considering various factors like 
the close relationship which prevailed between South India and Sri Lanka, 
the similarity of the administrative problems that these religious institut- 
ions would have had to face and the similarity of even some of the ad- 
ministrative arrangements, it is very tempting to postulate a common 
origin for the committee system. 
Unfortunately, apart from references 
to treasurers and accountants, no detailed list of the officials who consti- 
tuted the committees of management is available in any of the many rele- 
vant South Indian inscriptions. 
Hence, a comparison of the administra- 
tive institutions of the temples of South India and of the monasteries of 
Sri Lanka yields little information more specific than their obvious 
similarity. 
On the other hand, titles of certain officials of the kamtdn (the 
committee’ 
of management of the Cetiyagiri monastery) like the piri- 
vahanuva and the niyam jetu, are known to occur in the records of the 
ninth century; pasak kdmiyd occurs in an inscription of the eighth century. 
Titles of lesser officials like the veher atsama can be traced back as far 
as the fifth century, and the term pirivahanuvd was known in the field 
64, For an explanation of this term, see supra p. 72, 
65, 
See infra p. 114. 
66, For an explanation of this term, see H. W. Codrington, Ceylon Coins and Cur~ 
reney, Colombo, 1924, pp. 13,60. 
61, EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 107-8. 
e oa For an explanation of the terms kiri, amanu, pal, sce supra p. 54, n. 3, p. 64 
59. See EZ, Vol. V, pp. 111-9.

--- PAGE 63 [DIRECT] ---

a 
106 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
of secular administration. 
Tn.an inscription of a king entitled Sirisaiigabo 
Mapurmuka, mé pivivahaana and kabili pirivahannd are mentioned among 
the officials engaged in the administration of a district (rata). 
The 
incidence of this term in the Badulla inscription has already been cited. 
The word kamtin itself occurs 
in the sense of a government instit- 
ution in the term deruvana-dekamiin.” 
It is also relevant that 
committees composed of eight members each were known in local 
administration. The Badulla inscription cited above mentions two 
groups called the gamhi aladend, “eight of the village,” and the adaviye 
atadend, “eight of the forest tracts.”” 
These committees, which remind 
one of the gramastakula mentioned in inscriptions in Bengal, seem to- 
have been under the supervisory contro} of the pirivahannd.” 
These 
facts terid to suggest that the committee system of administration which 
was known at the Cetiyagiri monastery represents the result of a fairly 
long process of evolution in association with, and perhaps under the 
influence of, the local institutions of secular. administration. 
Tt is not certain whether the committee system was current at the 
other monasteries too. 
The office of parivahana was known at a her- 
mitage attached to the Abhayagiri monastery. 
A graffito from 
Sigiri refers to the niyam jet of a hermitage called Budgamu-vehera 
which, presumably, was in the Matale District in the central highlands.” 
Tt does not necessarily follow that the committee system as such was 
Jenown at these monasteries, but if indeed this system was the result of 
a long process of evolution, there is no reason to presume that it was 
restricted to one-monastery. 
In this context it is also interesting that 
the Calavamsa mentions that King Maina appointed seven patiharas to- 
serye under the monk to whom he donated the Uttaromiila monas- 
tery.” 
Normally the term pratihdra occurs jn Sanskrit literature in 
the sense of doorkeeper, 
But Geiger has drawn attention to the pos- 
sibility of a connection with the seven lay officials of the kamidén men- 
tioned above.”* 
If this is accepted, it would imply that this system was 
known also at the Uttaromiila of the Abhayagiri monastery. 
Duties of the Committee of Management 
One of the most important duties of the committee of management 
was, as in the cases of its counterparts at the Hindu temples of South 
7. 
AIC, No. 114. 
7m. See EZ, Vol. IS, pp. 24, 31,37,47- 
72. 
EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 2, pp. 194-5. 
73, 
See supra p. 102. 
74, Paranavitana, Stgiri Graffiti, Vol. It, p. 30, v.49; JRASCBNS, Vol. VI. D- fit, 
715, 
Cv. 5T. 20-1. 
16. 
Cy.trsl., Pt. 4, p- 194, n. 2; CCMT,p. 195. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
107 
India, the supervision of fiscal administratio: 
ihi 
ee that the committee should deat an ee ae 
the 
revenue and expenditure of the main monaster 
ae 
subsidiary institutions attached to it.”? 
Of these, the c ies hig ee 
from ne land belonging to the monastery would totes a 
ihe 
cae nena tasks, and it has been suggested that at iat a 
Y was passed over to a class of middlemen. 
There 
ari od 
references in the inscriptions dealing with monastic 
ro “ pio 
“practice of taking kdébdli’”’ as well as to the group of individ xt 
ata 
_reclpionts of kiibiili,” Kabéli has been interpreted by L $.P Anes 
a system by which the produce was collected and handed its ie 
vihdra and other responsibilities discharged for a part of ite es 
or may be for the payment of a fixed sum to the vihdra.’"78 Tbe 
ei 
aie with the system of pdatta. 
‘i z pate 
; 
aranavitana suggests that 
pata 
ri 
— denotes the instrument of nes oe A aioe a 
: 
Pep orga) Lea the revenues due from the a a 
of the village.” 
i 
ipti 
shee ia paltaladuvan were “a eee ety Aultiaus oveng ae 
sae ae ae to refrain from cultivating the land Benieuet The 
eure 4 
‘ ee state that the land belonging to the 
temas arene 
© given on pata tenure,*! but conditions at the 
eben 
tery, according to Paranavitana, were different. 
Thi 
ery, he maintains, “permitted its lands, 
at least some 
es 
be ited by revenue farmers.’'8? 
; 
ec 
sai Beas obi both or either of these interpretations would 
dale 
: © income of at least some of the monasteries de~ 
aera hae faa who made a profit by taking a share of 
eee 
ae ves. Apart from the obvious economic disad- 
ee ae ‘Ou cies a loss of a part of the income) there were other 
at 
ae ee ee an arrangement 
undesirable. 
Difficulties. 
ee 
Tesul of giving over land which enjoyed many immu~ 
to 
private individuals for the administration of revenue. 
Further, 
77. EZ, Volt, p.92, ll. 420-3. 
ig - 
S. Perera, Institutions, ,.p. 1248, 
_ 
79, 
The term paita may be com 
‘i 
i 
int 
t 
tt 
nspared with the T 
i 
i 
o modern times and was used in the sense of a unten tae of SE 
S 
uJ 
ol revenue, area held 
etc. 
r 
iu 
ui 
a. 
f 
? 
} 
ld 
etc.” 
See Dharma Kumar, Land and Caste in South India, Oxford, 
80, Ibid. p. 140. 
81, Ibid. p. 
93, 43-4. 
82, Ibid. pp. 127-8.

--- PAGE 64 [DIRECT] ---

agement 
108 
"TEE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
tortion under such a system. 
Soren a es tte *Mihintale Tablets specifically 
uF ee practice. 
Hence it would be worthwhile to upuaees 
Se Eiows basic to the interpretations given above in order 
their ae 
St cane inscription from Anuradhapura rior bate Bs 
ractice of ‘taking kabali”’ and to individuals who el ar aa 
a 
nel 
munities to the Isuramenu monastery, it states: 
eran 
cages a from the land around the eae 
su pl se ai 
i 
undred 
a 
ee 
ce apne ns Laer unlikely that the ie 
ee! ae eee as eight hundred and seven mien 
bate 
paste fits dues. 
The term kébali is known to occur mt ie si 
cane el Keibiil 24 which has been taken by most scholars aan 
Bane 
s qatnente: made over to Tamil employees in remuner a 
annie ne : ices, 
According to many inscriptions, lands are patie : 
i ae e iaking of Kabili”’ (kdbali noganna). 
This would amou an 
sri i os by ihe king not to allocate land or revenue from the rae 
ipa 
: In a general sense kabili also could have denote al - 
ers ian riven over to share-croppers for cultivation. eerie 
beh : ar cd ah seven people mentioned in this record may 
be ri 
Sago Ga land of the monastery in return for service or on a sha 
ees ani us with the interpretation that ee hae se ate 
i 
dita 
tenure. 
Paral 
é 
be of th ale Sane bade his contention that some Veet 
tation ‘Abt agiti monastery were given out on this basis does ae 
i es be justified. The evidence basic to this CT 
erated ee 
vane in the inscription of Kassapa Vat this haath : aesaithctie 
those who farmed the revenues of villages oe Se ation 
sangha, any debts due from them may be recover! Le oe nee 
but they should not be subjected to any che? 5 
De es fastiets 
Paranavitana presumes that this refers to officials a’ Peper! 
who owed debts to the monastery. 
It would be ra Se 
eee aie the 
ever, if those who owed debts to the monastery sought 
relug' 
ee 
i 
db 
d 
avata 
83, 
veherd kabali ganna atasiyé sat ha titulu kot hoyin etera meterd vehera 
keaball noganna isd. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 33, Hf. 23-4. 4K 
84, EZ, Vol.IIlL, 
pp. 143, 274; Vol. IV, 
p.*'- 
% 
é 
icéva 
kot gata yale 
85. 
Kiimikam kalavun yam palia vilanduvas sane sare at qieaee non aa reas 
i 
su 
nigd 
aranu isa, 
. 
1, 
9. 
47, 
Hl. 
26.7. 
Vane 
ae 
in 
enue Sr 
see egcught tage" in the preceding statements: mint kot 
ie 
sset 
yan tanat van kenekun.. sesit biyen van keneku,, 
UL. 
24-5. 
H 
I 
{ t 
iy 
y 
i 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
109 
saigha. 
The meaning of the passage becomes clearer if the context 
in which it occurs is taken into consideration. 
This particular portion 
of the record deals with immunities granted to the monastery, which 
included exemption: from, interference by state officials, 
Complicat- 
ions arose when men wanted by the law entered the precincts of a mon- 
astery, and the last few statements preceding the one in question deal 
with the procedure to be followed when criminals who. had committed 
murder and other grave offenses sought refuge within monastic grounds. 
Taken in this context the officials and revenue farmers concerned seem to 
have been men who owed debts to the state and were, therefore, wan- 
ted by royal officials rather than those who owed debts to the monas- 
tery itself. 
Hence it would be wrong to conclude, on the strength of 
this statement, that some villages belonging to the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery had been farmed out for the collection of revenue. 
"On the other hand, the fact that the monastic officials were in close 
and direct contact with the tenants is implicit in the regulations given 
in the inscriptions which were intended to protect the tenant from unjust 
demands. 
It is tempting to suppose that the lands situated at a dis- 
tance from the monastery were given out on pafta, but there are direct 
references, at least in the Mihintale Tablets, to officials going away 
from the monastery on administrative errands. 
The officials who went. 
on tours were advised not to accept any food or presents from the ten- 
ants apart from the quota of rice that they were entitled to by tradi- 
* 
tion.86 
This would suggest that such tours were an established prac- 
tice, and thus it is clear that there is no evidence to suggest 
that the 
collection of dues from monastic estates had been farmed out to a class 
of middlemen. 
It seems very likely that the monastic administrat~ 
jon was directly involved in this task. 
The many grants made to monasteries during the period under con- 
sideration which exempted their estates from interference by state offi- 
cials indicate that the administrative functions hitherto carried out by 
state officials had become the responsibility of the monastic adminis- 
tration. 
The monastic administration had to adjust itself to these hew 
functions which included the administration of justice in the settlements 
which came under its control. 
Evidence for the fact that cases con- 
cerning at least the less severe offenses came under the direct jurisdic- 
tion of monasteries is found in the Mihintale Tablet where it is stated 
that fines were to be levied for offenses committed by tenants, 
The 
guilty party was to be made to pay the fine in cash or in labor at the 
tate of an allotment of work at irrigation reservoirs (presumably dredg- 
ing work), sixteen cubits in circumference and one in depth, for each aka 
86, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 93, i. A46-8, 
See also infra pp. 188-9.

--- PAGE 65 [DIRECT] ---

110 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
ofthe levy.2?. 
The administration of justice, even if it was a cone 
‘task, was also a profitable one and would have helped. to increas 
sk, 
: 
1es of the monasteries. 
4 
; 
; 
a the Hindu temples of South India it was. the cea peel 
i 
ted festivals and feasts to Brahmanas, 
a 
gement which conduc 
8 
‘ 
SE 
te 
; 
i 
' 
tes.98 
In Sri Lanka, 
land and dealt with boundary dispu ‘ 
, 
a, 
seminierrallon supervised the administration of monastic Saat a 
the collection of revenue, saw to the satisfaction of the wants . 
t a 
who dwelt at the monastery, and maintained a 
buildings. : x ri 
i 
it 
inve 
lus income there was as it sa 
5 
likely. that it invested whatever surp 
“om 
ta 
ae 
i 
i 
q 
sibility of protecting 
p 
In addition to these functions, the respons 
: 
: 
pre 
is 
d in the committee of manag 
ty of the monastery was also veste 
i 
eal It was this committee: which accepted the sureties and aes 
‘the guarantors that monastic employees had eerie oe oe 
i 
f 
ight be incurre 
: 
reimbursement of any loss that might 
thes 
Pina 
i 
thout the permission o 
on monastic grounds could be felled witho 
r 
iO edeags 
i 
iolated this regulation was 
liable 
ittee, and any person who violat 
1 
was 
: 
file 
90° The meetings of the committee were held at the ‘inner ears 
tery’ andit had a junior scribe (le daru) under its service presume ly 
attend to the clerical work arising from. its proceedings. 
Minor Administrative. Officials and Functionartes noire 
The committee of management required the services 0 a na 
number of officials to carry out the many duties which were he cae 8 
bility. It is likely that these lesser functionaries were appoint! ae : 
ra 
committee since, as noted earlier, it accepted sureties and euiees i 
guarantors of these employees. 
Of the many lesser officials is espe 
Mihintale Tablets, three, namely the La dead tiie iste fe aides 
i 
i 
kami, 
i 
highest emoluments in 
. 
the rajge updni kami, received the 
1 
nate 
Fach wee assigned one kiri and two Lal 
of land ne piesa ee 
a 
i 
rst, 
aS sugges 
A 
ance of two admand of tice.* 
The 
tst, 
a 
1 
¢ 
Ms 
ot probably an assistant steward in the ee ie Saran m 
i 
i 
ited 
as 
The second term pitassam has been translate 
eet 
gs”? 
ns 
’ by Miiller and Gunasekar 
. 
away 
dead flowers’? 
and 
“scavenger 
i 
é 
: 
: 
Soot vali But on account of the context in which this term is found 
, Vol. 
1, p. 
93, Ht. ASI-3. 
7 os MRE, Nos.327 of 1916, 
393 of 1929/30, 38 of 1931/2, 113 of 1938/9. 
39, EZ, Vol. I, p. 92, Hl. A234. 
90, AIC, No. 113. 
91. EZ, Vol. [, pp, 96-7, fl. B43-4 
92. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 945, Hl. BS, 9- 
93, AIC, p. 118; EZ, Vol. I, p. 108, 0. 
9. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
HL 
and the emolument that he received, it is rather unlikely that he was 
a minor workman. 
It occurs, together with kulassam, after two other 
officials, an administrator of a territorial division (bim lad) and an agri- 
cultural official (vel bédi), in an inscription from Viratidagoda dated to 
a period ‘between the beginning of the eighth and the middle of the 
ninth century."°* 
These two terms and their yariant forms pitatsam 
° 
and kulatsam also serve as designations of royal officials in the Vihare- 
gama and the Polonnaruva Council Chamber inscriptions of the tenth 
century.95 
The element assam and its variant aisam are found in a number of 
terms in the Mihintale Tablets such as kamassam, dummalassam, kar- 
and atsam, dage atsam and veher atsam. 
The last occurs in its earlier 
form vahara atsama in the Hitiguregala inscription. 
Paranavitana 
suggested the derivation of at from artha meaning “‘substance, wealth” 
and “property” and samu from samudga which means ‘“‘box”’ or “casket.’* 
He defined atasama as ‘‘a functionary entrusted with the box or casket in 
which the valuables belonging to the monastery were kept."*” 
But such 
a derivation seems unlikely as atsamu occuts in connection with kar- . 
aidu which also means ‘‘a casket.’’ 
Paranavitana has also suggested 
an alternative derivation from arthasyémin which would yield the trans- 
lation ‘‘purser.’'%8 
There is some evidence to support this interpretation.. 
The vahara 
atasama of the Hitiguregala inscription was one of the officials who 
paid out the money belonging to the sagha for purchases made in the 
name of the monastery. 
Similarly, the context in which veher atsam 
occurs in the Mihintale Tablets suggests that he was an official attached 
to the storehouse of the monastery.! 
It has been mentioned before 
that the karavtd atsama may have been the official in charge of the casket 
in which the records of accounts and perhaps the valuables of the 
monastery were kept, 
On the other hand, not all the officials bearing. 
the title atsam seem’ 
to have performed functions connected with the handling of money. 
The dunmalassam were minor employees responsible most probably for 
the provision of incense (dum) and flowers (mal) to the relic shrines and 
94, EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 1, p. 123, Mf, 1-3. 
95. 
EZ, Vol. TV, p.41, H. A10-3; 
p. 53, . A10-2. 
96. EZ,Vol.V, 
Pt.1, pp. 119-24, H.2, 
6, 9, 13. 
97, Ibid. p. 118, n. 6. 
98. 
Ibid. 
99, 
See EZ, Vol. V, pp. 111-9. 
100. 
See infra p. 114.

--- PAGE 66 [DIRECT] ---

112 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
the image-houses.""! 
Hence the rendering of aisan as ““purser’’ does 
not seem to be acceptable. 
Perhaps the term was derived from artha and srain, “to exert’ or 
“to toil,” and, like arthasidhaka, it denoted an official “who exerted 
himself for the success of a given cause.’ 
Atsam always occurs in 
conjunction with another word like pita, yeher, dage ot karatd, and 
thus the literal meaning of the term pitassam approximates the transla” 
tion given by Wickremasinghe, viz. “one who arranges outside affairs.” 
Tt has already been mentioned that the Sanskrit inscription at the 
Abhayagiri monastery speaks of the “protection of the inside and the 
outside.”’ 
Similarly, while referring to the management of finance, the 
Mihintale Tablets also draw a distinction between ‘inside’ and ‘‘out- 
side.'"1° 
Though the exact significance of these terms is not clear, it 
seems likely that a distinction was made between the day-to-day ad- 
ministration of the main monastery and such affairs as the management 
of property lying outside the immediate vicinity of themonastery. 
The 
latter, one may, postulate, fell within the duties of the pitassam. 
: 
There is little doubt that the first word in the title rajge upani kami 
meant ‘the palace” or in a secondary sense “the government.” 
Miil- 
ler translated the title as “a workman born. in the grounds of the king” 
and Gunasekara as ‘“‘a workman, in the king’s house.”!04 
Upé occurs 
in Sinhalese literature in the sense of ‘‘birth’’ as well as “rise, ascent and. 
upsurge;””?°* updni may have meant “that which has arisen.” 
On this 
basis, Wickremasinghe's translation of the term as the official who “at- 
tends to matters arising in (connexion with) the royal house’ appears 
to be the most acceptable.'9° 
The possession of land and the control that the monastery came to 
wield over its tenants would have given rise to many occasions of con- 
tact with royal officials. 
‘While discussing the disadvantages of living 
at a large monastery, the Sérattha-dipani points out that a monk living 
there may have to constantly visit the palace or the residences of the 
ministers to attend to various matters.107 
A ninth-century inscription 
forbids monks to send betel leaves or other presents to the royal house- 
hold for, the sake of gain! If the interpretation given above is 
101, 
EZ, Vol.L, p. 96, Ue B34, 38. 
102, 
EZ, Vol.1, p- 108. 
103, 
EZ, Vol.3, p- 
92, Ut, A22-3. 
104, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 408, n, 20 
5, Amdvatura, ed. V. Sorata, 1948, p. 145; Mahabodhivamsa Ganthipada Viva- 
0: 
ranaya, ed, R, Dharmarama, 1910, p. 92. 
106, EZ, Vol.I, p. 108. 
107, 
Sarattha-dipani, Pp. 562 
108, EZ, Vol I, p-4, 1. 13. 
apne 
POT 
TTS 
ESET 
keene 
mee 
URES 
RETR 
TL 
I 
TT 
: 
eS 
- - : 
nena 
searperenoncmen 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
113 
accepted, 
i 
= cer Rae 
piA 
at Cetiyagiri a special official had been 
1 
© relatio: 
anne 
ns between the monastery and the royal 
A similar title which. 
i 
fu 
sunilay: 
i 
occurs in the latter part of the Mihi 
o : iin upani kimi. 
This title occurs among the ee a ce 
sn rae awe the refectory, and hence, Perera has suggested ee i: 
eli 
" such a person, 
But this is not necessarily so, 
and 
pee aie 
hy that he received a much higher emolument than th 
r 
employees in this group. 
He was 
; 
: 
h 
* 
allotted a kiri 
daily raat of one admané of rice. 
Vila (Skt Es ane 
A - re Ssdiigvdla, therefore, would mean “a pete ee ma 
ve ot term, Saigvilla, occurs in another part of the fase ine i 
Remine ae made of certain dues (gekuli) received. eke 
sa te aa _Another inscription from the tenth century refers to thi 
Ais ee belonging to the saxgvilla of the .Mulasoveher ita 
Est _ pe o have been a hermitage which accepted the teadershi 
aha ond, a larger monastery. 
Thus, on the analogy of th 
ee 
ee hai aes 2 suggested that the satgvili upani kami cae 
nded 
to matters arising from relati 
ith 
. 
# 
i 
beh ne teres of the Cetiyagiri monastery ee 
E 
ry. 
re a : ai of monastic property, the treasury or the store 
eC ead 
i ae became an essential feature in the organization 
PS re i ns ines Fa-Hian mentions the treasury 
A 
i, 
mor 
ty 
which 
contained ‘‘numerous 
arash ie of inestimable value.”’!3 
It was suggested salen the 
: 
ane Ha belonging to the Cetiyagiri monastery were kept in s 
ae a et called the mundu karatdu.* 
In addition to this 
6 
as et ere to maintain a constant and extensive supply of ae 
ay tala of food to the monks and for the “‘payment’’ a the 
ee pee Ps bs stipulated in the Mihintale Tablets that 
Oo 
be present, 
without fail, 
at 
* 
; 
the 
“ 
” 
bie allowances were distributed, at the place hee: oe 
ee gin es ert and in the refectory when the food was distri 
1 
onks. 
These were probabl 
f 
: 
mittee of management rather than lesser officials Sia ai 
109. 
L. 8. Perera, Institutions. 
110, 
£Z, Vol.1, 
p. 
95, /. B21. een 
M1. EZ, Vol I, p. 93, i. A39, 
112, £Z, Vol. 1, p. 25, Hl. 11-3, 
143, 
Beal, op. cif., p. 47. 
‘a See supra p. 104, 
15. EZ, Vol.T, p, 29, ll, A26-9; 
see also infra pp. 145-6

--- PAGE 67 [DIRECT] ---

114 
HE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
i 
€ 
At the Cetiyagiri monastery the ae eRe, a, wn 
y 
as 
the 
; 
i 
anagement of the storehouse wi 
; 
- 
see te storehouse.” 
He receiyed two pa of land ae 
a fon y 
cae of one admand and two pat of rice. 
He had 
asi pede 
k ‘6 
raki who received the same amount of land but a 
ly i 
ariad 
or rice per day, 116 
Probably the two veher ee w 2 2 oe 
ial 
q 
d to the storehouse. 
: 
i 
officials also were attache: ito 
; 
! 
pei that officials who bore this title were connected with the fin 
ou 
! 
wy 
ere 
. 
ances of the iaonastery as early as the fifth century. 
They wi 
i 
iti 
i 
f one 
allotted the same amount of land in addition i 
a lau tels het! : a 
ri 
The four employees ca 
p 
; 
mand and one pat of rice. 
out 
¢ 
ra 
ae 
ate the same section of the inscription are described as nei 
elas translation, 
!® but this translation finds no a an 
duaaneate translated the phrase as “four Lo aaa he 
i 
the paymaster. 
ickremasinghe as ‘servants of 
; 
i 
Nei it ats English as “employees who served 
uae weet 
ers.’ 
Their emolument amounted to two pa a 
Ae 
& of ri 
h. One may 
ce of one admand of rice eac 
may 
vet 
aes were under the contro! of the & kdmiya and, through 
him, 
vs 
ittes of management. 
; 
; 
a apart from the administrative officials enumerated pian 
€ Beata functionaries who seem to have been concerne 
| 
Nas 
iAtais 
ic 
i nization of the ceremonial and the ritualistic aspects of monasti 
orga 
1 jet who was allotted a kiri 
i 
remost of these was the marigu 
Dane : yasag??? and an 
additional allowance of three ee 
nae Oran oe. 
gold a year?! 
The Mihintale Tablets speak 0 
ae ae (anne held in honor of yarious sacred objects at “ eugee 
ae the mavgul jef may have been the functionary in charge © 
stery, 
Jet 
i 
ization. 
_ 
; 
oe 
a 
Os aaedliely after this the inscription mentions a certain vatsikt 
‘4 
a 
hi 
kiimi who received & Kiri of land and a vasag.'?? 
Miiller translated this 
i 
I 
ta denoted a standard measure. 
i 
95, Hf, BL7-8, 
The term pala 
¢ 
x 
al 
eae ate 
116, EZ, ar The value of this measure is vague. 
The see 
ary on 
Byidence eects thatit was the equivalent of nati (See supra p. i Perens 
i a enaniaccnt quoted by V. Sorata ( sis 
Pp. adapt? tM La eee 
i 
: 
i 
2 
eis 
gi 
; 
ice 
f, 
Si 
i 
i 
ar 
context an employee 
ts 
g! 
an 
i 
al 
rl Se a no pat a8 jess than an eighth of a nati, A mana was half a nd! 
if 
Ser 
417, 
See supra p. 102. 
11g. ALC, 
Pp. 118. 
is 
9, 
EZ, Vol.1,p. 
109. 
, 
: 
a oe anexplanation of the term vasag, see infra pp. 148-53. 
121. EZ, Voll, p. 4, 1, BO-7. 
422. 
{bid Hl, BT-8. 
that all these 
. 
i | 
j 
ft i 
k 
| | 
| 
t 
iH 
i 
| 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
115 
term as ‘‘one who prepares medicine” without offering reasons for his 
interpretation. 
Gunasekara’s translation as ‘‘a servant of one year’ 
is no more suitable.'2> 
 Wickremasinghe has translated vatsikd kimi 
as “a cowherd,’’"4 but while vatsikd does mean “a calf" in Sanskrit 
vatsika kimi or anything equivalent is not known in either Sanskrit or 
Sinhalese usage as a term denoting “cowherd.’’ 
The context of its oc- 
currence also suggests that the person involved performed some cere- 
monial function, 
Vat can be derived from Skt. vrata and siké from 
siks@ and the vatsika kémi could, therefore, also have been an official 
connected with religious observances holding an office similar to that 
of the upadhivarika of the Mila Sarviastivada Vinaya,'?> who announced. 
the dates on which the monks had to practice religious observances. 
An official called of kimi, who received two paya of land and one 
admand and two pat of rice as a datly allowance, seems to haye been 
another employee of the same category. 
Miiller and Gunasekara trans- 
lated the term as ‘‘masker,’’!?6 and Sorata has suggested the render- 
ing ‘‘maker of headdresses,'"!?7 
A graffito from Sigiri, dated to the 
second half of the eighth century, records a verse composed by three men 
who described themselyes as the assistants or the apprentices (atavdsi) 
of the olkamuna of the Dunaturd-né-vehera,!2* 
Paranavitana believed 
that the oJkamuna was a master craftsman similar to a sculptor since 
‘he had ‘“‘apprentices.”!*° 
But if the olkimi in the Mihintale Tablets 
was a craftsman, it is more than likely that he would have been listed in 
that section of the inscription which deals with the payments made to 
various craftsmen 
like carpenters, 
stoneworkers 
and 
blacksmiths. 
Secondly, the title kami (karmi) also suggests that he was probably a 
functionary. 
Olkémi can be compared with puda olakkam, which occurs 
in the Daladé-sirita, in the sense of ritual pertaining to the worship of 
sacred objects, 
'°° and if the terms were indeed related, the olkémi would 
haye been a functionary who supervised the performance of daily ritual. 
In his study of the Tirupati temple, Stein pointed out that the ex- 
pansion of the temple led to the rise of new subsidiary institutions with 
separate endowments and administrative arrangements which enjoyed a 
123, AIC, p. 118; EZ, Vol. 1, p. 108, n. 1. 
124, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 108. 
. 
See Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary, Vol, Il, 
126, £2, Vol. 1, p. 108, n. 11, 
127, SSS,p. 198. 
Paranavitana, Sigiri Graffiti, Vol. U1, p. 233, v, 375, 
129, ibid. pp. 233, n. 4, 
: 
Dalada-sirita, od, V. Sorata, 1955, p, 51,

--- PAGE 68 [DIRECT] ---

116 
‘THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
certain degree of autonomy.!3!_ 
[thas already been noted in a previous 
chapter that signs of a similar development are evident in the tendency 
to make land grants to @ particular institution within the monastery 
rather than to the monastery a8 a whole. 
Additional evidence is found 
in the Mihintale Tablets which refer to the prevalence of institutions like 
the “relic shrine’’ (dage) and the “image-house’’ (pilimage) with separate 
endowments and officials distinct from those of the main institution. 
The “relic shrine”’ owned a village called. Karandigama while another 
village, Gutigama, belonged to the “jmage-house.”!*? 
Six officials 
are listed.in the service of the first, namely dage atsam, ganajelu, 
karaidle and three who bore the title varjefu. 
Tt is noteworthy that the 
first and the third bear titles similar to those of the committee of 
management. 
It is likely that the dige atsam was the official in charge 
of the shrine and that the karavidle was vested with the charge of the 
relic casket or the casket of valuables, if not both. 
Gunasekara has 
suggested that the ganajetu was the chief of a chapter of monks, a very 
unlikely supposition,'** and Miller took it to mean “the overseer of 
tenantry.’''*4 
Wickremasinghe’s translation, ‘the chief of the retinue 
of attendants,’ seems to be the most appropriate since the term 
gananayaka is also used, at. times with this meaning.35 
As to the 
last term, Wickremasinghe’s translation as “superintendents of service 
by turns’’ is quite acceptable, This institution seemis to have depended 
to a great extent on the corvée or “service in turn’ as a source of 
Jabor.36 
All. these six officials presumably received the dues from 
Karandigama for their services. 
At least two officials were employed at the shrine of the stone image. 
Both of these, the piindkémi and the kamassam, receiyed grants of two 
pa of land and a daily allowance of one admand and two pat of rice 
each.!37 
While the first term is obscure, 
!5# the kamassam probably was 
the functionary who attended to the administrative 
affairs relating 
to the image-house. 
131, 
-B, Stein, “The Economic Functions of a Mediaeval South Indian Temple,” 
Journal of Asian ‘Studies, Vol. XIX; 4959-60, pp. 163-7. 
132, 
£Z, Vol. 1, pp. 75113, Ul, A37-8, B34-9, 
133, 
EZ, Vol.1, 
vp. 110, n. 5. 
434, 
AIC, p. 119. 
135, 
EZ, Vol.Lp- 110, 
136, 
See infra pp. 121-2. 
137, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 9, Ht, B41-2. 
438. Wickremasinghe believed that pind was a variant of ptiad,a ceremonial 
vessel used in shrines for pouring water and considered to be vested with magical 
power. 
It was ‘used in litigation and witnesses were made to swear on it, £Z, Vol. 
Lp. Win.7. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
147 
The Labor Force and Conditions of Service 
; The monastery maintained a considerable labor - 
i 
Lannea ata ae and to satisfy the needs of its pits pd 4 
aM sie omestic employees who attended to such chores as 
Lassi es 
ministering to the personal needs of the monks;!*% 
Hanes ae while others were laborers who were employed in 
sash Sahel ba : oe connected with religious cere- 
ave 
been recrui 
j 
means: some were employees who received land se pha 
ces of rice; some were s]| aves or bondsmen; and othe: 
monastery who performed coryée duty. 
ieee 
iio. pace maintained a permanent staff of craftsmen fi 
ion 
work. 
According to the ninth-century Sanskrit fraction 
~ from the Abhayagiri monastery, stone-cutters(si/akultaka) and carpenters 
reise alee Ae " = assigned one and a half kiri of fields from the 
sania fe ae renovation work at the monastety (nava- 
, 
Higa ies a ition, they were also giyen tracts of unirrigated land 
fp a Hi a rior grains’ (kudhanya), 
A similar allotment was made 
Seema a who supervised their work, 
They were given two 
laa reac days to finish their work and were to be deprived of 
ana bei a failure to abide by this stipulation.’ 
fuerte 
, 
ation is available on the exact strength of this 
In 
thi 
thi 
eae ee Mihintale Tablets prove more useful as they 
ee 
is = employees. 
The kamanavamda kabili jet seems 
ee 
ee 
twelve men under him who were tanned KAbIfE an iM ni aa 
ho 
¥ 
Ti 
and received 
pa an only two pa of land.'4! 
It is not certain wy cae sce 
ili; one possibility is that they were in ch 
“‘secti 
” 
Bie oie 
charge of 
“sections 
At 
; 
a a ering . band of craftsmen was the chief master artisan 
Seis a 
toa who 
received the tract of unirrigated land at Boid- 
ae 
al ae and under him there were two other master 
ara a sea The largest group of workmen were the eight 
aa 
adlu. (Gunasekara, who held that sir was equivalent to 
» 
translated it as 
‘‘basket-makers.”’ 
Miiller and Wickremasinghe 
139, 
Seeeg,, 
E 
8 EZ, Vol.T, p. 93, Hal, 
45 
ea EZ, Vol. 
1, p 5, I, 25-32, 
eo 
« 
EZ, Vol.I, p. 97, 1. B48-50,

--- PAGE 69 [DIRECT] ---

118 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
compared the term with siriyaru and took jt to be derived from chiirikd- 
vardhaka, thereby translating it as “carver."142 
Siriyaru occurs in the 
Ruvanmal-nighandu as the term for “carpenter,”’ which is inappropriate 
in this context since carpenters are mentioned separately.“ 
A more 
acceptable explanation would be to compare it with Tamil sirpar and to 
translate it as *stone-worker,.’’ There were two workmen called ujuvade, 
This term may be translated. as “prickmakers,” “brickmasons"’ or ina 
general sense as “builders,” 
Atl these employees were entitled to a share 
from the income from Vadudevigama (Devdgama of the artisans), 
In 
addition, there were two carpenters (kajuvagu) who received one Kiri 
each, two master lapidaries (minir maha dduru) who received three Kiri 
each and two blacksmiths (kambur) who got one Kiri each. 
The village, 
Sunuboldevigama (Deviigama of the lime-burners) was allotted to the 
lime-burners. 
For its transport work the monastery employed six 
garters, and the village Damunugama was set apart for this purpose. 
{t does not: necessarily imply that these yillages were in fact given to 
the employees concerned, 
It may be merely that the residents of these 
two villages were obliged to provide the lime required by the monastery 
and the carters for its transport work.’ 
Substantial resources were set apart for repairs at the Cetiyagiri 
monastery. 
One payala from Damgamiya and two kirifrom Algamiya 
were to be used for repairs at Katumahasiya and Kiribaidpavudagiba 
respectively, while all the offerings received at these two shrines as well 
as the shrines of the main monastery, in addition to ten yal of paddy and 
one hundred kaland of gold, were set apart for repairs at the main 
monastery.)#8 
It is evident that every year the monastery employed 
a considerable labor force for this purpose. 
Such a system would have 
ensured the self-sufficiency of the monastery and its independence from 
the support of the king for its maintenance. 
A tenth-century record from the Abhayagiri monastery states that 
the income from the villages and the land set apart for meeting the cost 
of repairs should be used for that purpose alone. 
Jf there were no such 
funds, whateyer was left from funds set aside for food and clothing was 
tobe used. 
And if there was no balance left from the funds set apart: 
for food, half of the funds set apart for robes was to be used for repairs. 
Monks who failed to carry out these instructions were to pe expelled from 
thie monastery.4¢ 
T nis passage suggests that some monasteries were no 
142, 
EZ, Voi.1, p. 412, n. 2. 
143, 
Ruvanmal-nighaadu, 
Pp. 
77, No. 396. 
144, EZ, Vol. 1, p.97, U. B44-8. 
145, 
EZ, VoL, pp. 92.3, HA31-7. 
146, BZ, Voi.I, p. 236, Il. 40-4. 
. 
produce robes for monks. 
According to the Samantapasadika, 
i 
-months and fiye days.'54 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
1 
19 
ea hie bea end ne same time, it hints at the possible preva: 
which 
did not 
: 
saa 
possess funds to meet the cost of reno- 
T 
i 
: 
i 
i 
re a 
hint mi aie pes instances of kings undertaking restora 
r 
eries. 
Even the larger and better e 
: 
t 
¢ 
ndo 
- 
aes ibigataae i erg tine 
their help in this respect, aan 
peed 
ee ee to serve at the Ruvanvalisiya, 
e 
task of restoring the shrines 
A 
1 
of A: 
and placed extensive funds at his disposal for this Se ne 
au arakmena occurs in the Péjavaliya'® as well as in the Sti ‘es 
cit celia . the equivalent for Pali drakkhapdricariya, 
149 = oe 
! 
the duty of guarding the Bo Tree. 
The help of the king i 
ase hi rhs is most sree and generously giyen after foreigh 
; 
: 
e reigns of 
Sena 
I 
Sat Con sauetion 
a I and Udaya lV, and after the 
Some of the craftsmen menti 
i 
; 
he 
o 
ioned in the preceding 
list, 
li 
per a 
lapidaries, would also have been employed iG ane : 
ron 
pl pie the monastery, Apart from them; there was a ae of 
oe " o catered specifically to these needs of the monaster 
Th 
nae : at te list five potters (umbal) who were given One EGE of 
ee bf Fy ey were to supply five vessels a day. Another potter 
seen 
ba kiri of land and a daily allowance of two admand of 
eturn 
for supplying ten bowls and ten water-pots every month 
: 
tt 
t 
mi 
most 
Lastly 
one Kir? and two paya were allotted 
to an e1 
oyee, 
y 
ployee, 
probably a weaver, who supplied the monastery with a water-strainer 
1 
: 
j 
every month.'5!_ 
It is also possible that weavers were employed to 
ossible 
In 
possible 
for monks to accept weavers and dyers as drdmikas,'5? 
Th 
fact, the Abhayagiri monastery owned a weavers’ village.153 
The Sanskrit inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery speaks of 
.. 
the pafteakaulikas who worked on the grounds of the monastery. 
Their 
work wi 
i 
Al ind 
praia out to them, and they were held responsible for the 
eir assignments within the stipulated period of two 
A similar term occurs in the chronicles. 
147, 
EZ, Vol. U1, p. 80, 7, 2! 
» 
Vol. 
II, 
p. 
80, 
7, 
29-32. 
oe Pjv., p. 1S. 
, 
Simhala Bodhivamsa, 
ed. Dhi 
150. Cy. 51. 69, Wuaeae 
ope ane 
it EZ, Vol.I, pp. 75-113, Ht. B27-9, 37, 
. 
Smp., Vol, I, p. 683. 
153, 
Cy. 41.96. 
154, EZ, Vol. I, p. 5, £1.29-30.

--- PAGE 70 [DIRECT] ---

| 
120 
TH MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
According to the Calavamsa, King Mana, who built the Uttaromila, 
endowed it with pattcapessavaggas.'°* 
(Pessa and pessiya mean “sere 
vant.'’!59) Geiget translated the term as ** five groups of servitors.”’457 
The term occurs in variant form in two later instances. 
Kittisirimegha, 
secking a reconciliation with the young prince Parakramabahu, is said 
to have sent the paiscapessiyavaggas to him, along with a letter and 
presents. 5 
Also, Parakramabahu JL (1287-1293) is said to have 
assigned the five pessiyavaggas who served at the palace to work for 
the saigha? 
: 
‘This term is probably equivalent to patica-kammalar and @fiju- 
cattiyar in Tamil, but it is not possible to atrive at a definite conclu- 
sion on the constitution of these groups. 
One Tamil list gives gold- 
smiths, 
coppersmiths, stonemasons, 
carpenters 
and blacksmiths as 
forming the five groups.! 
Two lists from Sri Lanka found in the 
Abhidhanappadipika Sannaya and the Mahdaripasiddhi Sannaya agree 
in saying that the five kulas were constituted of carpenters, weavers, 
dyers or washermen (rajaka), barbers 
and teather-workers.' 
The 
Apannaka Jataka reférs to the “five low castes’’ (paftcasu nica kulesu) 
and the Jataka Ajuva Gitapadaya says that they are composed of 
musicians(vena), hunters, chariot-makers, scavengers and candilas 1% 
Though in the absence of conclusive evidence it is not possible to 
decide in favor of any of these lists, it may be pointed out that the 
Jataka Atuva Gétapadaya is the oldest among these works. 
References to kings offering these craftsmen to monasteries suggest 
that slavery was a source of labor that the monasteries depended on, 
The Samantapasadika forbids the saigha to accept slaves, but. in the 
- same breath sanctions their acceptance if they were offered as Gramikas 
and kappiyakarakas..° 
Some inscriptions of the seventh and eighth 
centuries which were found in monastic precincts refer to people releas- 
. 
ing themselves or others from slavery by paying a fee which amounted at 
155, 
Cv. 57, 21. 
156. 
Péli-English Dictionary, PTS, 
See pessiya. 
157, 
Cyv,, trl, Pt. 1, p. 194, 
158, 
Cv, 67.58. 
159, 
Cy. 84.5, 
The Pjy. uses the term mé tdén in place of pessiya-vagga. 
if 
a Tamil Lexicon, p. 2403. 
taifan, kannan, cirpan, taccan, koltan, Cankatta- 
ara 
. 
161, 
Abhidhanappadipika Sannaya, ed. Pafiiamoli, 1895, p. 69; Mahdardpastddht 
Sannaya, ed. Dharmmaratana, 1926, p. 
418. 
162, 
The Jataka, ed. Y. Fausboll, Vol. I, p- 106; JAG, p. 53, 
The term ratha- 
kara was 
also wsed to 
denote 
‘‘leather-workers.” 
See Jdtaka Sannaya, et 
Dhammaratana, 1927, p. 511. 
163, 
Smp., Vol. Il, p- 683. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
421 
times to a 
figure as high as o: 
pas, 164 
me scholars 
fi 
as 
one hundred kahd, 
; 
was 
LpaRaS, 
So. 
i 
have cast doubt on the significance of the evidence from these inseiodots 
hey deny that the term vaharala, which occurs in these records soli 
D 
a 
*slavery,"'165 
if 
this 
evi 
; 
very 
But, oven if this evidence is disregarded, the prevalence 
of 
P 
ce © 
slavery at monasteries is be 
( 
av 
a 
yond doubt. 
Accordi 
A 
. 
According to the Ca 
- sess GSD. 619-628) granted captives taken in ee ease 
Maa bs 
and Aggabodhi IV 
(667-683), 
Potthakuttha i 
‘ 
= 
provided slaves for the 
ise 
elias 
ae aii 
various religious establish- 
ach Ries ee founded.'% 
The Galpata-vihara eee rans 
a 
specific, 
It mentions two types of slaves—‘‘heredi 
ae ee puree slayes’’ (ranvahalin). Ini fact, it has 
slaves were purchased 
with 
ing’ 
a monastery, 
It also lists ej 
ipl 
ior nee 
\ 
ighty-three slaves, in 
ili 
, I groups of 
ie been granted to serve the monastery in yarious : 
eta : 
herds, potters and tailors,1 
; 
spears ere 
It would appear that th 
‘ 
he monastery was 
al 
i 
3 
Nn 
also entitled t 
ue sinege 2 
tenants who occupied its lands. 
Most aa ‘8 ae 
re . 
si ae were not to take vdriyan from siigila: ths 
a 
astery. 
An inscription fr 
ipota 
: 
peat 
7 
rom Noccipotana cat 
i 
aa re ~ ai should not be taken for irrigation work gee 
nae sens 
cs Dorabavila stipulates that variyan or buf i 
bree Bes be si for ee work even if the twelve main fens 
stroyed.170 
One may 
pr 
, 
: 
; 
presume that t 
prevented royal officials from mustering men and cattle Vue 
c 
villages for irrigation work. 
In f 
vivi has been used in the 
vsilun 
act, ’ 
he Kavsilu 
Grants of immunitie: 
Sf 
8 from service’ d 
i 
er 
Y 
ue to the, kin 
a anes oe tights were turned over to the Pees eerie 
probably the Sanskrit equivalent of yéri, occurs in the Sanskrit 
164, EZ, Vol, TV, pp. 135, 144, 285-96, 
165, 
See D. J. Wijeratne, ‘Interpretation of Vaharala, 
etc. in 
Sinhalese Inser ip- 
by 
% 
ty 
s 
if 
in 
Sinhal 
tons,” 
UCR, Vol. X, 
1952, pp. 103-20. 
See also Paranavitana’s reply: 
‘‘Interpreta~ 
166, 
Cv, 44.73, 
Aer. Cy. 46. 10, 20; 50. 64, 
a BZ, Vol. LV, pp. 206-7, ll. 12-23, 
i, ee pes vari noganné isd. EZ, Vol. WU, p. 7, Ht, 12-4 
110, 
doles maha vd sunad vari. 
iu 
md 
isd, 
Vol. 
V 
Van 
rivan mivun nogai 
ar thls paioane generally translated as cabarets” aod woskane a ae retites 
viriyan) see a Ree 
ete a curious suggestion: “Since ‘is Let erie 
Needles ee 
! 
and 
mivin, can it not mea 
i 
ee 
a0, 
ye pate on ae 
pate 
ot 
mean a kind of oxen?” 
(p, 29 
UL. heen Cais rpretation is most inappropriate, 
" 
=

--- PAGE 71 [DIRECT] ---

422, 
| 
THB MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIG PROPERTY 
inscription from Abhayagiri.'? 
In this record yarikas ate mentioned 
jn one instance along with karmakaras and in another instance with 
karakas and karmakaras as one of the parties held responsible in cases 
where assignments ate not completed according to stipulation. 
Accord- 
ing to the Samantapasadika, yiharavarikas were to be employed to keep: 
watch over the belongings of the monks.!3 
The Sarattha-dipani, its 
commentary, explains that vihdravirikas were those who took turns in 
guarding the monasteries.17* 
Varikas need not necessarily have been 
laymen; but in the context of inscriptional evidence cited, there is 
hardly any doubt that they were laymen. 
Evidence in the Mihintale 
Tablets adds to the certainty of this supposition. 
Here it is stipulated 
that the monastery should avail itself of the “three-day turn of service’” 
(tunda var) put should not levy other forms of corvée like service on 
poya days.175 
This not only confirms that the monastery enjoyed the. 
right to free Jabor but. also suggests by implication that this right was 
sometimes abused. 
The grant made by Vijayabahu I to a monastery of 
the residents of the district of Ajisara has already been discussed. '7 
Tt may be cited as an indication that the right of the monasteries to 
corvée labor continued to be prevalent in the eleventh century. 
The mechanisms for the exchange of goods and services in the mon-~ 
astic economy were not uniform and homogeneous; in fact, it seems that 
different types of mechanisms operated simultaneously. 
Some of the 
services that the monastery received were from groups like slaves and 
tenants, while almost all the other employees were given allotments of 
jand in remuneration for their services, 
In the Mihintale and Kaludiya- 
pokuna inscriptions, these allotments are termed divel (var. jivel), The 
Sanskrit inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery uses the term jivita- 
dana, which. is presumably the Sanskrit equivalent of this term and has 
been translated as “maintenance.” The inscription of Kassapa V at the 
same premises directs the officials of the monastery to hold land and the 
villages of the main monastery only on the basis of dasakdré tenure,!7 
and another inscription at Abhayagiri reveals that other employees also 
a 
172. EZ,VoL4,P. 5,1, 23-4, 30-1. 
173. 
The reading vihdracarika has been preferred ini the P.T.S. edition. 
It gives 
yiharavarika as & variant form, 
Ca and va are easily mistaken for each other in the 
Sinhalese script. ‘There is no doubt that the original reading was yihdravarika since 
the Sarattha-dipar, the commentary 0D the Smp., cites this term in its comments on 
this passage. 
‘Smp. p. 357. 
474. 
yiharavariko, varan katva vihararakkhanako. 
Sarattha-dipani, p- 516, 
175. 
EZ,Vol.1, p. 93, i. A44, 
See also infra p. 200. 
176, 
See supra pp. 88-9. 
177, EZ, Voi 1, p. 49 HAG. 
| 
t 
| 
| | 
held land on the basis of dasakdré tenure74 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
125 
occur in any of these records, 
The term divel does not 
Wickremasi 
i! 
ead ae gh ae ries dasakéré variously as “tenth 
Laurea 
rvile 
te 
7 
asa yields to either 
i 
i 
tea Histo while commenting on the word eae 
eels taka, 
equates it with dasamabhagam and adds th ae 
f 
pa y 8 a tenth of the yield to the owner of th 
: 
Abn el 
eae 
he land was known in an- 
On the other hand, 
i 
i 
if dasa is taken 
i 
ee 
> 
1 
nin the sense of “ 
. 
Baie aed tape by Wickremasinghe would ies = 
: 
its contexts dasakéré indi 
nae 
Loi 
rd indicates a t 
os ay ae ofthe monastery. 
The fact that ie ah i eee 
eee aa pra suggests that dasakdrd had fae ateca 
paucity of evid 
it 
i 
i 
ie 
im ge oe 
any of these interpretations, si 
ea ear 
n addition to land the empl: 
; 
ssieutuet 
smployees at the Cetiyagiri mo: 
pees ee se eae of rice. The Abhayagiri sienptice’ nee were 
bib joes vatdkam) being paid to the employees es vi 
Brin 4 
er record from the Abhayagiri monastery 
a nd 
ae 
oualaated 
inscriptions refer to employees receivin, 
a i C 
cere eriteeniiee interpreted as a type of land en asa 
ae ae san it was derived from Skt. nivi meaning ce it vanes 
Scie ie im probably carries the same meaning. as ee : ich 
given as the Prk 
cae Hie ag ete it 
pasate 
t 
nivdpa, 
and in another 
i 
. bie ) seinen as nima and savabilla,.©4 Thus ye 
alk 
era se the meaning ‘‘wage.’’ 
This ‘‘wage’’ at ene ier 
ee eee the term, nivapa itself originally meant ‘‘grai sid sas 
Gavan een eed ee that some of the stint seed 
at the 
m 
ved 
an allow: 
i 
eee 
ance for clothing.*8 
i 
peed naan ae {employees wore an upper ees tad 
ress, 
The Daladé-sirita stipulates that Sroplbee 
Ae EZ, Vol. 1, p. 236, 1. 48, 
se Smee i, pp. 56, p. 103, n. 2; p. 240, n, 1 
. 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol.1, p. 250; Smp. Vol. VI p. 1103, 
181, 
Saxgun désan vatdkam 
here, most probably, 
refers 
to 
the payment made 
to 
ig) 
tdkam 
her: 
robably, 
refers 
to 
thi 
yl 
t 
made t 
7 
the monks and th e employees si) 
oy 
record for the provision of food. EZ. Vol 
Ep. 4, t oe in another part of the: 
182. EZ, Vol. 
> 
«1, p. 236, £, 48; Vot. Tl 
183. 2, Vol Ill,p. 267, n.2 
awe 
ie 
hampiyd Aiuva Gat 
15 Seo laha p. 148. 
tapadaya, 
pp. 76, 161, 226, 
. 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 97, i. BS3-4,

--- PAGE 72 [DIRECT] ---

124 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
who served at the shrine of the Tooth relic should be dressed in tunics 
(sdita) and headdresses (mayilakattu),"*7 and it is possible that similar 
regulations about dress existed eyen in earlier times. 
The Cetiyagiri 
monastery had even set apart three Kiri of land to be assigned to 
washermen for laundering the garments of its employees.'* 
The Cetiyagiti: monastery employed more than 
a hundred and 
seventy workers and functionaries in all. Apart from, other allowances, 
a hundred and seven Kiri and three paya of irrigated land, an allotment 
of unirrigated land and dues from five villages were assigned for their 
maintenance. 
The relatively high emoluments that the craftsmen. recei- 
ved is one of the most noteworthy features to emerge from a study of 
‘the conditions of service at the monasteries. Each of the master lapidaries 
received a tract of land measuring three kiri, the highest remuneration 
received by, any employee outside the committee of management. 
The 
potter, the painter, the florist and the astrologer! came next, with 
assignments of two kiri each. 
it isinteresting to note that they receiyed 
higher remunerations than the lesser administrative officials at Mihintale, 
In fact, the cooks and the washermen at this monastery received as 
much land as officials like the pirivahanu vata kimi and thé rajge upani 
kami. 
It is likely that these rates of remuneration varied from monas- 
tery to monastery and from time to time. 
For instance, the ninth- 
century records from the Abhayagiri monastery reyeal that one and 
a half kiri of fields and a plot of unirrigated land were set apart for a 
carpenter while, 
- 
at Mihintale, a carpenter received an assignment of 
only one Kiri of land during the tenth century. 
Some ofthe craftsmen employed at the monastery, such as carpen- 
ters, brickmakers and stone-cutters, were organized under “chief master 
artisans” (vagu maha adur) and “master artisans’ (vadu ddur).9° 
The 
names of these employecs and the exact nature of the services they rend- 
ered were recorded in the monastic registers.!" 
It appears from. the 
inscriptions at the Abhayagiri monastery that they had to serve the mon- 
astery sixty-five days a year. 
Bach employee was given a specific assign- 
ment at the beginning of this period, and, if he failed to work according 
to these arrangements and to finish the work within the due time, the 
allotments of land made over to him were liable to be withdrawn.' 
187. 
Dalada-sirita, P. 51 
188, 
EZ, Voi.3,p.97, i. 853-4. 
189. 
See infra p. 235, 
190, 
EZ, Vol. J, p. 97, Uh. B44-7. 
191, EZ, Vol.1,p.5, i. 28-9. 
192, 
Ibid. p. 5, 1. 30-2. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
125 
Similarly, those craftsmen 
i 
A 
who supplied the monastery 
wit 
: 
\ 
with 
pc atts quotas.!93 While the monastery ade Hae Ne 
ae ie the allowances and land allotments made poe ; 
f 
they failed 
in their duties, these edict 
ipule 
7 
{ 
$ also stipulat 
han who had fulfilled his obligations should be ate 
Be ee oe would seem that the relationship between the aed 
ployees acquired 
whi 
‘i 
1 
peor 
ql 
what may be described as a contractual 
oe foe kings sought to safeguard ‘the rights of employees and ter 
rials ey bases ay the monastery could exercise strict control o ss 
2 pu - be : 
: heats the eH stated threat of depriving re 
of 
the 
- 
ntly owned 
the implements with which 
the 
agri 
th 
- 
ue 
tilled 7 land and the artisans practiced their craft. A pccins 
e com ic discipline classifies all metal implements of ce tanh, like 
eee leather-workers, tinsmiths, blacksmiths and lapidaries, 
agricultural implements like hoes, spades and axes as the “‘indi rf 
io 
al of the monastery.’ 
Only a few specified peoriey ‘ 
P acing raiper were exempted from this rule; they were canteens 
ee 
an individual monks could lay claim to them, 
Thi 
aout ee written in Pali but its author claims that he based his ik 
o ava ari ese and that he strictly adhered. to the traditions 
f 
: 
. 
Tradition has ascribed it to Buddh: 
, 
h 
agh: 
Ss 
amenb 
pointed out,!% there is no internal sre ah rete 
ere . bind dates from the fifth century or not long after 
ink 
ea Ss nological and social development, when metal tools ai 
ae oe ea by, the ownership of the means of production would 
eae done i a domineering position vis 4 vis the workers 
. . Hence, if some of the arran 
Hence 
gement f 
* 
change of goods and services in the monastic economy seem és pee 
a 
contractual basis, it 
was certai 
y 
t 
contract between two 
inde- 
t 
tainly 
no’ 
2 
a 
ind 
Bookkeeping and Accounting at the Monastery 
Ani 
i Shae eee ite of the system which was developed to manage 
Be ah 
eka ie labor resources of the monastery was the tradition 
aie 5 bs maintaining records. 
The interest eyinced by the 
stery 
in 
bookkeeping and accounting 
was worthy of a business. 
ok See EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, if, B27-30, 
194, apa TI, p. 265, /, 30-2, 
. 
Sce 
Kankhdvitarant, ed. D, Maskell, 1. 
ni, 
ed. 
D. 
» London, 1956, pp. 135- 
. 
AP. Buddhadatta, 
Pali Sdhityaya, Ambalangoda 1960 vad p. 210. 
da, 
» 
VoL, 
p. 
210,

--- PAGE 73 [DIRECT] ---

126 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
i 
which 
i 
in 
house. 
The monastery maintained a register which is ani aed 
the Sinhalese records and palijika in the Sanskrit inscrip ie Lai 
Abhayagiri monastery. 
According to L-tsing, registers con a ae 
names of the resident monks were maintained at monet a 
India? 
Even if monastic registers in Sri Lanka containe ae 
information, they were certainly not limited to it. a Lease 
Sanskrit inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery 
pee . . 
upon the appointment of an employee, his name and tl C = 
Sande 
duties were to be entered in the register.1° According : aren 
Tablets, all receipts from. estates as well as all lay eee 
supply of food, for repairs, and to those who were entitle 
eaten 
es also recorded in the register.2? 
The records of a ies 
vane 
monastery mention certain functionaries called ED 
ve 
senior monks who maintain the register.""7 
But, as note a a 
official vested with this task at the Cetiyagir eee bird a - 
i 
X 
a 
da 
The committee of management prepared a 
° 
: 
: 
counts from the entries in these registers, and Ui he ce begat 
i 
1.201 
The committee 
had 
a 
‘ 
: 
ced in a locked casket. 
; 
seal 
ses 
ae casket was stamped with this seal and Sai in se a pane 
is 
i 
that 
thi 
inistratiye procedure 
It is important that this adminis 
d 
: 
Bae 
i 
it 
i 
he committee of manag! 
daily 
and thus it is clear that 3 
en a body of officials which ie meet hier Aue eet 
1 
i 
: 
ting the committee, 
nM 
Due to its regular system of accoun 
agen ae 
tO 
tate of finances and was 
had knowledge of the day-to day s 
f 
ded 
position to exert full control oyer financial matters and to lessen chan 
of misappropriation. 
et 
197. 
I-tsing, A Record of the Buddhist Religion, p. 65. 
498, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 5, Hl, 27-9 
199, EZ, Vol 1, p. 94, 
pee 
Vol. I, p. 5, Hf, 27-31. 
Jn 
ten 
Me 
de 
Pal he pata Tare tak paspot-hi liyava Keammtéin Lave nanrn ee wf sat 
Nt manavun sanin patavay mundi karanduyehi taba. E. Wi see anahe N gudh 
‘The 
phrase san ofamanayun sanin palavay Was translated by : ic Seeded aS 
suah’s 
are found falseshall be expunged from the account| S. Leen aentt 
toterpretation of ota as‘ falsehood” and Jayattlals i yen Mt 
Si ata OS 5658) 
i 
ne 
d ofa occur in the D. 
p 
eat 
Faire 
eae ea 
“to 
deposit.’ 
Pafavanit and patvay are known 
in the sense of 
“to place’ and 
“to deposit.” 
ui and Pay 
Ose “San ea poe 
i 
ani 
“to 
fill, to load, to impose ant 
i 
ate 
ie eed naan a pas the translation of the passage as given above sec! 
“sign 
a 
be the most appropriate. 
i 
asteri¢s 
~~ 
202, 
No seals which can be definitely identified as those belonging to monas! 
red 
Is of this nature have been yecove 
pie, Natanda, Kasia and Paharpir. 
A. Ghosh, 
1ix; ASTAR, 
in 
Sri Lanka, 
have been found so farin Sri 
; 
at 
mans se 
astic sites in North India, viz. 
alandé, 
: 
1 ae alandds pl. X; Dikshit, Pahdrpur Excavations, MAST, No. 55, BI 
1905.6, p. 58. 
i 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
127 
At the end of every month a monthly statement of accounts was 
prepared from the daily statements, and at the end of cach year the twelve 
monthly statements were used to prepare the annual statement of ac- 
counts which was presented to the assembly of monks.) 
Individual 
monks who enjoyed property bélonging to the monastery also were re- 
quired to show their accounts.?°* 
Probably these, as well as the accounts 
of hermitages attached to the monastery, went into the annual statement. 
The Sanskrit inscription at the Abhayagiri monastery directs the 
monks living in the hermitages at Lahasikaé, Hunala and Sunagrama to 
collect the income from the villages belonging to these hermitages and to 
make the officials (karmi) and the accountants (ganaka) submit, at the 
end of each year, a statement of income, expenditure and balance in hand 
for perusal by the monks nominated for the purpose by the sargha (pre- 
sumably of the main monastery). 
If any dishonesty was detected, the 
offender was to be made to restore the property in question, and disputes 
were to be inquired into by the senior monks who kept the register.2°5 
The inscriptions at the Abhayagiri monastery further specify that each 
year the officials of the monastery were to place before the monks the 
annual statement of income, expenditure and payments made to the 
employees of the establishments attached to the nikdya viz. the Naka.. 
vihira, Mahasalapilimage (the shrine of the stone image), Ruvanpaha, 
Abayaturamahasi,.. boge (the shrine of the Bo Tree), Batge (refectory), 
Sigiri and Natagiri.2°° The inscription of Kassapa V provides informa- 
tion on the keeping of accounts at the colleges of the Maha Kapara fra- 
ternity. 
According to this text the monks, together with the piriven 
Jaddan (monks charged with the administration of colleges), appointed 
a committee of cight members to obtain the accounts and to prepare the 
statement presented to the general assembly of monks at the end of the 
year. 
This committee was to be composed of four apilisarapa monks 
‘and four gorokun2°7 
; 
. Wickremasinghe’s translation of the two terms as ‘destitute’ and 
“decrepit’’ persons is obviously wrong. 
In the Dhampiya Aluya Géta-° 
padaya, the Pali term garuké is translated as gorok kota dtiyahu,2" and 
203, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 94, th A56-8, 
204. 
EZ, Vol.1,p 91, i. A15-6, see also supra pp. 81-6. 
205, varsaparisamdptau tatra tatra samastamayam vyayam sesaiica karmibhirga- 
nakaisca sanghanuiatesu bhikgipadarsya, 
.. patjikasthaviraireva 
padalayika nirdpa- 
noyd, 
EZ, Vol.1,p. 4, i. 3-10 
: 
p 
i 
? 
206. EZ, Vol.I,p 236, Ih. 44-9 
207. piriven laddansatgun sdmiingin dakva dun apilisarana satar denekun gorokun 
Satar denuku dtulvi de-asanin atdeneku piriven illa havurudu nimiyata lekam kot maha~ 
SO%gd asyauu isd. EZ, Voi, I, p. 49, ll, 54-6, 
. 
: 
208. 
DAG, p. 256.

--- PAGE 74 [DIRECT] ---

128 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
» 209 
the Jataka Atuvad Gijapadaya renders garukato as gorok karana ladde. 
: 
A 
On this basis gorokun would mean “those who me aes ue 
i 
ni 
du, gorok is used 
as 
A 
” Further, 
in the Revanmal- nighang ij 
is 
ee and gurus while in. the Vinayértha-samuceaya the pak a 
orokun vahanse is used in the sense of ciaaareneee 
e eis 
. appears that gorok was used in the sense of me er. Pier 
gorokun would be the senior monks who taught the di amine 
positions of honor. 
In an earlier section o 
n 
a 
vat-himiyan were distinguished from Jabhaladuvan and ecu 
es 
Tt is evident from this that the apilisarana monks eA ale 
a 
those who were entitled to an income and from an He Cae 
monastic residence. 
On considering this and the - anaes 
contrasted with gorokun, one may aetna : an io Tae 
the 
juni 
ither hel 
savgun were the junior monks who nei 
i 
a. 
vale and teachers nor were favored with eas Lhe 
ee : 
In this connection it is noteworthy that the Bu 
ist Be penton 
fully-fledged member of the saigha oe oe ee 
roils 
visi 
a sel 
issaya) 
spent’ under the supervision 0: 
eno: 
eae 
on ee ea years from the time of his Oe 
beara 
pletion of this period he was called a nissaya-samuce an 
: a pe 
independently.2"* 
The term 
nissaya 
also ene } es aes 
“help.” 
Its Sinhalese equivalent nisa has been use me ei ihe 
Dham iya Atuva Géfapadaya 
Tt is, therefore, quite p 
Seed 
nisa aa pilisarana were interchangeable and that the ue pit 
saigun was used to denote those monks who had Lanna ees 
of probation and had been released from the 
“"pro Ce 
anette 
teachers. 
It is thus clear that the a oe iis ee Me ecicinants ot 
; 
e 
¢ 
r 
or in other words the official an 
; 
I 
eone 
an were equally represented in the Setanta He es 
the annual statement of accounts for submission to 
the 
ee The Heiney pe 
eeterting © difficult disciplinary problem to a com- 
a 
g Te 
mittee (ubbahika) nominated by the general assembly of rit a i 
commended in the Cullavagga as a means of ise as 
avoiding the tedium of detailed open discussion. 
Subseq| 
ly, 
i 
ipti 
y 
consi 
ion apilisarana 
fthe inscription under consideration 
ap 
ss 
ses 
135 
ate 
, 
oe De 
sciabalehae ed. D. P. de Alwis Wijesekara, 4914, p. 11 
211, 
Vinayartha-samuccaya, quoted by M. Vimalakitti, see DAG; P. 330. 
212, EZ,Vol. 1, p. 48, Hl. 29-30 
213. 
See infra p. 140. 
214, 
DAG, p. 67, 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
: 
129 
decision of the committee was considered by the general assembly.?!5 
The Cullavagga also cites an actual instance from the very early history 
of Buddhism when this method was supposedly used. 
It reports that 
an attempt. was made to resolve the. differences over the ten points of 
discipline which led to the Second Council by appointing a committee 
of eight monks, composed of four representing the East and four repre- 
senting the Patheyya faction, to inquire into it2!® 
The similarity 
between this and the committee at the Maha Kapara fraternity as far 
a8 numbers and representation are concerned, strongly suggests a close 
connection between the two and possibly the derivation of the Jatter from 
the former. 
If this possibility is accepted, it would seem that institu- 
tions which were originally: used for the solution of disct plinary prob- 
lems were, in a later time, adapted to meet administrative problems 
which became common with the growth of monastic property. 
The ownership of all monastic property, whether held by individuals 
or by institutions, was, in theory, vested in the whole body of monks. 
Consequently, the general assembly of monks held supervisory control 
over the administration of its property, and the annual assembly which 
scrutinized the accounts gave the monks an opportunity to exercise 
their authority, 
The keen, sometimes too lively, interest they evinced 
in the proceedings of this meeting is clearly evident in a provision made 
in the inscription of Kassapa V cited earlier which directs royal. 
officials to mediate and settle any disputes which might arise during 
~ the proceedings.2!7 
P 
Further evidence on the annual settlement of accounts is available 
in an inscription from Kaludiyapokuna which directs the officials of the 
monastery to submit their accounts before the eighth day of the waning 
moon of the month of Vap (Skt. Aévina, October/November),2!8 
 Para- 
navitana has pointed out that the Dipavali, the day on which the Hindu 
merchants settle their annual accouuts, follows seven days after this—the 
amévisya day of the same month. 
He has suggested that the monastery 
may have closed its accounts seven days earlier to facilitate the prepara- 
tion of the annual statement in time for submission to the assembly of 
monks on this day.?9 
It is probably this session of the committee of 
the Mihintale monastery which saw to the preparation of the annual 
Statement of accounts that the representatives of the two mulas of the 
2U8, 
 Vinaya Pitaka, Vol, 1, pp. 95-7, 
216, 
Ibid, 
217, BZ, Vol, 1, p, 237, tl, 50-1, 
: ey vipa ajavakin membe lekam nokot diyel nogannd isa, 
EZ, Vol. Il, p. 265, 
878, 
219, 
£2, Vol. III, p. 268.

--- PAGE 75 [DIRECT] ---

130 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
iri 
rds from both Mihintale and 
Abhayagiri monastery attended.. 
Records 
EN 
anit aah 
i 
kuna also state that officials who 
mit 
their 
Se 
mia their rights to employment as well as to their ‘main: 
94220 
; 
Ee rlid to note that, despite such sto 
ee 
procedure, most of the transactions seem to have ~ in . ieee 
onasteries did have a cash income. 
For instance, 
zie 
a 
tery 
was in a position to set apart one hundred an 
i 
kaland aad one aka in gold for its expenses each year, a ath al 
caoaated to: more than ten thousand English grains in Wi ight. 
as used 
to 
iy 
e cer 
required items which 
were not 
Money wi 
dt 
tain 
hh 
pu chas 
fT 
; 
i 
h as 
factured by monastic employees sucl 
; 
aks 
a 
atte for the employees as well as material for setting en ie Si es 
monastic buildings.” 
In a few instances, as ee aiage cen 
id 
i 
the whole, 
the role 
ere 
paid in gold2?3 
But, on 
le, 
t 
: 
(eae economy was a limited one. 
It is likely recente 
was both “‘in gold" as well as “in kind" and ie as beiatiiet 
and Alalakh,2?* each type of commodity was totalled 
an 
|. 
separately. 
j 
Participation of Monks in the Management of the rae 
The information which is available on the cle Ae eee 
has given rise to the belief prevalent among on Ms te Lanes 
ministration of monasteries in Sri Lanka was hee ne 
Though the monks in assembly must have wielde 
the administration, it is noteworthy that only 0. 
monastery——the nakd balana himiyan—is mentione 
into direct participation in the actual administration. as 
of management would 
have met the need to 
Dee 
from involyement in activities proscribed in the 
Vinay 
i 
ittle 
is known 
Such a conclusion, however, does not accord with what fittle is ki 
ini 
i 
izati 
agiri monastery: 
about the administrative organization of the Abhayagit! 
ee 
‘As at the Cetiyagiri monastery, a large body of laymen seems to have 
3 
IU, p. 265, Hl, 37-8. 
220. 
EZ, Vol.1. p. 94, 1, A58; Vol 
. 
s 
221, 
EZ, Vol. I pp. 92-5, Ht, A33-7, Bi-3, Bi2, aa i. 
222, EZ, Vol.l, 
p. 
49, £. 
503 p. 
93, 1.438; B95, HH. B20-1. 
223, 
See supra, pp. 104-5. 
; 
224, 
See K. Polanyi, “On the Pai 
ene 
iqui 
ith Illustrations from Athens, 
Myc 
: 
eet aie 
ling and Robert M. Adams, Chicago, 1960, pp- 329. ae Hee 
‘325 
See for instance, the remarks of Jacques Ger 
Ose ie 
miques du bouddhisme dans ta société chinoise du Ve an Xe sitcle, 
fi 
d some influence over 
me monk from this 
das having entered 
Such a system 
mks 
i 
itutions 
in 
ment of Economic Institutions 
d Alalakh,” City Invincible. ed 
ects CON? 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
131 
employed in the administration of the Abhayagiri monastery. . 
Of these, 
the parivahana, for one, was an official common to both. 
But it becomes 
clearly evident fromthe records of the Abhayagiri monastery that its 
residents, unlike the monks of the Cetiyagiri monastery, played a very 
important role in the administrative affairs of their monastery. 
Certain administrative duties carried’ out by a ‘ay official at the 
Cetiyagiri monastery, like the maintenance of the monastic. register, 
were yestedin members of the savigha at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
They seem to have possessed some control over the appointment of 
lay officials. 
The ninth-century Sanskrit inscription at this monastery 
states that the allowance paid to the parivahana varied according to the 
efficiency he showed in the execution of his’ duties.2?6 
Presumably, it 
was the monks who exercised their discretion in the regulation of 
allowances implicit in this statement. 
This inference gains additional 
support from 
the Kaludiyapokuna inscription which 
decrees that 
. those monks who, without justification, deprive monastic employees of 
their ‘maintenance lands” or of their ‘‘wages’' forfeited their right to live 
at the monastery.227 
It is clear from this that the monks at these 
monasteries were in a position to restrict or control the emoluments 
paid to their employees and that there were occasions when they 
exercised their authority without prudence, 
It would appear that the monks living at the minor hermitages were 
held responsible to the main monastery for the supervision of their ad- 
ministrative arrangements. 
At the main monastery senior monks who 
- kept the registers and representatives nominated by the assembly of 
monks 
controlled 
the hermitages 
attached 
to the monastery 
by 
auditing their accounts and inquiring into their disputes. 
It was the 
monks and not the lay officials who represented the two mulas8 of 
the Abhayagiri 
monastery 
at the meeting 
of the committee 
of 
management 
of the Cetiyagiri 
monastery when 
the statement 
of 
accounts was prepared,”?° and, at the end of each year, they forwarded it 
to the general assembly of monks. of the Abhayagiri monastery for 
their approval.?3° 
They thus helped the main monastery to keep a 
close check on the constituents of the nikdya. 
The monks of the two 
=-°'mulas and the six avasas were also responsible for the administration 
226, parivahanasyapi antarvahisca rakganakusalasya padélaam varjam pratyekam 
Pratigrimam kiriksetvam déavyam samarthasya ndnyasya. EZ, Vo\.1, p. 5, ll, 32-3. 
227. 
nokani bila dasnat nimi divel valahana vat-himiyanud, EZ, Vol, YH, p. 265, fl. 
30-1, 
228, 
See infra p, 295. 
229. EZ, Vol I, p. 92, if, A20-3. 
230, 
EZ, Vol.1, p. 40, fl. 37-8.

--- PAGE 76 [DIRECT] ---

ee 
132 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
of the main. institutions within the Abhayagiri monastery. 
According 
to a tenth-century inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery, the 
accounts of the image-house, the stépa, the shrine of the Bo Tree, 
Ruvanpaha and Sligiri were to be obtained from these monks and 
presented to the general assembly of monks at the end of each year?! 
Regulations laid down in the inscription of Kassapa V_ provide 
further clarification of the yole of monks in monastic administration. 
According to this record,. the piriven laddan of the Maha Kapara 
fraternity were allotted one amuna of rice and four aka of gold a day 
for the provision of food and one thousand (kaland) of gold at the end 
of cach year for the provision 
of robes.22 
Wickremasinghe 
has 
translated the term piriven laddan ‘as ‘recipients of cells..'233 
Piriven 
which originally meant a “ell had. come, by this time, to mean one 
of the ‘colleges’? 
of monks living in 4 monastery.3+ 
in a Sater 
passage piriven laddan occuts in a context which suggests that the term 
denoted a special category of monks and not mere recipients of cells.’ 
The same record directs them to use all the income, apart from what 
had been personally allocated to them, to make the payments due to 
monks and employees, to pay for repairs and religious paintings, and 
to use the remainder 
to purchase land.36 
This reveals that the 
piriven laddan enjoyed personal incomes and held responsible posi- 
tions in the administration of the finances of the piriven. 
: 
It is not stated whether the piriven laddan were laymen of monks, 
However, the same inscription refers to a class of monks called avas 
laduvan.3? 
Avas, another term for a ‘“‘residence,’’ is, as Perera has 
shown,2** 
at times interchangeable with piriven.. 
Thus it is possible to 
suggest, on. this analogy, that piriven laddan also were monks. 
{n this context, it seems appropriate to examine another statement in 
the same inscription which deals with the organization of the adminis 
tration of the monastery. 
It runs as follows: 
abhiyukta bati himisuran 
pere sirit se vatanu isd.2° 
Wickremasinghe suggested vat as the alter- 
native reading for the second word, 
Vat-himisuran. would be senior 
monks, 
But itis fairly clear from the photograph of the estampage that 
231, 
EZ, Vol 1, p. 48, fl. 35-8. 
232, 
EZ, Vol. J, p.49, tf, 48-50. 
233, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 57. 
234, 
Sce supra p.9, and also Strattha-dipant, p. 510+ 
235, EZ, Vol. 
1, p. 49, f 54. 
236, 
BZ, Vol.1, p. 496, i. 54-6; sce also supra PP. 79-80, 
237, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 48, £29. 
238, 
L. 8. Perera, Jnstitutions. ..p- 1216, 
239, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 49, 1,45, 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
133 
the first letter is ba and not v 
H 
a. 
In this context, 
baté, if deri 
i 
eri 
fr 
bheta, as Sorata has suggested,” could mean “supported oe 
ee 
Vata in vatanu could mean “pay’’ or “food.” The y 
5 
sal is actory of the various translations of this passage seems to ane 
ee for pay should be paid according to former aa 
s. would 
support the suggestion made earli 
; 
l 
; 
pol 
; 
ier that 
Lacrietees in the administration of the Abhayagiri ona ee 
: 
a a Teceived remuneration for their services. 
This does not a 
ie a the administrative functions were performed by monks; the’ had 
the assistance of lay officials. But the responsibility for the ican 
re monastic residences lay primarily in their hands 
a 
re a Lae it was ribet the committee of management which 
Q 
e lesser officials. But monks seem to have 
h: 
over the appointment of at ‘Teast 
i 
eee ari 
| the senior officials. 
The Mihi 
poi 
eas 
se 
8. 
ihint 
Serie monks ee giving positions of controlling Li 
elonging 
to the “inner monastery’ (@tveher 
i 
tives and add that all 
relatives 
inte pends 
i 
of monks appointed. to 
offic 
monastery were to be dismissed.24 
Th 
Sonera’ 
j 
; 
e assembly of monk 
ai 
had-controlling powers o 
i 
i 
ee neath 
yer the officials, for it is specifi 
i 
olling 
pe 
h 
4 
pecifically 
stat 
vee Lapa officials were to be instructed or pine 
ks in assembly and not by individ 
addition to this, the naka bala 
Oeaeecnt 
a sii 
alana himiyan would have ser 
i 
a 
h 
h 
ved as a 
en 
ees and the assembly of monks. 
His eG 
fee 
of management should have facilit 
the administration 
in accor 
i 
cree 
enn 
cordance with the 
wish 
y 
i 
wishes of the asse 
: 
: ua eae a the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery eae 
3 
reater control over the administrati 
thei 
participation in it as “keepers of th 
i 
a ce 
0 
; 
he register’? and as t 
the Sains which scrutinized the accounts. 
ee 
anes 
sais ue noticed that at the Nalandi monastery monks congregated 
a ieee : 
separate assemblies since the total number of soaks 
astery was too large for all of th 
ee 
y 
{ 
1 
hem to meet at the s 
tine a One can envisage the prevalence of a similar system sete 
nas oe of Sri Lanka too. 
In fact, the evidence from the 
plions seems 
to 
‘support such 
an inference. 
Authority 
over 
the main shrines and hermi 
ermitages 
att 
agiri 
tery was vested in these hadien pone py ee 
240, SSS p. 634. 
241. 
Cf. Wickremasinghe’ 
| 
singhe’s translation: ‘* 
appo} 
Se oe se according to Toner cisions Ee MeL ae alae 
. 
EZ, Vol. 1, 
p. 92, 
ll. A18.9, A2A-5: 
see also infra 
pp. 
167-9. 
. 
> 
“53 see also 
lar 
243, EZ, Vol. 
pp. 91-2 Ul A167. 
Cee eee 
» 
I-tsing, A Record of the Buddhist Religion, pp. 154-5

--- PAGE 77 [DIRECT] ---

134 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
The Abhayagiri 
and the Cetiyagiri monasteries represent two 
different types as far as the extent of the influence that the sangha 
wielded in the administrative affairs of each monastery is concerned, 
but at both monasteries its influence was considerable. 
On the other 
hand, the Puliyankulam inscription reveals a situation in which the 
power of the saigha was reduced to a minimum.24 According to this 
record, Uda Mahaya, the heir-apparent under Dappula LV, built the 
Uda Kitagbopavu hermitage, made endowments for its maintenance 
and appointed 
a high dignitary —Sak-maha-émati Saiigalnivan—to 
the position of its steward, and it is by this appointment that the in- 
fluence of the monks was curbed. 
Uda Mahaya stipulated in this 
edict that the position of the steward was to be held by Saiigainavan’s 
descendants by hereditary 
right, and should 
royal officials or the 
saigha oppose the steward, the thousand armed retainers of the heir- 
apparent were 
to intervene and settle the matter. 
Further, if there 
were 
any disputes 
caysed by the clergy or laymen regarding 
the 
conditions laid down in the record, the thousand retainers were to help 
the officials of the hermitage to settle it without resort to arms. 
If they 
failed in this task, they were to seek the help of the atmed retainers of the 
palace. 
This is the first known instance of provision being made for in- 
tervention by soldiers in case of a disturbance within a monastery. 
Asa 
result, the steward was elevated to a position of importance and inde- 
pendence of the monks as well as of the state officials. 
It is clear from this discussion that it is extremely 
difficult to 
discuss the administration of a monastery in terms that are universally 
applicable. 
Gernet’s remark?" that the responsibility of administering 
the monastery 
was confined 
to the lay officials 
and the directly 
opposite view held by Rahula that ‘‘the administration of a monastery 
was entirely in the hands of the saigha'’?4? 
both exaggerate 
and 
misrepresent the actual conditions. 
The administrative organization 
evolved 
to 
divest 
the saigha 
of its 
responsibility 
of managing 
monastic property seems to have successfully met this need in some 
of the monasteries, but in monasteries like the Abhayagiri the monks 
were drawn into association with the very tasks that, as monks, they 
were trying to avoid. 
245. 
EZ, Vol. J, pp. 182-91. 
_ 246, 
“Finalement, c'est le principe de la gestion directe de leur biens par les reli 
gieux et par les communautés qui a prévalu, non pas dans toutes les partie du monde 
bouddhique, puisque, de nos jours encore, a Ceylan et dans les pays de l’Asic du 
Sud-Est, ces biens restent confiés a des administrateurs laics, mais en Chine et sans 
doute aussi les communautés mahayanistes d’Asie centrale.” 
Jacques Gernet, Les 
aspects économiques du bouddhisme dans la socitsé chinoise du Ve au Xe sidele, 1956 
p. 74. 
: 
247, 
W. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceyton, p. 135, 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
135 
Administrative Organization and the Nikaya 
Penh 2 
South Asia itis only in Sri Lanka that such detailed 
i 
conomic aspects of monastic life 
ini 
trative organization of Buddhi 
, 
ioe 
| 
eile Ge toes 
rs 
ist monasteries is 
ilabl 
of the ninth and tenth c 
i 
eee 
t 
enturies 
reveal the exist 
i 
which were endowed with 
i 
ae aR Datta: 
i 
extensive sources of inc 
which possessed an elabor 
i 
Oe 
ae 
orately organized system 
ini 
i 
n 
of administration 
aioe monasteries possessed an immense potentiality for économic 
oe 
ee restrained 
to some extent by the fact that the 
e 
tration 
had 
little independence in 
utilizing 
i 
utilizing its 
; 
of the endowments 
were 
i 
ee 
made for specific 
pur; 
i 
Pat 
j 
‘ 
purposes, 
There is one 
arieg a Ree being made at a monastery to finance the 
Nie 
on of a dam. 
The participation of the monasteries in such 
ac iM ies as the 
construction 
and the development of irrigatio 
a 
2 
oe sis pt even 
in the Mihintale Tablets. 
For, according ‘e 
ee: Sas til the villages of the monastery were to be 
2 
o 
work 
at 
dredging reservoirs if t 
I 
Get eae 
hey were unable to pay the fines 
The administrative needs arising from the growth of temporalities- 
- were met to some extent by the adaptation of institutions meant originally 
SS ORICEE aa fe as the general assembly of monks and the 
nquiry. 
At the same time, the 
att 
from actual participation, in th 
ee aise 
n 
! 
he management of property 
led to the 
ri 
of an organized lay administrati 
Walia 
ete 
ion, 
Certain similariti 
q 
i 
between the administrative 
OH 
Ge 
structures of the Buddhist 
i 
i 
Lanka and the Hindu tem 
f 
i 
PR ue ee 
ple of South India both in 
general 
f 
i 
some specific administrative practices 
fons. Be 
ie ae 
and regulations, 
But, th 
mon features seem to be due mor 
ic 
simi 
fon 
oolatene 
n 
featu 
¢ to the basic similarity 
in th 
i 
political institutions of the two 
ies 
ry 
all ane 
Pe IL 
countries than to any direct influence in 
on a re administrative organization of the monasteries did not 
ee ly _ “the monks from involvement in the management of 
nee papery it played an important role in strengthening the 
es 
aie bound together a number of monasteries t 
ne s . ve It is evident that the minor monasteries belonging to os 
fe erie pee en annual statements of accounts for scrutiny 
pointed 
by the main m 
Gaus 
! 
onastery. 
In the case 
ni monastery monks representing the two mulas of the tae 
‘dya participated 
in the meeting which settled their annual 
248. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 163-71. 
249, 
See supra pp. 109-10,

--- PAGE 78 [DIRECT] ---

ee 
136 
THE MANAGEMENT OF MONASTIC PROPERTY 
y 
rati 
i 
the 
accounts and submitted the annual statement ne a 
ayagiri 
nastery. 
Mon’ 
tal assembly of the Abhayagiri monastery, 
- 
: 
: 
Senet settled disputes at the minor institutions. a oeaaed 
a administrative level helped to keep alive the relations ae be 
the main monastery and the dependent institutions attached 
to 
ane tr the origins as well as the functioning of this eae 
organization were closely associated with and uapen esse eae a 
Hence the spoliation of monastic aay in a 
ba 
mie 
fs ete oe 
i 
ayabahu 
‘ 
ing 
the 
period between the death of Vij 
e 
Poe anes I should have, one would eae br Ea aAane ies F 
ini 
i 
fC 
ion. 
lapse of the administrative organizat 
. 
Phen eeth curtailed the main monastery’s control shee ne on 
‘ 
stituents of the nikaya. 
An inscription from the time of 
Kal Lande 
(1202 1208), found near the Ruvanvilisiya, shows that ba ee 
; 
* 
officials”? 
i 
ks, appraisers and 
a 
“high 
officials’? 
(samdaruvan), cler! » 
API 
ete its employ.2° 
But there is no evidence to — pastes 
ini administrative organization which existed in the nan rd 
“wy 
the Abhayagiri and Cetiyagiri monasteries was ever resuscita 
time of Parikramabahu I, or at any later time within the period 
— 
under discussion. 
250, EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 243-60. 
. 
adherence to’ its rules. 
Violation of the rules was an o 
’ Recruitment to the Sangha 
CHAPTER 
4 
Monastic’ Life and Relations with the Laity 
Monasticism constituted an essential aspect of religious life in early 
medieval Sri Lanka, and the development of the monastery into a highly 
otganized institution controlling extensive resources had a decisive effect 
on the life and ideals of Buddhist monks. 
The monk’s total dependence 
. on voluntary donations by the laity was a characteristic feature of reli- 
gious life in early Buddhism, 
In the early medieval period this was no 
longer so. The monastery provided the monk with the needs for his 
sustenance and the opportunity to lead a life devoted to scholarship and 
contemplation. 
Yet, in a sense, the monastery brought the Sangha into 
closer contact with the laity, for it was not a mere residence for monks; 
it was also the venue for congregations of the lay community for edu- 
cational purposes, for religious discussion and for the performance of 
ceremonial. 
Further, the monastery facilitated the regulation of clerical 
life. 
Monastic records dated in the period under review contain 
compilations of regulations selected by the saigha, sometimes at the 
instigation of the king. 
These compilations, 
called sirit.or 
katika, 
sought to regulate and systematize various aspects of clerical life as the 
recruitment and training of monks, their organization, payment of 
stipends and even their daily routine and the allowances of food. 
In 
return for the amenities it provided the monastery demanded strict 
i 
fense punishable 
with expulsion from the monastery. 
A constant supply of recruits was necessary to maintain the monaste- 
ties at full strength. 
The ranks of the sangha were periodically depleted 
by “purifications” of the Order. 
- In times of political turmoil monks 
Were sometimes forced to leave the island or give up their robes. 
Kassapa 
Y, who laicized monks for lapses in discipline, recruited young monks to 
(1371

--- PAGE 79 [DIRECT] ---

138 
MONASTIC LIFE AND ‘RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
fill their places.' 
Vijayabahu 1 held a ceremony of ordination after 
capturing Rajarattha from the Colas.2 
Each year Parikramabahu T 
held a similar ceremony in a pavilion erected on poats anchored in the 
middle of the river Mahaviili,?> and Nissanka Malla also claims to have 
held an annual ceremony of ordination.’ 
Evidently there was no difficulty in attracting recruits, at least in 
times of peace. 
Apatt from religious considerations, the ease and com- 
fort of monastic life would have had a great attraction for the Jaity. 
The 
monks were provided with food, clothing and, in certain cases, even with 
a personal income. 
They were exempt from taxes and corvée duty, and, 
in addition to these benefits, the monk occupied a position of prestige 
and honor in society. 
While discoursing on the advantages of clerical 
life, the author of the Pujdvaliya, himself a monk, refers to the immunity 
that the monk enjoyed from harrassment by royal officials who toured the 
country to collect taxes. 
He also points out that a monk is not obliged 
to tise from his seat on seeing the king, the heir-apparent or a minister ; 
he could remain seated without fear of punishment. 
In fact, it was the prospect of material advantages and prestige which 
attracted some men to monastic life. Men who were not suited to the 
disciplined life of the monastery were reluctant to leave it because they 
wanted to enjoy the worldly benefits it offered. 
Parakramabahu 1 dis- 
“who would ruin the Order in 
robed ‘‘many, hundreds’’ of sinful monks 
their quest for gain,"’ and offered them lucrative positions in lay life.® 
This problem finds clearer expression in the Ruvanvalisiya inscription of 
‘Nissaika Malla where he speaks about his “‘purification’’ of the satigha: 
His Majesty realized that those monks who lead impure lives and 
those who have lost interest. in. monastic life do not leave the 
Order through fear of the duties (i.c., duties to the government 
jncumbent upon laymen). 
Hence he declared that those monks 
who leave the robes without defiling the Order would be exempted 
from their duties; they would also receive gold, clothes, food, 
iron, seed-paddy, cattle and other needs.’ 
‘ 
ee 
1, 
Cy, 52, 44. 
2. 
Cy, 60, 4-8. 
3, 
Cv., 78. 28-30. 
4, 
EZ, Vol. U, p. 11, 6 A23, 
5, dada muda isran masran ila dvidund rajapurusa, 
stv yhidimaya... raja yuvaraja mnaha- 
diigt hifdima satvana suva vindimaya, 
Pjv., 
6. 
Cv. 78, 9,26; EZ, Vol, H, p, 269, 4. 12. 
4, EZ,Vol.M, p. 79.4 15-8, 
ed, Bentota Saddhiatissa, 1930, p, 22. 
yangen pidd novi jidima sataravant 
dmativan dutu kala bhaya niitiva hunasnen nol 
M 
E 
1 
ONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
139 
In another record Nissahka Malla 
reminds 
¢ 
of amenities provided for fies eter aE 
a ee 
io lead to birth in hell.8 
ia as 
Cis 
ibili 
{ 
y 
nS deeb o 
sangha to corruption necessitated periodical 
ae ine : the need for the exercise of caution in recruit- 
standard of dieiplieatone aN 
arches iar 
7 
: 
le 
a 
igha, 
e regulati 
in 
: 
ido sa Cale of Kassapa V instruct ie rie rte ak 
ee ee the Order and forbid them to accept presents fas 
ee. ination, 
Those monks who received such eetents 
a eo 
© gave them forfeited their right to live in the 
: 
sanka Malla exhorts the saigha to admit new eaheanly 
after thorough investigation t 
Vv 
Ce. 
t 
© 
prevent ‘‘deceitf 
¥ 
i 
; 
t 
i 
Gs 
Pp 
itful, crafty and sinful men” 
The Novice, the Monk and, the Monastery 
Accordi 
t 
ra 
Fy it eae sa oe slab inscription the knowledge of 
arbanave 
e Canon 
was an 
essential 
pr 
isi 
aa 
a8 
sential 
prerequis 
: 
a ee ees sigadeae to take about three eae - Peel 
ikayata recommends the rehear 
, 
tee Serie 
; 
J 
e rehearsal 
of the Her 
ee the Dasadhamma Sutta, and the practice ation cli 
puters c! ee for the novice.!2 
When the novices veaok 
. cen _ — ordained with the prior sanction of the eee 
-ordained monk was required t 
ri 
eee 
: 
, 
© serve a period of a 
ice- 
ee P. nissaya) under a senior monk. 
The Galvihara aie 
He ae monks called ganadetutera who were placed in Svcs H 
one 
iC) 
1" 
1 
+6 
. 
" 
oe. ss aioe These 
‘‘group leaders,’" who were saadble 
ee . ors (mahatera) for the education and discipline of the 
ks 
is 
wth ae were instructed not to accept a monk from authors oe 
te lirst seeing a representative of the senior monk of that eaurat 
ate rr bai from him. 
It was the duty of the “group Thedert é 
8 charges to a career of scholarship (granthadhura) or a life ° 
¢ 
contemplation (vidarsanddhura) 
in accordance with their 
Cl 
lents 
ort 
lat: 
daré 
thura) 
rd: 
ir particular talen 
e EZ, Vol. Il, p. 97, il, 7-8, 
. 
EZ, Vol. 1, 
pp. 48-9, Hf, 38-9 
s 
» 
PD. 
, 
Hl, 
38-9, 48, 
10, EZ, Vol. I, p. 97, Hl. 5-7 
I. EZ, Vol. 
1 
> 
Vol. 
1, p. 48, £38; Vol. OT 
(2. 
EZ, Vol, IL, p. 270, 1, 23. 
aga 
EZ, Vol. MI, pp, 270-3, I, 18-25, 29-30, 51.

--- PAGE 80 [DIRECT] ---

140 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
as drawn attention to the three stages of scriptural scholar- 
ship mentioned in the Samantapasadika—nissaya-sarnuccchanaka, reached 
after five years from ordination; parisupayhdpaka, attained after another 
and the final stage called bhikkhunovadaka when-a monk was 
five years; 
considered sufficiently qualified to act as an adviser to nuns.!4 
The 
Samantapdsidika outlines in detail the texts that the monk had-to master 
tion is available 
in each of these three stages, but no such detailed informa’ 
from the sources of the period under consideration. 
The Galvihata 
inscription seems to consider only the first of these three stages. 
; 
According to the Samantapasadika the monks of the first stage should 
commit to memory the two matikds (i.e, the Patimokkha section of the 
Vinaya Pijaka), the four Bhdnavaras, and the three Anumodanas which 
contain particulars about eccleciastical acts like the sposdtha and the 
pavarana, as well as the Ambattha, Maha-Rahulovada and Andhakavinda 
Suttas. 
According to the Sdrattha-dipani the three Anumodanas are 
discourses dealing with the merits accruing to patrons of the saigha 
which are delivered when offerings are received. 
It also states that the 
Mangala Sulta is recited at monastic ceremonies and that the Tirokudda 
Sutta is recited at funerals. 
The text goes on to explain that the parti- 
culars regarding eccleciastical acts mentioned in the Samantapdsadika 
- gre identical to those given in the Kammavagga in the Parivara section 
of the Vinaya Pitaka.S 
Of the three Suttas recommended for newly 
ordained monks, the Mah’-Rahulovada’® deals with the practice of the 
Gnipandsati, the system of meditation based on concentration on the res- 
piratory process. 
The Ambattha Sutta!” describes the victory of the 
Buddha in’ a dispute with a caste-conscious Brabmana youth. 
Five 
topics on which newly-ordained monks have to be instructed are out- 
lined in the Andhakavinda Suita," 
. 
The laconic comments of Sariputta on the passage in the Samanta- 
pasadika concerning the training of monks yield little information on the 
f education in his own period. Fortunately, there is some 
organization © 
helpful evidence in the Galvihara inscription. 
This record differs from 
the Samantapasadika in regard to the texts which it recommends for newly 
ordained monks, 
They were to rehearse at least the Khuddasikkha, 
the Patimokkha of the Vinaya Pitaka, and the Dasadhamma and the 
Anumana Suttas of the Sutta Pitaka.” 
The Dasadhamma Sutta is 
14, W. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, pp. 294.65 Smp. Vol. LY, PP. 788-90, 
15, 
Sdrattha-dipani, pp. 819-20. 
16. 
Majjhima Nikdya, PTS, Vol. I, 1948, pp. 420-6, 
17, 
Digha Nikaya, PTS, Vol. I, 1949, pp. 87-110, 
48. 
Anguttara Nikaya, PTS, Vol. TH, 1958, pp. 138-9, 
19. 
EZ, Vol. Il, p. 270, H, 19-20, 
Rahula h 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH. THE LAITY 
14t 
probably the same as the Dh 
the 
as 
amma Sutta in the Akk 
oe 
my 
i: 
kosava 
he 
ese ie nace It Hae io points of which the hes eats 
ful. 
In 
the 
Anumana Sutta” 
sa 
ea 
ae 
a 
a”! 
Mogelalan 
i 
ble i Moe regular practice of iP ekerealon ie ete Ve 
eas. 
lt may be surmised that this initiation inlets 
- 
, 
study of canonical 
texts was 
ollowed up by specia ization 
in 
one of the 
three 
branclres of 
the Canon— 
idhamma, 
the Sutta or 
the Vinaya. 
hree 
b 
th 
the Abhidhamma, 
tl 
yi 
At the Cetiyagiri monastery monks who studied the Canon were rewarded 
with emoluments which 
vari 
ses 
varied a 
i 
; 
specialized.22 
according to the branch in which they 
Special importance was attached to the study of the Abhidha mma, 
pd t 
ialized 
i 
ee ee who specialized in this field received the highest 
i 
ei ; on pees Ha a 
hy Beat monastery for nis tua . 
e 
ada and 
non-Tl 
a 
dhaghosa points out that 
i 
phialipe donna ene 
igho 
out 
no particular texts were reco. 
ded 
1 
ee Sommaire for the study 
of 
the peeing ¥ a 
+) 
g Buddhaghosa’s statements on the teaching of the Sinan 
amma, 
» Sark 
itute 
atiputta substitutes the term ndmaripa-pariccheda for Abhidhamma.?5 
If we identify this as a refer 
; 
ify 
ence to the work 
of A 
this name, itis possible to 
pS cbr 
melaeare nd 
fo 
suggest that the Némaripa-pari 
A 
tie a ue for the study of the Abhidbarine hea time of 
z 
rences in other commentaries of this period suggest that 
the elon of Ananda was another popular text.2¢ 
| 
e period under consideration texts on the Abhidhamma were 
held 
i 
i 
Id in such high regard that festivals were held in their honor? 
The 
chronicle records special recitals of the Ab hidhamma held at the request of 
kings: one such recital took 
place 
i 
i 
raat 
« 
K place in. the reign of Sena I1.28 
Mahi 
ae An ae recited by the thera Dathanaiga of fe attie 
patron ty io of the same king, another scholar, Dham- 
i kanant gee EHR wrote a commentary on the Abhi- 
ae e ae 
e emphasis laid on the-study of the Abhidhamma 
cessarily imply that other branches of the Canon were 
Angutiara Nikéya, PTS, 
Majjhima Nba 
Pre, vou on. o8 100 oF 
See infra p. 148. 
White 
og 
See infra p, 256, 
Smp., Vol. IV, 1934, p. 789. 
Sérattha-dipant p. 820, 
. 
See infra p, 154. 
See tafra p, 230, 
Cy, SL. 79, 
Cv, 54, 35-6,

--- PAGE 81 [DIRECT] ---

142 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
: 
a 
recital of the Vinaya by Learned 
d. 
Mahinda LV also arranged a rect 
: 
‘ 
. 
pane and Vijayabahu I had the entire Canon copied and pee 
ee 
Monks like Kassapa of Dithbulagala were versed 
In 
to the swigha.*! 
Ks produced during 
all three parts of the Canon, and the exegetical wor 
is 
period deal with all three sections. 
; 
, 
‘, 
ae A parently a career of studies in the scriptures was fey Lan 
Pets a life of coritemplation. 
According to the Galvihara i‘ aad : 
jon, the monks who were directed to @ life of meditation _ i sit 
who failed to meet the demands of a career of Pate aie 
those monks had to devote some time - - a 
acs ae 
i 
t 
itat 
the 
Dasadha 
js 
advised to constantly metlitate upon 
ast 
: 
ha to commit the Milasikkha. and the Sekiya to memory 204 ate 
7 
r 
icha-valaida-vinisa so 
that 
the) 
’ 
thoroughly rehearse the Stkha- va. 
; 
a 
sei 
to orak any section of the text on being questioned at See a i 
hae 
Despite the emphasis on ‘scholarship, the polit ° Shara ee 
; 
r 
advised 
to practice 
not forgotten. 
Every monk was a 
ace 
topic (kamatahana) selected to suit the Hh of Be ao oes 
nis 
initi 
ri 
f ‘apprenticeship’ 
(7 
After this initial period of ‘‘appren 
: 
eat 
live independently, and presumably he was assigned to a aoa : 
monastery. 
It was the duty of the saigha of the main me 
rmi 
t 
to it at 
nikdya to maintain the number of monks at her mitages attached 
4 
‘ 
‘ons, 
A ninth-century Sanskrit 
the strength presoribed by the patrons, 
he strength of the 
inscription at the Abhayagiri monastery specifies that ( 
Lahasikf hermitage should be maintained at three senior as patel 
novices. 
‘The incumbents of a monastery or hermitage haa alent 
vested with the “care” of a prescribed area. The ae ‘ bs aie 
hermitage, for instance, had to “look after Se 
see le sa aed 
villages set apart for repairs and the provision 0 
: . eran 
radhapura slab inscription lays down that seniority was bene 
consideration in the selection of monks for iene a aeat ite 
tions in monasteries, but nual Le 
ers a 
riptur 
ointed 
despite 
ye 
es sae Aen ienanded the undivided allegiance of its incumbents, 
i 
i 
monas- 
-° 
and monks were specifically forbidden to render assistance to any 
tery but their own. 
A monk who had. 
rece! ved his ordination 
in one 
monastery had to forgo all benefit provided by thi 
30. 
Cv, 54, 34. 
31. 
Cv, 60, 22. 
ios 
“p, 270, Hf, 
22-3. 
wie 
he 
ein, 
a pe oe ee 48, Hf. 40-1. 
Wickremasinghe’s translation 1s inaccurate. 
34, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p.4, fl. 3-5. 
35, 
BZ, Vol. 1, 9. 48, 
40-2. 
{ 
i 
i 
i 
t 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LALTY 
143 
relinquish all duties connected with it before he could be a resident of 
another.*© 
Regular residence 
was 
an essential 
prerequisite for the 
enjoyment of benefits provided by a monastery, and the Mihintale Tablets 
specify. that a monk is entitled to the income of a monastery only if he 
lives theres? 
The 
regulations 
‘in the Galvihara 
inscription 
forbid 
monks to give publicity to disputes within the monastery and specify 
ihat they should not be subject to the jurisdiction of ‘another monas- 
tery.* 
Violation of some 
of these regulations was punishable with 
expulsion from the monastery, 
The Daily Routine and the Basic Elements of Monastic Life 
The Mihintale and the Galvihara inscriptions contain guidance for 
° 
the regulation of a 
monk’s daily routine. 
They seem to have been based 
on practices current at the time and may be considered reliable sources 
of information on the life of monks. 
The Mihintale Tablets yield some 
information. 
According to this record, the monks were expected to rise 
early and practice the four-fold meditation—contemplation on the virtues 
of the Buddha, wishing for the deliverance of all beings, reflecting on the 
impurities of the body, and contemplation on death. 
Then they attended 
to their toilet and, wearing robes in the manner prescribed in the Sik- 
hakarani, proceeded to the.refectory where they recited the Metta-paritta 
and partook of the morning meal,3% 
: 
The directions in the Galvihava inscription, set up under the influence 
of the ascetic monks of the Araiifiika sect, prescribed a more’ detailed and 
rigorous schedule. 
The monks who rose at the break of dawn spent 
the early hours of the morning meditating on their respective topics and 
pacing along the promenades. 
This was followed by the rehearsal of the 
texts they had learned, “After putting.on their robes and attending to 
their toilet, they had to perform such chores as sweeping the compounds 
of the Bo Tree and the stapa, keeping the dwellings tidy and attending to 
the needs of the teachers, senior monks and the sick. 
“If they found it 
necessary,"’ they were to go to the refectory and partake of the gruel. 
After breakfast those with pressing business such as consulting books 
and documents, sewing and washing clothes, and the distribution of 
priestly requisites engaged themselves in those tasks, while others devoted 
. their time to meditation, 
After the mid-day meal the monks continued 
to engage themselves in meditation or in study of the scriptures. 
The 
36. EZ, Vol}, p. 4, df, 10-1, 13-4, 
37. EZ, Vol. I, p. 91, Ht, A156, 
38. EZ, Vol. If, p. 272, 1, 42, 
39. BZ, Vol. I, p. 91, ff, 
A9-L1,

--- PAGE 82 [DIRECT] ---

144 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
evening was spent preaching or reading the dhamma, listening to it, dis- 
cussing it, or committing it to memory. 
Lt was only in the middle watch 
of the night that the monks were permitted to sleep.*° 
The life of monks as prescribed in the Galvihara inscription was 
one of rigorous application to meditation and to study of the scriptures. 
The monks were obliged to perform some domestic chores and the 
burden this placed on. monks devoted to the practice of asceticisms is a 
common complaint found in many texts.41 
Some would shirk their 
responsibilities leaving the conscientious few to do all the work, and as 
a result these monks had little time for their religious practices. 
Bviden- 
tly, in the more organized monasteries, the monks were relieved of most 
of these chores. 
The Cetiyagiri monastery at Mihintale employed three 
keepers to maintain its stapas and an attendant to keep the premises 
clean.42 
In addition to them a group of employees called pahavisi are 
mentioned in the Mihintale Tablets. 
In the inscription mention of 
them follows the reference to the servants who worked in the kitchen. 
Wickremasinghe agreed with Miiller and Gunasekara, who translated 
the term as ‘“‘thatcher.""* 
On the basis of a consideration of terms 
like vehervasi and velviisi,”® it seems preferable to trace its derivation 
from P, pasddavasi, a term which probably connoted “an attendant 
attached to a monastic residence.” 
and they received two paya of land and a daily allowance of one 
admand of rice each, while their supervisor received 
arr additional 
pat of rice* 
It is possible that they were expected to perform personal 
services for the sargha and to 
In the early days the Buddhist monk depended on voluntary dona- 
tions for his food and necessities, but this was not an adequate meanis of 
support for the large number of monks concentrated at the capital. 
Fa-Hian, who visited 
recorded that he found about ten thousand monks living at Anuradha- 
pura—five thousand at the Abhayagiri monastery, three thousand at the 
‘Mahavihara and two thousand at the Cetiyagiri.47 
The provision of an 
alms-hall, the Mahapali, where a large number of monks were fed at 
the king’s expense, was probably an atiempt to improve this situation. 
40, 
EZ, Vol. U, p. 271, tl, A30-7. 
. 
41, 
Visuddhimagea, ed, Warren and Kosambi, 
pp. 560-2. 
42, 
EZ, Vol.4,p. 97; ff, B51-2, 
43. EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 95-6, 1, B26-7. 
44, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 110, n. 1 
45, 
EZ, Vol.3, p. 195; Vol. U1, p. 170; Vol. IV, p. 52. 
46. 
For these units of measurement, see infra p. 69, n. 
47, 
8, Beal, Chinese Accounts of India, pp. 46, 48-9, 
1950, pp. 96-95 Sdrattha-dipant, 
101; p. 114, n. 116, 
There were eleven such attendants, 
° 
keep the dwellings in good order. . 
Sri Lanka at the- beginning of the fifth century, 
- 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
145 
ele ~ 
to six thousand monks were fed at this place‘# 
o 
ata 
later period placed the figure at 
ei 
5 
rept 
: 
eight th 
0 
aes aa was continued after the capital was pauntet 
va; according to the Pajévaliya, 
Parakr: 
a 
[ 
f 
4 
s 
ikramabahu I 
a 
aha alms for about three thousand five hundred. monks.5° sale 
‘ 
vid nt this did not completely 
solve the problem. 
Durin; 
: @ perio 
under consideration provision of food became 
a maj : 
oa ] 
the apse organization. 
Gruel and boiled rice aoe 
ems in the monastic diet,5! and on occast 
: 
treated to delicacies like sweetmen 
fa gat oe 
treated 
| 
ats and molasses.°? 
A ninth-cer 
‘ 
we 
. 
~centi 
Hietass at the Abhayagiri monastery fixes the daily fare of civake a 
ee bes Sora », = 
a prastha of curd and a twentieth of a prastha 
. 
esidents of 
certain hermitages, monks en, 
i 
i 
ghe 
te 
gaged in. repairs 
to haernetaipa 
and those entrusted with certain special responsibilities 
wer allowed 
a double-share. 
No monk, even if he received a personal 
income, was entitled to a food allowance above the.fixed limit. 
A tenth- 
a inscription provides more information on the diet of monks 
t ain an endowment made to a monastery for the provision of ice, 
pul _ es (Phascolus mungo), sesame, red pepper, salt, betel, areca nuts 
an : ee 
. Monks were treated to sumptuous feasts when they were 
He i 
aby gine ne houses of theit wealthy patrons, 
Mahinda IV fed 
s of 
the 
Arafifiika sect with “abundant a 
i 
; 
k 
. 
nd costly food with 
ee kinds of curries (vyaiijana)” and provided them with sugar cooked 
in ghee, juice of garlic and betel as dessert. 
Among all monks he dis- 
bance i 
oil ae honey.55 
Normally the food was served in the 
; it was only a si 
Ais oe 
ly a sick monk who could have the food brought to 
The Mihintale Tablets reveal in detai 
; 
etail the arrangements made for 
. 
re 
pe 
provision of food to the saigha. 
Officials of the monastic administra- 
en were, ie would be expected, entrusted with the task of overall super- 
eee Three of them had to be present when the raw rice was being 
ued 
from the stores and when the food .was being served.5? 
Twelve 
48, 
Beal, op. cit. p. 47, 
49, 
Ibid. p. 445, 
50, 
Pv, p, 106, 
31, EZ, Vol. J, p. 91, ALL 
52. EZ, Vol. {, p. 25, Hl, 15, 21-2, 
53. 
EZ, Vol. I, pp 4-5, i. 1-3, 19. 
Prasiha appears to be synonymous with pata. 
34, EZ, Vol. IU, pp. 188-94. 
55. 
Cy. 54, 20, 22, 24. 
: 
36. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 91, d ALL-2, 
57, EZ, Vol. I, p. 92, d. B19-23,

--- PAGE 83 [DIRECT] ---

| 
| 
-yaried according to t 
146 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
cooks were employed; each of them received an allotment of one Kiri 
and two paya of land. 
They also received a daily allowance of rice which 
he functions they performed: the chief cook received 
an admand and one pata of rice; a servant who procured firewood and 
cooked the rice, three admanda; a servant who procured firewood or went. 
on errands, two admana; and one who merely cooked the rice received 
only one admana of rice. 
Probably the twenty-four female servants 
mentioned in.the list were also connected with the provision of food, 
Fach of them was assigned a paya of land, and the one who supervised 
their work received two payd. 
They were also entitled to an annual 
clothing allowance of one kajland of gold each. 
Two more employees, 
the jetmava (lit. “ihe chief mother’) and the batge lidi (“‘warder of the 
refectory’’), are mentioned in this connection in the inscription; it is 
not possible to ascertain what the duties of the former were.** 
Robes were distributed at the end of the year. 
According to the 
Mihintale Tablets, the officials who attended to the task of the distribution 
of robes were entitled to-one monk's share (probably the yalue thereof) 
in recompense? 
It is evident from a tenth-century inscription at Anu 
radhapura that the robes for a monk were expected to cost three kaland 
of gold a year. 
This, it may be noted, was thrice the amount spent on 
the clothes of a female servant. 
The cost of robes would, of course, vaty 
with the type of material used to make them, 
The Samantapasadikas* 
refers to robes which cost ten pieces of money and to some which cost 
twenty. 
However, itis not clear whether it is referring to Kaland or some 
other unit of currency. 
The information available is not sufficient. to 
justify any estimate of the cost of maintaining a monk. 
At the Maha- 
kapararima one amuna of raw rice and four aka of gold were set apart 
daily for the provision of meals for its incumbents; 4 thousand kaland 
of gold were spent each year on their robes. 
An employee termed navi who received a vasag and a land allotment 
of one Kiri is mentioned in the list ‘of the Mihintale Tablets. 
Pre- 
sumably ndvi is the same as navi, “barber,” which occurs in the South 
Indian temple inscriptions of the same period. 
In the Dhampiyad Aluvé 
Gétapadaya, nédvi is equated with the Pali kappaka which like navi denoted 
—_—_—$—<————— 
nt 
58, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 95, Il, B19-23. 
59. 
EZ, Vol.1, p. 95, Hl. BLS-6, 
é 
60: 
EZ, Vol.L p. 25, U.17-9. Twenty kaland 
of gold were set apart as a permanent 
endowment for the provision of robes to one monk. 
It is evident from the inscription 
that the donor expected a return of fifteen per cent on his outlay. 
For an explanation 
of katand, see supra p- () 
an 
61, 
Smp., Vol, IL, 1947, p. 358. 
62, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 49, Hf, 48-51. 
63, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 96, Hf, B32-3. 
Foran explanation of vasag, see infra pp. 148-53. 
MON IASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
147 
“a barber." 
It is not possible to 
: 
f6 the wont 
ascettain whether the 
bar 
The pasties of aa expected to serve the monks or the eo a 
in India, Rea 
RI 
weal to attend on monks was not ar 
from Gandhira who 8 refers to “Manorhita, the doctor of the aie” 
barinahCat 
gene ne hundred thousand pieces of gold to his b 
Some of the eee 
i 
Pec eararhe aa monasteries had hospitals to attend to the medi 
the tenth century, pine faci ae ee: dated in 
monast 
i 
ospital 
(veher ved-hal 
oath . ne ee According to the Hien Pate 
sae of ihe enka tt ee Tv, built a hospital outside the city for he 
giri hill at Mihintale hi group of ruins situated at the foot of the Ceti 
: 
Fn teen . 
as been identified as a hospital on basis of evid ae 
hospital bathe fad at the site. 
It is -probably the Peete 
Presumably it was Peete cae Sena I built at Cetiyagri® 
Tablets 
li 
tae 
: 
iyagiri monastery. 
ahinta 
erin - ee (veda) among the employees of the Rat 
Another, “a Sica a allotment of unirrigated land from Detlad, 
vasag and two paya of Li 
© applied leeches" (puhwida veda), received : 
vasag and an allotme oe ai third, called maxdovvak, receiyed on 
Milloc's transtati 
ment 
of one Kiri ‘and two paya of land. 
: 
nslation of the last term as “flower gardener” dogs Bie 
seem 
ot 
sae 
_ 
to be appropriate;”! arrangements made for the supply of flowers find 
mn 
mention elsewhere in the 
inscripti 
ntio’ 
he inscription, 
Wickr 
i 
on 
on. 
ckremasinghe?? si 
sat ‘ Biola Prepares medical decoctions.’’ "The napa oF 
pcan 
y 
be traced back to mand, ‘to dress,” ‘to ado: or a 
ae pean wae things means “‘to rub.” 
A traditional pk sidan 
neat a 
ie ments of the bones and the muscles by ae 
Gia fees rae i on in the Sinhalese villages even in Berti 
; 
gested 
that 
i 
fall Tle tole careers 
the mavdovvak was a physician who 
It appears that, at thi 
i 
; 
; 
e wealthier m 
ies, 
resi 
eres 
t 
onastories, resident 
ot only to lodgings and meals, but also to a share ace fone 
Income 
64, DAG, p. 81, 
65, 
Beal, op. cit., p. £57, 
66. 
EZ,.Vol. Il, pp. 25-33, 
67, 
Cy. 54, 53, 
68. ASCAR, 1910-1 
6% Cv. 51.73, 
§, pp, 19-20; 1952, p. 40, n. 1, 
10. EZ, Vol, 
, Vol. T, p. 96, U. 
B.30- 
W, AIC, p, 119. 
a 
72, EZ, Vol.1, p, 110, n.4.

--- PAGE 84 [DIRECT] ---

148 
, 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
‘ 
oer 
ide 
left over after meeting the usual expenses. ee ae ee 
i 
i 
i 
ndi 
i 
tices. in India, Fa-~Hian mentions shai 
: 
cently dues” L-tsing is more specific: 
‘The produce of the farms 
d the profits arising from trees and fruits,’’ he states 
e gardens, an 
n 
tre 
} 
i: Pe of Indian monastic life, ‘‘are distributed annually in shares 
i 
to meet the cost of clothing.’ It is likely that this practice was known 
i 
i 
Lanka:too. 
At feast 
s 
ine 
Sede and monks of scholarly pleaetein bear nal sca 
: 
iti 
income. Moggallina 
assigne 
oh Henin moaka 
‘According to the Mihintale Tablets, scholars 
scho 
ho 
specialized in the Vinaya Pitaka were entitled to five Pte 
aes 
d in the Sutta Pitaka to seven vasag, while specialists in 
© 
eh Ee Pitaka received the highest emolument——twelve me : 
pain system of remuneration, graduated according to oe bs be 
pres which a teacher specialized, was current at the Hindu 
temp 
i 
th India.77 
ey 
3 ‘h Seenteny, Sak pa sea 
James de Alwis 
suggested, 
: 
f 
i se bie 
Eon at de same term.” Gunasekara put ee 
Thee 
tations—“‘residence or cell of monk’’ and a pingo load o 
vl Aiea curry,’ Wickremasinghe, who considered the incidence 
pit ene in the Vessagiriya inscriptions, suggested several eae 
ead 
Comparing it with Pali vassaggena, he suggested 
that i 
eae be Gandia as ‘“‘seniority, fixed quantity of alms for the a 
nia i sa person receiving such alms.”’ 
Secondly, he pene 
e 
possibilty that it was derived from Skt. varsdgara and proposed 
‘a 
house 
for the season of retreat’ as another possible interpretation. 
A third 
in 
Pali vasaga 
is basis, ano- 
source of derivation was sought in Pali vasagara and, on this basis, 
i 
i 
i 
artment,’’? was suggested.® 
ible meaning, “a cell or sleeping ap 
a 
; 
; 
ae se Wickremasinghe does not seem to have been athe 
multitude of interpretations which he had put forward. 
Later 
on, 
m. 
same note, he suggested 
ets, Eduard Miiller rendered 
ee 
1, 
op. cit., p. 22, 
F 
’ 
i Tike 4 Record of the Buddhist Religion, p. 193. 
78, 
Cv. 44.49. 
16, 
EZ, Vol.1,p- 91, 
i, A12-4. 
77, 
MRE, 1918, p. 146. 
78. 
AIC, p. 145, 
chat 
s de Alwis, A Survey of Sinhala 
L 
aout of 
the Sidat Satigarava, Colombo, 1 
80, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 100, n. 4. 
81. 
EZ, Vol. 
1, p. 28,0. Se 
966, pp. exlviii-exlix. 
hose monks who shouldered special res- 
F 
song: 
three more possible interpretations; 
permanent 
iterature, being the Introduction to the. 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
149 
residence with fixed board,” “‘a house with land adjoining it for one’s 
maintenance,” and ‘the receiver of such board and lodging.” 
In 
another context he translated 
vasag as “a measured quantity of 
of Uda Mahaya) he rendered it as “allowance.’? 
Elsewhere, he has 
also translated the term as “the end of the vassa season.’’®? 
Jn his edi- 
tion of the Eppavala inscription Paranavitana translated vasag as “end 
of the year,” but more recently, in the course of editing the Kalkulam 
Rock inscription, he has adopted the rendering “dwelling house,’"® 
Certain mistakes are clearly evident in these early attempts of 
scholars to explain the term vasag which have brought forth not a clari- 
fication of the term but a bewildering plethora of variant interpretations, 
One was the confusion of vasag with vasdgin, a phonetically similar term 
which occurs in the inscriptions of the ninth and tenth centuries. 
The 
latter was evidently ‘considered to be the Instrumental Case Singular 
form of the former. -The ancient Sinhalese sanne on the Khuddasikkha 
where the term vasag occurs helps us to distinguish this term from ano- 
ther word, vasegini, which is most probably the same as vasdgin in the 
inscriptions.*> 
Vasegini occurs in a passage which is a quotation from a 
‘gloss on the Kaikhévitarani.®© 
Both vasegini and vastigin seem to be 
“! Sinhalese equivalents of the Pali term vassaggena which occurs in the. 
. 
Kabkhavitarani and other Pali commentaries, and it may be translated as 
“at the end of the year, at thé end of the vassa season” or as “in accord- 
ance with seniority.” 
The contexts in which these terms occui suit these 
interpretations.*7 
The undue emphasis that these scholars placed on 
+ etymological explanation and their failure to consider the contexts in which 
this term and its equivalents occur in Sinhalese and Pali literary works 
were further shortcomings in these pioneer studies, 
In the following 
of the term by avoiding these mistakes. 
It appears that at the wealthier Buddhist monasteries resident monks 
| were entitled not only to lodgings and meals, but also to share of the 
income left over after meeting the usual expenses. 
Tho Sinhalese sanne 
on the Khuddasikkhaé quoted above not only alludes to this practice 
but also uses the term: vasag when it speaks of the distribution of produce 
'.82, 
EZ, Vol. I, pp. 83, 196, 
83, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 56, n. 2. 
84. BZ, Vol. IIL, p. 191; Vol. V. Pt. 2, p. 165, 
7.89. 
Kudusika hi Purdtana Vistara Sannaya, ed. Moragalle Siri anobhasa Tissa, 
Colombo, 1954, pp. 142, 150. 
; 
86. Kankhavitarani, pp. 61, 92. 
87. EZ, Vol. I, p. 48, i, 40-1; Vol. ILL, p, 265, Hl. 28-30; Kudusika ha...p. 150, 
provisions” and in yet another instance (the text of the slab inscription- 
“paragraphs an attempt will be made to arrive at a clearer interpretation 
|

--- PAGE 85 [DIRECT] ---

150 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
belonging to monasteries. 
It states that any monk who arrives at a 
monastery at the time of the distribution. was entitled to half of a vasag 
that would normally.be given to a resident of that monastery.** 
The 
context of the incidence of vasag in the sanne is noteworthy, for here it 
is used in the sense of a share of produce. Furthermore, the same passage 
occurs in the Vinaya-vinicchaya-sangaha-tika of Sdriputta, and in this 
work the Pali term bhaga, also meaning “share,” 
is used in place of 
vasag.®® 
The Sumangala-pasddani, a Pali commentary on the Khud- 
dasikkha, also uses the term bhdga in this context but states that the 
“non-resident” who arrives at the time of the distribution is entitled to 
only a fourth part of a “share, 
Another work in which the term 
vasag occurs is the Sikhavalaida-vinisa, a Sinhalese comunentary on mon- 
astic discipline which has been assigned to the tenth century on the basis 
of its style.%! 
It defines the term samandasanika, “monks entitled to equal 
seats,’’ as those who were colleagues of equal years and were of sufficient 
seniority to be entitled to one or two yasag."'? 
It is possible to suggest 
on the basis of the preceding discussion that the practice of distributing 
the net income from the common property of the monastery among the" 
inmates in “shares” called vasag prevailed in Sri Lanka and that there 
were certain monks who were entitled to more than one vasag. 
However, 
- 
only the senior monks seem to have enjoyed the benefit of receiving 
one or more “shares.” 
It is possible that others were entitled to 
“part-shares”” but unfortunately 
this cannot be verified, 
The term vasag is also’ known to occur in seven epigraphic records. 
However, the contexts of its incidence in the Puliyankulam, Eppavala and 
Kalkulam inscriptions yield hardly any information which would help 
to explain its meaning. 
In comparison, the Mihintale Tablets and the 
slab inscription from Vessagiriya mentioned earlier are more useful. 
While outlining the allowances enjoyed by the resident monks and 
the employees of the Cetiyagiri monastery, the Mihintale Tablets ment- 
ion both monks and laymen among those entitled to vasag. 
Among the 
laymen were an astrologer, physicians, administrative officials and various 
types of workmen. 
Wickramasinghe and L. 8. Perera have pointed out 
that certain employees received allotments of land and daily allowances of 
uncooked rice while others received land and vasag; vasag and rice were 
88, 
Kadusika ha. ..p. 142. 
89, 
Vinaya~ vinicchaya-sangaha 
1907, p. 16. 
90. 
Satika Khuddasikkha, cd. Sumanajoti, 1897, p. E31. 
91. 
UCHC, Vol. 1, Pt. 1, p. 395. 
92, 
samavas iitteyij ek vasagekin devasagekin evi: mahalu viiyeij saga vayeylj samnan’- 
yanika nam. 
Sikhavalavda-vinisa, ed, D. B. Jayatilaka, 1924, pp. 63-4. 
-fikd, ed. Kobtegoda Dhammananda, 
Colombo, 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
151 
never allotted to the same individual. 
Fr 
is 
it 
én 
i 
in this context vasag denoted ‘‘a hed prot het 
matte a 
interpretation “share of cooked food’’ seems to be more a si 
A 
when considered in the light of the incidence of vasag in an sa iheltne ar 
the same inscription where it is said that monks who are bedridd i nd 
too i to come to the refectory should be served with vas 
ee 
specified by the physicians.4 
Satie 
PEN aieates a to specialists in the scriptures are distinguished 
ae 
granted 
to lay employees by the qualifying term kavdin pisdin. 
@ terms Kanda (khanda) and pinda occur in connection with vasag in 
the Vesagiriya inscription too, 
Wickremasinghe compared 
pinda aiid 
peti sie interpreted it as ‘‘food.’’” He thought that kantay which 
fy : 
meant ‘‘piece”’ or “fragment,’’ was an allusi 
Ke 
tags’ recommended for ntonks and interpreted riewuueoiraas “ 
ever, the word sivur, the usual term for ‘‘robes,”’ occurs in a later line of 
ie ee Tablets. : The two types of vasag mentionedin inscription 
0. t from Madirigiriya are bat vasag and pidin vasag. 
Obvious! 
the first refers to the share of food that the record goes on to eae 
Hence the type of share described as pidin or pinda also will have 
t a 
given a different interpretation. 
C 
a 
In Sanskrit the term pipda had a wide variety of meanings. 
Perhaps 
“the most common of these was “lump.” 
In arithmetic it was used to 
denote “sum” or “total amount.” 
Jt occurs in the Arthadastra in the 
compound form pindakara to denote a tax. 
This has been interpreted 
- 
by Kangle as an “‘aggregate tax’’ collected from the village as a whole, 
as distinct from the tax collected from individual villagers.°’ 
One ma y 
be justified ay suggesting that pitdin vasagak similarly denoted an ag. ; 
qe 
aac ae monastery which was annually 
ent monks in ‘the manner described 
in 
¢ 
Sree se Micaleet as well as in the Son 
anaiel 
dt 
ae 
cchaya-sargaha-tikd. 
On the other hand, 
the 
tern 
kaidin vasag (“share in fragments, share in i 
Te 
i 
de 
ae 
Fagin 
nstalments’’) or bat vasa; 
onan geste a ee daily shares of 
requisites like food and betel 
at ay cence ba rom the evidence in the Sikha-valaida-vinisa 
WMhiadsle etiek ° ahaha seniority were entitled to vasag, while the 
a Teh ee 
$ make 
it clear that certain monks received emoluments 
welve vasag. 
The award of katdin pitdin vasag would mean 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 83; L. S, Per: 
5 
. 1, p. 83; LS, Perera, The Lnstituti 
m. BZ Vel te se 
aie 
he Institutions ., 
+ pp. 1477-8, 
5. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 39, 0. 3. 
one Wilhams, A Sanskett-English Dictionary, p. 573 
fe Kautiliva Arthasdstra, ed. R, P, Kangle, Bombay. i963 p. 140, n. 3. 
, 
> 
1963, 
p. 140, n. 
3.

--- PAGE 86 [DIRECT] ---

152 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
either that the recipients could choose between “aggregate shares’’ and 
“shares in instalments” or that they were entitled to poth of these. 
If 
the monks had the choice between an “aggregate share’ and a “share in 
instalments,”’ it would imply that the former probably amounted to the 
annual value of the latter. 
Evidence in South Indian inscriptions suggests that a similar and 
comparative system of ‘‘shares’’ (Tamil pangu) was known at South In- 
dian temples too. 
The Additional Tafijavar Inscription No. 66 of Raja- 
rija gives a list of temple employees who were entitled to “‘shares’’ and 
places the annual value of a “‘share’’ at a hundred. Kalam of paddy or. 
the produce of one véli® of land, The remuneration that the employees 
of this famous temple were entitled to receive varied from two shares to 
eight-twentieths of a “share.” 
Superintendents of temple women, super~ 
intendents of musicians and senior accountants received two ‘“<shares’* 
each. 
Certain teachers of dancing received two “shares” while others 
received only one and a half, 
All dancing girls received one “share’’ 
each. 
There were four grades of payment for singers and musicians; 
some received one and a half “shares” while others were given one, three- 
fourths or half a ‘share’ each. The lowest scale of eight-twentieths of 
a “share” was the remuneration made over to paraso}-bearers.'°° 
Two slab ‘inscriptions from Madirigiriya and the Vessagiriya 
inscription yield valuable additional information concerning the opera- 
tion of the vasag system at monasteries by revealing that these “shares” 
had a cash value and that they could be bought. 
At Madirigisiya the 
purchaser who bought an “‘aggregate share’’ stipulated that it was to 
be operative as a “food-share.”” 
Since the value of a ‘share’? would 
depend on the extent of the properties of the monastery and the number 
of its resident monks, it isto be expected that its price would vary from 
time 
to time and from monastery to monastery. 
According to the 
Madirigiriya, slab inscription No, J, a “share” was bought for only 
fifty kaland of gold while at Vessagiriya a “‘share’’ cost as. much as 
two hundred kaland of gold. 
The prevalence of the practice of the 
sale of ‘shares’? may imply that the monks were entitled to the right 
of alienating their additional “shares,’ 
On the other hand, it is also 
possible that the purchase of a ‘‘share”’ merely amounted to the creation 
of a new endowment to maintain an additional monk or to enable 
the grant of an extra “share”? to an inmate, 
In poth the Vessagiriya 
98, 
1 kalam=12 marakkala=96 séru measures. 
The author is indebted to Pro- 
fessor 8, Vithyanandan for this information, 
See also, G. U. Pope, A Handbook of. 
the Ordinary Dialect of the Tamil Language, Oxford, 1905, p. 30, 
99, 
One vali is about 6.74 acres. 
Tamil Lexicon, Vol. VJ, p. 3839, 
100, 
Sd, Vol. 1, pp. 278-303, 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
153 
na nd Madirigiriya inscriptions, the purchasers of “shares'’ mak. 
Hs . pha to the monastery and not to individual monks 
Fvidence 
Ne : er inscriptions of this period suggest that at least at.certain 
iaitapsisiee the number of resident monks was fixed. ! 
Further, the 
Bek sider oe five a the inmates of a monastery hesitant 
E 
r numbers unless there was a cor 
ing 
i 
in the income of the mon. 
epi ebay 
astery. 
Hence, though the 
evi 
is 
j 
adequate for one to arrive at 
ni 
foluston 
MAA 
: 
a definite conclusion, it 
i 
that the purchase of 
a‘‘share"’ 
ae a 
‘are’’ 
amounted to the creation of an end 
} 
lo 
Pa 
een by Ha ple invested the proceeds from such “‘sales’’ paired 
would 
augment its income. 
It would th 
a 
membership in the monastic coi 
i 
i 
vein watnee 
} 
mmunity entitled all 
k: 
i 
of daily requisites like fo: 
i 
pag 
abil 
aaa 
od and clothing, some 
of th 
monks of a certain seniority 
hi 
is 
Sioa dethnteat 
1 
y had been assigned shares 
of 
inc 
esc eNeemaieiee 
hares of the net income 
property of the monastery. 
Th 
i 
shares among members of the 
i 
sea 
arte) 
8 
al 
monastic community was 
not 
i 
egalitarian basis and was variabl 
iori 
eae 
le. The seniority 
of th 
id 
hi 
knowledge of the seri 
saned 
Ge 
tures seem to have determined the 
e 
‘ 
t 
numbe 
shares he was assigned. 
It is most likely, though this cannot be ed 
. 
that the shares held by a monk returned to the common pool at his death 
It seems reasonable to suggest that the life of monks at some of the 
» Jarger 
3 
i 
‘ger 
monasteries was one of comfort; at times, even one of luxury. 
The-equipment provided at the monastery of Aritthapabbata was ‘fit 
~ 
for royalty." 
Jt is doubtful, however that all monks had the benefits 
- 
hep 
higs Regie life that the larger monasteries provided. 
Ag- 
raat 
-D, 831-833) found that monks from the smaller sina? 
© go to the Mahavihara for their gruel and medicine.’ 
«:. Mahinda IV was obliged sometimes to send his own physicians to attend 
ath lek me also vie to have provided the Pamsukilika 
, 
black pepper (marca), lon 
t 
(pi, 
1), 
gi 
sugar and the three kinds of myrobalan.!o4 
Pain eee 
medic. 
i 
: 
al use. 
Monasteries usually had fixed endowments set apart for 
i 
Ried 
Eine ot but these funds were sometimes used to meet the 
siniiaien - ou not all the monks were fortunate enough to 
aie Pe 
t 
nd of the year. 
Kassapa IV distributed pieces of 
! 
use in patching up and strengthening old robes.1% 
; 
+ 
See for 
ii 
6078. 
‘or instance, EZ, Vol. I, p. 48, 4. 40-1 and p. 187, i/, 28-32; C/HSS, 1972, 
102. 
Cv, 50, 63-4, 
303. 
Cy, 49, 88-90. 
104, 
Cv, 54, 21, 23, 
105, See supra p. 118, 
106. 
Cy. 52, 23,

--- PAGE 87 [DIRECT] ---

154 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
Monks as Scholars 
‘The ample opportunities for study that the well-endowed monasteries 
provided, the contact with Indian centers of Buddhist scholarship, and the 
patronage and encouragement extended by kings (some of whom were 
themselves scholars) stimulated. scholarly activity among monks during 
this period. 
Dathaniga and Dhammamitta are the only scholars of the 
tenth century to find mention. in the Cilavamsa. 
Unfortunately the 
commentary that Dhammamitta wrote at the request of Mahinda IV has 
not been preserved, 
Ananda, the author of the Malatika whose opin- 
ions are quoted with obvious respect by later commentators, claims that 
his work was written at the request of a certain Dhammamitta.'°? 
The 
Milatikd is a sub-commentary on Buddhaghosa’s writings on the Abdhi- 
dhamma, 
The Sdsanavamsa explains that it came to be known as the 
Mialalika since it was the first in the series of subcommentaries (tika) 
written on the Pali Canon. 
{tis certain that the Malajika was written 
before the time of Sumaigala, the disciple of Sariputta; Ananda finds 
mention in the Abhidharamattha-vibhavint of Sumangala.!? 
Malala- 
sekera has dated Rnanda’s lifetime in the “eighth or ninth century,”!° 
and he is listed as an Indian monk in the Gandhavamsa, an. account of 
Pali literature written by a Burmese monk.!!! 
Though it is not possible 
‘to assign an exact date to the Gandhavamsa, it is a work of late origin, 
Jt is evident from the discussion. in the Malatika on the opinions of the 
Abhayagirivasins that Ananda was a follower of the Mahavihara School. 
Itis possible that his exposition of the “orthodox” point of view was based 
on commentarial sources which were available at the Mahavihara. 
If 
the Dhammamitta who requested him to write this commentary on the 
Abhidhamma lived in the time of Mahinda 1V, Ananda should have lived 
during the tenth century. 
It is reasonable to expect that the Malalika 
he tenth century when both the satgha and the Jaity 
was written during t 
seem to have evinced a particular interest in works on the Abdhidham- 
yna.t!2 
7 
The statement of the Sasanavamsa that the Miilatika was the first 
subcommentary would imply that the Visuddhimagga-+tika and the sub- 
commentary on the first th 
107. 
Abhidhammamilafikd, Burovese edition, Burmese Buddhist 
Society, 
Rane 26. 
goon, 1960 »Vol. L, p. 203 
108. 
Sdsanavansa, trsl, B. C. Law, London, 1932, p. 36. 
109. 
See Abhidhammattha-vibhavint, ed. Pafifiasiira an 
pp. 81, 108, 118. 
410. 
G.P. Malalasekera, Pali Literature of Ceylon, p. 210. 
jli. 
Lp. Minaev, Recherche sur le bouddhisme, p. 240. (Minaev reproduces the 
text of the Gandhavarsa in this work). 
112. 
See supra p. 148 and infra pp. 230-1. 
d Vimaladhamma, 193, 
ree nikdyas of the Sutta Pitaka were written 
“=f 
M 
‘i 
ONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
155: 
after the time of Ananda. 
The colo 
: 
a. 
phons o 
i 
i 
ethno» sar or sol by thane 
ot 
Dhaai 
eee i 
a ascribes them to the same author and distin, he 
has eunces of the same name who lived at Hedaratiftta "5 
ea 
hes ephet the Visuddhimagga-tikad was written ere 
ae ae 
: seal who lived at the Siddhagdma-parivena 14 
ee name of Siddhagama is mentioned in the chronich 
ane si egested that the Siddhagima-parivena was the ; = 
rhe eave iane built by Sena FV (A.D. 954-956), 
He fi tie 
nee se : pieriead should be identified with the monk of the ae 
oe 
a eee 
t 
etween the names 
ha st te i Oa 
mend 
lavanes 
§ 
Ama-parivena 
ited 
‘agai 
He cee He is referred to as a Fae: of ie cca 
th seis . 
ronicle, 
This is particularly striking since Dhammne 
als th 
ne asa ae of the Sitthagama-parivena in the oats : 
Handa woke 
gute ese. are. not strong objections against the ide i. 
_ a sive 
hi 
ase le that the chronicler made an orthographic ne 7 
a pares : 
: 
ise at Dhammapala, the author of the Visuddhima: = 
te 
marientary on the first three nikdyas of th 
on 
ive ‘ may the tenth century cannot be ruled out 
us 
Pings au . Pe “Culla Dhammapala, 
the senio 
caren ae 
of Ananda, composed the Saccasankhepa,”™"7 The 
eke hones a e ae Ananda in the passage which precedes this 
Sen uthor o the Miélatika. 
The Sdsanavamsa attributes th 
sue ce th (annpika) onthe Malaika to a monk called Dhati 
eee fae 3S as AG whether they are identical or whether 
Vode 
naie 
uy 
e identified with the author of the 
One of the most notable scholars of th 
i 
an 
e period under considerati 
nee author of the Abhidhammattha-saigaha ohen 
and the identity of ee 
ae Sra aie abe 
ot 
hs 
The brief colophon of the work comprises a ptOan en Sea 
or 
in Sdsanavansa, pp-.36-7. 
 Visudahi 
POsa 
Wa 
“ 
368, 
isuddhimaged-tika, Burmese edition, ed. U Hpye, Rangoon, 
1910, Vol. JI. 
” 
y 
» 
VOL 
A, 
15, A, P. Buddh 
i 
ake 
adatta, 
adi 
sates 
116, 
Cr. 54, 35-6, 
atta, Theravidi Bauddhacdryayo, (960, pp. 54-5. 
ne Minaev, op, cit, p, 240. 
8, Sdsanavamsa, p. 37,

--- PAGE 88 [DIRECT] ---

i 
i 
i 
if 
i 
{ 
i 
i 
| 
156 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
the prosperity of a monastery called Milasoma;"! 
presumably, it was 
his residence. 
A commentary on the Khuddasikkha, known at present 
only in Burma, mentions a monastery called Milasoma which was in Sri 
Lanka.° 
The Talaing records quoted by Gray place Anuruddha 
among scholars from South India.2! 
The Gandhavamsa lists him as an 
author from Sri Lanka and attributes the Abhidammattha-saigaha as well 
asthe Namarapa-pariecheda and the Paramattha-vinicchaya to his author- 
ship.’ 
In doing so the Gandhavamsa contradicts evidence from the 
Paramattha-viniechaya which was written, as is evident from its colophon, 
by a monk from the city of Kaveri, who was living at the time of writing 
at Tafija in Tambarattha.’* 
The colophon of the Némaripa-parice- 
heda gives little information on the author but suggests that he was from 
the Mahavihara. Even early commentators like Sumangala believed that 
However, as Buddhadatta 
all the three works were by the same author. 
has shown, the Abhidhammattha-sangaha agrees with the Na&maripa- 
paviccheda; it differs from the Paramattha-vinicchaya on some of the 
views it expresses.'74 
It is possible that the Abhidhammattha-saigaha 
and the Némaripa-pariccheda were written by the same person; it is also 
possible, however, that the authors of the three works were distinct from 
each other. 
Using ‘stylistic criteria, Malalasekera has assigned the 
Abhidhammattha-sargaha to the tenth or the eleventh century; others 
have assigned it to the twelfth century. 
é 
_- 
The reforming activities of Parakramabahu 1 and the revival of the 
sabgha under his patronage ushered in an era of fruitful scholarly acti- 
vity. 
Kassapa of Udumbaragiri who took a leading part in reforming 
the saigha is described as a scholar who was thoroughly versed in all the 
three sections of the Canon and particularly in the Vinaya Pitaka. 
His 
disciple Sériputta calls him “the father of the saigha and a specialist in 
119, 
Abhidharmartha-sargrahaya, ed, Nandarima Tissa and M. Dhammaratana, 
Colombo, 1938, p. 152. 
_ 320. 
See A.P. Buddhadatta, Pali Sahityaya, Vol. II, p. 324, 
The prologues and the 
colophons of the known Pali literary works have been published together with the 
author’s comments in 
scription from Anurédhapura mentions “the Viraikurarama monastery attached to 
the Miilaso monastery.” 
It is possible that Miilasoma was the same as Millaso, but 
the only monastery by the name. ‘Virankurérama mentioned in the sources of Sri 
Lanka was part of the Abhayagiri complex. 
Sec infra p. 247, 
121, 
J. Gray, Buddhaghosuppatti, 1892, p. 26. 
122, 
Minaev, op. cit. p. 245. 
123, 
Paramiattha-vinicchaya, 
identification of Tambarattha, see infra pp. 266-71. 
124. 
Abhidhammattha-vibhavint, pp. 57, 81, 88; Buddhadatta, Theravads Bauddht 
earyayo, p. 79. 
125, 
Malalasckera, op. cit. p. 168. 
Pt. 2, p. 585. 
the two volumes of the Pali Sahityaya. 
A tenth-century ine) an 
ed. Devinanda, Colombo, 1926, p. 337. 
For the 
See also CHY, Vol. LV, p. 91; UCHC, Vol, Ls 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
. 
157 
the Vinaya.’""6 
 He'was an id 
ri 
i 
i 
oe the standards of FR 
geen oe ee 
POA We leading light among the scholars of the time of 
eta 
» 
Asagr ‘ammarian he was compared with Candra 
and 
i 
ne as a poet with Kalidisa.'?? 
He gathered round him a 
. 
oe : seape Under his leadership the Jetavana aoa: 
shar 
Eble a great center of learning. 
In the Dathdvamsa, 
Sa bee Dhammakitti, he is credited with the authorship 
pation coin Mo} 
rules of discipline called the Vinaya-satgaha and 
Pace ete iN sins Paticika of the grammar of Candra, the Samanta- 
ha x es Me anoratha-parant, the commentary on the Anguttara 
eehvedaie te n a known as the PGlimuttaka-vinaya- 
expressed doubts 
on the attribution 
of pete eo ae 
a ae pedi to Sariputta.'29 
But it is ode Iv 
tae: 
eae oe the author of the Vinaya-sérattha-dipani who 
nae ip 
le of Sariputta credits him with the authorship of this 
are aps ', SIX . 
the verses which appear in the prologue of the 
ve ay : @ are also found in the prologue of the Sarattha-dipani 
Jetavana aoe si prsaael one hiss ee : 
na 
mona: 
lues 
rakramabahu, and in 
bart deo rea oe 
was a disciple of the mahathera an a 
pai ee : ence there is little reason to doubt that these two 
shia ule is ee y the same author. 
In addition to the four works 
Vinisdraheona. ae aoe juan i ith 
Sera ere 
n 
the 
i 
fi 
san 
a 
ie sprite of the last work he claims to haye Gree ne 
Dieta wd toe ec aioe ae 
In this connection it is Thtbreataetaet dhae a aiemayrey 
‘nfs 
: 
e@ Saddhamma-san 
ree: . 
: nue PS 
ae (probably Ayuth’ya) who is duels 
ele forse, 
century, records a tradition which speaks of a 
Gein ae 
Se by Kassapa at the Jetavana monastery to 
ba eine ae ation of subcommentaries on the Canon, 
The 
Pa 
an di the Sdrattha-dipani, the Sarattha-maiijasé and the 
i 
ae -p 
ani, the subcommentaries on the Vinaya, the Sutt 
d 
idhamma Pitakas. respectively, to this council of monks headed 
ee Cv. 78,7; Sdrattha-dipani, p. 1. 
5s ee Theravaddi Bauddhacdryaye, p. 79. 
ae neu ed. B,C, Law, Lahore, 1925, pp, 49-50, 
5 
’, Vol. I, Pt. 2, p, 285. 
, 
130, 
Buddhadatta, Pali Sahityaya, Vol. UI, p. 287

--- PAGE 89 [DIRECT] ---

~ scholar Dhammakitti are mentioned as contemporaries who requested 
158 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
by -Kassapa.3! 
If indeed such a council was held, it is rather strange 
that it is not mentioned in the Calavamsa or in any other literary 
source in Sri Lanka. 
Moreover, the colophons of the Sarattha-dipant 
and the Sdraitha-maijiisa as wellas other contemporary sources state; 
as 
pointed out earlier, 
that these 
two 
works were composed by 
Sariputta. 
However, the tradition in the Saddhamma-saigaha may 
not be completely rejected, for it is possible that Sariputta had the 
help of other scholars of this period in the writing of his com- 
mentaries. 
: 
Buddhandga, the author of the Vinayattha-mafjasd, refers to Sari- 
putta as his teacher and states that he wrote this work at the request of 
Sumedha.'32 
It is possible that Sumedha is the teacher of Sariputta 
mentioned-earlier. 
As evident from the reference to Parikramabahu I 
in the colophon, the Vinayattha-mailjasi seems to have been written 
during this reign; probably Buddhanaga was one of the senior disciples 
of Sariputta. 
A list of scholars who were probably junior contemporaries of Sari- 
putta or representatives of the generation which followed his is found in 
the Vinaya-sdrattha-dipant, a work written by one of his disciples. The 
identity of the author is withheld in the colophon, but the Arafiftika monk 
Sumangala, the Cola monks Buddhamitta and Kassapa, and the lay- 
him to write this work.'* 
Sumangala is probably the same as the Arantika monk of this name 
who requested Sangharakkita to write the commentary on the Khudda- 
sikkha significantly named the Sumangala-pasadant, “that which pleases 
Sumangala.’")> 
It may also be suggested that he should be identified 
with Sumangala, the brilliant exegetist who specialized in the Abhidham- 
ma. This monk, another disciple of Sariputta, wrote the Abhidhammat- 
tha-vikasin’ and the Abhidhammattha-vibhavini as commentaries on the 
Abhidhammayatara of Buddhadatta and the Abhidhammatha-sangaha 
of Anuruddha, respectively. 
. The only drawback to this identification 
is that the former was a monk who ‘‘constantly lived in the woods” 
while the latter claims to have lived 
at the Nandiparivena of the 
ee 
131, 
Vinaya- 
ett 
1907, p. 151; ‘Abhidharmartha-sangraha-sanyaya, ed. Totagamuve Panihamoli, PBliya- 
goda, 1897, p. 195, 
See also Minaev, op. cit., p. 241. 
132. Saddhamma-sangaha, ed. Nedimale Saddhananda, 
Society, 1890, pp. 58-61. 
133, 
Vinayattha-matijisa, ed. U. P. Ekanayake, 1912, p. 296, 
134. 
Pali Sahityaya, Vol. UL, pp. 238-9. 
135. 
Sumangala-pasddani, ed, Dangedara Sumanajoti, Colombo, 1898, p. 1. 
Journal of the Pali Text 
-yiniechaya-sangaha-tika, ed, K&(f6goda Dhammananda, Colombo, 
* 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
159 
Jetavandrama.'3* Even if the’ 
identi 
: 
y were not 
been contemporaries of Sariputta. 
Soe tot 
ova 
Sangharakkhita, yet another disci 
ari 
: 
ita, 
isciple of Sariputta, lived 
at 
ia ieee ie when he wrote the Supicain beatae : ae 
of 
this work he claims to have written f 
of 
| 
k 
| 
0. 
our oth 
t 
ocak eee Subodhilatkdra, and the vane 
rote 
the 
Sambandhacinta—a work o 
t 
: 
pean rae 
) 
n syntax. 
.In the Vutto- 
, 
y, he refers to the thera Sila of th 
a 
tana as his teacher,'*? and 
i 
ae 
r, 
presumably it was from. this mo 
pie agramiaees 
the colophons of both the Giada 
ican 
nd 
andhacinté, Sangharakkhita speaks with. affecti 
i 
: 
a 
ction 
of 
Sst nae of the Aratifiavasi 
sect who had rete 
sais ane ae neue of the monastic fraternity of Udum- 
4 
ulagala), 
Both teacher and disciple, 
it is 
clai 
part in a “‘purification’’ of the satgha.! 
is 
in 
ata 
part 
a 
gha.38 
This information 
i 
in identifying and datin 
i 
a oath 
\ 
g the two works since, 
accordi 
deny 
n, 
hee pain eee a monk called Sangharakkhita oe aed 
of 
Sdriputta, and another called Medhank 
sciple 
: 
ata who wa 
Dithbulagala, took the leading part in reforming the saigha de 
_ 
time of Vijayabahu of Datibadeniya (A.D. 1232-1236). 
It also becomes 
evident from this discussion that at least the Suman, 
: 
gala-pasddani 
La the Sambandhacinta were 
written 
during 
the ceeds. Por 
atibadeniya kingdom. 
; 
wae 
The Vinayartha-samucei 
, 
; 
“ 
d 
aya, a commentary on the Vin 
eet hae to its colophon, by a disciple of dedloutte eae. 
of 
rammarian..4? 
It has been attri 
>Egal 
; 
ributed 
to Medhan- 
een 
a records that a commentary ne 
ths 
as written 
by a disciple of Sariputta.’? 
T) 
di 
A 
tien 
by 
. 
he 
- 
ek fan the Né&maripa-pariccheda, Khema, abitahan une 
voce ae commentary on the Saccasankhepa to a certain mahdsimi 
Aenean Pine maar had a disciple called Vacissara 
> 
le of 
Sariputta and author of the Dajha 
¥ 
posed a poem on the Tooth relic during the reign of au =" 
136, 
Abhidhammattha-vikasini, 
- 
ni, ed, A. P. Budd. 
137, 
Vuttodaya, Burmese edition, 1898, p. me Ce gk ener 
138, Sumangala-pasddani, 
‘ 
1898-1900, p, Hee ‘pasadant, p. 329; Sambandhacintd, Burmese edition, 
Rangoon, 
ig 
* 
139, 
Niks, p. 26, 
ae a Sahityaya, Vol, I, pp. 528-9. 
» 
Saddhamma-sangaha, p. 64. 
; 
142. 
Ibid. 
ans 
143, 
Sasanavamsa, p. 37. 
144, 
Dathavamsa, p. 4, v. 6.

--- PAGE 90 [DIRECT] ---

160- 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
It is possible that Kassapa, who is mentioned along with another 
Cola monk named Buddhamitta in the Vinaya-strattha-dipant, is identical 
with the monk of this nanie who wrote the ‘Moha-viechedant. This work, 
together with Abhidhammatha-vikasini and the Abhidhammattha-vibhévini 
represents the final stage of the’ development of the Abhidhamma in 
India 
and 
Sri Lanka. 
At the time the Moha-yicchedant 
South 
was written, Kassapa was residing at the Naganana monastery in Cola- 
amila country called Kassapa is. 
dhinathaputa’ 
A monk from the D 
mentioned in the Sésanavamsa as one who wrote the Vimati-vinodani.\° 
His name occurs after that of Sariputta. 
The Gandhavamsa attributes 
four works—the Moha-vicchedant, Vimatiechedani, Buddhavamsa and 
the Andgatavamsa—to a monk named Kassapa.’*7 
It is possible that 
Vimaticchedani is a corrupt form of Vimati-vinodant. 
Probably the 
Vimati-vinodani and the Moha-vicchedani are works of the same author. 
No information is available on Buddahamitta, the other Cola monk. 
The lay scholar Dhammakitti, who is also mentioned in the Vinaya- 
sdrattha-dipani could be the same as the pandita Dhammakitti who was 
one of the Sinhalese envoys at the Burmese court in the time of Parakra- 
mmabihu 1.148 
A lay scholar by the same name is also mentioned in the 
Nikdya-sangrahaya.'? 
Tt is evident from. the preceding discussion that the literary activities 
of the period under consideration were dominated by exegetic scholar- 
ship. The role of the scholars was one of explaining t! 
their commentaries, critically examining the interpretations given by 
achings of the 
their predecessors, and systematically presenting the te 
‘Theravada school. Yet, there is reason to believe that the knowledge of 
at least some of the monks was not restricted to the teachings of the 
‘Theravada school. 
It has been pointed out elsewhere that special pro- 
Abliayagiri monastery for the study of treatises 
vision was made at the 
of the non-Theravida schools.'6° 
Mugalan, who was the chief incum- 
pent of the Uttaromila in the time of Vijayabahu I, is described .as a 
scholar versed in the dgamas and the sastras.'* 
In his inscription at 
Dambulla, Nissaika Malla claims to have promoted the study fof the 
scriptures and “other extrancous éastras’’ among monks.'5? 
Kassapa, 
145, 
Moha-vicchedant, ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, and A, K. Warder, PTS, London, 
1961, p. 359. 
146, 
Sdsanavamsa, P- 37, 
147, | 
Minaev, op. ¢ff., P. 240. 
148, 
Cv. 76. 32. 
149, 
Niks, p. 28, 
150. 
See infra p. 256. 
151, 
Ef, Vol. XVI, p. 337, HL. 25.6. 
152. 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 131-2, fl. 21-2. 
he scriptures and 
° 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
‘161 
the Cola monk who wrote the Moha-viechedani. 
) 
- 
lant, 
‘i 
i 
aie oe Satthantara (sastrantara),'53 Re ainreeeh rites : 
ae 
Lait: éastras” (bihirasdstra) mentioned drove, 
ae eaehaie nee either to non-Theravada teachings. or to “ 
paiva 
erage ree though it is more probable that it con- 
ieee ‘ 
eae : e Dithivamsa Sariputta is described as a teache: 
doctrine.154 Suen Pecunia fee non Tho 
rhe 
- 
-dipani refers to 
hi 
a Sere ( 
Jotisattha) and the Beets eaten ase 
riputta claims to have written a work on astrology 
pee 
The Widening Intellectual Horizon 
‘A. broad 
liber: 
j 
for leet tie education was considered as an essential requisite 
such a trainin; 
nks during the medieval period. It was hoped that 
ehaieaad - vous equip them intellectually to defeat their rival. it 
among the laity ee help them to secure broad-based ee 
5 
idea occurs in the 
t 
comments on a verse from the paneer of Bu-ston where he 
In order to vanquish and to h elp others as well 
i 
Pat ier aia 
of himself, he (the seer 
rE wee y 
Et 
aig oie 
std ccordingly the science of logic (hetuvid) i) 
adversaries Gas ere the i 
4 ieee Mae eine (an rans 
; 
cience of 
Medici 
vidya 
and Arts (silpakarmavidya) for Dr aioe eee 
and that of Met 
i 
js 
of himself, 
etaphysics (adhydtmavidyd) to acquire knowledge 
It is possible that ‘similar intentions ¢ 
oe 
n 
ncouraged the Sinhale 
. even seein in the secular fields of study. 
One eae 
its eaiesses commentary of Sariputta on the Candra-vydkarana 
fete ae 
pis of Saigharakkhita have already been men- 
Baa be 
i was written by Buddhappiya, a Cola monk who 
nates Sanat monk, '57 Moggallina, a monk from Anu- 
Seared 
ates 2 the Moggallayana-vydkarana, lived in the time 
of 
is 
au 
I, 
In the 
Vinayartha-samuccaya'’? 
Medhatkara 
153, 
Moha-viechedant, p. 359. 
154,. Dathavamsa, pp. 49-50. 
‘ 
155, 
Pali Sahityaya, Vol, IL, p. 287, 
156, 
Sarralankar 
d 
B 
The 
# 
Buda 
vikdra, 
ed, E, Huber, 1908, 
pp. 
+23 
dhism in India and Tibet, trsl. E. O. Obertniller, ti 
eidatberg: 1951 Vs en i 
> 
> 
Vol d, p44, 
, 
157. Mahdrdpasiddhi-s 
Colombo, 1891, p. ia sannaya, 
ed. M. Sumangala 
and 
B, Dhammaratana 
158. 
Pali Sanit yaya, Vol, IL,.p, 
51 
159, 
Ibid., pp. 528-9, 
Bees

--- PAGE 91 [DIRECT] ---

162 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
refers to Moggallana and Sariputta as his teachers. 
Piyadassi, who com- 
posed the Padasadhana based on the Moggalldyana-vydkarana, Was 
another student of Moggallana.1 
These two works started a new school 
of Pali grammar. 
The grammarian seems to have been different from 
Moggallana of the Sarogamamiila who composed the lexicon titled Abhi- 
dhinappadipika during the reign of Parakramabahu ye 
The Vuttodaya and the Subodhalankira of Sangharakkhita are works 
on prosody and poetics. 
Tt would be natural to expect that monks who 
wore interested in literary activities would not confine their efforts to 
purely technical studies and-would attempt to compose poetry themselves. 
Due to the dictates of the disciplinary rules they had to deal with “appro- 
yed"? subjects like the personality of the Buddha. 
Exercises in metrical 
construction in praise of the Buddha such as the Jindlaikara of Buddha- 
rakkhita and the Pajjamadha. of Buddhappiya are typical results ‘of this 
situation. 
Yet it was not always that the poetic talents of monks were 
restrained by disciplinary rules. 
Paranavitana's comments on the graff- 
itiscribbled by monks who visited Sigiri are revealing: “itis very rarely 
that the subject-matter of their verses proclaims them to be the compo- 
sitions of those who adopted the religious life. 
Most of the clerics had 
entered into the spirit of the occasion and addressed the ladies in a manner 
far from ‘sermonizing. 
One of them, for instance, addressing a lady in 
the painting, expounds the doctrine that an occasional lapse from virtue 
in one who is generally of good conduct may be condoned.’ 
167 
The widening of the intellectual horizon of monks is reflected in their 
interest in the study of Sanskrit. During the earlier periods, though the 
knowledge of Sanskrit would not have been uncommon, Sanskrit does 
not seem to have occupied an important place in monastic education. 
Sinhalese and particularly Pali were the media of intellectual activity. 
The interest in the teachings of the non-Theravida schools of Buddhism 
was one of the factors which induced monks to study Sanskrit. 
Most of 
» 
the inscriptions which testify to the prevalence of Mahayana and Tantric 
practices in Sri Lanka are in Sanskrit. 
These records, which are in the 
Pallava Grantha, Kutila or the Sinhalese script, reveal a close acquain- 
tance with the language, a high standard of learning and a remarkable 
ability at metrical construction. 
As a result Sanskrit studies seem to 
have become popular in Sri Lanka at a time w' 
was in decadence in India. 
se 
160, 
Padasddhana, ed. Dharmananda, pp. 302-3. 
161, 
Abhidhdnappadipika, ed. Tobagamuve Pannatissa, 1895, p. 161. 
162, 
S. Paranavitana, Sigiri Graffiti, Vol. 1, p. cexiv. 
163, EZ, Vol. Ul, pp. 157-64, 219-35; Vol. V, Pt. 1, pp- 168-9. 
hen Sanskrit literature 
© 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
163 
The 
i 
ace eatin that the monks took in the study of Sanskrit is evident 
ge nae oes works written during this period. 
In addition 
a one odhana, a work attributed to Kassapa of Udumbara i 
anne Foes that Sariputta wrote on the Paticikalankara dates fr 
a 
saa ee has suggested that Buddhandga, the naher ee 
getical work 
on Sanskrit grammar, shou 
‘ 
er 
lw 
ould. be 
i 
i 
ad cee of Sariputta who bore this namo," The phe 
Hae a es oun the network of espionage organized by Dafa: 
, 
refers 
to spies versed in the Itihdsa, 
i 
: 
‘ 
d 
, the P. 
A Lela a went about in the guise of monks.!6 
This yates ree ; 
ie Z 
; ane edge that the monks were expected to possess. ih his a S 
eee pea Pe 
ee I the author of the Celene 
s 
his knowledge 
of the epi 
j 
i 
, 
pale persons like Dusyanta and eee eee 
af ae that the monks made in literary activity during the 
per- 
obs irae 
o the patronage extended by the kings. 
The Cdlav 
siete : Udaya T gave bronze alms bowls to monks who aa od 
. 
any of the literary works of the “Polonnaruva Period” m *k 
roe oe mies of the generous patronage extended. 
by Pardkramabal 
oe ee bee written at his special request. 
This Bais 
y 
Nissanka Malla who, ac 
i 
0 
his 
i 
ipti 
sited facilities for the expansion of esis pe eg ee 
sige os 
saree! bai en REL scholars who studied at his feet who 
abo 
ival 
in 
uddhist scholastic activity and 
re ia ane of Pali literary works of the period under ie 
Thane of this period was not the exclusive contribution of 
; 
eer 
rea sf 
oe nor had it been so in the period which pre. 
: 
of many monks from South India, 
i 
tines 
n 
‘ 
, and 
from Burma, are found in the lists of Pali scholars. 
In ect 
‘most 
emi 
i 
. 
Most eminent writers came from South India and some of them studied 
un, 
i 
ane sane ether 
even persuaded Sinhalese monks to write 
: 
. 
er, 
they seem to have worked 
i 
i 
ee 
; 
orked 
in fruitful collabora- 
0 
n 
ystematically 
present 
i 
yada, particularly of the Mahayihare school eae nee 
The Monastery as a Center of Education and Culture 
Th 
F 
: 
ote ainpie reais of the clerics with the belles lettres and their 
sical 
arly pursuits in the secular branches of knowledge turned 
164, 
UCHC, Vol. I, 
168 Gy 6h Mae? 
t. 2, p. 588, 
166, 
Cy, 64, 42-5, 
167, 
Cy, 49.34, 
168, 
See supra p. 160.

--- PAGE 92 [DIRECT] ---

164 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
the monastery into a center of literary ieee? Seo eDE ay 
i 
i 
i 
re 
i 
ition to impart knowledge 
literati of the society, were in’a posto! 
par 
: 
sea 
i 
isited India in the seventh century, 
fields to the layman. 
I-tsing, who visi 
ate 
the 
i 
time performed this function: 
noted that the Indian monks of the 
: 
i 
monasteries of India, there are many vee we aro onteusted to 
the 
i 
i 
ar 
literature. 
Bhiksus and instructed by them in secula 
: 
If the testimony of the Calavamsa is to be accepted, - ek e 
: 
i 
ake: 
ahu included the study of the 
Su 
4 
the young prince Parakramabal 
2 
aa 
iptur 
: 
tiha), 
poetics 
(kdveyya), 
hy 
scriptures, grammat 
(saddasa 
i 
ka 
Base lini 
i 
7 
i 
bha), and writings on sta 
‘ 
nighandu), works on ritual (kefubha), 
: 
: 
or 
Pe 
pei 
as the treatise of Kotalla (Skt. Kautilya), in addition to eee 
dance and song, the use of weapons like the bow and the gn +a oe 
handling of elephants.17! 
Even if this account is not strict ly ene . 
it does represent the ideal, and itis noteworthy that in this as 
the i ee 
the Buddhist teachings is given a prominent place. Apart sat : 
ti 
monks of this period would have been in a position to teacl 
i 
ier 
i 
ce the 
jects as grammar, poetics and lexicography. 
In an earlier instan 
Calavamsa mentions that Dhatusena learned statecraft (niti) from a. 
monk who was his uncle.!? 
The monasteries of Sri eae 2 
Hindu temples of South India, employed laymen as Vindenicle eee 
teach those secular subjects which the monks were ora Lapvieet 
ciplinary rules to refrain from learning or Lage sete nsiall 
monastery at Mihintale had lay teachers (ddura Sala alate 
Six men, some of whom were teachers and some pt eac ers ( 
damin), wore allotted the dues from the village Gutigams. aisle 
It would be an exaggeration, however, to maintain, as een 
done, that “the whole system of education, both ecclesiastical 
a 
; 
was in the hands of the saigha’’ and that the mon ee ees et 
into their hands the education of the whole nation. 
: 
eh aa ball 
education, current at. this time baat sien eo i vi ee 
i 
f a variety 
of skills, in addition 
to 
te 
ae It is nai 
unlikely that the monks or the teachers employed at 
-tsing, 
op. cit,, pp. 105-6. 
; 
; 
, 
gia 
in as nett defined ketubha fs ine ange _aaaists the oe 
etlony” 
rpeeres 
7 
s, 
OF 
: 
rection.” 
priests yay 
vol for 247, See also the PTS Pali-English Dictionary. 
. 64, 3-4, 
' 
fae 
; 
~ 
in a 38.21. 
This passage, however js not very reliable; it is merely a ¢ 
jectural reading. 
173, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, If. B38-9. 
174, 
Rahula, op. eit. p. 287. 
ks of Sri Lanka “took - 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
165 
the monasteries taught such skills as the handling of weapons; even liter- 
ary learning would not have been the monopoly of monks. 
The Cala- 
vamea refers to men who taught youths the art of writing and the skill 
in handling weapons.!”> 
It is reasonable to expect that the Brihmanas 
also occupied an important place as teachers at a time when the study of 
Sanskrit and subjects like keiubha were popular. 
This is not to deny that the monastery played a prominent role in 
education. 
‘The monk's role in education gave him an opportunity 
to come into contact with-and to influence royalty, the official classes and 
the literati. 
The cultured laity showed an interest in learning the Bud- 
dhist scriptures, and laymen versed in the Buddhist teachings were some- 
times employed by monasteries to work as preachers.!76 
Its contact 
with the gentry won for the satgha an influential body of patrons, and 
during the reign of Kassapa IV, the high officials of the court surpassed 
the king in their munificent patronage of the satgha.” 
These contacts also resulted in the percolation of Buddhist influence 
into the secular fields of intellectual activity. 
For example Buddhism 
had a discouraging influence on the study of the Sanskrit epics. 
Several 
of the Buddhist texts state that the study of the Mahabharata and the 
Sittharana (Raméyana) is a fruitless waste of time.’”® 
Though works 
like Ciilavamsa reveal a knowledge of the epics, it is noteworthy that, 
in contrast to other countries influenced by Indian culture, the influence 
of the epics on Sinhalese culture is hardly discernible: literary works, 
paintings and sculptures draw their inspiration almost exclusively from 
Buddhist sources.!” 
In fact, this is one of the significant characteris- 
tics which have given the island a cultural individuality which is quite 
distinct from the other subcultures of South Asia. 
A detailed assessment of the influence of Buddhism on Sinhalese 
society is a task fraught with many difficulties, for Buddhism existed side 
by side and was to some extent intermixed with other religions and cults. 
Sometimes more than one religion can work in collaboration to propa- 
gate cerfain common ideas. 
The idea of ahimsd may be cited as one such 
example. 
Aggabodhi VIII forbade the bringing of fish, meat or intoxi- 
cating drinks to the city centre on the uposatha days which are of religious 
significance to the Buddhists.18 
‘Nissanka Malla went so far as to order 
175, 
Cv. 66. 138, 
176, 
See supra p, 164. 
177, 
Cy, 52, 16-34. 
178, 
Sumatgala-vilésin’, Vol. 1, p. 76; Papaficasiidant, ed. J. H. Woods and D. 
_ Kosambi, PTS, Vol. I, 1922, p. 163; Amévatura, ed, SManaloka, 1959, p. 93. 
179, 
See supra p. 163, 
The view that the author of the J@nakiharana was a Sri 
Lankan is controversial. Even if he was, it is likely that the poem was written in 
India since no manuscripts have been found in Sri Lanka. 
A Sinhalese gloss on it is 
known but, evidently, its author did not have access to a complete text of the poem. 
180. 
Cy, 49, 48,

--- PAGE 93 [DIRECT] ---

166 
MONASTIC’LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
that no animals should be killed within a distance of seven gave from the 
capital. 
The “twelve. great irrigation reservoirs’” were turned-into sanc- 
twaries for. the fish, and fowlers were persuaded with gifts to give up 
killing of birds. 
This is recorded in an inscription found at a Buddhist 
shrine, the Ruvanvilisiya.1*! 
Ostensibly it would . 
appear that it was the 
influence of Buddhism which persuaded these kings to enforce the prac- 
tice of ahimsd, but it is also noteworthy that in Sinhalese society the eating 
of beef was considered particularly repugnant. 
The Jataka Aluva Gdta- 
padaya explains the term bherivadaka-kula as denoting a caste of people 
who beat the drums and were accustomed to cating beef.!** 
Presuma~ 
bly eating beef was considered to:be an abominable practice which was 
confined to the ‘low’? castes, 
Certain Sinhalese edicts of this, period 
carry the warning that a person who violates the rules laid down therein 
will bring upon himself the sins committed by the elumaruva of Mabavo- 
tiya (Mantai).’ The word eju normally means “goats”, and elumaruva, 
“Killer of goats.”? A well-known Saiva shrine was found at this time at 
Mantai.'®? - 
One possible interpretation of this passage is as an allusion 
to the practice of killing goats at Mantai to cater to the Saiva popu- 
lation who did not eat beef. 
However, Paranavitana. prefers to read elu 
as ela and translates the word elamaruvé as “killer of cows.’'84 
If this 
interpretation is accepted, it would seem that the killing of cows at 
Mantai was considered to be a grievous sin, even by the Buddhists. 
The sanctions against the eating of beef which existed in Sinhalase 
society would suggest that the idea of ahimsé was not the sole contri- 
bution of Buddhism; 
it reflects the influence of Hinduism particularly 
of the Saiva variety. 
This clearly illustrates the collaboration of Bud- 
dist and Hindu influences in the propagation of common ideas within 
Sinhalese society. 
Changing Relations between Monks and Laymen 
The growth of monastic wealth discussed in some of the previous 
chapters meant that a new relationship between the satgha and the laity 
came to play an increasingly important role. 
Monks were not only 
spiritual leaders and teachers in Sinhalese society; they were also the 
“Jandlords’’ for many villagers tiving in the area surrounding the monas- 
181, 
EZ, Vol. Il, p. 80, #2, 26-8; p. 140, 
A23-33, 
4h bherwadokanule’ beravakulehi, gerimas kat nam bera gasat nam & beravadyoyi, 
yD. 
fa 
. 
183. 
Sec. e.g. TiraMdna-gampantar 
Te avarattiruppatikankal, Tiru-murai-2, 
Pati- 
kam-243, Kalakam pp. 518-520. 
184, 
EZ, Vol, Wl, p. 225, n, 8. 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
167 
tery. 
ety. 
Several laymen were employed at each monastery as craftsmen and - 
functionaries. 
If the monk h 
igi 
lay society for his pean ary 
Ne eat 
mie eerie ‘on the monastery for their living ee 
ae ‘oe 
ie i 
se Rees in monastic estates does not seem to have 
pesca 
ne 
at of tenants living in estates of the laity, For 
ey 
een ae . a oh on their allotments was a tenuous one. 
De hs 
aan even iving under the control of religious tehliharet 
hn Fak rah peice of their officials was a phenomena 
Tieubkiitianam jomd by Bolskare Revo for een om 
cials to accept on mortgage or-to cultivate fand al aude eaias 
reigned the Vignu temple at the site,185 Pee aici 
araian nile in Sri Lanka faced the same problem. 
The 
jopianc tah 
lets 
decree that no allotments held by cultivators on terms 
ae st Bases pete te be seized by the monastery except 
Rea 
ee 
pee nai 
but more latitude was allowed in the ass 
Same 
employees. 
The property of “good employees" 
0 
be confiscated by the officials unless it was meant for the dian ot 
many laymen 
. 
the monastery.18”. 
If our interpretation is correct, this would imply that 
Segre ae a 
mits 
employee could be withdrawn on the plea 
@ monastery"’ 
se concerned was Gurisailsfuctaty. " SO 
ee arate 
e Kaludiyapokuna inscripti 
i 
D 
iption orders that taxes hi 
: 
hokage rates were not to be levied by the ae Bf au 
sis : 
enants of monastic estates could also be vexed by de: maids 
: be 
services during religious fostivals. 
The Mihintale Table " 
hint at apart ee the “three day turn of seryice’’ no carte def e 
on uposatha days or during religior 
i 
are 
vs 
| 
p 
igious festivals.189 
‘T; 
i 
Haass bandera the king tried to defend the rights of tenants ie mh 
ipa te who Were vexed by such problems as insecurity of tenis = 
ion, but how far the monastic administrators did in fact 
“.: abide by these stipulations is another matter. 
a hah na the religious and economic ties which linked the mon: 
@ lay society kinship ties also brought the individual nis 
185. 
Travancore Archaeological Series, Vol. V, pp. 178-80. 
186, 
haskata papapuren 
vat 
di 
Ba Vo 
kgs rapa We vdtena kéré Aumbur novetiyd hot mut hard nogaté yutu. 
i sudasun vat veherat nut kdmiyan nogaia yutu, EZ. Vol, 1 p. 93, 1, A 
he ae ae vada kina karavuvara nobandand isd. EZ, Vol : HL p oe t 
N's 
i 
; 
“as, 
var mut poho matgul dy sesu var nogata yuin, EZ, Vol I, D. va 
2 YOL I, 
p, 
93, 
fl.

--- PAGE 94 [DIRECT] ---

168 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
close to lay families. 
The responsibility of a monk towards his. parents 
is acknowledged even in the Vinaya.!? 
Enthusiastic patrons went to 
the extent of patronizing the kinsmen of the monks they admired. 
Kas- 
sapa V distributed rice and clothing among the mothers of the Pamsu- 
kilike monks.1! 
Vijayabahu I granted “maintenance villages’ to the 
relatives of monks: who practiced asceticism. 
These isistances may 
indicate that the admission of a person into the order of monks brought 
social recognition to his family. 
Perhaps it also reflects the failure of 
monks to sever completely the ties and obligations which bound them to 
their kinship groups. 
Sometimes these obligations proved to be burdens 
which hindered the monks in their pursuit of a religious life. 
Nissahka 
Malla bestowed wealth on the kinsmen of monks to relieve “the reverend 
and virtuous monks” of such obligations. 
It is possible. that some 
monks tried to secure posts in the monastic administration for ‘their 
kinsmen. 
The Mihintale Tablets forbid monks, on pain of expulsion 
from the monastery, to give control over monastic property to their 
kinsmen. 
If any relative of a monk were to be found occupying a post 
in the administration, he was to be dismissed forthwith.* 
According 
to a ninth-century inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery no monk 
whose relatives lived in a monastic village was to be allowed to live at the 
monastery 
concerned. 
Presumably, 
kinship 
ties prevailed 
even 
between monks. 
Probably, it was to discourage this that, the Anuradha- 
pura slab inscription of Kassapa V decreed that four or more monks 
who were kinsmen should not live together at the same monuastic resi- 
dence.196 
The close relations the monks maintained with their kin would 
have made it difficult for them to dissociate themselves from their former 
social station in lay life. 
Atleast the monks from the upper rungs of the 
caste system would have been less inclined to forget their status, 
The 
Cola monk Kassapa mentions in his Moha-viechedani that he was a Brah- 
mana by caste.!97 
In works by Sinhalese monks of the poriod under 
consideration no specific mention of caste is found, though they do claim 
“purity” of lineage,!* and thus it is possible that in Sri Lanka caste 
190, 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. 1, pp. 447-8, 297-8, 
191, 
Cv. 52, 27. 
192. 
Cy, 60,69, 
193, 
EZ, Vol. i, p. 79, Hl, 18-9. 
194, 
EZ, Vol. I, pp. 91-2, Ud. A18-9, A24-5, 
195, 
BZ, Vol.1, p. 5, H. 26-7. 
. 
196, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 48, Hf, 39-40, 
197, 
Moha-viechedant, p. 359. 
198, 
Pali Sahityaya, Vol. TI, pp. 379, 509. 
MONASTIC LIFE AND RELATIONS WITH THE LAITY 
169 
periaete was not as rigid as it was in South India. 
Yet, as 
pointed 
a eu here, it is important to note that distinctions of birth a offic 
asia pais and given expression in the organization of Buddhist 
acca an “ the administration of monasteries:!°9 
In an pay 
-century inscription from. Kottange a mo: 
; 
i 
pti 
tt 
nk refers to his 
ee eke fis unto an ornament of the Limdni oe 
; 
: 
ore 
definite references to the o: 
: 
: 
: 
d 
aste and clan 
i 
i- 
vee monks are found in subsequent times.2% 
It is Hearts 
. 
se 
the Pujévaliya, who states in the earlier part of the book th: ( 
s-lose their caste identity on entering the Order, lays claim in ihe 
colophon to “unmixed descent o: 
i 
a Di 
°F 
we 
at 
See eee 
oth sides ftom the Mahapatidivamsa 
199, 
See infra pp. 240-41. 
200. EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 89-90, Hl, 4-5. 
oa Pali Schityaya, Vol. HI, pp. 547, 382. 
. 
Pijdvaliya, ed, B, Saddbatissa, pp. 6, 754.

--- PAGE 95 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER | 5 
The Sangha and the King 
The Buddhist tradition placed great, emphasis on the pena 
of the king as a leader of men. 
People follow their king, one : a 
e 
stories in the Jataka collection states, just as naturally as nines : eae 
would follow the leading bull along paths alle a hota . i 
e - 
he 
i 
i 
: 
he proper function 
lity of the social system: as well as tl 
, 
. 
a 
ane 
} 
king? 
Like the Buddha 
himself, 
universe depend on thé conduct of the 
ae 
; 
he Capit the ideal Buddhist king, ong Ha ea ui 
i 
: 
isa). 
Similar r 
characteristics of a “great man’ (mahapur' 
’ 
d 
pectarined at the funerals of a Cakkavatti and a Budahe; and it iyi 
er to build a stapa to commemorate a Cakkavatti, 
Some — : 
ideal are found in the chronicles of Sri Lanka: ‘ Many people ag is 
erected these and other monasteries, emulating the a earn : - : 
ith 
living 
creatures: what he who is master does, evil or good, 
same 
ane subjects.'"* 
The Citlavamsa also mentions that during a 
reign of the just king Sena IV the gods always sent rain in the correc! 
J 
. 
ae attitude favorable to close cooperation with ne pti , 
i 
i 
liest 
days: of its 
. 
ies 
is 
evident among the sargha from the earl 
h 
‘The Buddha advised the monks to obey the king.© The rules oy 
Vinaya Pitaka, which forbid admission into the Order of the emp! the 
of the king and men.wanted by the law, also reflect the deference show) 
é 
. 
48-51, 
1, 
Ummadantt Jataka, The Jataka, ed. V. pee ras V, 1894, p. 222, vv. 48 
: 
ikdya, PTS, Vol. I, 1888, pp. 74-6. 
> 
ef tha toe | 
1885, pp. 76-7; Digha Nikaya, PTS, Vol. Il, 1903, pp. 142-3; 
. 
hy 
is 
Ay 
Vol, IIL, pp. 58-80. 
4, 
Cv, 46, 25-6, 
5, 
Cv, $43, 
6, 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol, I, 1879, p. 138. 
[170] 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
171 
by the community of monks for the interests of the state,’ - 
The kings 
were equally considerate. 
Bimbisara for example, declared that monks 
were immune from punishment.® 
Buddhist Political Ideas in Sri Lanka 
In Sri Lanka a very close relationship between the king and the 
satgha developed though it would seem that the excesses committed by 
Mahasena in his persecution of the Mahavihara brought about a change 
of attitude on the part of the saigha. 
In the course of commenting upon 
the Buddha’s injunction to obey the king, ‘Buddhaghosa introduces a 
proviso: “'The king may be obeyed as regards righteous acts; but in cases 
_ 
of unrighteousness, no one, whoever it may be, should be obeyed’? 
With few exceptions kings of Sri Lanka from. the time of Devanampiya- 
tissa were ardent patrons of the sangha, 
It is not unlikely that kings 
considered the influence the monks wielded over the people as a factor 
which could be utilized to help consolidate their political positions. 
The belief that Sti Lanka was a land favored with a special relation- 
ship to Buddhism is evident in the legends from. the earliest chronicles of 
the island such as the Dipavamsa and the Mahdvamsa. 
According to 
these chronicles the Buddha visited the island three times, 
It was he 
who made it fit for human habitation by driving its former inhabitants, 
the yakkhas, away. 
His very presence sanctified the places where the 
important shtines of the island were later to be built, and even his last 
thoughts were concerned: with the welfare of the island. 
This idea is 
farther developed in later records. 
According to the inscriptions of 
Nissanka Malla, the establishment of Buddhism in Sri Lanka made 
it a noble land; in fact, the island belonged to the Buddhist ‘sdsana,! 
‘A natural development from these beliefs was the idea that the king 
of the island should be a Buddhist. 
The Pajavaliya and the Saddharma- 
laikara, dating respectively from the thirteenth and the fourteenth centu- 
ries, maintain that the island is suited only for kings of the true faith. 
The power of the Buddha is such, they add, that no non-Buddhist: dy- 
nasty would be able to consolidate their authority oven if they were to 
usurp the throne by force.41. 
There is strong evidence which suggests 
7. 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. 1, pp. 73-6. 
8. Ibid. p. 76. 
9. -aftilasmimca dhammike kamme anuvattitabbam, adhammike pana na kassact 
anuvattitabbanti, 
Smp,, Vol. VI, p. 1068. 
10, EZ, Vol. UL, p. 113, UC. 3-4; p. 161, U2, 8-10, 
ll. 
Pjv. p, 49; Saddharmalaitkara, ed. Bentota Saddhatissa, 1934, p. 393,

--- PAGE 96 [DIRECT] ---

] 
i 
d 
172 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
that this idea was known in earlier times. 
The coremony of {he i 
secration of the king evinees a distinctly anna ee ed 
iati 
i 
ith 
the cult of Buddhist relics-—parti 
association of the king with t 
1 
emenaseid 
ics— 
ts to the same conclusion. 
Tooth and the Bow! relics—also poin 
; 
Sa Gate. 
i 
. 
, 
a during the reign of 
5! 
h relic was brought to Sri Lanka 
du 
: 
the me a 301-328) it was housed in a shrine close to the palace. Ei 
viiaa senate that it was kept in a shrine within the oe : ne re rd 
i 
i 
ri 
by the side of the palace. 
° 
to Hiven-isang, the shrine was 
x 
santero 
i 
ithi 
i 
Anuradhapura helps to iden 
it 
jon found within the citadel of 
1 
Lene i 
i 
ital 
was shifted to Polonnaruva, 
Vijayan 
the shrine.!6. When.the capital 
as 
8 
Bela 
Tee aitalt 
i 
Temple of the Tooth within the cita 
i 
raion took the two relics—the bias rie 1 
ae 
his capture 
of 
the capital, 
Rohana to Polonnaruva after 
; 
sia 
eta 
> 
i 
him to win popular suppor 
A 
Hecate ee eH 
a 
inst Sugala great importance 
igns 
of Patakramabahu 1 agains 
vu 
5 
‘2 
eee eens the capture of these relics. age 
aul bce 
bs ture they were sent to the capital to be housed in as sera hs 
ak of the city® 
As Geiger pointed out,?? these relics a ehh 
ce ce to constitute the national palladium—the symbols e 2 
ingship. 
<i 
; 
a 
ee pidenes is found in an inscription from the bee ia 
Abhayagiti monastery, dated in the ya a king scare oo aries 
¢ 
i 
d, the 
king speaks 
TV (A.D. 956-972), 
In this record, 
ei 
the Buddha, who'ot 
y 
“the Keatriya lords devoted to tl 
vate 
Date 
Oe the assurance. made by the Omniscient Lord of Sages, at Lge 
pet the Sakya clan, that none but Bodhisattvas would become 
king! 
anka.’?* 
; 
' 
rey) thus seem that kings of Sri Lanka not only ae . . 
Bud 
dhists; they had to be Bodhisattvas—men destined to be Bu ie mute i 
It would ‘also follow from this statement in the inscrip! 
those who became king indeed were Bodhisattvas. 
The elevation of 
42, 
See infra p. 176. 
3, 
See also infra pp. 227-9, 
ri Beal, Chinese Accounts of India, p. 48. 
ic re 
paneer 413-20. 
The identification suggested by Wickremasinghe is 
. 
See ASCAR, 1897, Pp. 3, 
, Cy. 
60. 16; ET, Vol, XVI, p. 337, HU. 17-22. 
18. 
Cy. 70. 265-6. 
19, 
Cy, 74.83 ef seq. 
. 
314, 
: 
oat 
a 
or 
at een caahneian! sahdkula kot savaniya muniraj-hu (viydFat) Ta 
Voll, p. 237, 11, 52-3, 
See also p. 240, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
173 
the king to the highest position that a layman could aspire to in the Bud- 
dhist social order represents an advanced stage in the development of the 
concept of kingship in Sri Lanka. 
‘It is noteworthy that this inscription 
was found within the grounds of a monastery. 
By acquiescing in this 
idea the sdigha recognized the king as the leader of the laity in the poli- 
tical as well as in the religious arena. 
This, of course, does not mean 
that all kings of this period were considered to’ be Bodhisattyas during 
their reigns. 
It is not possible to ascertain to which period the state- 
ments in this inscription are applicable, though it is clear that this idea, 
in its germinal form, goes back to very early times, 
The term mahasattva used as an epithet of Bodhisattvas, is applied 
in the Mahivamsa™ to Sirisanghabodhi who ruled during the third cen- 
tury and was considered to be a paragon of virtue and a zealous patron 
of the faith. This name was used alternatively with Salamevan Abhaya 
as a title by the kings of our period. 
Buddhadasa (337-365) led the life 
of a Bodhisattva, 
and Upatissa If (517-518) practiced the ten para- 
mitas.* 
Similarly, both Aggabodhi I (571-604) ‘and Sena I (833-853). 
are said to have aspired to Buddhahood.?5 
Aggabodhi IV (667-683) 
was considered such a “holy’’ man that his superstitious subjects used 
ashes from his pyre as medicine,** 
Mahinda IV claims in an inscription 
to have ‘‘secured for himself the way to Nirvana.’?7 
It is true that the 
: 
evidence in these sources refers to a few individual kings being called 
Bodhisattvas and that this does not necessarily amount to an enhance- 
ment of the position of kingship. 
These “holy kings,” however, would 
have made the elevation of kingship to the highest. position among the 
laity in the Buddhist social order an easier task. 
In addition to this, the dynasty which ruled the.island during the 
period under consideration laid claim to a close personal relationship 
with the Buddha. 
The tradition which was basic to this claim is found 
in the Dipavamsa and the Mahavamsa which trace back the genealogy of 
King Pandukabhaya to the Sakya Amitodana, a brother of Suddhodana. 
Yet no evidence of a king actually claiming to be a descendant of the 
Sakya clan is found before the tenth century. 
Such a claim occurs for 
the first time in a record dated in the third year of the reign of Kassapa V, 
who was one of the most prominent scholars of his time. 
In this record 
22. My, 36, 90, 
23. 
Cy, 37. 109. 
24, 
Cy. 37, 180. 
‘ 
25. 
ageabodhigatésayo, Cv. 42.1; 
buddhabhiimigatasayo. Cv, 50. 65, 
26, 
Cy, 46. 37. 
27. EZ, Vol. I, pp. 32-3, i, 3-4: p, 34,

--- PAGE 97 [DIRECT] ---

174 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
Kassapa claims descent from the line of Okavas (Pali Okkaka).*® 
There 
is little doubt that this ancestor is the-same as Okkika who occurs in the 
Mahavamsa as a king of the Sakya clan? 
This claim occurs in stereo- 
typed form in the records of the successors of Kassapa V. 
In the reign 
of Dappula LV (924-935) a certain Lamini Mihindu claims to be a des- 
cendant of King Padu Abha (Pandukabhaya) 
and to be “the incomparable 
ornament of the Saha clan.’3° It occurs in greater detail in a fragmentary 
slab inscription from the Jetavana monastery issued during the seventh 
regnal year of a king identified as Mahinda IV (A.D. 956-972). 
In this 
record Mahinda is described as “‘the pinnacle of the illustrious Saha clan, 
who is descended from the lineage of Okavas, who has come down in the 
succession of the great king Sudovun and who is descended from the line- 
age of the great king Paiiduvasdey Abha.’3! 
Descent from Suddhodana 
is claimed in two more records—the Polonnaruva pillar inscription of 
Mahinda V and the Ditbulagala inscription of the queen of Vikrama- 
bahul.? 
This was not a claim which strictly conformed to the traditions 
in the chronicles. which maintained that Pandukabhaya was a descendant 
of the line of Amitodana. 
Yet, it was a claim which legitimized the rights 
of the Sinhalese kings by presenting them as the direct descendants of the 
line of the Buddha. 
1t was but fit and proper that “the descendants of 
the line of the Buddha’’ should rule the land which “belonged to 
the 
sdsana.”” 
: 
: 
In the Badulla inscription of Udaya LV (946 954), a predecessor of the 
king (Kassapa IV9) is referred to as satalosa piriniviyan vahanse, ‘the 
lord who entered the parinirvéna in the seventeenth (regnal) year,”"*> 
Une 
der normal circumstances the word pirinivi was strictly reserved: to denote 
the demise of a Buddha or an Arahant—beings in their last birth. 
It is 
significant that the phrase bears a striking similarity to the posthiimous 
title of Stiryavarman I (1002-1050), and it is quite probable that the Ca- 
mbodian king was called nirvanapada after his death in accordance with 
the traditions of “apotheosis’’ known in his country.4 
It is tempting 
to suggest that.the similarity of these titles indicate a parallel attempt to 
28, 
Miédirigiriya pillar inscription, EZ, Vol. 11, pp. 25-33, 
29, 
My. 2, 11-2, 
30. 
padu abha& naranind-hu parapuren 4.,.stihd Keulat ektala tikva siti. 
pp. 222-3, Hl. A 17-Bl, B1S-7. 
EZ, Vol. Il, 
31, 
siribar sithékulat kot okévas [parapure|n bat sudovun maharaj-hu anvalyeln @ 
- 
paduvasdev abhd maharaj-hu parapuren bat, EZ, Vol. Il, p. 227, fl. 1-4, 
Parana- 
vitana uses the phrase “Sihi sace” in place of ‘‘Séhé clan.” 
32, EZ, Vol. LV, p. 64, if. A12-4; Vol. IL, p. 95, Al. 
33. EZ, Vol. ¥, Pt. 2, p. 185, Hl, 423-4. 
34. 
Coedas, Les érats hindouisds. ...pp. 224, 249. 
66, 
H 
roportion” or 
“‘size’’ i 
V 
a 
_ 
proportion” 
ot 
“‘size’’ 
in the 
Vesaturudé Sanne and the Butsarana,*§ an 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
(75 
elevate the institution of kingship to a position of 
equality with the higt 
ranks of the Buddhist Order. 
On the other hand, it is also 
ccsiblo a 
Paranavitana has suggested, that this was merely the most aca i . 
the scribe knew of referring to the death of the king?5 
It is o ‘k le, 
however, that a term which was usually reserved for Buddhs on 
iat was used, in this case, to refer to a king 
co 
Evi ence of a similar nature is found in ane inscripti 
y 
Abhayagiri monastery, datable on palaeographic ee : i 
tenth century,*6 
The king who set up this record claims that he 
meted 
a golden image of the Buddha at the Bul Atula monastery, and th aie 
is described as tamé paluiigi.7 
The word palaiga oecure ii the et 
9 
it occurs three times in the Siyabaslakara, a work contemporane 
itl 
the inscription, 
In one of these contexts the word means “simile Mer 
In the other two it seems to carry a stronger shade of meaning 
and ae 
translated as “resembling” or even ‘‘tidentical.’"49 
If the A ‘ine i 
bhai ioral las on this basis it seems to reveal thet tae klig i 
uestion erected 
a Buddha image which bore his own 
i 
r 
which conformed to his proportions, 
The practice a lee 
statues 
of kings in the form of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas was common in 
ey Asia"! 
Tt was a means of identifying the king with the higher 
ivinities of the Buddhist pantheon or with the Buddhas themselves, 
The idea that the king was almost an equal of the Buddha is 
it 
consistent with the Theravada tradition. 
Possibly it is a claim teu k 
oe ee is found in the Northern Gateway inscription of NA 
a 
he states that “‘to get an impartial king 
is like 
i 
Aas eae The obsequies performed at the dente of Vinieunla ny 
rca 6) also suggest that the king was 
treated 
like a religious 
ignitary; the cremation of his body was carried out within the 
pr 
cincts of a monastery and a sta@pa was erected on the site of the Sat 
35, EZ, Vol. Ul, pp. 86-7. 
36. 
Wickremasinghe identified 
i 
: 
W 
th 
A 
(ae 
Fi 
f 
but thie eee name 
en 
ied 
the king mentioned in this record with Mahinda tv, 
37, 
(buh 
atula 
di 
ad 
p(laiigi: 
i 
i: 253, of atid veherht suvan muva tamd p(laig!) munind pilibib kara, EZ, Vol. 1, 
esaturidd Sanne, ed, Hetti 
4 
ed. 
Sorata. 
27 
38. 
OV, 
» 
ed, 
jaracci, p. 
415; Bufsarana, 
ed 
Pp. 
39. 
Siyabaslakara, ed. Nanatiloka and Nanasi ha, 
1933, p. 7, ». 8 
A 
40. 
Ibid., 
p. 8, v. 87. 
, 
ae 
41, 
Coedas, 
“Note sur Papothé 
Ache 
ul 
pothéose au Cambodge,” Bulletin de la C 
iss 
335 mee de 
Indochine, Paris, 1911, pp, 38-50; 
Les états hindoulsés. 
7 eee 
42, EZ, Vol. I, p. 109, ff. C5-7. 
: 
43. 
Hatthavanagalla - vihdra-vamsa, PTS, p. 32.

--- PAGE 98 [DIRECT] ---

h 
176 
THE SANGHA AND: THE KING 
The claim that it was the saigha which vested the king with his au- 
thority added religious sanction to political authority. 
The rulers of the 
island, according to the inscription from the Abhayagiri monastery cited 
above, were “wont to don the white turban to serve and attend the great 
community of monks on the very day they celebrate the coronation festi- 
val after attaining to the dignity of kingship bestowed by the great com- 
munity of monks for the purpose of defending their bowls and robes.'’* 
Two facts emerge from this statement: 
First, it bécomes clear that king- 
ship was supposed to have been “given by the saigha.” 
Ag mentioned 
eatlier, the ceremony of the consecration of the king described in the 
Vamsatthappakisini evinces a distinctly Buddhist character. 
It is stated 
in this work that the vessels used for the ceremony were made from clay 
obtained from seven places, five of which were certainly of religious 
significance.*5 
It appears from the inscription quoted above that, apart 
from the coronation, there was another rite connected with the investi- 
ture of the king—the donning of the white turban—which was performed 
on the same day. 
Second, this passage indicates that the protection of 
the smigha and their possessions was considered to bethe express duty of 
the king. The king was the defender of the Buddhist order. 
A similar 
idea is found in the Velaikkara inscription at Polonnaruva, and, according 
to this record, Vijayabahu I put on the crown at the request of the sargha 
in order to defend the sasana.4° 
In his Hatadage inscription ‘Nissatika 
Malla states that the protection. of the sdsana was the duty of the kings 
of Sri Lanka.*? 
Undoubtedly these ideas of kingship and the attendant ceremonial 
would have added a religious aura to the power of the king. The king's 
claims that they were Bodhisattvas and descendants of the line of the 
44, 
tuma pay sivur rak(nuvas) mahasaig-hu pitivayd rajsiri pamini sind bisey yindua 
(da)vas satig-hat meheyat uvasarvas (sevel) bandna. EZ, Vol. I, p. 237, H, 53-5. 
Wick- 
yemasinghe translates rund pay sivur as “the bowl and robe of the Buddha.” EZ, Vol. 
Ip. 240. 
This'is inaccurate. 
45. 
The clay for the ceremony was objained from beneath the northern flights of 
steps of the Mahabodhighara, Nila pond, Lohapasada, Pagonupamalaka, and the 
Mahacetiya and from beneath ‘the northern doorways of the Catussala and the Civa- 
raparupanat{hina-samujjanasalé. 
Vap., Vol J, p. 307. 
Rahula states that Sona Il 
received his coronation at the Mahaceitiya (History of Buddhism in Ceylon, p. 71). This 
seems to be based ona misunderstanding of the word abhiseke in Cy. 51.82, 
If we take 
this word as referring to a coronation, as Rahula has done, it involves the implication 
that the coronation was held annually. 
Obviously this is not a likely possibility. 
Abhiseka in this strophe seems to be the same as udakaseka in the preceding strophe. 
Cy, 51,81. 
Evidently it was a part of the rites pertaining to the image of Ananda, 
performed, to ward off illness. 
For a discussion of these rites, see infra p. 227. 
46, 
buddhasdsanam rakshikka véedi samgha-niyogattal tirumudi Sadi. El, Vol. 
XVI, p. 336, Hl, 8-9, 
47, 
EZ, Vol. Il, p. 97, Ul. 3-4. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
177 
saree holding an office conferred by the saiigha should have great! 
bd a to strengthen their position among the lay population of a ea 
y 
pain predominantly Buddhist. The ideas that the king of the island 
ee ee see i aaeee and that the Sinhalese dynasty was directly 
rom 
the line of the Buddha seem to reveal 
i 
Buddhism as much as the threat th: 
i 
ea catesan td 
hi 
at 
that the Sinhalese kings had to fa 
ties ti of : Hindu kingdoms of South India. 
These si 
ave 
been used 
by the Sinhalese kings to strength 
: 
itimi 
wou 
a 
: 
{ 
hen and 
their claims to kingship over the island and to mobiles the ee 
support of their. dynasty. 
ce aoe 
F Pies political ideas could be particularly useful during the time when 
see ae struggling against the Cola occupation of the northern 
rovinces, 
However, there is no specific evidence of 
thei 
i 
; 
: 
, 
; 
their bei 
Bae ans = reign of Nissanka Malla who was perhaps cee 
adept 
of all.local rulers in the use of pro: 
iti 
id 
4 
paganda for political 
pur 
His was an insecure throne threatened by claimants of South Thdiaw ore 
gin and local chiefs who rose in revolt, 
Ina statement obviously directed 
ea the latter, he says that it would be as ludicrous for a man of the 
iovi caste to aspire to kingship-as for a firefly to try to emulate the sun 
a he states, no non-Buddhist such as a prince of Cola - 
erala origin was fit to rul 
i 
i 
Idhi 
oe 
ule the island which belonged to the Buddhist 
; The concept of kingship as an office bestowed by the saiigha was 
ae a factor which could weaken the power of the king by making him 
ee on the satigha. Upon comparison with the later Buddhist 
a o Southeast Asia, it seems remarkable that the Sinhalese kings did 
a aim to be the reincarnation of Buddhist divinities or Buddhas who 
z evades right to rule. 
Theoretically the power and the position of 
eg ee to have depended upon the concurrence of the satgha 
“ As 
eee it is significant that the position of the saiigha - 
and 
could 
not rival that of kingship. 
For one, th 
: 
rival 
fs 
, 
the absen 
a single leader and. the division of the saigha into three main rival ree 
were factors which weakened its authority. 
The Vinaya rules which 
ae the life of monks prevented them from directly assuming politi- 
* aut! rity. Even if the monks chose to ignore these regulations, the 
* 
ae as the 
“protector of the sd@sana,’’ was in a position to enforce them 
a rial also suggest that the possibility of confiscation of monastic 
: rs 
H as withdrawal of monastic privileges would have deterred the 
Sangha 
from openly challenging the position of kingship. 
Hence the 
48. EZ, Vol, U, p. 114, 4. 22.

--- PAGE 99 [DIRECT] ---

178 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
by which they could obtain controlling authority over ne 
Tae o 
ointing their nominees to the throne. 
They trie 
See i ‘ath these attempts. they were unsuccessful.” 
Further, 
ean i themselves dependent upon the king's patronage i: 
ae pi for protection of their aaa pe = Lan ae 
he 
ki 
e been an 
ee : ia oe oie an Ee ip silieiee society in that it 
Santen both of 
these institutions from extending their authority or 
hegemony unduly over each other. 
The .King and the Sangha Hierarchy 
ee 
eee rae 
{t 
was 
pointed out earlier that this concept of kings! hip 
: oe 
hi i. . the role of the king as the benefactor and ee hone 
Hen Buddhist kings, even. as early as the beste aie ae 
Aas 
ane 
: 
i 
y 
hism and 
dis 
: 
; 
f protecting the satgha from sc! 
a 
inity. 
“ 
ve ole Rdicts erected at Sarnath, Kosambiand Seek ipoHe ct ot 
f 
ie expulsion of all monks and nuns who een to ae pe 
b 
instt 
Ahdmitras 
throug) 
i 
isunity but also instructs the mai 
4 
: 
enanae order.s® 
It is not known what effect this attitude had on 
i 
i 
i 
f Sri” 
the sectarian divisions which had already split the savigha, 
Kings of 
Sri 
i 
i 
ivision 
of the sarigha into nikdyas, 
] 
h they acquiesced in the division o 
hs 
ae saul themselves to be the defenders of the 
“true 
H 
Sh 
7 
: 
; 
ne 
s also the king who lent the force of political author oe ati 
jet te execution of the eccleciastical acts of Byam ae 
op 
i 
ission an 
‘purifications’ and the ceremonies of cea cmp 
ubit 
It carried out under his patronage. 
From 
the: 
tir ae 
di 
ided into nikdyas, his participation was essential 
ciate 
ia sofort which 
affected 
the whole Order. 
sean et 
. ae : s of the satgha during the reigns of a aameire aol ay 
K qn anntena Moggallana JIT, Pee at Ge a i CaN 
u 
, 
1a 
; 
oh 
the reigns of Sena J 
ae 
; 
aaa aa ae V (914-923).>% 
Presumably these wea 
tae ike acts’? were concerned with discipline rather hoa ie r 
tales 
It is specifically stated with regard to the reign 0} 
renee 
th 
tit was the monks of questionable discipline who were expe! 
a 
49, 
See infra pp. 209-10 
50. 
CH, Yol. ee 
41, 111-2. 
32, 
‘ O38. 57; 41.23 44,46; 44.75-95 48.71; 51.64; 52.10; 52.44, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
179 
the Order. 
Parikramabihu I (1153-1186) was following this tradition 
when he worked in collaboration with Kassapa of the Dithbulagala fra- 
ternity to expel monks who lacked discipline and to bring about the uni- 
fication of the saigha.! 
In China the continuous growth of the clerical 
population and the consequent loss of revenue and dues of the state 
prompted kings to carry out periodical faicizations.s4 
The « 
“tions” held in Sri Lanka should have helped Sinhalese kings t 
the same ends and should also have 
sangha, 
Kassapa IV and Kassapa V are said to have made arrangements for 
the admission of monks after the “purifications” they held. 
In his in 
scription at the Abhayagiri Monastery Kassapa V also claims to have 
gained adherents to Buddhism from among men of varied birth.5> 
This 
seems to find corroboration in the Calavamsa which states that the’ king 
“made poor people recite the formula of the (threefold) refuge and the 
nine qualities of the Buddha and then gave them food and clothing,'’56 
Another king, identified as Mahinda IV, claims in his inscription at the 
Abhayagiri monastery that he induced people to enter the Order.57 
Vijayabihu I revived the ceremony of ordination which had fallen into 
purifica- 
© achieve 
given them a means of controlling the 
_ 
abeyance.58 
Nissanka Malla appears to have taken upon himself the 
role of the spiritual mentor of the monks, 
In the Hatadage and Rankot- 
vehera inscriptions he advises them on the question of the recruitment of 
new monks and enjoins them to diligently Ptactice the precepts.5 
Itis evident from the preceding discussion that kings played a promi- 
nent and essential role in the ecclesiastical routine of the sangha, 
Apart 
from this a considerable portion of the wealth of the state was used for 
the patronage of the Order and for the performance of religious rites. 
The Cilavamsa mentions that the amount spent in this way by Udaya II 
(887-898) during the eleven years of his rule was 1,300,000 pieces of gold. 
It has been pointed out elsewhere that Nissaika Malla claims ‘to have 
spent 4,700,000 
pieces 
of gold 
on 
two 
festivals 
alone.® 
Only 
53. 
See tafra p. 315, 
34. 
See K. Chen, “The Economic Background of the Hui Chang Suppression 
of Buddhism,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, Vol. 1X, 1956, pp. 67 ff. 
55, 
nan jdyin nan seyin budband karay. BZ, Vol. I, p. 46, 1. 9, Wickremasinghe’s 
translation is inaccurate, 
: 
56. 
Cv, 54,29, 
| 
57. BZ, Vol, p. 235, 1. 14, 
58. 
Cv, 60; 4-8; see also infra pp. 271-4, 
59, EZ, Vol. Il, pp, 96-8; Vol. V, PP. 266-9, 
60, 
Cy. 51. 135, 
61. 
See infra pp. 239-40

--- PAGE 100 [DIRECT] ---

ARERR 
AT 
SRT 
180 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
occasionally, as for example during the reign of Kassapa IV, was the 
patronage of the king exceeded by that of the courtiers and other high 
officials. 
i 
By the ninth century the relationship between the king and the san- 
gha had. become rather complex owing to changes which had appeared in 
the constitution and in the organization of jnonasteries. 
The monastery 
of this period was not merely a group of monks living together; it also 
represented an institution which possessed considerable landholdings 
and an administrative organization to controlits property and its tenants. 
Royal officials were sometimes appointed to positions of ecclesiastical 
significance. For example, during the reign of Moggallaina T (491-508), 
Silakila, who later became king, was placed in charge of the Hair relic. 
But in Jater times the title kesadhatunayaka, ‘“‘the protector of the Hair 
relic,’ seems to have become merely honorific in meaning. 
During the 
period of Cola rulé, Kassapa, @ ruler of Rohana, bore this title, and 
Parakramabahu I had two generals who had the same title. 
There were 
also three others who. bore the title Kkesadhdtu during the reign of Parakra- 
mabahu; these titles were conferred by the king.% 
Two instances of royal officials being appointed to posts in the mon- 
astic' administration are known from the inscriptions. 
Ina tenth-century 
inscription’ an heir-apparent called Udaya records that he appointed a 
certain Grand Minister (maha-dmati) called Savigalnavan to the position 
of the chief lay official at the Uda-kitagbo hermitage which he built near 
the Puvaram monastery.” 
The relic shrine of the Cetiyagiri monastery 
at Mihintale was placed in charge of an official who bore the title ratladu, 
“district headman’’ (lit. one who received a district). 
Unlike the other 
employees, he did not receive remuneration in land or in gold. 
He was 
given only a subsistence allowance of a daily portion of a ndli of rice. 
It seems likely that he was a state official who had been placed in a posit- 
ion of responsibility in the monastic organization, 
The practice of ap- 
pointing princes and dignitaries of high rank to similar positions in the 
temple administration was known in South India too. 
According to an 
inscription. from the Ramniid district of Tamilnadu, Parikrama Pandya, 
son of the Pandya king Kulaéekhara, was appointed guardian of the inner 
62, 
Cy, 52,.10-36, 
63, 
Cy. 39. 54. 
64. 
Cy, 52, 52. 
65. Cv. 57, 65. 
66. 
‘Cv. 70. 19, 279, 283; 72. 6, 59. 
67. 
Puliyankulam Inscription. 
EZ, Vol. I, pp- 182-90. 
68, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 96, Id. B37-8, 
. the Samantapisadiki and the Khuddasikkha-tika, 
ti 
3 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
paeeae (ullil-vééal) of the Andal temple 
and 
and 
the right to a portio: Lo 
; 
n of the prastida,© 
ihi 
ie 
1 
praséda. 
At the M 
” i here was another official whose title seems to impt nie on 
a 
uty of maintaining liaison with the state official gilt 
ative arrangements would have facilitated close’ 
e 
ween oa state and monastic administration 
wever, 
t 
fame iy Pic i of Rahula that “the sésana constituted a full 
‘ 
18 an exaggeration, 
“Ther 
os 
i 
: 
. 
here 
ee ae nae paid by the State," he maintains, “to look Se tai 
a bela monasteries such as Mihintale and Abhayagiri e Oar 
cone baie sie juae of monasteries reveals that the officials a 
ee eo prep at both Cetiyagiri and Abhayagiri wore ai: 
ained 
by the monastery concerned rather than by the 
state.” 
There is certainly no evidence to s how that they 
wer 
paid from 
y 
e 
181 
He was assigned two md of 
Such adminis- 
and easy relations bet-. 
Royal Intervention and Monastic Immunity 
Kings 
si 
i 
gs showed considerable interest in the regulation of the affairs 
of moriasteries, 
ali 
i 
f 
The Pali commentaries on monastic discipline, especially 
? 
se 
his 
a 
contain, detail 
1 
s and directions for the administration of pereerare ae 
monastic property. 
In certain i 
ver, 
Jk ings and other 
pa 
I 
. 
(i 
instances, howe 
i 
, 
A 
Pp 
rons to! 
initiative 
i 
i 
: 
nee 
; 
mn . 
ok the initiative in laying down sirit (= P. caritia, cern - 
0 
“ 
im 
ary ch secondary sense “regulations”’) for the guidance of 
nae aeehe It is not surprising that Kassapa V, a kin: baa 
Hien ie ings of Buddhism,” took the initiative to ieee (int : 
atti e ce 
aie slab inscription recording 
t 
: 
Steries 
belonging to th 
E 
ini 
mika 
eae 
ae 
; 
belonging to 
@ Abhayagiri nika. 
Sneed fee Seana bilan to the aden inlolinbion: of ths 
dusciee af 
ys an 
even directions on the recruitme 
iste Aiea 
It ts possible, however, that the inthatee "of ae 
fery were consulted in the preparation of the draft 
of 
Oo 
69. MRE, No, 564 of 1926, 
10. 
rajge updai kén imiyak, EZ, Vol. t, 
: 
‘ 
. 1, 
p. 95, 2. BO; S 
eee ‘og 
kahula, History of Buddhism in Ceyton 
ine tre eed 
Religion was established 
ca nf : 
s 
shed.” 
There is no factual basis for this statement, 
As evident 
from his footnotes, hi 
s 
°s, 
he seems to have 
di 
See Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. XXII Sune 1964 ae Eee 
aes, 
R, See supra pp. 101 ff. 
7B. 
See infra p, 324, 
1956, p. 72. 
A recent 
wri 
» P. 
72. 
it writer 
speak: 
inhalese history, a special Ministry of 
. 4, BZ, Vol: |, pp. 41-51.

--- PAGE 101 [DIRECT] ---

182 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
In the regulations instituted for the Uda ae 
hermitage, the heir-apparent Udaya, who built the hermitage, : és 
a 
ts of monks who were to live there, the immunities it yeah 
Be 
ne cages for its administration and the means for settling 
those regulations. 
18 
<n. 
y 
can 
ee instance of a king taking the initiative to lay down. sirit 
i 
i 
inscription of the sixteenth regnal year 
fora ara 
anaes pee "within the precincts of the Cetiyagiri 
pea a Mihintale.? It mentions that an earlier king who was his 
Te ee umably. Sena IV. (954-956), had also instituted a set of regu- 
piesa are same monastery.”? 
The scope of the regulations is out- 
te a in the record: 
‘‘Thus in respect of the great community of 
in aii ie in this monastery, as well as in respect of functionaries and 
monks ae respective duties, and the receipts and disbursements, Bis 
Se 
? <d these following regulations rendering them explicit by 
a coe ents."78 
This is the most extensive record available on 
eae a iaive organization of monasteries. . 
It gives a list of officials 
See apoio maintained by the monastery, fixes the rates of their 
am 
neration and sets down administrative procedure regarding the 
. 
remu 
late the conduct of the em- 
t of finances. 
It attempts to regu! 
° 
defen that relations with the monastery and the tenants ee 
call with matters such as the discipline and nets ern ilies 
: a 
Tyee 
gh 
aa 
gage: 
ni 
ing 
took the initiative in this matter, it is sig 
“at 
ee 
cash) of monks from both the Antevasin 4 ae 
‘Catiyasir monasteries for consultation. 
This set of regulations, 
Mihintale Tablets claim, was selected by the king in collaboration with 
- 
regulations which were in use at 
fare. ae aoe That the kings thought it was their 
ae to ensure the proper management of anes Suna 
These inscriptions provided for enforcemen 
Rien 
s and for their intervention 1n disputes among ae 
gha- 
According to the Anuradhapura slab inscription of Kassap : 
© aon 
sponsible for violation of the regulations and their accom 
ef aan mie 
be expelled from their residence.”? 
This injunction is 
eated i the Mihintale Tablets.°° 
In cases of misconduct such as 
r 
1 
; 
royal official 
75. EZ, Vol. I, pp. 182-90. 
76. EZ, Vol. 1 pp. 75-113. 
71, EZ, Vol. 1p. 91, tL A5-6, 
} 
g os 
sate 
a 
wa? 
: 
asavit 
on me TEAte sate pamanin vada vat sirtt ikmé van vat-himiyanu] eyat pr 
79. 
no sal 
d 
isd. 
-3, 
vat-himiyanuj e 
avasa novasavant isa. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 48, it, 42: 
80. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 92, i. AL9-20. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
183 
quarrels among monks, the members of the fraternity (mula) were to 
settle them; if they did not succeed in settling a dispute they were to sit 
with royal officials to investigate the matter and, where necessary, pres- 
cribe punishment. 
Royal officials were to be sent to mediate if, as.a result 
of a dispute, monks refused to partake of their gruel. 
They were to be 
discreetly persuaded to take the gruel, but no force was to be used, 
If an 
official was found guilty of imprudently using force contrary to the orders 
of the palace, he was to be dismissed from office. 
But if such an act was 
committed at the instigation of the palace authorities, the monastery was 
to be given a payala (of land or rice?) in recompense.®! 
All cases of 
misappropriation of. monastic wealth were also referred to committees 
of investigation composed of both monks and royal officials. 
Monks 
who were found guilty were to be expelled from the monastery.® 
Farther reference to expulsion of monks occurs in an inscription of 
Kassapa V which lays down that monks who had been banished to India 
after incurring the displeasure of the king, and those who had been ex- 
pelled from monastic life, were not to be readmitted to the monastery. 
This record also stipulated that even those monks who created a dis- 
turbance by trying to bring them back would themselves lose their right 
to live at the monastery.®? 
It is clear from this that the kings did in fact 
have the authority to banish monks, 
The Mahivamsa account of the 
reign of Gothabhaya reveals an instance when this authority was exerci- 
sed.*4 
L. §. Perera draws a distinction between “expulsion” from a 
monastery and the act of “disrobing.”” 
He remarks that there is no known 
instance of a monk being disrobed for any offense.*5 
Though Perera 
may be correct in suggesting that expulsion from a monastery does not 
necessarily imply expulsion from the Order, there are instances recorded 
in the chronicles of monks having been expelled from the Order.86 
It js 
evident from the many instances cited earlier’? that the king lent the 
force of his authority to the regulation of monastic affairs. 
Evidently a 
show of force was sometimes necessary eyen in such matters. 
It has 
already been pointed out that at the Puliyankulam hermitage the task 
al. 
EZ, Vol. ¥, p. 48, Hf, 29-35, 
82. 
avasin paha karanu isd, EZ, Vol. 1, p, 49, Hf, 51-2, 
83, 
udahasin dambdi 
yaya vat-himiyanud ayasa 
yatin pahakala vat-himiyanud 
ovun pahakala avasata yatila no vidda denu isd ovun Rena vadnat viyo kala vat-himiya- 
nud € avas-hi no vasavanu isd. EZ, Vol, 1, p. 48, i. 43-5. 
84. 
My. 36, 111-2. 
85. LS. Perera, Institutions. +P. 1440, 
86. 
See supra, pp. 178-9. 
87. 
Ibid.

--- PAGE 102 [DIRECT] ---

184 
THE SANGHA AND: THE KING 
of ensuring adherence to the rules governing monastic life was entrusted 
to the personal militia of the heir-apparent.®® 
The ninth and tenth centuries-saw the proliferation: of immunity 
‘grants which sought to ensure for the monastery a source of income un-~ 
encumbered by taxation and other demands of the state. A large number 
of these inscriptions are fragmentary, and it is impossible to determine 
the exact extent of the immunities granted. 
There is much variation in 
the extent and the number of immunities among the well-preserved grants, 
. 
though their phraseology is stereotyped. 
; 
In about forty published grants of immunities made to monasteries 
the most common clause was the exemption of variyan,®* milk and draught 
cattle, and buffaloes and carts from liability to being drafted for service 
to the king. Such immunities were not restricted to’ monastic lands 
alone. There are instances of similar grants being made to land belong- 
ing to private individuals, dispensaries and villages in general. 
The mention of yariyan, “those who served in turn,” is significant as 
it probably represents the right to corvée labor that the king enjoyed. 
In the Noccipotana inscription, dated to the reign of Udaya II (887-898), 
itis specifically stated that the workers in the estate in question were not 
to be drafted for irrigation work.°* 
The Mannar Kacceri inscription of 
Kassapa IV and the Kataragama inscription of Dapulla TV (924-935) 
state that vdriyan as well as kudin®! were not to be commandeered from 
these monastic villages. 
This, of course, did not amount to the 
- of 
exemption of the tenants from corvée duty, but merely implied the 
transfer of this royal prerogative to the monastery. 
However not all 
the monasteries enjoyed the privilege. 
Certain immunity grants like 
those made in the Puliyankulam 
inscription of the heir-apparent 
Udaya and the Vessagiri inscription of Mahinda IV did not carry this 
proyision.*? 
The Polonnaruva Rajamiligava inscription of the latter 
permits officials 
to employ men from monastic estates who had 
volunteered to serve their turn at the corvée, but they were not to enter 
the monastic village to recruit laborers.” 
It is very likely that the term var, which occurs in some inscriptions, 
is related to vari, and presumably the latter was derived from the former. 
88. 
EZ, Vol, I, p, 187, i. 33-9; see supra p. 134, 
89, 
See supra pp. 121-2. 
90. 
EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 5-8; see supra ps 121, 
91, 
Fora 
discussion on the term, see supra p. 75, n. 138, 
92. 
EZ, Vol. UL, pp. 100-13, 219-25. 
> 
93. 
EZ, Vol. I, pp. 29-38, 182-90. 
_ 
94, 
The line is not very clear: (& vériyan misa a)seli(n) gamat vida vériyan nogannd 
isd, EZ, Vol. Ui, p. 54, tf. C1-4. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
185 
Var (Skt. and P. vara) nor! 
} 
a 
. 
‘mally means, among 
other 
thi 
‘turn’ 
: we Bir ical order,"’95 , but te also or ana the 
sense of ‘turn of service." 
Its occurrence 
i 
ihi 
3 
“tut 
ioe. 
| 
¢ in the Mihintale slab inscrip- 
ce which is of particular interest, illustrates its meaning. The dcel 
ye 
tundavar, ‘“‘the three day turn of service,’ to which the 
ery was entitled.°6 
Certain records lik 
an 
n 
the Tamravava 
inscri 
tion of Sena II and the Gonna, 
caerip 
Diced nos 
a Devale inscription 
of D 
not refer to viriyan in granting 
i 
iti 
leita 
eae 
£ immunities but state that no d 
6, 
= 
Cre 
rH 
ipha 
pris turns of service" 
like suvar and mahavar from the lands rated 
@ monasieries.°? 
The Mihintale slab s turn over the 
oe the pe ale 
In the light of the remarks made bic 
uvar and mahavar may be rendered 
into Engli 
a 
turn of service’ and “‘the 
princi 
) 
is Pet te 
principal turn of service’’ 
and 
as “the principal turn of ‘servi 
Fie 
anne 
vice on roads,’' 
It is 
al 
i 
these connoted taxes or 
i 
ne an aa 
anaes 
payments made in commutation 
of these 
Inscriptions also mention 
i 
; 
Dt 
a considerable number of dues and i 
ae melajsi (var. melassi, melacci), matgiv pegiv (var. maiigdiv ana 
tain & oes ere pediv), kul, deme] kuli, hel kul and sutvat 
ich 
the monastic lands were exempted. 
‘Ni 
ifyi 
Ae 
D 
h 
A 
lo cl, 
dau 
available, however, to determine the exact nature of encan 
cia He 
ieee eh that some of these grants covered was the right 
‘ 
ccording to the Polonnaruva Rajamili 
inscripti 
Mahinda IV ordered the ro 
ionarie: 
EHS 
] 
yal functionaries who superyi 
i 
(velvétssan and velkimi. 
i 
Peis Gouden 
Y 
ivan) to refrain from interfering 
wi 
irri 
s 
% with the irriga- 
tion rights of a monastery. 
Codrington 
has suggested fist the 
an ae He 
use in Ségiri Gragiti, Vol. U, vy, 305, 330. 
aa 
van a var mut poho matgul dy sesu var nogaté yutu, EZ, Vol. I, p. 67, it. 
» 
BP. 
67, 
i 
97. EZ, Vol. V, pp. 280-88; Vol, IV, 
Vol. 
, 
280-88; 
Vol. 
IV, pp, 184-91, 
98. EZ, Vol.1, p. 97, Il. B54-5, 
” 
99. Paranavitana e 
dtsi 
wi 
1 
f 
uates meldtsi with Skt. ypari! 
inti 
¢ 
portions yegpnymous (upari=T, mél, Cabove fear @ pointing, out that yor ite 
Pechenil i tre Prepare waiter could not find an instance of the use 
of 
the sand ae 
Hasire tae ie 
2 tax.” 
But it is apparent in many inscriptions that 
Jajst 
vagrants” 
(22 VOL 
tg), baeanee 
age enact, mate reel 3 ur a 
pie. 
. 
HE,p.5). 
Par 
vitana 
believed 
they were 
ro: 
i 
Ths ideas Lites number of inscriptions the mavigiv pegiv ae peer eaee ne 
eh ee whieh eerane had been granted. 
In one inscription the phrase rah, 
officials ane 
in site followed by i" packolletmiyan no vadné isd, “other toyal 
sible, 
hot 
t 
» 
No, 
113), 
Hence 
Paranayitana’ 
ion 
i. 
tn a 
ka 
on 
important ants Soe amminity grants Oficial cre eae at 
‘ol. 
Tp. 
7, C18-21; Vol. 1 
i 
‘seems to algo refer toa due, 
Ni 
i 
janation 
of kala posit, ore 
iO Sep ho 
» No satisfactory explanation of kuli is possible. 
101, £Z, Vol. I, p. 53, Hl. B33-41,

--- PAGE 103 [DIRECT] ---

186 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
piyovaddranan, who are forbidden to enter monastic property in.six of 
the published records, were also irrigation officials.! 
A detailed examination of the inscriptions dealing with immunity 
grants show that the great majority of them exempt the land concerned 
from interference by officials called meldtsi, mavigiva pegiva and perendiju 
(var. perendtti, perendttiyam, perendstiyany 103 
‘There appears to. have 
been a few different types of meladtsi. 
Some are called dunumardula 
melatsi, some kuli melatsi and others masigamahavar melé{si, while in 
certain instances the term melajsi occurs on jts own. 
In certain contexts 
the terms melajsi and maiigive pegiva probably were used to denote the 
officials who dealt with the dues known by these names. 
In his explanation of the term perenattu, Paranavitana’®+ selected 
the variant form parendjtiyam and examined it along with ulvddu. 
He 
equated uivadu with ulpadu and took ul and pagu to mean “interior” and 
“to sing,” pere in perendtiyam to mean “front’’ or “outside,” and ndtfi- 
yam to mean “dancing.’’ 
He also compared these two terms with the 
phrase antaranga bahiratiga karya in the Butsarapats 
The Cilavamsa 
mentions an official who held the antaratgadhura under Parakrama- 
pahu 1.0 Paranavitana interpreted antaratga as “nner theatre’ and 
bahiranga as.“ outer theater” and, based upon this analogy, adduces the 
following explanation: 
: 
Ulvadu, most probably, were a class of functionaries who had the 
right of entry to the ‘nner music hall of the royal palace, and 
perendtiu a lower gra 
ther than the dancing hall in the outer precincts of the palace.’” 
Unfortunately the evidence offered for this highly imaginative expla 
nation is neither convincing nor authentic. 
Paranavitana’s rendering of 
the terms antaranga and bahiraiga is questionable. His interpretation 
would suggest that there were two music halls—“the inner singing” and 
«the outer dancing’’—which were of considerable significance in the daily 
routine of the palace administration, but this conjecture has no estab- 
lished basis. 
On the other hand, the phrase antarangabahiranga karya, 
if used in an administrative sense, could be more easily rendered in English 
as “business concerning the inside and the outside.” 
A division of ad- 
ministrative business into “inside” and “outside” affairs is noticeable 
102, 
EZ, Vol. Ul, p. 410. 
103, 
Change of medial w to i is not uncommon in bot! 
cumbati > sivebiyt; vdduka > vadikai. 
404, 
EZ, Val. V, p. 140, n. 2. 
si 
105. 
Butsarana, ed. V, Sorata, 1953, p. 154. 
106. 
Cy. 69. 32, 35. 
h Sinhalese and Tamil. Cf. 
de who were not permitted to proceed fur- 
* 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
187 
even in the administrative organizatio! 
i 
a 
nm of monasteries.!97 
i 
ee eee a office vested with the charge of Pha ak 
een aR page of the king and the central administr: 
Sey 
anes a affairs of the provinces. Parakramabahu y 
Beare ie rable land under the control of the aitarcrigadur 
ee 
Passage the minister of the antaraitgadhura is disti 
é 
as e officials of the provinces (vijita).198 
auicicd 
bo Ul eet in most cases perendftu occurs in conjunction 
pe tlc ke be deriyed from ndju, “province.” Pereniifiu 
bere 
ae es in charge of a province and vdriperendtju ma 
ee 
°. ficial in charge of corvée labor. 
As a verbal ro : 
Hered : naseeegm of “to inspect, examine or inquire.” 
If this 
peer he ar 
pied, viriperendtiu should be translated as “inspect 
pees can charge of the coryée.*!109 
one 
r tae en A a deruvana dekamtlin occurs most frequently 
papa . : 
oes not occur in any literary work, 
Kamtén, 
eee ny : Out clsewhere,¥9 carries the connotation of an 
ee ray 
8. 
Paranayitanal! has made the plausible sugges- 
ee @ may refer to ‘‘two treasuries," 
(Two treasury estab- 
tae ean oo in both state and temple administrations of South 
ae pa aie is accepted, this immunity would amount 
ae ane 
property concerned from interference by the 
Iti 
: 
‘6 
Bae baailiten ee all the official titles cited so far seem to 
higher incidence of aye aoe en nie 
haeraaionts as 
i 
: 
; 
veals 
that 
the 
prim. 
i 
pein: Late the grants of immunities was a ik peut 
: a i aay of regular taxes due to the king. 
ik 
arene bee the neod to protect the monasteries from the 
and retainers was Seine it 
pert peaeea ane 
itu 
i 
i 
Many records prohibit the entry of ieee peep eet aokiny 
107, 
atid bahari. 
EZ, 
q 
a 
fs 
, Vol. I, 
92, 
antoval 
i 
fy 
‘ne, 
hauira Thick 
ae EAE Ureaincis oti olin tts Mahasira Jaga th ferent eee ne fs 
“aise 
ae der 
a 
L 
e outside, The Jaiaka, Vol. I, } 
385: 
Warnes nee 
ie ane a 
king gives the power over antoval. ba 
to 
ah 
nares we 
: 
‘aka, VoL, 
‘ovaiatja to an ogress 
108. 
Cy, 69, 32-5, 
ve 
ld 
ae For alvddu, see infra pp. 191-2, 
10. 
See supra pp. 101 ff. 
- 
111. #Z, Vol. IL, pp. 143-4.

--- PAGE 104 [DIRECT] ---

188 
: 
THE SANGHA. AND THE KING 
‘arms into monastic lands.!?. 
In certain inscriptions: soldiers and offi- 
cials are specifically advised to desist from “creating trouble’’-or “com- 
mitting misdeeds” within those lands.'!3 , 
Trouble sometimes ensued 
when a king's retainers attempted to fell trees on monastic grounds, an 
act which was forbidden in the Anuradhapura slab inscription of Mahinda 
V4 The Puliyankulam inscription of Mahddipada Udaya forbids royal 
officials to fell palmyra and mi (Madhuka longifolia sapotacea)trees within 
monastio precincts. Similarly, the Polonnaruva Rajamaligava inscription 
-of Mahinda IV forbids royal functionaries in charge of agricultural affairs 
to fell palmyra and coconut palms in estates belonging to the monastery 
concerned.43 
An inscription at Mihintale instructs. the management 
committee of the monastery to sit in judgment and to punish any offenders 
who were guilty of violating the property rights of. the monastery." 
In the Gonniva inscription of Dappula IV and. the Arhbagamuva, 
inscription of Vijayabahu 1 officials are forbidden to accept presents.1"7 
Most grants of immunities carry the provision that the lands concerned 
were exempted from supplying bilibat, pilisal and varisal. 
Yn certain 
cases the-exemption was extended to include the supply of milk, sour 
milk (dihi) and oil. The Mihintale Yablets specify that monastic func- 
tionaries who went on official tours were. not to demand any. provisions 
other than the customary dilisal from the tenants of the villages they 
visited.’ 
Further evidence on this practice is found in the Sahassa- -.. 
vatthu-pakarana. 
It contains a story which refers to a royal official who 
visited a. village on official business and was provided with balibhatta 
at lunch time.!? 
Another story in the same collection speaks of a 
royal official who visited a village and was treated to chicken curry, 
ghee and rice, and liquor to go with it.2° 
Hence there is little doubt 
that bilibat (Pali balibhatta) was boiled rice and bilisal was raw rice which 
the villagers had to supply for visiting officials. 
One cannot be certain, 
however, whether vérisd! meant rice supplied to feed the corvée workers 
112, 
These include men bearing staves (daiidu muratdu gatuvan, dati gutavan), 
iron clubs, (yamaguru gatuvan), swords (kolpatfin), and nooses or canes (valgatian, 
dandapasika), 
113. 
dkulnokaranu. EZ, Vol. 1, p. 33, 1. 35; anipya nokaranu, EZ, Vol.1, p. 93,1 A49, 
114. 
EZ, Vol. 4, p. 187, i. 27-8. 
115, 
velvdssan, EZ, Vol. Ul, p. 54, Ut. 66-7. As Paranavitana pointed out, the term 
vdssan has been used in the sense of employees. 
{£Z, Vol. iI, p. 113). Cf. veherd 
ydsan (EZ, Vol. UI, p. 104, tt, C19-20) and ved-hal vassan (EZ, Vol. 11, p. 31, Hf. 9-10), 
116, 
Miiller, A/C, No. 113. 
: 
117. 
EZ, Vol. TV, p. 189, #. C1; Vol. II, p. 214, 1. B46. 
418. 
veherat kdmin giya kémiyan haskaruvan dena peresirit bilisal mut ratin vd- 
tum no gaté yutu. EZ, Vol. I, p. 93, dL. A46-7, 
119. 
Shsvp., p. 40. 
120, 
Ibid., p. 180. 
- 
eka 
inti 
i 
i 
i 
‘Agama inscription; éu@é occurs in this sense in the Si 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
or whether it meant rice su 
officials. 
ae not to seek lodgings in monastic villages.12¢ 
. 
eeponts of the tenant from his 
¢ royal officials does not necessarily 
i 
he 
icials 
arily imply an impro 
i 
dition. 
As is evident from the Mihintale Tablets i asta enna 
the transfer of these rights to the monastic officials. 
ee fae implies, were hardly less severe.'22 
; 
out nine inscriptions from the tenth 
ce 
: 
ny 
: 
he 
tenth 
century carry 
the 
isi 
al bal a 
dened Premises should not do ips muileal ac 
: 
@ 
Mayilagastota pillar inscripti 
ibi 
: 
PE 
_ 
The 
Mayila; 
t 
cription 
prohib: 
ing. 
mae gleeful singing 
within. monastic lands.23 
The ee 
eae 
Ps 
| ie ee accompaniment in order to observe a respectful ail i 
vs ne ae tsk place or monument was known from very ay 
. 
ahévamsa records that the 
practi 
i 
is 
* 
h 
sords 
th 
practice of stopping 
all 
i 
ae bien the graye of Elara, in accordance with the aries patel 
euetite Uithagaoant, was continued by royalty up to the time of i 
arin sae ne alae mentioned in the inscriptions are tudi, 
dhin. 
Paranavitana has remarked th, 
7 
at the first tw 
probably denote types of drums while the third may 
ref 
cae 
shore 
! 
y refer to whip: 
The advantages which accru 
i 
- 
ed to monasteries from 
gr: 
i 
: 
M 
ants 
= 
re were by no means restricted to financial gain ae eh sh 
Pr 
slaiaa and there are reasons to believe that they retcied the. 
Eater SaaS of the royal 
officials 
over monastic net 
comnts ig to 
the Anuradhapura slab inscription of Kassapa V, ro 1 
ae were not to enter monastic property to fell trees, 
to teoeuit 
bate ih or to appropriate carts, oxen or buffaloes. The Puliyankt ia 
a iption orders them not to attempt to fell trees.128 
A, similar (inne 
: spec the levy of workmen, carts and buffaloes is found : the 
; 
: aftaragama inscription of Dappula IV.27" 
The Kaludiyapokuna be " 
lecrees that no officials of any of the “three royal Saab: 
pplied by villagers in turn to the local 
Their demands, the 
121, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 47, if, 27-8, 
122. 
See infra pp. 199-200, 
123, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 197, t, C189; Vol. IIL, p. 140, 1, C26-7; Vol. IV, 
3 
. 
TY, 
3-5; Vol V,p.38! 
5 
35; 
Vol Vb 
9, U1. BI8-20, p, 361, U. C13-8, p. 377, H. C18-21; 
EZ, Vole pst 
‘124. 
Mv, 25, 73-4, 
125, 
i 
sot 
i 
i 
ipti 
Cf. tudi solt bera in the Itiva inscription and, soli bera tudi gattan in the Pal. 
Seen insert Te gates 
ilappadikéram, Canto VI, 1, 51. 
126. EZ, Vol. I, p. 
4 
Vol. I, 
p. 47, 
17-83 p. 
187, Ul, 27- 
127, 
Ez, VolLilt. p. 
293, ih Cet 
189» 
The Anuradhapura slab inscription of Kassapa V insteucts 
customary obligations towards. 
it probably indicates.

--- PAGE 105 [DIRECT] ---

190 
: 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
(tun_radola) could enter to levy these dues.!2® 
It is evident from the 
grants cited above that though the authority of the royal officials to 
carry out their administrative functions was limited, it was not com~- 
pletely withdrawn. 
It is significant, however, that in about fourteen 
of the published records royal -officials are categorically forbidden to 
enter monaslic property. 
Apparently these restrictions were extended to include the adminis- 
trative officials at provincial and district levels. They are ordered not to 
collect dues from monastic property,in the Tripinniyiva. inscription of 
Kassapa IV,2° and according to the Moragoda inscription of the same 
king and the Madirigiriya inscription of Kassapa V, these officials—the 
ratladu and the pasladu—were not to “enjoy the land’ or “exercise author- 
ity’ therein.'" 
In certain other instances they are categorically for- 
bidden to enter monastic lands.3% 
This particular immunity, however, 
ig not mentioned in records after the time of Dappula IV (924-935). 
In 
some cases the rights of velkamiyan, velvdssan, and yelbddiyan and 
veliiyut pasdend, who were 
probably concerned with irrigation and 
agriculture, were withdrawn; but those terms are found only in a few 
of the published grants.55 
Judicial Immunities 
It becomes quite évident from an examination of the 
immunity 
grants of this period that considerable powers were transferred to the 
monastic administration by withholding the authority of the government 
officials to intervene in their affairs. 
The most important immunity. 
granted to the. monastery, from an administrative point of view, was per~ 
haps that which dealt with judicial rights. 
The immunity of monks from punishment, which according to the 
Mahavagga was accepted even in the time of Bimbisara, 
was undoubtedly 
known in Sri Lanka; but it is not certain whether it was always respected. 
As early as the first century AD, Kanirajanutissa, because he was in- 
censed at the high treason contemplated by some clerics, had sixty 
128, 
£Z, Vol. SIL, p. 26, tt, 40-1; for tet radola, see UCHC, Vol. [, Pt. 1,7. 367, 
129, 
£Z, Vol. I, pp. 163-71, 172-3, 200-7; 
Vol. 1, pp. 14-9 19-25, 34-8, 
38-43, 44-9, 64-70; Vol. LL, pp. 100-13; Vol, IV, pp. 246-52; 
Vol. V, pp. 323, 377. 
130, 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp- 168-9, Hl, C717. 
131, 
novalandanu kot isd. EZ, Vol.I, pp. 204-5, HI. Bt 
Vol. It, p. 31, #. B21-4. 
132, 
EZ, Vol. It, p. 42, ff, BI8-C3; p, 24, I Cl-45p. 37, H. BUB-CLs p. 
47, Ih 
3-7: Vol. THE, pp. 104, W. 18-21; p. 274, 1 C2LA, p. 290. If, 7-93 Vol. Vp. 377, 
fh C1S-6. 
: 
133, 
Others like yahangovvan (chamberlains), mahaputiladdan {administrators of 
ports), Kabili laddan (recipients of land allotments) and saddladdan (1) are occasion 
ally mentioned in the grants. 
9-C1; isir no karanu isd. EL, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
19. 
: 
1 
suspects thrown into the “d 
és 
. 
“dungeon of 
Kanira.""! 
Sanghatissa 
: 
anira.’"14 Tn the se 
Bai i. ne as ee is campaigns against Moelle fae 
en 
contending for 
power 
oe 
Wi 
order t 
é 
power, 
donned t 
‘abe 
sank Gea to ee lt is not peeecasri ee aoe 
tho 
rf 
. 
M 
that it hee pete be a mere disguise or whether Seana ne 
decbaaied 
er him immune to capture. 
Nonetheles 
ought 
ispreent : captured and executed. 
These two exam fe oe 
draw any on xtraordinary incidents, and it is Brobabiy i i pail 
Bae ne ee from this evidence. 
The inscription ae . 
ey Sev as ee the power to banish monks from the ee ¥ 
“false views” and val punishment was used in cases other than b li na 
Faint ue of ee and rules of discipline. 
ee 
of 
varied 
types are fi 
. 
. 
period, 
The 
/ 
‘ound in the 
. 
temiiieeae Bee far. reaching were those which ie ee 
ced Rerbkie eid ies refuge in monastic lands. 
The fae 
iptions of Kassapa 
I 
aaa 
lava, 
granted to | 
pa IV, which record 
i 
iti 
explicitly eae y the Sen Senevirad College of pene Ey 
BRS, 
at 
‘thieves and those who entered 
aft 
wero 
aden ee not to be arrested.¥37 
In shes Ralcunitaton ae 
village aera ae 
stated that no one who sought aris scree ae 
bacelaer aay q clonging to the Mihind-aram nunnery . ae the 
aie a bears aehy inscription, which records ee 
2 
that “those who Seite His to the Tisaram ninaelys (aes 
ed 
after committi 
eeptacis 
arrested.39 The. 
5 
ing assault'’ wer 
‘to 
bi 
privileges in PH 
Mahanapavu monastery at Sigiri was seared ann he 
ee eigch) 
inscription issued in the reign of Kass 
Pagal 
after carnitine a not even those who entered the monsati rae 
privileges tiie a i Braye crimes'’ were to be arrested ue ‘sina 
‘ 
: 
corded 
to 
r 
‘ 
beats 
‘ 
imilar 
of Nissaika Malla.41 
a preaching 
hall built’ during the reign 
Immunities which 
, 
accrued to th 
i: 
little 
practi 
ne 
: 
@ precincts of a preachi 
this unas Pantin since, obviously, a sit t eould a ay 
: 
very long. 
Judicial 
i 
eee 
enjoy 
have be 
‘ 
cial immunities in suc 
a Epil aa an honor rather than a privilege. ts priv nous 
.and 
Ayitigevava inscriptions concerned ley a ll 
smal 
334, 
My, 35, 10-1, 
135, 
Cv. 44, 29-36, 
i See supra pp. 178-9 
+ 
soran kotévan 
tb 
2 
ie gee vel ae EZ, Vol. 1, p. 169, if. C19-23; p. 174, Hf, BL4-7, 
He EZ, Vol. , pp. 34-8. 
ar EZ, Vol. V, p. 352, Hl, C10-3, 
. 
EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 165-78.

--- PAGE 106 [DIRECT] ---

192 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
ts of land, but the Sigiri inscription pertains to all the he neon 
ae ; 
nastery (vehersara} = vihdrasarattha). The Tripinniy va . 
bates ; a irly extensive area and the Nigama inscription covered 
an 
pail i = No evidence whatsoever is available in contemporary 
ea ne 
mks concerning the attitude of monastic mormon = 
se ie 
Is who sought refuge on their land. 
The absence of 
det a 
hse soification in this type of grant leaves many questions unanswered. 
a 
‘ines probably did not expect that they would pause ne ee 
i 
ss 
? upon monasteries.: 
ble, 
sllcae i : 
rien ag HRS AP 
in certain instances led to frict- 
Bowers eenboral and monastic authorities. 
° 
; 
as 
is ed type of immunity grant is even por ol i nr 7 
inscriptions direct royal 
officials no 
o 
Oe Sree responsible for assault. uel 
a 
diva 
inscription of Sena IT, officials were not to en 
si 
ek belonged to the Sen Senevirad college even to a z 
. Een ntered it after committing murder." 
It may be oe 
ethos ivilege is confirmed in the Iripinniydva inscription whic 
pions ‘be ae mropeety.4 A similar privilege was granted to the 
en : ff 
a ove of the Kasub Senevirad college of the et 
a ae 
sathority of the royal officials to enter the village nae 
aint ai had committed assault was Bill abso ee . 
ipti 
officials 
ai 
sink ee vee radio monastic control, even to 
enter Kulavitiya, 
; 
‘ed 
nslaughter:!° 
In 
after committing ma 
‘ 
arrest those who had entered it aft 
king, immunities granted 
inscripti 
f the same 
turupolayagama inscription o 
. 
bers a ‘ing which belonged to the Senaram monastery co 
hose who had co 
rde 
eer the village after EP 
aae ait ee spe i sheiiate 
icti 
ev 
ats that the restrictions which 
prevent 
sai 
ae areaekan (var. piralikkan) and the ulvidu hae eae bes 
on 
a adi) from entering certain monastic lands eae : he soba 
judicial immunity to the property in question. . Dec 
tks 
ie tion of Kassapa IV the perelikkan are directe: 
Pans 
alashivan Pirivena all the income from the fines they 
lev: 
ag 
guous. 
e147 
42, 
See infra pp. 208 et seq. 
ve EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 2, p. 285, Hi, D3-9. 
rap. 191. 
a 
Vol i, 
pp. 38-43; see also supra p. 191. 
146. 
EZ, Vol. V, p. 377, ll. i 
147, 
EZ, Vol, V, p. 389, I, B. 20-4, 
mmitted murder within the village and those who 
5:4 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
. 
193 
Mibiligama village belonging to this hermitage.1# 
According to the 
Kondavattavan inscription ‘criminals guilty of homicide were to be 
handed over to the slvadu.149 
Evidently both perelakkan and ulvddu 
were employees associated with the execution of justice. 
Though restrictions were imposed on royal officials which prevented 
them from entering monastic property to make arrests, this does not 
necessarily imply that the criminals concerned escaped punishment, 
Unfortunately these records do not. explain the procedure followed in 
such cases. 
Only a few details are found in certain of the grants. 
The 
Miadirigiriya inscription of Kassapa V and the Polonnarava Raja- 
miligiva inscription of Mahinda IV which award similar immunities 
specify that offenders who had entered the village after committing 
assault were to be arrested after they were made to quit the village; a 
tenth-century inscription in the Colombo Museum!s° adds that the 
assistance of the villagers was to be sought in order to evict them. 
It 
is significant that all the inscriptions 
cited in this Paragraph 
are 
concerned with the apprehension of only those offenders who were 
responsible for assault. 
The Atibagamuva inscription of Vijayabahu 
1, which deals with immunities granted to an extensive area comprising 
four villages apart from other property, further provides for the 
apprehension of criminals responsible for offenses falling within the 
purview of the “five graye crimes,’!51 
148, EZ, Vol. U1, pp. 9-14, 
For comments on pereldki see EZ, Vol, WI, p, 145, 
149. EZ, Vol. V; Pt, 1, p. 138, Hf, C31-5,. Th 
scription as the title of a 
temple official, but his fu 
vancore Archaeological Series, Vol. IE, p. 164. 
See also EZ, Vol. UE, p. 145, 
150, 
gama va(n keynekun dla gamya(ssan) lava (pitat) kara (ganut) misa (gamat) 
vida no(gannd) isa, EZ, Vol. IV, p. 251, WD 3-10. 
(paticamahdparadha) seems to 
ig 2 Brdhmana, drinking liquor, 
I teacher, and ‘associating with 
Gpatakas, “the five grave lapses.” 
Other works like Vaéistha (1. 19-22) and Apastambha (1. 7.21.8) do not completely 
agree with this list, 
The Todunrkeyal, a Tamil work, enumerates killing, lying, stealing, 
drinking liquor and abusing one’s guru as the paicamahipatakam (TL, p. 2409). 
‘The 
Buddhist sources speak of the Pakeanantariyakamma, 
In their explanations they enu- 
merate five of the six abhithdnas (viz. matricide, parricide, killing an arahant, causing 
a Buddha and following other teachers) or the offenses mentioned 
uct, lying and intemperance. 
(Khud- 
1915, p. 189; Milindapaiiha, 1880, p. 25; Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. IL, 
itissa, 1931, p, 774). It is doubtful that

--- PAGE 107 [DIRECT] ---

194 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
All these records refer to esa bee ae 
eects feet a 
Hl 
; 
3 
bis ne arn a cae residents of mene 
ee cal : 
the successful working of the arrangements made or - 
poate of criminals. who sought refuge in lands which pats 
apprehension 
ity. depended entirely. on, the cooperation of the tenant , 
: 
ae officials. 
The inscriptions oe Lang 
a 
i 
over the offenders. 
j 
omc sae ee in the event of non-compliance 
e 
are comer inscription of Kassapa IV and the acre’ 
i 
sy 
f Sena IV represent two attempts to overcome meh wa ng 
Leagan ' 
rd grants of extensive immunities, but only sul ject Hes 
ae ag ndlilon The first record directs the monastic oficls, e 
aries és 
5 guilty of assault from the village in sal ea . 
ie pee a strict exhortation.to monastic officials not to. a sae 
ante ca had committed: assault or murder, Nor was any resic 
enee ne 
itted such an offense to be harboured within the precincts 
pee aie lands; they were to be evicted after their ions 
« ce Ma satisfactory explanation of the term gedand is ge ve 
na 
the context of its occurrence suggests that it was aa ee 
pas se It is evident from the ninth-century Sanskrit record 
from 
: 
pees iri 
monastery that the practice of confiscating the property . 
See acs Enea Gedaid (Skt. grhadanda) may denote suc! 
° 
Ts aie inscription from the peashats aaron seine bes 
186 jg 
perhaps 
the most 
rema' 
; 
ae Se 
ee ne Ae sitet cain the entire area which 
aaa niktya It is also a highly detailed and comprehensive 
gient ae conti to represent an attempt - a ies ane fait 
is 
i 
; 
iminals 
eurtaili 
eae eeu one ae It significantly departs 
privil 
db 
a 
i 
isd. 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 205, 
i 
kota 
‘kenekun dia gdmin pitat karanu isa. _ 
p. 
205, 
Ul. 153. me 
gan te 
aghe's Sucatation of he Rae eee 
ettting. & ms 
He 
ae 
gan)nd isG. 
: 
enter 
f 
nmitt 
murder 
(ean) ite se ourel (ee 
aoty 
is 
inaccurate. The rendering ohuite is questional 
shall not | its 
rpocurrence in EZ, Vol. lll, p. 76, f B23; p. 
4 ¢ oe La uues 
2 re “pb dra mint kota no yadda den a ts ee mini 
ket 
aa | 
isa 
1 IML, p. 265, #2. 32-3. 
‘ 
tat karanu isd. 
EZ, Vol, 
ii, 
! 
: 
ren 
yah ae te example EZ, Vol. I, p. 47, Lp. 255 p. 93, £ AST; p. 247 
155. EZ, Vol. J, p. 5, tf. 23-4, 
156, EZ, Vol. {, pp. 41-57, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
195 
from normal practice and retains the right of officials to enter monastic 
estates and punish criminals: 
If there be any persons in a village held to be guilty of murder, the 
king's employees may enter that Village and demand them, but 
only them; no wrong shall be done to other villagers who had not 
abetted these offenders... If there be any who, after committing 
murder, have taken refuge in the premises of the sangha, these 
offenders and those who abetted them shall be tried and sentenced 
to be exiled to Darhbdiy (Indi).157 
The inscription further stipulated that the authority of the royal 
officials extended also to cases other than murder. 
Once in every two 
years, the officials of the central administration’58 
who went on tours of 
investigation were to demand the surrender of all offenders guilty of the 
“‘five grave crimes;’’ it was specified that they were not to interfere with 
less severe cases which did not fall under this category, 
Further, in levy- 
ing punishments for offenses other than murder, the penalty of gedand 
was to be avoided; nor should the offenders be banished. 
Another 
clause states that king’s officials who sought refuge with the saigha to 
escape repayment of debts due to the treasury were to be apprehended and 
made to pay the money they owed ; but they were to be spared other indig- 
nities. 
The list of “immunities” in the Abhayagiri inscription makes it 
abundantly clear that criminals who sought refuge within monastic 
estates as well as the tenants of these tands guilty of the “five grave crimes’ 
were brought under the jurisdiction of the royal officials. 
It was made 
possible for royal officials not only to enter monastic estates but to levy 
punishments on offenders living or hiding therein,1%° 
Provision was 
made for high government officials in charge of judicial affairs and other 
dignitaries to review disputed judgments and to reduce fines imposed by 
lower officials, 
This does not imply that the monastic administration was completely 
divested of its judicial authority, 
Evidently all cases that did not falt 
under the “‘five grave crimes’ came under their control. 
This is also 
implied in the instructions to the royal officials not to impose additional 
fines in cases in which fines had already been levied, presumably, by the 
monastic officials. 
This gives precedence to the rights of the monastic 
157. 
mint ket kenekun ita gamat vada ovun ma illat mut sesu ehi no pahala sesu 
kudinat aniya nokaranu isd...mini kota savigun van tanat van Kenekun ata ehi pahala 
vanud evunuj vicdra kot dambdiv yavanat harnd isd, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 47, it. 18-9, 24-5, 
158. 
rajkol samdaruvan. 
Wickremasinghe translated this as “the princes of the 
toyal family,” 
159. 
For a discussion on the interpretation of the passage, see supra pp. 108-9, 
nite Cf, punishments prescribed in the Vevilkatiya record. 
£Z, Vol. I, pp. 
SL,

--- PAGE 108 [DIRECT] ---

196 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
officials in such areas of judicial administration where the limits had not 
been clearly defined. 
The grant of Kassapa V was in certain respects a withdrawal of im- 
munities, 
for some of the villages of the Abhayagiri nikdya bad been 
enjoying. much. more extensive immunities. 
In a sense it was a Tea- 
sonable definition of the relative rights of the king and the monastery. 
This grant took the necessary steps to safeguard the pecuniary interests 
the monastery would have in judicial immunities. 
All the fines collected 
on the estates of the main monastery were to be set apart for its use. 
A 
similat arrangement was in force in Mibaligama, a village attached to the 
Madabiyan 
college.1® 
Such 
an 
attangement ensured the income 
accruing from judicial proceedings for the monastery but at the same time 
curtailed those privileges which hindered the normal and efficient adminis- 
tration of justice. 
The: Brahmadeya Tenure 
Two recently discovered. inscriptions from Miadirigiriya are parti- 
cularly relevant for an examination of a type of immunity that the monas- 
tery enjoyed during the ninth and tenth centuries.’ 
One of these, refers 
to bambadeya or brahmadeya holdings of the monastery. “The other in- 
scription probably had a similar reference as is evident from the letters 
at the end of the twelfth line and the beginning of the thirteenth. 
The 
Buddhist canonical texts are the earliest sources to speak of brahenadeya 
grants. 
The Ambattha Sutta, the Lohicca Sutta and the Sonadanda 
Sutta of the Digha Nikdya, and the Canki Sutta of the Majjhima Nikéya 
mention Brahmanas who had received villages and towns on brahmadeya 
tenure from the kings of Kosala and Magadha. These sources state that 
the grants carried with them rights over “grain, wood, grass, and 
water: 
According to the definition in the Arthasastra of Kautilya, 
brahmadeya grants involved the transfer of rights of exemption from 
taxes and fines. 
Such property was heritable, but alienation by sale 
was possible only if the purchaser was entitled to similar rights.’ 
More details on the brahmadeya tenure are found in the Sumargala- 
yilasini, the work of Buddhaghosa based on the Sinhalese exegetical 
tradition preserved at the Mahiavihara. 
It explains that.a brahmadeya 
grant was a transfer of rights over land which entitled the grantee to 
161. 
EZ, Vol. II, pp. 9-14. 
162, 
CJHSS, New Series, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1972, pp. 60-74. 
163, 
satinakatthodakam sadhathian. _ rajadiyam brahmadeyyam. 
Digha Nikays, 
ed. T. W. Rhys Davids and J, B. Carpenter, London, 1890, Vol. I, pp. 87; Vol. iil, 
p. 224; Majjhima Nikaya, ed, R. Chalmers, London, 1951, Vol, Il, p. 164. 
164. 
The Kautiliya Arthasastra, pp- 63, 257. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
197 
“raise the parasol” and enjoy. 
it:i 
raise 
t 
joy. it: in royal manner (chattam 
ussa 
‘ 
1 
US 
ns ee bhutijitabbar). 
He collected the taxes and ae aa 
pas an ie eee Lia this area (sabbam chejjabhejjam anustisayan 
t 
-tittha-pabbtadisu sutke ganhantena). 
This 
i 
irrevocable (na puna gahetabbam hoti 
ni 
Sa earl gare 
: 
abl 
n 
ti nissaltham 
pariecat 
165 
Dighanikadyatthakatha Linatth 
di 
aa li 
beg 
a 
avanynand, 
a subcomment. 
later “Anurfdhapura Period,” fe 
nla 
ae 
a suaelies 
urther explains that those 
judici 
vested the grantee with the 
i 
ee 
‘ 
; 
authority to leyy all t 
i 
ypes of 
paren ie aia and corporal punishments.!* 
The ion 
e, 
drawn 
from the Buddhist exegeti 
i 
getical works of Sri 
Li 
probably reflect local conditions and | 
: 
ue 
hence hel: 
i 
of brahmadeya tenure in the island, 
Dae noe 
Prin Hie the two inscriptions from Madirigiriya, the term bamba- 
occur in a ninth-century inscription f 
idr 
Vihara while its variant form bambe 
is 
fou 
nein 
mbadesa is found in an inscripti 
2. 
. 
*, 
_ 
eee Pras bie Patanavitana has suggested a date in pert 
A 
aiiduruppe Vihara inscription has 
not bi 
i 
date. 
The inscription from Eppa 
tedeihh 
oi ee 
ppavala, though it deals with 
ment made at a. monastery, 
yields no 
i 
i 
ea 
: 
ery, 
information on tenurial 
ri 
sia 
Lene petite pillar inscription of Mahinda V, which Be bar 
of 
brahmadeya tenurial rights concernin, 
belonging to the Tisaram mon: 
fae 
ne 
a 
astery, contains more detail: 
i 
certain officials who were forbidden t 
hi 
Pa wane 
o enter this 
property 
and 
: 
draught cattle and buffaloes 
ae 
per u ee 
i 
were not to be impressed within 
i 
cincts.18 
Unfortunately the usefuln 
i 
pies 
Grin 
ess of this record is 
impaired 
fact that about twenty-two of its li 
i 
Hiaed the ster 
f 
at 
abou 
f 
ines, which probably outlined 
ie granted to this monastery, are damaged and TEBE. as 
oe ace from staan discussion that certain monastic 
tates, 
ig some of the properties. of the MAadirigiri 
enjoyed such extensive tenurial ri 
th 
eyol 
ake tay 
y 
; 
ights that the authority 
of th 
officials was virtually excluded from them. 
It appears taut these instead 
165, Sumargala-vilasini, 
2 
1886. Vol. 1, 246, ed. T. W. Rhys Davids and J.B, Carpenter, London, 
166. 
sabbam chejja-bhejjanti sartra-danda-dhana-dandadi bhedam sabbam danda- 
méha, 
Dighanikdyatthakatha Linatthavannana, ed. Lily de Silva, London, 1970, Vol, 
1, p. 376, 
167, 
EZ, Vol. I, p, 
190. 
i 
12 
nZ, 
Vol. 
I, p. 
190,117, As Paranavitana 
pointed 
feaugetain manuscripts of the Amdvatura, a Sinhalese iene atthe 
tao ocsogs Navin 
clone Sp oS IA The fe bee 
occurs with the meaning 
of 
£7 
» 
, DP. 
95, m. 12), The form brahmadesa 
(IRE No. tater ig of brakmadeya in certain South Indian inscriptions too. 
168. EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 59-67.

--- PAGE 109 [DIRECT] ---

198 
THE SANGHA AND THE. KING 
represent the most complete property rights known in early medieval 
Sri Lanka. 
It is. noteworthy, however, that in the Madirigiriya pillar 
inscription immunity rights ate granted to only one of the villages held 
by the monastery.’° 
It suggests by implication that perhaps not all the 
estates. of the monastery enjoyed such immunities. 
Inscription No. 2 
from Madirigiriya also implies that some of the properties belonging to 
this monastery did not enjoy brahmadeya tenurial status, for the donor of 
this grant stipulates that, if his endowment were to be destroyed in times 
of strife, the “food share’’ which he instituted should be maintained with 
the income from the brahmadeya properties. 
“While this statement under- 
lines the confidence that the donor had in the inviolability of the brahma- 
deya holdings of the monastery, it would seem that the income from 
which the “food share’ was to be maintained came from a source which 
did not enjoy the privileges of brahmadeya status. 
Tho immunity grants of the period under consideration reveal a great. 
deal of variation in the extent and types of the immunities granted. 
This 
variation does not fit into a coherent chronological pattern, nor can it be 
maintained that the variation is related to the importance of the monas- 
tery concerned. 
Perhaps it was regulated by factors such as the personal 
_ yelations of the king with the abbots of these monasteries and internat 
political conditions, for which no evidence has been preserved. 
In his discussion on monastic property Rahula apparently consi- 
dered only some of these immunity grants. 
“If anyone entered these 
lands and villages for protection or asylum,”’ he maintains, “he could not 
be arrested there. 
Should there be any unworthy of protection, they 
could be arrested only after they had been made to quit the temple: 
lands.’"'® 
It is evident from our discussion that this statement is not. 
true of all the immunity grants. 
Moreover, it is noteworthy that not all 
the monastic estates enjoyed judicial immunities. 
The Puliyankulam 
inscription of Udaya and the Mayilagastota inscription of Mahinda do 
not mention judicial immunities, 
Yet in almost all the instances where 
immunities were granted, there is reason to believe that the monastery 
enjoyed jurisdiction over at least the cases concerning minor offenses. 
This kept the monastery involved in the maintenance of order and the 
administration of justice. 
If the association of the king with the sangha helped to legitimize. 
- 
his position through. religious sanction, it also led to a gradual abdication 
of his economic rights and political authority over a.section of the people. 
Monasteries were no longer mere centers of religious activity; they had. 
n 
1684, 
£Z, Vol. 11, pp. 25-33. 
169. 
Rahula, op. cit. p. 142. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
199 
developed into institutions which wielded economi 
: 
Ms 
ini 
i 
ace at i eee of their considerable iaicee 
ee 
oe Dy, 
e 
immunity grants that in most cases the control that 
ade rasa 
monastic lands amounted to the right to intervene 
pt eter i es oa! monasteries and the right to apprehend and 
rnoonna ae He 
of grave offenses, Such delegation of adminis- 
estates Guiles ennatoe phy ei. eee 
tainly seems to have introduced a foadalt deer oe body aut 
It is evi- 
Rights of Tenantry in Monastic Estates 
pe hat hae poe ee 
interests of the satigha, 
nt 
ure 
the rights of the tenants t 
- . 
be va fori from harsh treatment and the undue exactions 
et peter 
aaa : 
: 
these duties necessitated a close supervisory con~ 
Pal ehiena ws astic administration. The interest that the kings showed 
eee is eae in some of the regulations in the Kaludiya- 
sare P See HI and the Mihintale Tablets of Mahinda IV. 
Sane sisi rae bs by the tenantry living under the control of 
was a phenomenon der Gea 
Cee peinillneg 
| 
phonon 
: 
ia. 
An 
“ 
: 
in 
Pecan a Tirukkadittanam issued ie 
ee 
si a ; 
: i. 
to take on mortgages or to cultivate the land allot- 
aaah ape sk Tummers of the Visnu temple at the site,170 
Bie Stee gene the Buddhist monasteries in Sri Lanka faced 
a ieee 
Ma Mihintale Tablets decree that no allotments 
Te nue tip erms of hereditary succession were to be seized 
Epi 
sta i si upon the occasion of failure of the succession,!7! 
eee jals seem to have enjoyed great control over lands 
nase tor fale employees. According to the Mihintale Tablets, 
pt apa cae nents were not to be confiscated by 
implies that, unlike the saleraiee ae aaa ge cn 
eres 
t 
mployees, even if thei 
was satisfactory, could have their allotments coniiscated en 
it was 
0 their 
decided 
oe 
ney ee monastery 
needed 
them. 
The 
Rolidivaneling 
ption orders that taxes higher or lower than the customary rates 
190. 
Trav 
re 
‘1 
Vol: 
Y, 
78-80, 
i re i ‘avancore Archaeological Series, 
Vol: 
pp. 178-8 
. 
faskaru parapui 
it 
card 
i novatt 
: 
ce yutu, 
iv i Wi pe yen vitena kard Kkumbui 
novatiya hot mut hiva nogatd 
yutu. 
172, 
suclasun 
vat 
ve herat mut 
kémiyan 
i 
EZ,V 
A43 
att 
val 
vel 
it 
kémiyan 
nogaté 
yutu, 
EZ, 
Vol. ¥ p. 93, ¢. 
, 
nd, 
P33,

--- PAGE 110 [DIRECT] ---

200 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
should not be levied by .the monastic administration!" 
However, 
tenants of monastic estates could also be vexed by demands for extra 
services during religious festivals. 
Thus the Mihintale Tablets specify 
that apart from the “three day turn of service,” no other corvée should 
pe levied on uposatha days or during religious festivals,!74 
Kings devoted much attention to the problem of controlling the 
activities of monastic officials. 
Apart from instances of officials abusing 
their authority to get their land cultivated by the tenants of the monas- 
tery, officials also tended to acquire monastic lands by purchase or 
mortgage. 
The Kaludiyapokuna inscription set apart two villages as 
remuneration for officials; they were instructed not to seize cattle, 
buffaloes or serfs from other villages for their own use. 
Nor were 
they to take monastic lands on mortgage, on pamunuwt? tenure, 
oF 
“for cultivation,’ presumably on a share-cropping basis. 
The state- 
ments in the Mihintale Tablets amount almost toa reiteration of 
these regulations, 
In this, context the 
officials were 
forbidden to 
acquire the land of the monastery on mortgage, or on pamunu, patta 
and kara tenure; they were also forbidden to use the draught oxen of 
the monastic villages to cultivate their own lands. 
Nothing untoward 
was to be committed within private holdings ; 
for instance, trees could be 
felled only. if prior permission had been obtained from the committee of 
management.176 
Officials who went on tour were enjoined not to 
demand from the tenants anything other than the portion of rice to which 
they are entitled by custom and not to accept any presents.'7” 
It would thus appear that tenants on monastic estates who were 
freed from interference by royal officials were confronted with the 
possibility of maltreatment by monastic officials. 
In such cases royal 
intervention would, no doubt, have been beneficial. 
It is not at all 
clear, however, whether this supervisory control was adequately regular 
and effectual. 
The Buddhist Sangha under Hindu Rule 
The close relationship which prevailed between the sangha and the 
state was bound to be shaken in times of foreign invasion and foreign 
rule. The Pandya invasion during the reign of Sena IT was disastrous in 
173, 
pere siritin vada ‘kina kavavavara nobandand isa, EZ, Vol. IW, p. 265. 
174. 
tun dé var mut poko mafgul dy sesu var no gaté yutu. EZ, Vol. I, p. 93, i 
175, 
For explanation of this term see supra p. 68. 
1716, 
See supra p. 110, 
177, 
EZ, Vol.1, p. 93, H. A45-51.. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
201 
its effects on the main monasteries of Anura 
ae 
nuradhaputa. 
The 
golden 
i 
. ae sear at the Ratanapasida, the jewel-eyes of Hoa fades 
{al 
hayagiri ?), gold plates from the Thiparama stdpa and 
iden 
ate from other shrines were plundered.1?® 
During the Cola jee oh 
: ee ae of Udaya IV, the Manipdsada, the hall of the four he 
: ¢ 
Padalaiichana and the shrine of the Tooth relic were burnt do 
picenas Bilt 
Caesipcuat house and the Mahapali almshall mies 
ae 
© campaigns that the Colas led int 
during their occupation of Raj 
f 
Ocul 
Parc 
jatattha were marked by 
similar 
i 
of destruction.. 
The author of th 
i 
a 
ee teenie 
¢ 
¢ 
e. Calavamsa complains 
monasteries were destroyed and plundered,'# 
Pinuer i ase ae 
me that the relic shrines at Mahagama which had been Generel 
: sie 
. oe ee by Vijayabahu 1.18! 
His upardja Viabite 
e@ -Buddhaguna: cetiya which had bee: 
1 
: 
Colas.®? 
It is likely that the shrin 
Papereeeyinaned 
a 
i 
. 
es at Mahiyan, 
adirigiri 
or despoiled during these caer pda 
n its account of the reign of Para 
: 
a 
: 
; 
‘akramabahu I, the Cah 
records that the king repaired the Ratnavaluka (Mahithiipa) “Abhay - 
baeh elias ental stipas and the Lohapasada, all 
of Brite 
estroyed 
by the Colas.18+ 
The Pajavali: 
; 
Vjavaliya corroborates 
thi 
statement with regard to the first three st¢, 
i 
Gp 
t 
fit 
‘dpas, and it also adds Thapa- 
sah to the list. Though it is not included in this list, the ae aa 
ae bah the Lohapasida was repaired during the 
ing. 
t is rather difficult to believe, h 
i 
f 
owever, 
t 
bi lee aan tai forty years after winning back Re 
las and 
who 
built many new monasteries at Polo 
' 
7 
v 
iod 
z 
Aas ais religious establishments in the outlying pisioen? — 
ade no attempt to repair these shrines which were 
aa 
f 
p 
the most 
be 
Buddhists. 
The Calavamsa tries to explain this by saying pepe 
a not been restored by previous kings “because it was so difficult v6 
n spite of the testimony of the chronicles, the possibility cannot be ruled 
178. 
Cv. 
50, 
33- 
i 
cy 7 . aoe The golden image was later brought back, 
179, 
Cy, 54, 44-5. 
180. 
Cy, 55, 20-1, 
181. 
Cv, 60.56, 
182. 
Cy. 60.81, 
i ASCAR, 1946, p. 15; 1951, p. 17. 
4. 
Cv. 78. 96-104; Archaeological evidence sugge 
aise 
one Bs iy se of desolation. 
ASCAR, en a 
si car 
ey 
186, 
Cy, 78, 96-7; Cv, trsl, Vol, II, p, 113,

--- PAGE 111 [DIRECT] ---

202 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
out that the decay of some of these shrines was the result of neglect during 
the troubled period preceding the accession of Parakramabahu I rather 
than of willful destruction by the Cola troops. 
It would, there- 
fore, be rash to contend that the restoration of shrines and monasteries 
undertaken by Parikraniabahu I reflects the extent of the destruction 
wrought by militant Hindus who had followed a policy of persecution of 
Buddhism. Though examples of conversion of Buddhist monasteries into 
Hindu religious establishments can be found,.as at Buddhannehila,!*7 
it does not necessarily follow that these conversions represent the 
work.of 
the Colas. 
It is possible that they date from the reign of Magha 
who, as the Célavamsa and the Péjavaliya claim, made a determined 
attempt to convert Buddhists to an alien faith.1#8 
In his description of the ruins at Padaviya, Godakumbura remarks 
that “the occurrence of remains of Siva temples among the Buddhist 
monuments or above their foundations has to be attributed to the Cola 
invasion of the eleventh century (sic).""""" 
A number of Tamil inserip~ 
tions datable to the.tenth and eleventh centuries, among them two from 
the reign of Rajaraja, wore found near a Siva Devale at the site. 
Yet, 
even if the Siva temples were built over the foundations of “Buddhist 
» Monuments,’ as Godakumbura has suggested, it seems advisable to re- 
frain from hastily concluding that they represent evidence of suppression 
of Buddhism by the Colas. 
Itis quite possible that the Hindu shrines were 
located on abandoned and dilapidated Buddhist shrines. 
Secondly, it 
is not possible to identify the exact character of a building from the re- 
mains of its foundations. 
On the other hand, the ruins at Padaviya which 
are still available for examination reveal that both Buddhist and Hindu 
shrines:existed side by side. 
A slab found near the stipa of the Bud- 
dhist shrine bears a Sanskrit inscription of the twelfth or thirteenth cen- 
tury which records that a Buddhist monastery named Lankatilaka received 
the protection of the Velaikkairas, Tamil mercenaries.!°° 
Hence no 
- definite evidence is available which would support the suggestion that the 
Buddhist monastery at Padaviya was destroyed by the Colas. 
; 
; 
In this context it is very important to note that there were Buddhists 
among the Tamils. 
There are also some, though rare, instances of 
patronage of Buddhist shrines by even the Cola kings who, avowedly, 
were devoted Hindus.!®! 
Instances of ‘patronage of Buddhist institut- 
ions by Tamils in Sri Lanka ate found in a number of inscription’ spread 
187, 
ASC, Seventh Progress Report, Sessional Papers, 1896, p. 30. 
188. 
Cp, 80, 65-8, 75-9; Piv., pp. 108-9, 
189. ASCAR, 1963, p. 67. 
190. 
ASCAR, 1953, No. 19. 
191. 
See the Leiden plates, El, Vol, XXII, pp. 213-84. 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
203 
over a wide area from Velgama, Anuradhapura, Polonnaruva, Hitigurak- 
goda, Moragahavela, Pafiduvasnuvara and Paramgividiya to Miyan- 
katidura.!2, 
A. Tamil inscription dating from the reign of a certain 
Sonavarman records that certain Sri Lankan Tamils extended patronage 
to a Buddhist shrine called Makkodaipalli.!%2 The record probably dates 
from the ninth or the tenth century, 
Of all these inscriptions those from 
Velgama are of particular interest since they reveal that Buddhist institu- 
tions were actively patronized by members of the Tamil community even. 
during the period of the Cola occupation. 
It is possible that this Bud- 
dhist monastery was named Rajatajaperumpalli because it was patronized 
by the Cola king, but no donations made by the Cola royalty occur in 
the inscriptions at the site. 
This is the only known instance of a Bud-’ 
dhist monastery being patronized during the period of Cola rule. 
It is 
not impossible that patronage was extended because Tamil-speaking 
monks, who could cater to the religious needs of the Buddhists among 
the Tamil community, were present at the institution.’ 
In this connec- 
tion it is noteworthy that the Calavamsa mentions a certain Velagimi 
monastery as one of the shrines repaired by Vijayabihu I.'%5 
If this is 
identified with the Velgam Vehera, as Nicholas has suggested, 
!° it would 
also exemplify the dangers involved in drawing conclusions concerning 
the religious policy of the Colas based upon evidence of restorative work 
undertaken by Vijayabahu I. 
: 
Nevertheless, the deposal of the Sinhalese dynasty by the Colas and 
the loss of power and position that the Sinhalese nobility probably suff- 
eréd removed important sources of patronage that had sustained the 
saiigha. 
Buddhist monasteries also suffered from neglect, and some of 
them wete plundered during military campaigns. 
One could surmise 
that the estates of the saigha were also affected, but there is no specific 
evidence of confiscation.’2? 
There is reason to believe that these con- 
ditions led to the emigration of monks to foreign lands.198 
Under such 
cirgumstances it is but natural that the saigha would have welcomed the 
restitution of Sinhalese power over Rajarattha, but there is no evidence 
492, 
ASC, Seventh Progress Report, Sessional Papers 1896, p. 57; ASCAR, 1909, 
* p, 26; 1951, No. 19; 1952, No. 17; 1953, Nos. 6, 19-21; CSG, Vol, II, p.199, 
No. 596; 
UCR, Vol. XVII, pp. 46-9; SH, Vol. IV, Nos, 1405, 1410; #Z, Vol. VI, pp. 65-79, 
10-2, 88-92, 
193. 
South Indian Inscriptions, Vol. £V, No, 1405. 
194, 
See also infra pp. 305-6, 
195. 
Cy, 60. 62. 
196, JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 45. 
197, 
See supra pp. 86-7. 
198. 
See infra pp. 271-3.

--- PAGE 112 [DIRECT] ---

{ 
I 
204 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
for the contention that the saigha became “a potent nationalist and poli- 
tical power’? during the struggle against the Colas,.1 
The influence of Saivism lingered on after the period of Cola rule. 
The Ca/avamsa mentions that Vijayabaihu I did net withdraw the grants 
which had been formerly made to shrines of gods (devakula).2 
He 
seems to have even patronized a Saiva shrine, for a temple in the Kan- 
tale region bore his name. 
Presumably his son Vikramabahu was 
more devoted to the Saiva faith. 
An inscription from Budumuttiva, 
dated in his reign, implies that he patronized Saivism since it mentions 
a Saiva shrine named after him.2° 
This policy of extending patron- 
age to Saivism was continued by Gajabahu IL who, according to the 
Ciilavamsa, fetched nobles of heretical faith (papaditthino) from abroad 
and had Rajarattha “filled with the briers (of heresy),’2°3 
Tamil tradi- 
tion claims that he was converted to Saivism.%* 
The partiality of 
these last two kings towards Saivism naturally vitiated the traditional 
relationship between the saigha and the king. 
It was only during the 
reign of Parakramabihu I that the patronage of the saigha was resumed 
on a generous scale. 
: 
Monastic Influence and Political Affairs 
_ The close relationship which generally prevailéd between the savigha 
and the king not only enhanced the king's position in the eyes of the 
people but also elevated the position of the sakgha. 
The saigha's 
“support was important for the king. As religious preceptors and men of 
letters the monks held a prominent and influential position in society. 
This very role gave some monks access to the royal family and influence 
over the king. 
It is evident from the Mahdvamsa that Gothabhaya 
(A.D. 249-262), who was impressed by the erudition and wisdom of 
Satghamitta, entrusted him with the education of his two sons.205 
Mahasena, who later became king, was a devoted follower of this monk. 
Aggabodhi VIII (804-815) built the Bhita college for his teacher (saka- 
cariya) and his retinue of three hundred monks.?°° 
During the period 
199, 
D. I. Devendra, Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, fascicule A-Aca, p. 22.Cf.W, M. 
K. Wijotunga, The Rise and Decline of Cola Power in Ceylon, Unpublished Ph.D. 
thesis, 1962, p, 322, 
200, 
Cv, 60, 77, 
201, £2, Vol. TV, pp. 191-6. 
202, 
EZ, Vol, Tl, pp. 302-12, 
Sce also Supra pp, 89-93. 
203. 
Cy. 70, 53-4, 
204. 
Cri Dakgina Purdam, ed. Vaittiyalinga Degihar, 1916, Pt. I, p. 20; 
Tri 
Aopasala Puréaam, ed, Ganmugaratna Aiyar, 1909, pp. 170, 178, I am indebted to 
Prof. K. Indrapala for this information. 
205, 
Mv, 36, 114-7, 
~ 
206. 
Cy, 49, 46, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
205 
under consideration at least two kings were deeply versed in the teachings 
of Theravada Buddhism. 
Kassapa V (914-923) wrote the Dhampiyd 
Aluvé Gétapadaya, a Sinhalese commentary on the Dhammapadattha~ 
kathé2°’ 
In his slab inscription at the Abhayagiri monastery, he claims 
to have expounded the works on Abhidhamma in the presence of his 
teacher and “extolled the virtues of the Buddha in the Sinhalese lang- 
guage.’'2°8 
According to the Caélavamsa he often read the Canon and 
used to preach the Abhidhamma “‘in the manner of a Buddha (buddhali- 
ldya)”’ to the monks of the Mariccayatti monastery. 
Similarly, Sena 
TV (954-956) was wont to explain the canonical texts to the monks of the 
three nikdyas who came to listen to him at the Lohapasida.24° 
Pre- 
sumably Kassapa’s teacher was a monk. 
The profound. knowledge of 
the Theravada that these kings possessed and the esteem in which their 
learning was held even by the monks suggest that they may have under- 
gone a long period of training in’scriptures at monastic schools. 
In the 
Polonnaruva inscription of Vijayabahu I, Mugalan of the Uttaromila 
fraternity is described as rdjaguru.2!! 
This may imply that he was 
either the teacher or the personal preceptor of the king. 
The influential position that monks held as preceptors and teachers 
gained them access to the king and could be put to important political use. 
Monks were sometimes counsellors of kings,?!? but it was in the role of 
mediators that, they were most profitably employed. 
Not only did they 
have easy access to both parties in a dispute, they could also be certain 
of getting a respectful hearing. 
This gave the sangha considerable 
influence in political affairs, particularly in times when the island was 
divided. 
The monks 
of the three nikdyas accompanied yuvardja 
Mahinda, who had been forced to flee to the central highlands after 
incurring the displeasure of Sena II, when he came back to seek recon- 
ciliation with the king.?!? 
They intervened with success again in the 
time of Kassapa IV. 
Adipdéda Mahinda, the ruler of Rohana, had re- 
yelled against the king and defeated the royal army. 
However, his father, 
yuvardja Kassapa, persuaded him to give up his intentions to capture the 
throne. 
Later on Mahinda was faced with a rebellion within his own 
province and was forced to solicit the support of the king. 
The monks. 
207,° 
DAG, p. 295, 
208, EZ, Vol. I, p. 47, Hf. 11-2, 
209, 
Cv, 52.48, 82, 
210, 
Cv. 54, 4, 
211. 
EF, Vol. XVII, p. 337, 1.26, 
212, 
Cv. 57, 23, 
213, 
Cy. 51.14,

--- PAGE 113 [DIRECT] ---

206 
: 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
interceded on his behalf and it was through their mediation that friendly 
relations between him and the king, which led to his marriage to the 
king’s daughter, were restored.2!4 
After the incident 
at Tapovana2!s 
Udaya II] (A.D. 935-938) faced a critical situation when he found him- 
self powerless to control the army and the citizens of Anuradhapura who 
had risen in revolt. 
Here again it was the monks who pacified the troops 
and saved the situation for the king. 
Manabharana of Rohana, who 
fought a series of campaigns against Gajabahu II during the course of his 
struggle for the throne of Polonnaruva, went to see the latter in the com- 
pany of monks after he decided to give up hostilities and enter into a 
friendly pact with his erstwhile adversary.2!° 
In certain instances monks served the king as emissaries. 
When 
the rebel prince Patikramabahu returned to the kingdom of his step- 
father Kittisirimegha after his sojourns in the neighboring kingdom, the 
latter sent the head of the kiathdrasabha and Abhaya, the abbot of the 
Paficaparivenamila, as emissaries to persuade hiin to come back to the 
capital"? 
Gajabahu II, desperate in his losing struggle against Parak- 
ramabahu who had defeated his troops in several engagements, saw no 
alternative but to solicit the intervention of the monks of the three nikayas. 
According 
to the Célavamsa,?"* the monks visited Parakramabahu in 
his camp at Giritataka and prevailed upon him to cease hostilities. 
They 
convinced him that before long he could claim the kingdom on the death, 
of.Gajabahu who was without offspring and advanced in age. 
Appa- 
rently Parakramabihu also realized the advantages of biding his time 
“at the: request of the saigha.’ 
For this assurance would strengthen 
his claims to the throne of Polonnaruva against the rival claims of Mana- 
bharana.of Rohana. 
The rival princes agreed on a treaty of friendship 
in-which the kingdom was bequeathed to Parakramabahu, arfd a copy of 
this. treaty was indited at the Mandalagiri monastery. 
This record has 
not.been found, 
Nevertheless, the historicity of this important incident 
is attested to by:another copy of this treaty which is found at a monas- 
tery in Samgamuva in the Hatahaya Korale of the Kurundgala District.2 
According ‘to this: edict Gajabahu and Parakramabahu entered into a 
pact..of-friendship and non-aggression. 
Each nominated the other as 
successor and heir to his kingdom. 
Obviously this arrangement worked 
214. 
Gy, 52. 4-9. 
215, 
See infra p. 208, 
216. 
Cv. 70, 179-81. 
217. 
Cv, 67. 60-1, 
218. 
Cv, 70. 328-36; 71, -5. 
219, 
EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 1-8, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
207 
in favor of Parakramabahu, the younger ruler. 
At the end of the 
document they solemnly state that if either of them were to violate these 
conditions, it would be tantamount to a breach of the orders of the san- 
gha. 
It is significant that the edicts were placed within the premises of 
monasteries. 
Perhaps the location was expected to sanctify the solemn 
decision which had been taken by the princes. 
Itis also possible that this 
reflects the important role the monks played in accomplishing this deli- 
cate political mission. 
The diplomatic skill of the monks would have been most useful in 
maintaining relations with other Buddhist rulers in countries like Burma. 
It is not possible to determine on the basis of available evidence whether 
the envoys and emissaries exchanged between the two countries included 
monks. 
Of the emissaries sent by Parakramabahu to the Burmese court 
it is possible that dcariya Vacissara was a monk.?2° 
It is noteworthy 
that the Burmese envoy was called Tapassin,?4 which means “‘ascetic,”’ 
and it is not unlikely that he too was a monk. 
It is more certain that 
monks played an active part in restoring friendly relations between the 
two countries after the outbreak of hostilities in the time of Parakrama- 
bahu. According to the chronicles it was to the saigha that the Bur- 
mese wrote requesting intercession, and the monks succeeded in persuad- 
ing Parakramabahu to cease hostilities.22? 
Areas of Conflict 
It is evident from the preceding discussion that the power and the 
influence of the king and the saigha were complementary and were used 
to serve their mutual interests. 
Geiger rightly pointed out that the in- 
terests of the sakgha and the king were closely interwoven: 
‘The king- 
ship by which the state was represented was the firmest support of the 
Buddhist church and the latter that of kingship."’223 
However, it would 
be an over-simplification and a distortion of facts to state that there was 
- 
no friction between the state and the satgha over non-religious matt- 
ers.*4 
Concern for their property and privileges was one of the im- 
portant considerations which guided monastic establishments 
when 
formulating relations with the king. 
The grants of immunity made 
during this period left the boundary between monastic and temporal 
authority largely indeterminate, 
This was a situation which could easily 
lead to friction. 
220. 
Cv, 76.32. 
221, 
Cv. 76. 23. 
222. 
Cv. 76, 59-75. 
223, 
CCMT, p. 203. 
224, 
Rahula, op. cit, p. 69,

--- PAGE 114 [DIRECT] ---

206 
THE.SANGHA AND THE KING 
interceded on his behalf and it was through their mediation that friendly 
relations between him andthe king, which led: to his marriage to the 
King’s daughter, were restored.2!4 
After the incident 
at Tapovana2!s 
Udaya IT (A.D. 935-938) faced a critical situation when he found him- 
self powerless to control the army and the citizens of Anuradhapura who 
had risen in revolt. 
Here again it was the monks who pacified the troops 
and saved the situation for the king. 
Manabharana of Rohana, who 
fought a series of campaigns against Gajabahu II during the course of his 
struggle for the throne of Polonnaruva, went to see the latter in the com- 
pany of monks after he decided to give up hostilities and enter into a 
friendly pact with his erstwhile adversary.2!6 
In certain instances monks served the king as emissaries. 
When 
the rebel prince Parikramabahu returned to the kingdom of his step- 
father Kittisirimegha after his sojourns in the neighboring kingdom, the 
latter sent the head of the kijhdrasabhé and Abhaya, the abbot of the 
Paficaparivenamila, as emissaries to persuade him to come back to the 
capital.?\7, 
Gajabahu II, desperate in his losing struggle against Parak- 
ramabahu who had defeated his troops in several engagements, saw no 
alternative but to solicit the intervention of the monks of the three nikdyas. 
According to the Cilavamsa,*!® the monks visited Parakramabahuw in, 
his camp at Giritatika and prevailed upon him to céase hostilities. 
They 
convinced him that before long he could claim the kingdom on the death 
of, Gajabahu who was without offspring and advanced in age. 
Appa- 
rently Paraikramabahu also realized the advantages of biding his time 
“fat the request of the satgha.’’ 
For this assurance would strengthen 
his claims to the throne of Polonnaruva against the rival claims of Mana- 
bharana of Rohana. The rival princes agreed on a treaty of friendship 
in which the kingdom was bequeathed fo Parakramabahu, and a copy of 
this treaty was indited at the Mandalagiri monastery. 
This record has 
not been found. 
Nevertheless, the historicity of this important incident 
is attested to by another copy of this treaty which is found at a monas- 
tery in Samgamuva in the Hatahaya Korale-of the Kurundgala District.2 
According to this edict Gajabahu and Pirakramabahu entered into a 
pact of friendship and non-aggression. 
Each nominated the other as 
successor and heir to his kingdom. 
Obviously this arrangement worked 
214, 
Cv, 52, 4-9, 
215, 
See fafra p. 208. 
216, 
Cv, 70, 179-81. 
217, 
Cy, 67, 60-1, 
238, 
Cy. 70, 328-36; 71, 1-5, 
219. 
EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 1-8, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
207 
in favor of Parakramabahu, the younger ruler. 
At the end of the 
document they solemnly state that if either of them were to violate these 
conditions, it would be tantamount to a breach of the orders of the san- 
gha. 
It is significant that the edicts were placed within the premises of 
monasteries. 
Perhaps the location was expected to sanctify the solemn 
decision which had been taken by the princes, 
It is also possible that this 
reflects the important role the monks played in accomplishing this deli- 
cate political mission. 
The diplomatic skill of the monks would have been most useful in 
maintaining relations with other Buddhist rulers in countries like Burma. 
It is not possible to determine on the basis of available evidence whether 
the envoys and emissaries exchanged between the two countries included 
monks, 
Of the emissaries sent by Parakramabahu to the Burmese court 
it is possible that dcariya Vacissara was a monk,?° 
It is noteworthy 
that the Burmese envoy was called Tapassin,?24 which means ‘‘ascetic,"’ 
. 
and it is not unlikely that he too was a monk. 
It is more certain that 
monks played an active part in restoring friendly relations between the 
two countries after the outbreak of hostilities in the time of Parakrama- 
bahu. 
According to ‘the chronicles it was to the savigha that the Bur- 
mese wrote requesting intercession, and the monks succeeded in persuad- 
ing Parakramabahu to cease hostilities.222 
Areas of Conflict 
It is evident from the preceding discussion that the power and the 
influence. of the king and the saigha were complementary and were used 
to serve their mutual interests. 
Geiger rightly pointed out that the in- 
terests of the saigha and the king were closely interwoven: 
‘‘The king- 
ship by which the state was represented was the firmest support of the 
Buddhist church and the latter that of kingship.’’?23 
However, it would 
be an over-simplification and a distortion of facts to state that there was 
no friction between the state and the saigha over non-religious matt- 
ers.“4 
Concern for their property and privileges was one of the im- 
portant considerations which guided monastic establishments when 
formulating relations with the king. 
The grants of immunity made 
during this period left the boundary between monastic and temporal 
authority largely indeterminate. 
This was a situation which could easily 
lead to friction. 
220. 
Cv. 76.32. 
221, 
Cv, 76, 23. 
222. 
Cv. 76, 59-75; 
223. 
CCMT, p, 203. 
224, 
Rahula, op. cit., p. 69.

--- PAGE 115 [DIRECT] ---

208 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
- In the tenth century the rights of the Isuramenu monastery to water 
from the Tissa reservoir led to a dispute between the employees of the 
monastery and the royal officials. 
As mentioned earlier, the monks app- 
ealed to the king (identified as Mahinda EV) who, in an edict issued in his. 
ninth regnal year, decided in favor of the monastery.225 
A more serious. 
confrontation with the king himself took place during the reign of Udaya 
ILL when the rights of the monastery to give asylum (abhaya) to men 
wanted by the law seem to have been challenged. 
Certain mininsters of 
the king fled from his court and sought refuge in the Tapovana where the 
Pamsukilikas lived. 
The king went to the Tapovana with his upardja 
and had the fugitives executed. 
The fact that the king took a personal 
interest in the affair and the fact that the offenders were put to death 
suggest that they had committed a rather grave offense. 
Yet the monks. 
resented the conduct of the king which they presumably considered to be 
a’ breach of privilege and left for Rohana in protest. 
This roused 
the atmy and the citizens of Anuradhapura and they arose in revolt. 
“They killed the officials responsible for the incident, threatened the king 
and forced the yuvardja and the ddipada to implore the monks to return. 
lronically,.it was by seeking refuge in a monastic residence that the king. 
himself escaped the wrath of the rebels, and it was only after the monks. 
intervened. that the rebels were pacified.”"° 
The kitig was humiliated 
‘before his people and forced to beg the Pamsukiilikas to pardon him, 
‘and thus the rights of the satgha were vindicated in a most dramatic 
manner. 
The incident not only shows that the monks were conscious 
of their ‘secular’ rights and ready to defend them, but also reveals that 
the: people were convinced that this was right and proper. Above all it 
demonstrated that the good will of the king was not always necessary to 
preserve the privileges and the position of tho sangha. 
_ 
When examifed in the context of this incident, immunities granted. 
in an ‘inscription from Giritale, dated in the first regnal year of this king, 
.aequire a new significance. 
It declares that officials were not to enter the 
tract of land concerried to arrest offenders but also a new provision is. 
added. | 
It specifically mentions that traitors to the royal family were not 
to be given the right to asylum??? 
Perhaps it is a similar incident that is referred to in two strophes in 
the account of the reign of Vijayabahu I in the Cilavamsa: 
225. 
Vessagiti Inscriptions, Slab A, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 29-38; see supra p. 73. 
226. 
Cy, 53, 14-27. 
227. | 
radolat pitatun gama (a norakna isd, EZ, Vol. WI, p. 140, ff, ©30-2, 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
209 
viharabhayactrittabhedinim mahisim sakam 
parihére sabbaso chijja gahayitva galamhi tam 
puramha bahi kéretva mahisangham khamdpayi 
pakdasesi ca lokassa sanghagaravam attano,?* 
These strophes can be translated as follows: 
His own queen who had violated the immunity rights of the 
monasteries, he divested her of her privileges and had her 
led by the neck and evicted from the city. 
Thus he conciliated 
the mahdsatigha and demonstrated to the world his reverence 
for the sangha? 
It was an unprecedented step that the king took in imposing such a severe 
penalty on his own queen. 
In fact, it is unique in the annals of Sri Lanka. 
There is no indication of the exact nature of the offense which she had 
committed, but there is no doubt that she was considered to be guilty of 
violating monastic privileges. 
Vijayabihu I had two queens, both of 
whom were foreigners. 
Tilokasundari was from Kalinga, and Lilavati, 
who had lived in the Cola country, was a daughter of Jagatipala, a prince 
from Ayojjha. 
It is possible that they were not Buddhists, 
The public 
disgrace of the queen for interfering with the rights of the sangha is a 
graphic illustration of the power and the influence of the sangha and the 
king's dependence upon their good will. 
The Abhayagiri inscription of Kassapa V, as pointed out earlier, 
© 
claims that kingship was an ‘office conferred by the satgha. 
Some~ 
times kingship or the royal insignia were offered to the satgha by the 
kings as. a token of their submission.22° 
The: saigha was consulted in 
certain instances in the selection of heirs and successors, but we cannot 
be certain that this was a customary procedure. 
It is possible that, 
atleast in some of these cases, the monks were invited to these deli- 
berations because their support in cases of disputes over succession was 
highly valued. 
Upon the death of Saddhatissa (137-119 B.C.) the cour- 
tiers ‘convened an assembly of monks and obtained their assent to the 
appointment of Thilatthana to the throne. 
In doing so they overlooked 
the rights of the eldest son, Lafijatissa.291_ 
When upardja Virabahu.died 
228. 
Cv, 60, 54-6, 
229, 
Geiger translated viharaébhayacaritta as “peaceful life of the vihéras;” abhaya- 
cdritta (Cf. sirit in inscriptions supra pp,180-1) seems to carry a more specialized sense 
in this context. 
He is inaccurate in translating puramia bahi karetvé as “had her led 
out into the town.” 
Also, no mention of an “iron.collar’’ as given in his translation 
is evident in this passage. 
See Cy. trsl, Vol. I, p.219. 
Nicholas follows Geiger's 
translation. UCHC, Vol. 1, Pt. 2, p. 431. 
230, 
My. 32.36; 31.90-111; Cv., 39.31; 42.61; 82,30; 85.109. 
231, 
Mv, 33. 17-8.

--- PAGE 116 [DIRECT] ---

210 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
Vijayabahu I consulted the monks and followed their advice by appoint- 
ing Jayabahu to fill the position.#3? 
The most significant convention for choosing a successor in which 
the monks participated took place after the death of Vijayabahu I. The 
news of the death of the king was not conveyed to his son Vikramabahu, 
who was the governor of Rohana. 
The monks of the leading frater- 
nities (@yatana) and the high dignitaries of the kingdom took counsel 
with Mitta, the sister of the king, and her three sons and decided to con-" 
secrate Jayabahu.as king. 
They further ignored the rights of Vikrama- 
- 
baihu in nominating Manabharana, a son of Mitta, as the upardja. 
Itis 
significant that the author of the Ci/avamsa, though a monk himself, 
criticizes this act for which the satgha was partly responsible as a viola- 
tion of customary procedure.243 
The monks probably had their own 
reasons 
for the decision; 
nevertheless, 
their injudicious 
association 
with a highly disputable decision proved to be disastrous both for the 
sdigha and for the kingdom.. 
It led to a protracted struggle for the 
throne and resulted in the division of the island into three rival king- 
doms, and after the capture of the throne of Polonnaruva by Vikrama- 
babu the influence the saigha had traditionally wielded over the king 
was severely curtailed, 
Faced with these circumstances, the sangha 
turned to a new source of protection. 
Mugalan, the abbot of the Uttaro- 
mila, handed over the protection of his fraternity and its property to the 
Velaikkara mercenaries,?4 but these precautions proved to be of no 
avail since Vikramabahu confiscated monastic property. In a concerted 
act of protest the inmates of all the major monasteries of Polonnaruva 
left the capital for Rohana, carrying with them the most sacred relics in 
the island--the Tooth relic and the Alms Bowl of the Buddha.?35 
But 
this time they were not popular enough to rouse the people to revolt in 
sympathy. 
The long period of contiguous existence of the saigha and the state 
led to the development of a close relationship between the two institutions 
and the evolution of many ideas conducive to their mutual benefit. 
One of the most politically potent ideas to emerge from this relationship 
was the notion that only a Buddhist, nay a Bodhisattva, could become 
king of Sri Lanka. 
The Sinhalese kings who occupied the throne during 
232, 
Cv, 60.87, 
233, 
pubbacarittamaggam langhitya. Cv., 61.1-4. The phrase yatayo tathayatan- 
aydsino wag translated by Geiger as “the ascetics dwelling in the district.” 
Cy. trsl., 
Vol. I, p. 225, 
234, 
Ef, Vol. XVILL, pp. 330-8; see supra p. 89. 
235, 
Cy, 61.54-61; see also supra p. 92. 
q 
THE SANGHA AND THE KING 
21k 
the period under discussion not only claimed to be Buddhists; they traced 
back their descent to’ the family of the Buddha. 
The position of the 
king was “legitimized’’ and strengthened by the support of the saigha. 
Jn practice, the king was chief patron of the satigha.. 
He could and did 
intervene to settle disputes among members of the satgha, set up regula- 
tions for the administration of monasteries, and initiate ‘“‘purifications’* 
in times of lapses in discipline. 
On the other hand, it was held that the 
island belonged to. the sésana and that it was the satgha who invested 
the king with authority. From about the ninth century wide adminis- 
trative powers over monastic estates were transferred to the monasteries. 
It is notable that there was some hesitation over the transfer of judicial 
rights; the attempts of the kings to assert their authority in this field 
sometimes led to disputes. 
But on the whole the monastery had exten- 
sive authority and controlling power over the inhabitants of its estates. 
Members of the satigha wielded considerable political influence through 
their personal contact with kings, particularly in times of political dis- 
unity and in cases of disputed successions. 
Outside China it was only 
in Sri Lanka that the Buddhist saigha had sufficient power and influonce 
to challonge the king in defence of their privileges, and they did challenge 
him successfully at least once during the period under review.

--- PAGE 117 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 
6 
Cults and Ritual 
Buddhism offered a path to salvation through personal endeavour 
and, originally, it had no cultus to cater to the “specific plebian religious 
needs’! of society at large. 
Hence it did not demand that its followers 
completely reject non-Buddhist cultic practices. 
Even during the early 
years of its history, Buddhism came to terms with popular cults like the 
propitiation of yakkhas and négas and*the worship of Brahmanical gods. 
Buddhist texts merely claim that the yakkhas, nagas and the devas accep- 
ted the supremacy of the Buddha. 
In Sri Lanka some of the pre-Buddhist 
cults had been appended to Buddhism by the beginning of the period 
under consideration, and this did not necessitate any change in its funda- 
mental principles. 
In some cases “Buddhist’’ rites were introduced to 
perform the functions of pre-Buddhist practices, 
On the other hand, 
the contact with the Mahayana, Saiva ard Vaignava faiths stimulated the 
development of cultic’ practices and elaborate ceremonial in Sinhalese 
Buddhism. 
Together, these trends represent the development of Sinha- 
lese Buddhism into a comprehensive religious system capable of serving 
the varied religious needs of society. 
The Yakkha Cult 
Myths and legends concerning the early history of the island: reveal 
the influence that the cult of the pakkhas had on the life and thought of 
the people.2 
Yakkhas, both benevolent and malevolent, aré mentioned 
jn the chronicles and other literary works. 
The Mahavamsa speaks of 
the twenty-eight chief yakkhas who stood guard at the ceremony of en- 
shrining relics at the Mahathiipa to ward off malevolent-(duttha) yakkhas. 
1. 
have borrowed the term from Weber. 
See The Religions of India, 1958, p. 237, 
2. 
My. chs. 1 and 7. 
[ 212.) 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
213 
And in the account of the reign of Pandukabhaya, the chronicle refers 
to the cult of the yakkhas Citta, Kalavela and Maheja and the yakkhinis 
Citta and Cetiya.? 
Jayasena, the yakkha mentioned in a story in the Sahassa-vatthu- 
pakarana,* belonged to the malevolent type. 
According to this story, 
which clearly reflects the belief.in the maleficent influence of the yakkhas, 
a concubine of Gothayimbara, the general of Dutthagimani, was “pos- 
sessed’ by Jayasena. 
She fell on the ground unconscious; white froth 
formed at her mouth, and she began to roll on the ground with her eyes 
swivelling in their sockets. 
It is natural to expect that these beliefs would 
persist within a community of monks who were drawn from a society 
which believed in the influence of yakkhas. 
This is evident in the 
Sumangala-vildsint which prescribes measures to be taken if a monk were 
to be “possessed” by a yakkha.s 
Gothayimbara cured his concubine by 
challenging Jayasena-and killing him in a duel. 
But lesser mortals pre- 
ferred to propitiate ‘such malevolent spirits with sacrifices, 
The But- 
. garana makes an incidontaf reference to the practice of sacrificing cocks 
to yakkhas to cure the afflictions of the ailing.© 
The Saddharma-ratnd- 
vali, a later: work, also speaks of rituals which were performed to propi- 
tiate the yakkhas.” 
: 
One means of reconciling Buddhism with the yakkha cult was to 
" claim that some of the yakkhas were followers of the faith, 
As pointed 
: gut earlier, the twenty-eight chiefs.of the yakkhas stood guard at the 
. 
Mahathipa. A slab inscription of MahindalV(A.D. 956-972) found in the 
Issarasamana area speaks of the rdkeasa of the Tissa tank who had been 
“disciplined” by the thera Mahinda and “employed in the service of the 
Order and the World.® 
On the other hand, an attempt was made to 
present Buddhism as a potent magical force which could overcome the 
power of the malevolent yakkhas. 
This attitude finds precedents in the 
Pali canonical literature. 
The Alavaka Sutta,® 
for instance, deals with 
the subjugation and conversion of a powerful yakkha by the Buddha. 
3. Mv. 9.23; 10. 53-63, 66-9, 84-7, 90, 
See also Paranavitana, “Pre-Buddhist 
Religious Beliefs in Ceylon,” JRASCB, Vol. XXXI, 1929, pp, 302-28. 
4, Shsvp., p. 97. 
5, Sumangala-vilasini, PTS, Vol Il, pp. 969-70, 
6, leda tendttavuta séinti pinisa yak-hata dun kukulu billak sé. Butsarana, ed. Ve 
Sorata, 
1931,"p. 264, 
9, Saddharma-ratnavali, ed. D. B. Jayatilaka, 1936, pp. 80, 89. 
8. anubudu maha mihindu himiyan: visin yinoyd sasun yada lovad-hi yedts rakus. 
EZ, Vol, I, p. 33, H. 9-10, 
9. Samyutta Nikéya, PTS, Vol. 1, pp. 212-5; Sarattha-pakdsint, PTS, Vol. I, 
pp, 316-37, See also J, Masson, La religion populaire dans le canon bouddhique 
pal, Louvain, 1942, pp. 126-9.

--- PAGE 118 [DIRECT] ---

214 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
According to the chronicles, the island had been the home of yakkhas 
in the past. 
It was the Buddha who, with his miraculous powers, de- 
feated them and drove them away to make it suitable for human habi- 
~ 
tation.'° 
Devotion to the Buddha and the assiduous practice of his 
teachings made people immune from harm caused by yakkhas. 
In a_ 
story from the Sahassa-vatthu-pakarana," a royal official and a sorcerer, 
who tried to kill a merchant who was a pious Buddhist, were themselves 
killed by the very evil spirit they invoked. 
; 
Further, “Buddhist”’ rites were developed to replace the normal rites 
connected with the yakkha cult. 
Transfer of “‘merit’’ took the place of 
sacrifice and the buddhamanta replaced incantation. 
According to the 
Sumangala-vilasini, a man ‘‘possessed’’ by an evil spirit could be cured 
by reciting the Motta Sutta, the Dhajagga Sutta and the Ratana Sutta 
for seven days. If this should fail the demoniac was to be escorted to 
the monastery and made to perform such “‘merit-producing’’ functions 
“as worshipping the dsana, lighting lamps and sweeping the courtyard 
of the stipa, 
After this the Mangala Sutta was to be recited for the 
benefit of the spirit; then the spirit was to be addressed in an assembly 
to. which the tree-deity of the monastery was also invited. 
Here he 
should be informed of the merit transferred to his credit and requested to 
- 
release the demoniac from his hold. 
If the yakkha was obstinate and 
refused to listen to the safigha, the Atandtiya Sutta was to be recited 
and appeals were to bo made to the chief yakkhay and the deities 
“informing them of his obstinacy. 
This Sutta was to be recited by a 
.” 
mionk, who observed the rules of ceremonial purity by abstaining from 
both meat and food made from flour, behind closed doors guarded 
by men bearing arms.'? 
The magical potentialities of the Atanatiya Sutta were recognized 
even in the Pali Canon. 
Yet it was an incantation meant for the indi- 
vidual ‘‘protection'’ of the monks, nuns and devotees. 
In the comment- 
ary it took the form of an elaborate rite which accords an exorcizing 
“function to the Buddhist monk, a development which should perhaps be 
‘interpreted as an attempt to absorb the yakkha cult into the fold of Bud- 
dhist' ritual. -However, the evidence from the Butsarana cited above 
testifies to the persistenco of the parallel practice of propitiating yakkhas 
with sacrifices. 
Moreover, it is possible that even monks sometimes 
“10. My, ch. 1, 
AL. 
Shsvp., p. 145. 
12, . 
Sumatigala-vilasiné, Vol. TH, pp. 969-70, 
13. . 
Digha Nikdya, PTS, Vol. III, pp, 194-207, 
For studies on this Sutta, see Prz- 
yulski and 
Lalou, ‘Notes de mythologie bouddhique,” Harvard Journal of Asian 
Studies, 1938, pp. 40-6. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
215 
offered sacrifices since the Dathbadeni Katikavata specifically forbids 
monks to offer sacrifices to yakkhas or to take part in exorcism.'* 
The Propitiation of Nagas 
In the Pali Buddhist canon ndgas occur as powerful beings who were, 
nevertheless, subservient to the Buddha. 
At Uruvela and later in the 
Cedi country the Buddha is said to have subdued hostile ndgas.5 
Re- 
ference to the ndgas occur prominently in the early legends about the 
visit of the Buddha to the island in the Dipavamsa and the Mahavamsa.‘* 
A legend in the Ca/lavamsa mentions a rite connected with the ndga cult 
performed at Gokanna by a certain Mahanaga who lived in the sixth 
century in order .to ensure his accession to the throne.!7 
It is natural to expect that in an agricultural society the cult of spirits 
connected with water would acquire the important magical function of 
making rain. 
The naga cult seems to- have been closely connected with 
water. 
According to the Mahabharata one of the blessings that Mani- 
‘naga conferred on Magadha where he was worshipped was to attract rain- 
clouds to this area.® 
Hliuen-tsang speaks of the shrine of the Nagaraja 
Elapatra at Taxila where people used to pray for rain or fino weather.!? 
In Sri Lanka many sculptures of nagas have been found near ponds and 
reservoirs. A figure of a naga was found by the Vannamaduva reservoir, 
for example. 
Close to the reservoir is a semi-circular pond by which 
another figure of a ndga and a “single figure of a goddess’’ are cut on 
thé rock.2° 
At Morakanda a néga carved in the round is placed in such 
a manner that it seems to emerge from the stream where it is found.?! 
Perhaps the most elaborate specimen of this type of sculpture is the an- 
thropomorphic representation of a néga on a slab found on the bund of 
an irrigation reservoir at Gal Oya. 
He wears a crown which is shielded 
by a seven-headed hood; to his right is a dimunitive nagini with a promi- 
nent saikha symbol above her. 
Another feminine figure, who stands on 
his left, holds a sankha with her right hand and is attended by a ‘child. 
14, 
xpan régaya nisé yakun kelavim balitibim balibat kiyavim dai nosarup dé nokata 
yutu, 
Katikévat Satgara, ed. D. B. Jayatilaka, 1955, p. 19. 
15. 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. I, pp. 24-5; Vol. 1V, pp. 108-10, 
16. 
Dv. ch. 2; Mv. ch. 2, 
17. 
Cv, 41,79-82, 
18. 
See infra p. 218. 
; 
19. 
Beal, op. cit., Vol. Il, p. 180. For further discussion on the connection of the 
Naga-cult with water and rain, see J. Ph. Vogel, Jadian Serpent-lore or the Nagas in 
Hindu Legend and Art, 1926, pp. 240-2, 251-6. 
. 
20, 
ASCAR, 1897, p. 8. 
al. ASCAR, 1897, p. 7.

--- PAGE 119 [DIRECT] ---

216 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
On either side of his head there is an attendant figure in a “flying 
posture.’"?2, 
The location of the sculpture and the saikha symbol which 
appear on it strengthen the probability of its connection with water. 
One may surmise that by erecting figures of ndgas by reservoirs and 
honoring them the devotees of this cult expected to ensure their supply 
of water. 
Apart from their association with water, n@gas are known in Indian 
literature as guardians of treasures, patticularly jewels.” 
It is probably 
in this role that they frequently occur in monastic precincts. 
Figures of 
ndgas, both anthropomorphic and theriomorphic, occur on the stelae of 
the st@pas at Jetavana and Cetiyagiri2* 
They 
occur more 
often 
on the guardstones of the “late-Anuradhapura’”’ and ‘Polonnaruva’’ 
periods.’ 
A rather unusual figurine of a twenty-one-headed ndga was 
found in the relic chamber of a stapa near Tépaviiva; 
beneath the relic 
chamber was a yantragala which contained forty-five figurines of nagas 
in nine “family groups." 
None of these sculptures appears to have 
served a-.cultic purpose. 
Nagas are given more importance in certain sculptured slabs found 
neat Buddhist shrines. 
One of the most striking examples is a slab 
about four fect in height found at Jetavana. 
On it is an imposing 
’. 
figure of a seven-headed_néga who wears a band below his head and 
» lies coiled beneath a, chatra. 
He is flanked by pilasters which support a 
band decorated with “Buddhist windows.” 
A similar slab from Polon- 
‘naruva.-has‘a five-headed n@ga who is seated under a chatra and attended 
‘by two figures seated on short pillar-like supports on either side.26 These 
slabs, give the impression that they were used for a cultic purpose. 
An 
instance of the reconciliation of Indian Buddhism with the naga cult was 
. 
recorded by Sung-yun who saw at Udyana a Buddhist monastery situated 
by a lake. which was ‘occupied’ by a naga king: “The king of the 
country propitiates him with gold and jowels and other precious offer- 
. ings: which he casts into the middle of the tank; such of these which 
find their way through a back exit, the priests are permitted to retain.’ 
The monastery depended on this income for its expenses.2? 
It is possible 
22, 
-ASCAR, 1953, p. ix. 
23. 
“Vogel, op. cit., pp. 131-2, 173-4. 
24, 
UCHC, Vol. J, Pt. 1, pls. VIEL, IX, X. 
25. ASCAR, 1909, p. 29, pl. LXVI; A. K, Coomaraswamy, Bronzes from Ceylo 
1914, pl. XX, fig. 87. For the more recent discoveries at Padaviya see also ASCAR, 
1954, pp. 16-20. 
26, UCHC Vol. J, Pt.1, pl. Vib; ASC, Eleventh Report pl. X; ASCAR, 1894, 
p. vii; CJSG, Vol. II, p. 98, pl. LVIL 
27. 
Beal,.op. cit., Vol. I, p. 64. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
217 
to imagine that, in a similar manner, theenga cult found a place in. 
the Buddhist shrines of Sri Lanka. 
An inscription found at a group of ruins to the east of the Abhaya- 
giri monastery seems to support this supposition.** 
This record is 
dated in the reign of a certain Senavarman. 
There were five kings who 
bore the name Sena and all reigned during the ninth and tenth centuries. 
The record is written partly in Tamil and partly in Sanskrit and contains 
an endowment made to a Buddhist shrine by a group of Tamils to meet 
the cost of a religious festival. 
It is interesting that the reference to the 
main image of the shrine is followed by a respectful reference to a 
niga — sistandga-naraiyum. 
Presumably it refers to a second image at 
the shrine, though the fragmentary nature of the record precludes a 
definite conclusion. 
The present writer is not aware 
of any other 
reference to a naga by the name of Sista. 
However, Jista is a title 
applicable to a ndga who had been ‘“‘disciplined’' or ‘‘converted” to 
the faith. 
A pond which is situated within the grounds of the Cetiyagiri monas- 
tery at Mihintale is of particular interest in this connection. 
This pond, 
known as Nagapokuna today, is presumably identical with the Naga- 
sondi built by AggabodhiI.2° 
It is notable for the prominent figure of a 
polycephalic naga carved in such a manner that it seems to rise from the 
water.2° 
Itis possible that this pond, like the lakes described in Chinese 
accounts, was used for a cultic purpose. 
A statement in the Mihintale Tablets of Mahinda IV seems to sup- 
port this inference. 
It contains an account of the allocation of resources 
for the maintenance of monastic buildings which includes a list of the 
income from offerings made by devotees to the dage (relic shrine), mantgul 
mahasala pilimage (shrine of the Stone Image), mahaboy ge (shrine of the 
Bo tree), nayinda and the Minina! devdin ge (the shrine of the goddess 
Mininal).3* 
.Paranavitana®? has suggested that nayinda is derived from Skt. 
Nathendra, an epithet of the Bodhisattva Lokanatha. 
He believed that 
Mininal is derived from Maninala. 
This word, which is similar in mean- 
ing to Manipadma, is considered to bé another name of Tara. But the 
term nayinda does not occur in Sinhalese literature as an epithet of Loka- 
natha, 
The usual Sinhalese derivative from Nathendra is Natifidu.%* 
28, 
SI, Vol. IV, No, 1405. 
29, 
Cv. 42.28, 
30, ASCAR, 1962, pls, TI, III. 
31, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 92-3, i. A33-7. 
32. 
CJSG, Vol. Il, p. 57. 
33. 
Tisara Sandesaya, vv, 62, 128; Ka@vyadekhara, vy. 15-24,

--- PAGE 120 [DIRECT] ---

218 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
The term nayi is a common derivative from naga and occurs in this sense 
in Dhampiyé Afuva Gijapadaya,** a work contemporaneous with the 
inscriptions; nayinda is the Sinhalese equivalent of Skt. négendra. 
It is 
also noteworthy that in referring to other shrines the inscription uses the 
term ge (house), while it is significantly absent in the reference to nayinda. 
Similarly, Maninala is not known to occur in any Buddhist work 
as an epithet of Tara. 
On the other hand, Nal was a common name 
- among Sinhalese women in the eighth and ninth centuries.25 
The suffi: 
xes -/a and ~/ were, according to Paranavitana, “frequently added to 
proper names, evidently to indicate respect, e.g. Mihiddla (Mihida= Pali 
Mahinda), Nal (Né=Skt. Naga), Deval (Deva=Skt. Deva)..." 
Itis 
thus evident that in this case Paranavitana considers N&/ a derivative 
from the Skt. Naéga.*7 
It thus seems to be more plausible to trace the 
derivation of Mininal to Skt. Maninaga. A hill in Rohaya was named 
after Manindga:* 
The cult of a Maninaga finds mention in the Maha- 
bharata.” 
In the description of Rajagrha in the Sabhaparvan of the 
epic, Krgna refers to him: “*. .here is the excellent abode of Svastika and 
of: Maniniga. 
Manu (Mani?) hath made Magadha such that clouds 
cannot’keep aloof from it.’’. He is again mentioned in the Vanaparvan. 
in association with. the city of Rajagrha: 
‘‘Going thence to Maninaga,. 
one will reap a benefit equal to a gift ofa thousand kine. Whosoever par- 
takes of the water of the tirtha of Maninaga, had he been bitten even by a 
venomous snake, the poison will have no effect on him." 
The excava- 
. tions carried out by Marshall and Bloch“ at the shrine of Maniar Math 
in: Rajagrha revealed a circular structure decorated with stucco figures 
datable, on stylistic grounds, to the Gupta period. 
They include five 
‘figures 
.of ndgas and one of a ndgini. 
This points to the possibility of a 
magini associated with the cult of Mani and strengthens the probability 
that a.ndgini: who bore the name Mani found devotees in Sri Lanka. 
‘Two figurines from the Leslie de Saram Collection in the Colombo 
‘Museum probably represent the cult of a nagint. 
They were listed by 
«Coomaraswamy as figures of PAttini, but he was not certain about these 
34,. DAG, p. 249, 
35, . 
Paranavitana, Sigir? Graffiti, Vol. HU, vv. 93, 95, 165, 543, 608, 627. 
36, 
Ibid., Vol. I, p. oxxiii. 
37. Manindga> Minind, The use of the title devdd is not unusual; ndgas were known 
as bhunmmnadevaté, 
In Bengal the cult of the négi was absorbed into Buddhism in the 
worship of Janguli, 
See N. K. Bhattasali, Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanic 
Sculptures in the Dacea Museum, 1929, p. 224; B. Bhattacarya, Indian Buddhist Icono- 
graphy, 1924, pp. 78-80, 
38, My, 34, 89. 
39, 
Mbh.,, Sabhap. 21. 9-10; Vanap. 84. 106-7, 
40, ASCAR, 1905-6, pp, 103-6, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
219 
identifications. 
Neither of the figures has any of the attributes of Pat- 
tini#! 
One is an erect figure which measures 22.5 cm.“ 
Its upper 
body is bare except for the ornaments and the upavita, and on the whole 
the dress and ornaments are comparable to those worn by. the ndga figu- 
res on the guardstones. 
The figure holds a flower in either hand and 
has a conical headdress ornamented with cobra-hoods. A figure of a 
stapa is found slightly above the forehead, and a large hood of a cobra 
shields the head. The second figure is 13.3 cm. in height.“> It repre- 
sents a female figure sitting cross-legged on what appears to be the coils 
of a cobra which holds its hood over her head. 
The dress and orna- 
ments are similar to those of the first figure though the stapa symbol is 
missing. 
Both her hands are poised in the kataka mudré. 
The two 
figures have been dated, on stylistic grounds, to the ninth or the tenth 
century, 
The continuance of this association of the naga cult with Buddh- 
ism in the ‘“Polonnaruva Period’’ is reflected in the title of one of the 
senior monks invited by Parakramabahu I to participate in the ‘‘puri- 
fication’’ of the saigha, 
Among those who came from the province 
of the yuvardja 
was thera négindapalli.4 
It does not seem likely 
that Nagindapalli was a name. 
On the other hand, the whole phrase 
could be rendered into English as “the chief incumbent of the shrine of 
the naga king.’’ 
It is evident from this passage that there was a well- 
known shrine of the n@gas in the Dakkinadesa and that its incumbent 
at the time ranked high in the order of the saiigha. 
Bréhmanas and Brahmanic Ritual 
Evidence from both the chronicle and the inscriptions testify to 
the popularity of the Brahmanas and Brahmanic ritual during this per- 
iod. 
Mahinda IT (777-797) and Sena. I (833-853) donated food to Brah- 
‘manas.45 
In the reign of Sena If (853-887) 
their influence was strong. 
enough to win royal patronage on a grand scale. 
At a festival held in 
their honor Sena fed a thousand Brahmanas with milk-rice in jewelled 
bowls, clothed them in new garments and presented each with a golden 
vessel filled with pearls capped by a costly jewel.4* An inscription from 
41, A. K. Coomaraswamy, Bronzes from Ceylon, p. 12. 
42. 
Ibid., p. xvi, fig. 43, 
43, 
Ibid., pl. XVI, fig. 42. 
44, 
Cv. 78.9, See infra p. 316. 
45, 
Cv, 48. 143-5; 50.5, 
46, 
Cy, 51, 65-7.

--- PAGE 121 [DIRECT] ---

~ 
220 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
the reign of Gajabahu II reveals that Kantale was called Vijayaraja- 
vaturvedi-mangalam;*?- 
presumably, 
there “was 
a large number of 
— 
Brahmanas living there. 
It was probably named after Vijayabahu I, 
and this may suggest that the settlement was patronized by him. 
Ano- 
ther inscription from the same reign records the establishment of. sacri- 
ficial boundaries by a royal official.® 
Pardkramabahu I gave alms 
to Brahmanas/? 
The Brahmana village 
at Kantale received royal 
patronage again in the time of Nissahka Malla. 
In an inscription found 
‘there he records that he sat at that spot watching the distribution of 
alms. in the alms hall he built in the Caturveda Brahmapura.®° 
It is 
significant that the chronicle records instances of kings patronizing 
Brabmanas without any apparent resentment. 
In fact, in this connec- 
tion Sena II is called pusiava, ‘one who accumulated merit.’ 
The Cilavamsa reveals that the kings of Polonnariva employed 
Brahmanas to perform rites prescribed by the Grhyasitras and to inter- 
pret dreams and bodily marks.*! 
According to the account of the 
early life of Parikramabihu I, rites like Jatakamma, Kannavedha, An- 
‘napisana, Medhajanana, Namakarana and Upanayana were held stric- 
tly according ‘to Brahmanic rules? 
Par&kramabahu I built a hall 
called Hemamandira for the ceremonies to dispense blessings performed 
by Brabmanas.53 
The navagrahadsinti that Nissahka Malla attended 
was probably a similar ceremony connected with the cult of planetary 
Bods. 34 
. However, these rites appear to have acquired ‘Buddhist’? charac- 
teristics and to have undergone modifications to suit local needs. 
The 
ceremony of the first offering of food described in the story Dutthaga- 
mani in the Mahdvamsa. 
has few. Brahmanical characteristics. 
It 
was, preceded by the giving of alms, and the food offerings which the 
monks did not consume themselves were given to children, 
Similarly, 
» the Upanayana tite of Parakramabahu was preceded by a Buddhist cere- 
mony lasting three days-during which the ‘three jewels’? were honored 
swith, offerings of lamps and flowers.5® 
47.) EZ, Vol. LV, pp. 191-6. 
48. 
SH, Vol. IV, p, 492, No. 1397. 
49. 
Cv, 73,32 
50. EZ, Vol. II, pp. 283-90. 
Si. 
Cy, 62, 28, 46-7, 
52, 
Cy, 62.42, 45, 53; 64, 13-7, 
33. 
Cv, 73, 71, 
54, EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 146-8. 
55, 
My, 24,74-7. 
56. 
Cv. 64, 15-7, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
227 
. 
It is possible to suggest that Brihmanas were employed at Bud- 
dhist shrines for the performance of ritual functions. 
Fa-Hian ment- 
“jons in his reference to the ceremonial concerning the Tooth relic that 
the king ‘‘putified’’ himself ‘‘according to the strictest Brahmanical 
. 
rules,""5?_ 
In the Ruvanvalishya inscription of Kalyanavati, Brahmanas 
are mentioned in a listing of the shrines’ employees.5® 
Presumably 
their presence. was necessitated by ceremonial requirements. 
According 
to the Srei Santhor inscription of the Cambodian king Jayavarman V 
(968-1001), the purohita had to bathe an image of the Buddha and recite 
Buddhist “‘prayers’’ on festival days.5® 
A Burmese inscription from 
Pagan, dated in the twelfth century, mentions Brihmaya astrologers. 
as the functionaries who drew water at an auspicious time for the per- 
formance’ of the paritta ceremony. 
It is likely that the ‘Brahmanas 
employed at the Ruvanvalisiya performed similar ceremonial functions. 
The Cults of Gods. and Bodhisattvas 
Evidence of the rapprochement of Buddhism with the cults of Brah- 
manic gods is found even in the Pali canon. 
In the Mahasamaya Sutta 
they are presented as followers of the Buddha who flocked to listen to 
his discourses.*! 
In Sri Lanka the cult of gods persisted side by side 
with Buddhism. 
Mahinda If restored decayed temples of gods and 
made images for them. 
Parakramabahlu I restored seventy-nine dila~ 
pidated shrines of gods and built thirteen new ones in Rajarattha; in 
Rohana he repaired twenty-four shrines.® 
There is no evidence to 
determine the identity of these gods, however. 
It has been suggested 
that the cults of Agni and Parjanya were prevalent in the tenth century. 
Other Brahmanic gods like Brahma, Sirya and the Guardians of the 
Four Quarters also were honored in Sri Lanka, and the cults of tree- 
deities and local gods like Sumana and Vibhisana seem to have occu- 
pied a fairly important place in the religious life of the people.*° 
57. 
Beal, op. cit., p. 47, 
58, 
EZ, Vol. EY, 
p. 257, 1. 15. 
59. 
L. P. Briggs, “The Syncretism of Religions i 
ig South Bast Asia,” Journal of the 
American Oriental Society, Vol, LXXI, 1951, Pt. 4, p. 241. 
60. 
Epigraphia Birmanica., Vol. IIL, p. 36. 
61. 
Digha Nikdya, PTS, Vol, II, pp. 253-63, 
62. 
Cv, 48, 143-5, 
63, 
Cy. 79, 19, 22, 80. 
64. 
Cv, 57, 5-8. 
65, 
Art, As., Vol. XVI, pp. 167-190. 
66, 
My. 1.33-6. 
See also the Mahmayari, JA, 1915, p. 40.

--- PAGE 122 [DIRECT] ---

222 
yu 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
Buddhism did not discourage the worship of gods. 
When the 
author of the Calavamsa says that Vijayabahu I took nothing from the 
property of the shrines of gods, he is illustrating the good qualities of the 
king.” 
In an inscription placed at a Buddhist shrine Nissaika Malla 
records that he built a devala at Raméivaram. 
The syncretic attitude 
of Buddhism led to the absorption of some of these cults into the fold of 
Buddhist ritual. 
Brahmanic gods adorn the stelae of the early stépas 
at Anurddhapura; they also occur in the relic-chambers of stipas and 
the yantragala receptacles found beneath the pedestals of images. 
A 
stapa from Topavava yielded figures of Brahma, Varuna, Yama, Indra, 
_Naisrita, Agni and Visnu. 
With the reconciliation of these cults with Buddhism it came to be. 
believed that these gods were followers of the Buddha. 
In fact Sumana, 
the god of Sumanakiita, was supposed to be a sotépanna, one who had 
reached the initial stage of the path to salvation.” 
He became closely 
associated with Buddhism as the “guardian of the Footprint of the Bud-. 
dha.’ 
Astrophein the Cilavamsa, which states that Kassapa of Rohana 
“built the Khadirali monastery and honored the god,’’ suggests a possi- 
ble connection between the cult of Khadirali Uppalavanna and this 
monastery.”4 
The Uttaromila fraternity of the Abhayagiri nikdya seems 
to have had connections with the cult of Skanda.” 
But the most signi- 
ficant piece of evidence concerning the close association of Buddhism 
_ With the cult of gods came from the account of the origin of the Selan- | 
tara fraternity. 
The prospective chief incumbent of this fraternity was 
inade to prove that his appointment had the approval of gods by spend- 
ing a night in a devapalli. 
It is evident from the Cilavamsa that this 
practice was known even at the time the chronicle came to be written.” 
The influence of the Mahayana encouraged the practice of wor- 
shipping Bodhisattvas within Sinhalese Buddhist ritual. . 
Reference to 
this cult occurs in the Calavamsa as early as in the time of Jetthatissa IL 
(A.D. 328-337), a sculptor who is said to have carved a figure of a Bodhi- 
sattva.74 
Dhiitusena had a complete set of regalia made for a figure 
of a Bodhisattva he had erected at a special shrine,”5 and Sena If (833-853) 
placed a Bodhisattva figure in the Manimekhal& pasida at the Jetavana 
67. 
Cy. 60, 77. 
68. EZ, Vol, II, pp. 98-423. 
-69. 
ASCAR, 1909, pp. 17-8. 
70. 
My. 1.33. 
‘NN. 
khadirdlivihdram katvé devam ca apijayt. Cv. 45,55. 
72, 
See infra p, 290, 
73, 
See infra p. 302. 
74, 
Cv, 37, 102, 
“15, 
Cv, 38,67-8, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
223 
monastery.” 
In a tenth-century 
inscription 
from: 
the Abhayagiri 
monastery a king claims to have gilded the image of the Bodhisattva of 
the Blue Shrine at the monastery.7” 
The popularity of the cult of Bodhisattvas is evident also from the 
sculptures found in different parts of the island. 
The specimens from 
Buduruvegala, which Paranavitana dates to about the ninth century, are 
of particular interest. 
Here the colossal statue of the Buddha is flanked 
by large figures of the Bodhisattvas Avalokiteévara and Maiijuért. 
Avalokitedvara is attended by his gakti and a male figure while Maii- 
juéri is attended by two male figures.”? 
Another large figure in kingly 
attire from Valigama has been identified by Nell and Paranavitana as 
a representation of Avalokiteévara.”” 
Van Lohuizen«de Leeuw has 
Suggested that it represents Samantabhadra.6° 
Two more 
life-size 
figures of this divinity, dated by Mode to the latter half of the seventh 
century, have been found at Situlpavva and Kurukkalmadam.*! 
Three bronze figures in the Nevill collection of the British Museum 
and one in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts also attest to the popularity 
of Avalokiteévara.®2 
Almost equally frequent in occurrence are sculp- 
tures of Tara. 
A large bronze figure in the British Museum measuring 
143,75 cm. in height, a small figurine in the same collection which mea~ 
sures 13.3 cm., and two small figurines from the Anuradhapura Muse- 
um have been identified as representations of this deity.*? 
Apart from 
these, bronze figures of Vajrasattva (%),* 
Vajrapani, Jambhala and 
76, 
Cy. 51,77. 
77. 
EZ, Vou.I, p, 222, f, 22. 
78. 
CJSG, Vol, Il, pp, 50-1; ASCAR, 1955, p. 4. 
719. 
CJISG, Vol. II, pp. 49- 50, 
80. 
J. B-van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, “The Kustarajagala Image—an Identification,” 
Paranavitana Felicitation Volume, Colombo, 1965, pp. 389-416, 
81. 
Heinz Mode, Die Buddhistische Plastik auf Ceylon, 1963, pp. 100- 1, pis. 161, 
162, 163. 
Mode's dating is not based on clear evidence. 
The sculptures could be 
considerably Jater. 
82, 
For the dating and the description of the characteristics of these images see 
A. K, Coomaraswamy, ‘Mahayana Buddhist Images from Ceyjon and Java,” JRAS, 
1909, pp. 283-97 pls, 
I, figs. 1, 2; LI, figs. 1,3; Memoirs of the Colombo Museum, Series 
A, No, 1,1914, pp. 20-1; Catalogue of the Indian Collection in the Boston Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston, 1923, Pt. I, p. 81. 
83, Coomaraswamy wrongly identified the figures at the British Museum as rep- 
resentations of the goddess Pattini, 
See JRAS, 1909, pp. 292-3, pl. LI, figs. 2, 3. 
They have been more recently identified as representations of Tara. 
See e.g. P. L. 
Prematilleke, Religious Architecture and Sculpture 
of Ceylon, Unpublished Ph.D. 
thesis, University London, Vol. I, pp. 240-2, 
See also ASCAR, 1957, pl. VI, fig. 1. 
84. 
D. T. Devendra, The Buddha Image and Ceylon, 1957, p. 239, 
Prematilleke, 
op, cit., Vol. I, p. 239, Vol. Il, pl. XCIV, 
It is difficult to determine whether this is a 
representation of Vajrasattva or of Vajrapani. 
The-figure wears a tal! headdress and 
sits in the virdsana, a pose unusual for Vajrapani, 
The virdsana is usually associated. 
with the Buddha.. On the other hand, it carries the vajra in the right hand but not the 
ghanid; Vajrasattva usually carries both the ghanié and the vajra.

--- PAGE 123 [DIRECT] ---

224 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
Cunda have been found in Sri Lanka. 
Except for the figure of Vaj- 
rasattva(?) which has been dated to the fifth-sixth centuries,®® 
all the 
other bronze figures have been assigned, on considerations of style, 
to a period extending from the eighth to the tenth century. 
They seem 
to represent the wave of Mahayana influence which, as evident from 
the other sources, spread over Sri Lanka during this period.®” 
The cult of Bodhisattvas was not confined to those nikdyas which 
overtly acquiesced in Mahayana influences. 
The Bodhisattva Maitreya. 
seems to have found favor with the followers of the Mahavihara. 
A 
figure of Maitreya was unearthed among the ruins of the Thiparama 
monastery at Anuradhaipura.®® 
Though not many figures of Maitreya 
have been found, the wide popularity of his cult is evident from certain 
records of this period which carry the warning that those who violated. 
the regulations embodied therein would not be able to raise their hands. 
in adoration even.if Maitreya Buddha were to pass by their doors.®? 
An account of Maitreya is found in the Dharmapradipika, a commen- 
tary on the Mahabodhivamsa, written during this period.” 
The pre- 
valence of the Bodhisattva-worship at the Mahavihara does not neces- 
sarily mean that the Mahayana concept of the Bodhisattva was accepted 
by this nikdya. 
It is more likely that the Bodhisattvas were worship- 
- 
ped as “Buddhist gods” by the followers of the Theravada. 
The parallel trends of “borrowing” gods from the Mahayana and 
of “converting’” Brahmanic and local deities to Buddhism seem to have 
led to the formation of a Sinhalese Buddhist pantheon. 
Here the term 
pantheon can be used only in a limited sense since it is not clear that the 
relative positions of all.these gods had been worked out by this time. 
But even so, the concept of ‘Buddhist deities’ (bauddha dévativan) ap- 
pears ‘in the Ruvanvilisflya inscription 
of Nissahka Malla, 
‘These 
“Buddhist deities’ afforded protection to those who regularly perfor- 
jned Buddhist rituals. 
Once they came 
to converse with Nissanka. 
Malla while ho was engaged in worshipping relics.’ 
It seems to have: 
become part of popular belief that these deities would protect the 
island in times of calamity. 
According to the Mahdvamsa, the Buddha 
85. 
JRAS, 1909, pp. 285, 288-90, 291-2, PI. I, figs. 3, 4; PL IE, fig. 1; Catalogue: 
of Indian Collection in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, pp. 82-4. 
86, 
Prematilleke, op. cit., Vol. 1, pp. 239-40. 
87. 
Sce infra p. 281, 
88, 
Memoirs of the Colombo Museum, Ser. A, No. 1, p. 20, pl. V, fig 9. 
The 
figure was assigned by Coomaraswamy 
to the seventh century. 
Prematilieke 
prefers a date in the 8th-10th centuries, 
Prematilleke, op. cit., pp, 235-6. 
89, 
See eg. EZ, Vol. UI, p. 258, f/, B7-13, see also p. 190, If, 20-1; p. 265, 1. 46. 
90, 
Dharmapradipikd, ed, Dharmarima, 1951, p, 206-8, 
91, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 80, i, 28-32. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
. 
225 
charged Sakka with the protection of the island when he was on his 
death bed. 
Sakka entrusted this task to Uppalavanna.? 
The Paja- 
vdliya and the Calavamsa explain that the invasion of Magha took place 
at a time when the powerful deities who protected the island had lost 
interest in their task owing to the many misdeeds committed by its in- 
habitants.°3 
By the time of the Polonnaruva kingdom Saivism had become an 
important force in Sri Lanka. 
It is possible that the rivalry which pre- 
vailed between Buddhists and the followers of Siva in South India spread 
to Sri Lanka. 
Saiva néyapars like Tiruflanacampantar and Manik- 
kavacakar, who were particularly associated with the militant attitude 
that Saivism adopted towards Buddhism and Jainism, were also wor- 
shipped in Sri Lanka.* 
It is likely that the cult of the a@yanars fostered 
a certain amount of enmity between the Buddhists and the Saivites. 
Siva is found among the gods attending on the Buddha in the murals 
of the relic chamber of the Mahiyangana stiépa,> but it is not very likely 
that there was a rapprochement between Buddhism and the worship 
of Siva, 
Rites, Ceremonies and Festivals 
In addition to the cultic practices which were brought within the 
folds of its ritual, Buddhism evolved ceremonial and even magical 
practices to meet the religious needs of the people. 
The power of the 
Buddha and Buddhist rites were considered to be potent magical for- 
ces which could even counter the adverse effects of calamities like 
plague, famine and drought. 
Legends claimed that, in 
the past, the 
Buddha Kakusandha visited Sri Lanka and through his miraculous 
powers cured the inhabitants of a plague and that Konigamana 
came to the island in a time of drought and famine and caused rain.°? 
Perhaps the most popular Buddhist rite was the recitation of the 
paritta, 
The paritia was supposed to be a charm which could be used 
for the personal protection of the individual. 
It was also an efficacious 
and potent rite which could serve -the whole community by warding off 
danger of drought, bad harvest, illness and the malevolent influence of 
92. 
Myv.7. 1-5. 
93. 
Pyv. p, 108; Cv, 80,54-5, 
94, 
P. Arunachalam, “Polonnaruva Bronzes and Siva Worship and Symbolism,” 
JRASCB, Vol. XXIV, pp. 221-2; C..Godakumbura, 'Bronzes from Polannaruva,” 
JRASCBNS, Vol. VII, Pt. 2, p. 244, 
95, 
ASCAR, 1951, p. 17-8. 
96. 
Pv. p. 50. 
97, - 
Pfy. p. 52.

--- PAGE 124 [DIRECT] ---

226 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
evil spirits. 
In Burma it was believed that even the worst crimes could 
be mitigated by the recitation of the paritta,®* and thus it became an im- 
portant rite in the life of the people. 
The knowledge of the section 
of the scriptures which contained the paritta was considered an essential 
prerequisite for admission to the Order? 
The rite consisted of the recitation of prescribed suttas in order to 
infuse thread and water with magical power. 
When used as a charm 
* for personal protection the water was sprinkled on the body and the 
thread was worn. 
The Telapatta Jataka refers to the use of charmed. 
sand and thread as a protection against demons,’ 
According to the 
- 
Mahdvamsa, the god Uppalavanna came to meet Vijaya and his foll- 
owers when they landed on the island." He sprinkled them with water 
from his vessel and tied a charmed thread round their arms. 
Later 
on, the chronicle says, one of them was caught by a female demon, ‘‘but 
because of the power of the magic thread (paritta sutta) she could not 
devour him, and though he was entreated by the female demon, the 
nian:would not yield’ up the thread.”! 
The Sumangala-vildsini, 
as 
mentioned earlier, commends the paritta as a charm against evil spirits. 
‘Manabharana held a paritta recital when he heard that his queen had 
conceived,!2 and Parakramabahu I built a mansion called Paficasat- 
tati specifically for the purpose of sacralizing the thread and water 
: ‘iequab the recitation of paritta.'™ 
Kings held paritta recitals on a grand scale in times of grave cala- 
mity!s 
“The Calavamsa describes a performance of this rite during the 
reign. of Upatissa I (A.D. 365-406) when the land was ravaged by fam- 
iné and’ plague. Monks walked around the wall of the inner 
city 
throughout the night chanting the Ratana Sutta and sprinkling water. 
This .was’done in the manner in which the Buddha is said to have ori- 
ginally recited the paritta in order to protect the city of Vesali against 
famine and illness. 
This combination of incantations and sympathetic 
magic is said to: have produced the desired result. 
“When morning 
dawned,’" the chronicle states, ‘‘a great cloud poured rain on the earth. 
‘Those who suffered from disease, being well, ‘held a festival." The 
tite-was performed again during the reign of Sena II who had the Ratana 
98.. M. Bode, The Pali Literature of Burma, p. 12. 
99; EZ, Vol. §, p. 48, 7, 38; Vol. IIE, p. 264, f 21. 
100, ° 
The Fétaka, Vol. 1, p. 39. 
101, 
My. 7.6-9, 14. 
102. 
Cv. 62.31, 34, 
103. 
Cv. 73. 73, 
104. 
Cy, 37,189-98. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
227 
Sutta engraved on gold plates. 
The image of Ananda was taken around 
the city in procession while monks chanted the paritfa and 
sprinkled 
water to charm people against illness. 
He himself was annointed with 
it at the Mahathapa and had procedure written down so that annual 
performances could be held in the same manner.’ 
Kassapa V had the 
rite performed to ward off the plague and to ensure a good harvest,'0¢ 
Due to the influence of Tantric Buddhism the use of dhdrapis, Tan- 
tric incantations, was introduced to Sri Lanka. 
Invocations addressed 
to Vairocana, Sikhi, Gaganabuddha, Akaéagarbha and Tara are found 
on copper tablets at the Vijayarama. 
These devotees expected a variety 
of favors. 
Some of them asked for salvation and freedom from sor- 
row while others were concerned with much more mundane matters 
such as securing help to ‘‘overcome fatigue’ and ‘‘removal of obstruc- 
tions in the vital organs.’’ 
They have been assigned, on palacographic 
grounds to the ninth century.!°7 
Evidently their use was popular even 
in the twelfth century, for a building called the dhéranighara was erected 
by Parakramabahu I for the recitation of these incantations. 
1° 
Apart from these rites which were supposed to be magically potent, 
festivals and ceremonies which grew round many cult-objects played an 
important part in the religious life of the Buddhists. 
The scale of a festi- 
val was determined by the importance and the prestige enjoyed by the 
cult object for which it was performed. 
One may surmise that the im- 
portance of cult objects that a monastery possessed and the scope it 
offered for cultic activity would, to a large extent, determine the follow- 
ing that the monastery commanded. 
Monasteries employed special 
officials to attend to the organization of these festivals. 
The popu- 
larity of these cult objects is reflected in the extensive literature which 
grew round.them which includes works like the Kesadhatuvamsa, Déthd- 
vamsa, Dhituvamsa, Mahibodhivamsa, Thapavamsa and their commen- 
taries. 
The Calavamsa speaks of relic festivals (dhatupaja) held by Kassapa 
IV, Sena II and Mahinda IV.!4° 
The Anuradhapura slab inscription 
of Kassapa V and the Kaludiyapokuna inscription of Sena III also re- 
fer to ‘relic festivals’’ and ‘‘relic processions.''!!' 
The. Hair relic was 
105. 
Cy, 51,79-82; see also supra p. 176, n. 45, 
106. 
Cv. 52. 80. 
107. 
ASC, Sixth Progress Report, July to September 1891, Appendix A, pp. 12-4. 
108, 
Cv. 73. 71, 
109, 
See supra p, 114, 
110, 
Cy, 52,36; 53.37; 54, 54-5, 
_ 
UL. 
£Z, Vol.1, p. 46, if. 9-10; Vol. HI, p. 265, f, 36.

--- PAGE 125 [DIRECT] ---

228 
i 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
at the. Mariccavatti monastery, 
!!2 and Sena I held a festival for it.1 
Another relic, the chinnapatadhdtuka, is mentioned in the Céilavamsa in 
connection with the reign of Mahinda V.''4 
Wijesinha believed that 
this was a. “forehead band.’ 
Geiger surmised that it was a strip of 
cloth from the Buddha’s robe.11° 
The festival held in honor of the Tooth relic was perhaps the most 
popular and elaborate ceremony of its kind. 
One of the 
important 
reasons for the popularity of the Abhayagiri monastery was its asso- 
ciation with this relic. 
Fa-Hian'!* who visited Sri Lanka in the fifth 
century reports that every year in the middle of the third month the 
Tooth relic was taken in procession from the. shrine in the center of the 
city to the Abhayagiri monastery. 
It was kept there for three months 
after which it was brought back to the city. 
If Fa-Hian was following 
the Chinese calendar, this ceremony was held in about the early part 
of April. 
According to the Calavamsa'!? Sena II held a festival in 
honor of this relic. 
We can surmise that even at this time the celebra- 
tions ‘were held at the Abhayagiri monastery since Sena is said to have 
gone into the Ratanapdsada at this monastery during the course of the 
festival. 
After the period of the Cola occupation Vijayabahu I built 
a new shrine for the relic and regularly held festivals in its honor.?!8, 
: 
During the reign of Parikramabihu I the Tooth relic was taken in 
: procession round the city. 
The Calavamsa’ gives a detailed descrip- 
tion of this festival. 
The relic was inserted into a hollowed-out jewel 
filled with scented paste. The jewel was deposited inside a reliquary of 
precious stones, and this in turn was placed in a casket of gold. 
This 
casket, together with the Bowl relic, was placed on 
a 
seat inside a 
wheeled pavilion. made of gold. 
The pavilion was guarded by Lam- 
bakannas and other men of high rank who carried whisks, parasols and 
swords and was accompanied by hundreds of vehicles carrying dancing 
-: girls.and musicians. 
The king himself, attended by his dignitaries, ac- 
companied the relics on. an elephant, honoring them 
all the while. 
After the relics were brought back to their shrine a festival of lamps 
12, 
Cv. 54,40-1. 
113, 
Cv, 50,71. 
114, 
Cv. 55,17. 
115, 
Cy, trsl., Vol. I, p. 187, see also n. 3. A stipa.in which the robe of the 
Buddha had been enshrined is mentioned in the Sidvp. p. 7. 
116, 
Beal, op. cit,, p. 48. 
117. 
Cy. 51.22 
118, 
Cv. 60,16, 
J19. 
Cv. 74, 198-248, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
229 
was held in their honor for seven days. As evident from the Dalada- 
sirita, the procession of the Tooth relic became. more elaborate by the 
fourteenth century. 
An important development was its association 
with the paritta. 
The Daladi-sirita prescribes that seven or at least five 
monks should continuously recite the paritta before the relic. 
During 
the procession the monks held the charmed thread attached to the festival 
‘car and chanted the paritia as they followed it.'2° 
. Fa-Hian makes an interesting statement in his description of the 
- 
honors paid to the Tooth relic. 
As a result of the regular performance 
of these rites, he maintains, the kingdom suffered “‘neither from famine, 
calamity nor revolution." 24. 
The Célavamsa also speaks of the special 
powers of the relic. . 
Heavy rain poured forth when the relic was taken in 
procession, yet no one in the procession experienced any difficulty since 
the cloud moved ahead of the procession. 2? 
During the reign of 
Parakramabahu II, when the country was ravaged by a drought ‘caused 
by evil planetary influence,” the Tooth relic was taken in procession ar- 
ound the city, and this brought abundant rain.!23. 
The Daladé-sirita 
prescribes that the relic should be taken in procession in times of 
drought.!24 
It is thus evident that the recitation of the paritta and the 
rituals connected with the Tooth relic were associated with important 
magical functions such as the curing of illness, exorcism and particularly 
rain-making, 
The reigns of Parakramabihu I and Nissanka Malla saw a pro- 
fusion of stdpa building, the most important being the ones at Polon- 
natuva, such as the Damilathipa, the Rankotyehera 
and the Kiri- 
vehera.25 
This period rivals the stdpa-building phase of the “early 
Anuridhapura Period"’ in both the size and the number of stdpas built. 
The popularity of the stipas at Anuradhapura remained undiminished 
even after the change of capital to Polonnaruya and the erection of new 
stipas at this-city. 
Literary works like the Thipavamsa and the costly 
festivals that were held in honor of the Mahathipa reflect the esteem 
in which this stépa was held.}26 
A more developed concept of “relics” appears in two Sinhalese 
works, the Pajivaliya and Saddharmalankara, dated to the thirteenth 
120, 
Daladé-sirita, §, 51. 
121. 
Beal, op. cit., p. 47. 
122. 
Cy, 74,239-40. 
123, 
Cv, 873-9. 
124. 
Daladé-sirita, p, 53, 
125, ASCAR, 1909, p. 6; 1910-11 
28-9; 1911-2, pp, 86-9; UCHC, Vol. f, 
pee eee 
Pp. 
+ PP. 
, DP 
, 
Vol. 
I, 
126. 
EZ, Vol. II, pp. 70-83; Vol. IV, pp. 253-60; see also infra p. 240

--- PAGE 126 [DIRECT] ---

230 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
and fourteenth centuries respectively. 
They speak of the Bo Tree and 
the dharmadhdtu as “foundations of the Buddhist ordet’’ (sésanapra- 
tistha) which prevent the establishment of the authority of non-Bud- 
dhist rulers over the island. 
Moreover, the Saddharmilaikéra men- 
tions a type of stdpa, the dharmacaitya, where scriptural works like the 
Dhamsaigunu (Pali Dhammasaigani) and the Pratityasamutpida were 
enshrined.127 
The practice of enshrining fragments of scriptures in stdpas was 
widely spread throughout the Buddhist world. 
Traditions of Buddhist 
kings depositing canonical and commentarial works in stipas are found 
in the accounts of Chinese pilgrims who visited India.’28 
Plates bear- 
ing excerpts from the Pratttyasamuipdda were found at Kasia,’ and 
similar tablets containing the formula ye dharma etc., inscribed in the 
so-called pre-Nagari 
script, have been found 
in Central 
Java.!s¢ 
According to A. Stein, the practice of depositing manuscripts in stapas is 
illustrated in the paintings of Tunhuang.’3!. These deposits were known 
as dharmadhétu. 
Griinwedel has pointed out that they were also known 
as pratigthdé,192 
: 
There is strong reason to believe that the practice of honoring the 
dharmadhatu was known for a long time before the thirteenth century. 
It is recorded in both the Calavamsa and the Nikdya-sangrahaya that 
_ the dharmadhitu containing the writings of the Vaitulya nikdya brought 
‘by a merchant from India during the reign of Silakala (A.D. 530) were 
housed: by the king in a shrine close to the palace. 
Ho instituted the 
practice of taking them each year to the Jetavana monastery where a 
festival was held in their honor,'33 
By the reign, of Kasappa V this rite had been adapted to suit the 
requirements of the Therayada.'4 
The Dhammasangani was inscribed 
on gold plates adorned with jewels and was placed in a shrine in the 
center of the city. The king appointed his own son to guard it. 
This. 
shrine is mentioned in a tenth-century inscription of a person who des- 
cribes himself as the guardian of relics at the shrine of Dhamsatigunu.!5 
127. 
Biv. p. 49; Saddharmélankara, 
ed, Bentota Saddhatissa, 
1934, p. 388; 
Saddharmaratnékaraya, ed. Kosgoda Nanavimala, 1931, p, 298. 
128, 
See o.g., i-tsing, p. 150; Beal, op. cit., p. 194, 
129, 
ASTAR, 1910-11, p. 74. 
130. 
F,D. K. Bosch, Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, The Hague, 
1961, pp, 171-97. 
131, JRAS, 1931, pp. 863-5, 
132, 
Griinwedel, Mythologie... 
p. 110. 
133, 
Cy, 41. 37-40; Niks., pp. 19-20; see also supra pp. 33-4. 
134. 
Cyv., 52,48-56; EZ, Vol. I, pp. 46-7, Uf. 10-1, 
135. 
£2, Vol. TH, p. 133. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
231 
Every year the king carried these “relics,” riding his elephant at the 
head of his army through streets. decorated with great pomp, to the 
“cglic shine” of a monastery which may be identified with the Maricca- 
vaiti-vihara.196 
Here a great festival was held in their honor. 
It is clear from this that the idea of dharmadhdtu found acceptance 
among the Theravadins of the ‘‘orthodox’’ school. 
However evidence 
for the prevalence of the practice of enshrining dharmadhatu in stipas 
has been found so fat only at monasteries which came within the Ablia-~ 
yagiri nik@ya. 
According to a tradition preserved in the Saddharma- 
ratnikaraya, a certain king Kassapa enshrined dharmadhatu in the Ab- 
hayagiri st@pa which he rebuilt, raising it to a height of 140 cubits,137 
The only Kassapa who is known from other sources to have repaired 
‘this stapa is the fourth king of that name. 
A. number of copper plaques 
bearing inscriptions in the Sinhalese script of the eighth or the ninth 
century were found at the Hidikatuslya at Mihintale. 
They contain 
excetpts from Sanskrit Buddhist works like the Prajidpéramité and the 
Kasyapaparivartia,38 
Evidently the worship of the dharmadhdtu was 
introduced’ to Sti Lanka and practiced by the Mahayanists, and the 
idea was borrowed by the Theravadins to develop a ritual which would 
suit their particular requirements. 
The worship of the Bo Tree associated with the Enlightenment of 
the Buddha was an essential part of Buddhist ceremonial. 
The Maha- 
bodhivamsa, an ornate poem of a certain thera Upatissa, which testifies 
to the popularity of this cult, has been dated to the tenth century, 
Gu- 
rulugomi, who is thought by most scholats to. have lived during the 
twelfth century, wrote a Sinhalese commentary on this work called the 
Dharmapradipika. 
According to the Cilavamsa it was customary. to 
bold a festival in honor of the Bo Tree at the Mahavihara in the twelfth 
year of each reign." 
The festival held by Sena II is mentioned in the 
chronicle. 
The Mihintale Tablets allocate. two kaland of gold to 
cover the cost of festivals for the two Bo Trees at the monastery—the 
Somnas Mahabo and the Ruvanasun Mahabo.'4! 
Itis hardly necessary to dwell on the wide popularity of image wor- 
ship. Apart from images of the Buddha, statues of other important 
136. ' 
This occurs soon after reference to the Mariccavattivihara. 
The monastery 
in question is described as one built or renovated by the king, The Mariccavatti- 
vihara is the only one which fits the description. 
af 
137. 
Saddharma-raindkaraya, p. 333; Piv. p. 103. 
138. ASCAR, 1911-2, pp. 44-6; EZ, Vol. IL, pp. 199-212; Vol. 1V, pp. 238-42. 
139, 
Cy, 38. 57. 
140, 
Cv, 51.78, 
141, 
EZ, Vol, pp. 94-5, 7. B8, B12.

--- PAGE 127 [DIRECT] ---

2320 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
personages like Mahinda and of Bodhisattvas and their saktis were used 
as cult objects. 
The colossal image of the Buddha had already come in« 
to vogue by the beginning of the period under consideration. 
The 
image at Maligavela, which measures thirty-four feet in height, has been 
dated to the early seventh century.“ 
The thirty-eight foot colossus 
at Avukana probably dates from the eighth or the ninth century.’ 
Images of colossal proportions found at sites in Sdsseruva, Tantrimalai, 
Alahara, Ataragalliva and Buduruvegala have been dated to the “late 
Anuradhaputa Period;’’ no specific evidence is available which would 
facilitate a more precise dating. 
As evident from the images at Gal- 
vihara and the three main image-houses at Polonnaruva—the Thipi- 
rima, The Tivankapatimaghara and 
the Lankatilaka—the 
colossal 
image retained 
its popularity in the ‘‘Polonnaruva 
Period.’ 
The 
Tivankapatimaghara is of special interest owing to its unusual image 
which is in the tribhanga, the “‘triple-bent,”’ pose. 
The colossal image of this period is obviously a representation of 
the “superhuman’’ 
aspect of the Buddha’s personality. 
This is in ac- 
cord with ideas that underlie the treatment of the Buddha in literary 
works like the Butsarana. 
In these works he is presented as a power-- 
ful and heroic figure who overcomes and subdues both human and super- 
human foes. 
Such a concept would have suited the demands of a per- 
iod of intense rivalry between the Buddhist and Hindu faiths. 
Early image-houses were built of materials that were greatly sus- 
. 
ceptible to decay, and hence’ only their foundations remain. 
A later 
type, built of brick, is found at Jetavana.!4 
It is surmounted by a 
vaulted roof, from which it receives the name gedige. 
This type of 
image-house followed a ground plan which incorporated a circumbula- 
tory path (pradaksinapatha) which perhaps was included to meet a new 
need of Buddhist ceremonial. 
It is a development of this type that is 
represented by the three image-houses at Polonnaruva mentioned above, 
The Laikatilaka,'45 built by Parikramabahu I, is the tallest and per- 
haps the most impressive of these buildings. 
It measures one hundred 
and twenty-four feet by sixty-six feet and six inches at its full length 
and greatest breadth. 
The preserved portions of its walls rise to a height 
of fifty-five feet, and its doorposts measure forty feet in height. 
The 
interiors of the image~houses are arranged like the South Indian Hindu’ 
temples in the mandapa-antardla-garbhagrha order ; 
but it is not clear that 
this similarity reflects similarities in ritual. 
142. 
ASCAR, 1954, p. 27. 
143, ASCAR, 1934, pp. 21-2, 
144, erate 1892, pp, 1-3; 1893, pp. 1-5; 1895, pp. 1-2; ASC, Tenth Report, 
p 
145, 
ASCAR, 1910-11, pp. 30-8, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
233 
As in the case of relics, elaborate festivals were held in honor of 
images. 
The author of the Ci/avamsa states that the annual festival of 
the image of Mahinda was held right up to his own day in the manner 
specified by Sirimeghavanna in the fourth century. 
Then he goes on 
to give what appears to be an eye-witness’ account of the festival in great 
detail, 
Yt began on the eighth day of the month of Pubbakattika (Octo- 
ber-November) when the gold image of Mahinda was brought to the 
Cetiyagiri monastery at Mihintale. 
The following day it was taken in a 
procession led by the king to the Sotthiyakara monastery near the east- 
ern gate of the city. 
On the twelfth day it was taken to the Mahavihara 
where a festival was held in its honor for three months, then it was taken 
to be housed in a shrine close to the palace. 
Another ceremorty was 
held in its honor on the last day of the season of Retreat (vassa),146 
Ceremonies connected with images of Mahinda were also sponsored by 
Dhatusena and Aggabodhi Ion the embankment of the Mahinda re- 
servoir.147 
: 
The concentration of many important cult objects at the capital 
attracted a large number of pilgrims from the provinces, and pilgrima- 
ges to worship at the important shrines scattered over the island became 
a common practice. 
After his capture of Polonnaruva, Vijayabahu I 
left on a pilgrimage lasting three months.'48 
The Sumanakiita, where according to popular tradition the ‘‘Foot~ 
print relic’ (padalasdé)'” of the four Buddhas: of the present kalpa 
were preserved, became a popular center of pilgrimage during this per- 
jod. 
Bvidently this shrine was known and revered even at the time when 
the Mahivamsa was written. 
The Cilavamsa mentions routes which 
led to this place from Rajarattha through Kadaligéama andfrom the pro- 
vince of Hava. 
The king built and endowed rest houses for pilgrims 
who came along these routes.15° 
It is possible that there was another 
route from the province of Maya through Gilimalaya.’5' 
Confirmation 
of the evidence in the Célavamsa is found in an inscription from Ath- 
bagamuva which records the erection of rest houses at intervals of five ° 
4146, 
Cv, 3766-90. 
147, 
Cv, 38.58; 42, 29-30, 
148. 
Cr. 59.3 
149, EZ, Vol. II, p. 213, £26, 
150, 
Cy, 60, 64-6. 
451. Gilimalaya i 
is identified by Geiger as the village of same name in the Kuruviti 
Korale in the Ratnapura District. 
Cy. tts], Pt. 1, p, 221, n. 2. The discovery at 
Gilimale of a duplicate of the Aribagamuva inscription seems 
to confirm this 
suggestion. 
CJSG, Vol. Il, p. 185.

--- PAGE 128 [DIRECT] ---

234 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
gavu on the way from Rajarattha, the grant of lands for their mainten- 
ance, and the 
provision of necessities for pilgrims."? 
Later Nis- 
sanka Malla went with his whole entourage to pay homage to the shrine 
and restored the property of the shrine which had. been confiscated by his 
predecessors.13 
He also visited shrines at Anuradhapura, Velgama, 
Madirigiri, Dathbulla, Kalani, Devundara 
and Mahagima.'5+ 
The 
popularity enjoyed by the Sumanakiita is reflected in an ornate Pali 
poem on the shrine, the Samantakita-vannand, which has been assigned 
to the ‘“‘Polonnaruva Period’’ by some scholars. 
The Place of Ritual, Ceremonial and the Arts 
The growth of the popularity and the importance of ritual in Bud- 
dhism is reflected in a ninth-century inscription from the Abhayagiri 
monastery, 
According to this record offerings (satra) were to be per- 
formed without fail even if it involved the disruption of the ecclesiastical 
acts of the Order (saighakarya), and those responsible for disruption 
of offerings were 
to be expelled from the monastery.455 
Monasteries 
soem to have employed special officials to look after the performance of 
these rites,15¢ 
We have already, mentioned that certain days of the year were set 
apart for annual religious festivals, 
Apart from those mentioned above 
the full noon day of the month of Vesakha, traditionally connected with 
the main events in the life of the Buddha, was considered particularly 
suitable for religious activity. 
Sena Il celebrated this festival with the 
poor and treated them to food and clothing.’ 
Parakramabahu 1 
 edlebrated it annually.58 
The -uposatha days of the month. were tra~ 
ditionally set apart for alms-giving, the observance of the higher pre- 
cepts, and ritual activity. 
The second and third kings who took the 
name Sena gave alms to the poor on-uposatha days.9 
Vijayabahu I 
and Parikramabahu I observed the precepts of higher discipline on the 
days of the uposatha.! 
The Mihintale Tablets mention festivals held. 
152, EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 202-18, 
153, 
Cy, 80,24; CSG, Vol. IL, No. 378, 
154, BZ, Vol. U, p. 111, HB. 103 p. 173, Hf. 29-31, 
155, 
satravighétam kurvatépt na vaciqyyane sanghakaryavighatepi satravightito na 
kartayyah, BZ, Vol. 1, p. 5 ul, 18-9, 
156, 
Sec the interpretation of ofkdmi in apa p. 145. 
157. 
Cv. 51, 84, 
158, Pv. p. 106, 
159, 
Ibid. 
160, 
Cv. 60.21; 73. 40, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
235 
on uposatha days.'% 
Such ceremonies provided occasions for the 
community to come together. 
The monastery probably derived an 
income from. the stalls which were set up for trade on these days.16 
Presumably ceremonies and festivals were fixed for astrologically aus- 
picious hours. 
The festival held by Vijayanavan at the Mahathipa 
was fixed for the asterism of Visi.‘ 
An astrologer was in the pay of 
the Cetiyagiri monastery at Mihintale.'6+ 
The rituals concerning cult objects, especially the images, seem to 
have been based on the idea that they. should be treated like living per- 
sons. 
As such they were bathed, dressed and served with food. Hiuen- 
tsang records that the Tooth relic was bathed thrice a day.1% 
The 
Daladé-sirita also refers to the preparation of unguents to be used for 
the bathing of the Tooth relic. 166. 
‘The Saddharma-ratnikaraya gives a. 
mote 
detailed 
account 
of the rites performed 
at Dhinyakataka 
. 
by 
a 
Sinhalese 
monk.’ 
The stone 
image 
was 
bathed 
daily. 
The marble image was covered with a layer of scented paste two inches 
in thickness. _ 
Sevvanniya'®® flowers were fixed on the paste so that the 
jmage looked like a figare made of flowers.’ 
The following day it was 
first bathed in perfumed water, then in sesame oil and thirdly in milk. 
Subsequently it was rubbed with unguents and finally bathed in clear 
walter. 
The Velaikkara inscription mentions an annual ceremony of ap- 
plying collyrium to the eyes of a Buddha image.'® 
Images were some- 
times adorned in an extravagant manner. 
Dhiatusena is said to have 
presented the stone image of the Abhayagiri monastery with a robe 
made of gold, a wig made of dark blue gems and a net of gold for the 
feet.170 
Kassapa IV presented ornaments for the images (patimabha- 
rana) he built.!7!. 
Devi, the queen of Kassapa V, offered a crest jewel 
(cila@mani), a robe, a parasol, and a net to cover the feet of the Buddha 
image at the Mariccavatti monastery.!7* 
Arrangements made for the 
provision of food are evident from a tenth-century inscription from 
161, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 93, fh, A44-5, 
162, 
See supra p. 97. 
163, 
EZ, Vol. IV, p. 256, 2 1. 
164, 
See EZ, Vol, I, p, 96, f, B32, 
165, 
Beal, op. cit., p. 443, 
166, 
Daladé-sirita, p. 51. 
167, 
Saddharma-ratnékaraya, pp. 500-1, 
168. 
Rosa centifolia, Rosa damascena. 
Ss8, p. 1084. 
169, 
Ef, Vol. XVIL, p, 338, 
170, 
Cy, 38, 62-3, 
The net was probably an ornament for the feet. 
171; 
Cy, 52,26. 
172, 
Cv, 52.65,

--- PAGE 129 [DIRECT] ---

236 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
Eppavala which records the deposit of four kaland of gold to pay for 
curd, honey and two pat of rice to be offered daily to the Bo Tree and 
the Buddha image at the site.'73 
Similarly, the popularity of the practice of honoring cult objects 
with lamps, fiowers and incense necessitated atrangements at monas-| 
teries for the regular provision of these items, 
A-number of inscript- 
tions from this period record endowments made for the supply of off 
and wicks for lamps at various’ shrines.'74 
The Cetiyagiri monastery 
employed two florists to supply white flowers and one to supply a hun- 
dred and twonty blue lotuses each month to the relic shrine, and another 
florist was attached 
to the shrine of the stone image.'7> 
Female 
garland-makers were employed at the Mahathipa during the reign of 
Kalyanavati.!”6° 
The ‘four kinds of perfume,” incense of kaluvil and 
camphor were used for this purpose. 
Offerings of perfume was such 
an important item in ritual that the Mahathipa had perfumers (osan- 
davatuvan) in its employ,'7? and the dummalassamun employed at the 
relic shrine and the image-house of the Cetiyagiri monastery probably 
performed the task of fumigating the shrines by burning incense.178 
A ceremony for the “consecration’' (abhiseka) of a Buddha image is 
mentioned in the account of the reign of Kassapa I in the Céilavansa, 
It also alludes to a similar ceremony having been held during the reign’ 
of Dhatusena.1”? 
The Mihintale Tablets speak of the consecration’ 
of the Buddha (budbisey) in the relic house and the shrine of the image. 
Tt appears that both oil and water were used in this ritual,12° 
Though 
it is not possible to determine the exact significance of this rite, one may 
suggest that it was connected with the idea found in Mahayana works 
like the Avatamsaka Sitra that the tenth or the highest stage of spiritual 
progress of a Bodhisattva was attained after a ‘consecration’ 
(abhi- 
geka).'*' 
The rite of “consecrating” images also seoms 
to indicate 
that these rituals were developed on the model of rites connected with 
royalty. 
173, EZ, Vol. I, pp. 184-94. 
174, 
See e.g. EZ, Vol. J, p. 96, [ B35; Vol. I, p. 18, H. C1921; ASCAR, 
1953, p. 27, No. 20, 
175, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, il. B 35-40. 
176. EZ, Vol. LV, p. 257, f, 175 p. 260, n. 6. 
177. 
Ibid, 
178, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, U. B34, B38. 
179, 
Cy, 38.67; 39. 6-7. 
180. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, Hl, B42-3. 
481, 
Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fasc. A-Aca, 1961, pp. 125-30; 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
237 
The monastery was not merely the venue for the performance of 
rituals. 
It remained, as it had always been, a place where the comm- 
unity could congregate, listen to discourses, and take part in religious 
discussions. 
In the fourth century Fa-Hian noted that public sermons 
were regularly held within the city of Anuradhapura on the eighth, four- 
teenth and fifteenth days of the month.!8? 
Vijayabahu I is said to 
have encoutaged preachers with presents,'®3 and Parakramabahu I and 
Nissanka Malla built halls for sermons.!® 
Sometimes laymen deli- 
vered sermons. 
Kassapa V, for one, was a well-known preacher,18 
The Mihintale monastery engaged lay preachers (bana vajdrana damin) 
who were given land allotments for their maintenance.!8 
We may 
surmise that didactic and edificatory stories from the life of the Buddha 
were popular subjects for such sermons. 
Parikramabahu J appointed a 
- preacher to relate Jataka stories and built a special hall for the purpose. 
'87 
The popularity of the Jataka tales is evident from the paintings in the 
shrines of this period.'88. 
Sometimes, as for example during the reigns 
of Sena Il, Kassapa V and Mahinda IV, sermons were also delivered on 
the subjects of higher philosophical doctrines. ' 
: 
The. enjoyment of musical entertainment was not viewed favorably 
in early Buddhism. 
Certainly the monks were bound by their rules of 
discipline to abstain from such indulgences. 
Hence it is rather signi- | 
. ficant that music seems to have played an important role in most of the 
rites and ceremonies of this period, and the use of music made the rites 
more attractive, 
Presumably drama, dance and music, like literature, 
were expected to “‘rouse the serene joy (pasida) and emotion (samvega) 
of the faithful.”’ The use of music was not at innovation made during the 
period under discussion. 
The festivals held by Bhatikabhaya and 
Mahadathika Mahaniga in the first century A.D. at the Mahathipa 
and the Cetiyapabbata respectively were attended 
by dance-drama 
(natanacca), song, and instrumental music.° 
Songs and dances in honor 
of the Mahathtpa were a part of the festivities held by Mahinda IV, 
182, 
Beal, op. cit., p. 47 
183, 
Cy. 60.20. 
184. 
Cv. 73,72, 81; EZ, Vol. H, pp. 165-78, 
185. 
See infra p, 324, 
186, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 96, 4. B39, 
187. 
Cy. 73.72, 
188, 
The Vessantara, Asanka, Sasa, Tundila, Vidhura, Guttila, Cuila Paduma, 
. 
Maitribala, Mugapakkha, Sama, Maha Sudassana ‘and Ummagga Jatakas have been 
identified among the paintings of the walls of Tivanka image-house. 
189, 
Cv, 51.79; 52, 49; 54. 36, 
190, 
My, 34.59, 60, 77, 
191, 
Cv, 54, 37-8,

--- PAGE 130 [DIRECT] ---

238 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
and Vijayabahu I had dances performed in honor of the Buddha.152 
The use of musical entertainments in relic processions is mentioned in a 
tenth-century inscription of Adipéda Mahinda from Mayilagastota,!% 
During the reign of Parakramabahu I music was employed in ritual on 
an elaborate scale. 
Dancers and musicians, both male and female, 
played lutes, flutes and drums and followed the Tooth relic when it was 
taken in procession, honoring it with song, dance and music, 
The regular use of musical entertainment in Buddhist ritual fed, at 
least by the time of Kalyanavati, to the engagement of musicians in the 
service of the monastery. 
The Ruvyanvilisiya inscription 
of this reign 
refers to dancers, singers and musicians adept at playing drums, conches 
and the ‘‘five instruments’’!5 in a list of the employees of the shrine,'% 
According to the Daladda-sirita a large orchestra, in which thirty six in- 
struments are listed, was employed at the shrine of the Tooth relio,!7 
Evidence in the Mihintale Tablets seems to suggest that the prac- 
tice of employing musicians in the regular service of monasteries dates 
back to a much earlier period. 
This record refers to a group of eleven 
employees called ali led by another called djing. 
Wickremasinghe 
took the term di to be derived from aikkam and translated it as “‘pain- 
ters,’’ 
But this seems improbable as the term sittara also occurs in the 
list of omployees, 
There is no doubt that sittara connotes ‘‘painter.” 
The sittara received a land allotment of two kiri; the djing received two 
paya of land and a daily allowance of one admané and one pat of rice, 
while his assistants received a:similar allotment of land with a vasag 
each. 
In contemporaneous 
inscriptions from 
South 
India 
the 
temple musicians are listed in groups of eleven. 
A record of Rajaraja 
Cola mentions six groups of musicians. 
Each consisted of eleven mem- 
bers and was led by a twelfth.2°° 
Ali may be connected with the Tami! 
word alikkai which was a dance and Glipettu, the term by which the dance 
of Krsna was known. 
Ali also connotes a mask worn by dancers at 
temple festivals. 
It is likely that the ai were a group of musicians or 
192, 
Cy. 60.18. 
193, 
£2, Vol. II, pp. 60-61, ff, 13-21, 
194, 
Cv, 74,216-8. 
195. 
Two drums (davul, tamumdttan) and three wind instruments (horand, ndgasin- 
nam and sak) are listed in the Sinhalese works. 
Sorata takes pamcayan as one 
instrument, See S88 p. 969, 
196, EZ, Vol. IV, p. 256, Hi, 15-6. 
197. 
Dalada-sirita, pp. 49, 52. 
198. 
£Z, Vol. I, p. 95, i, B13-4, 
199, Ez, Vol. I, p. 95, if. B13-4, 
For explanations of the terms Kiri, paya, pata 
© 
admard and 
vasag, see supra pp. 54, 69, 114, 148-53, 
200. 
Tanjore inscription No. 66, SH, Vol. IL, pp, 259-303. 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
239. 
. 
dancers employed at the monastery. 
If this interpretation is accepted, 
the practice of employing musicians at monasteries can be dated at least 
as far back as the tenth century. 
Like music, painting was expected to play an edifying role by 
depicting scenes from the life and the previous existences of the Buddha. 
Paintings of this type decorate the inner walls of the Tivaika image 
house at Polonnaruva2” 
At Abhayagiri a part of the income of the 
monastery was set apart to meet the cost of religious paintings, 
and 
a painter was also in the employ of the Cetiyagiri monastery. 
Thus 
the arts were actively patronized by the monastery. 
However, in the 
thirteenth century the Dathbadeni Katikdvata speaks of literary and 
dramatic arts in a tone of disapproval. 
Monks were directed to refrain 
from learning or teaching such “despised branches of knowledge.''204 
The statement is significant not only for its derogatory tone but also 
for what it reveals, for the cultivation of the literary and dramatic 
arts by Buddhist monks seems to have attracted the attention of 
reformers by this time. 
Some of the Buddhist rites and ceremonial described above, es- 
pecially those relating to the worship of images, appear to be strikingly 
similar to the Hindu ritual of the period. However, this does not neces- 
‘sarily mean that Buddhist ritual was derived from its Hindu counter- 
part. The Bodhicaryévatara, a Buddhist Sanskrit work datable to about 
the eighth century, describes rites like the bathing of images, adorning 
them with robes and ornaments, and musical performance in honor of 
the Buddha and the Bodhisattvas.2°° The influence, therefore, could 
have come from Mahayana Buddhism. 
It is also significant that some 
» of these practices can be traced to a very early period in Sri Lanka. 
Yet 
it is possible that some of these rites were borrowed from Hinduism and 
that the prominence ritual gained in Buddhist religious life in Sti Lanka 
was a reaction to, if not the result of, the influence of Hindu ritual, 
The proliferation of elaborate ceremonies in Buddhism necessitated 
considerable expenditure on the part of the monastery and its patrons, 
and shrines were sometimes individually endowed to meet the cost of 
such rites. 
Apparently the main festivals were held by kings. 
Festi- 
vals were held on a grand scale during the reign of Nissanka Malla, 
201, Seen. 188, 
202. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 49, Hf. 52-4. 
203, 
See supra p. 238. 
204. 
kavya ndtakadi garhita vidyd tama nigata yutu. 
annunut niginviyd yuin. 
Katikdvat Savigaré, p. 15. 
205. 
Bodhicaryavatara, ed. Medhananda, 1959, ch, 2, pp. 10-11, vv, 10-4,

--- PAGE 131 [DIRECT] ---

240 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
During a festival held at the Mahathipa he is said to have scattered pearls 
on the terrace and to have offered flowers. of gold and silver, banners 
of silk, and the seven kinds of gems.. 
He claims that this festival cost 
him four million pieces of gold (masuran) and that he spent seven hundred 
thousand on ariother festival at Dambulla.2°° 
The example of kings 
was sometimes followed by the upper classes. 
The lavish offerings 
made to the Mahathiipa by an official in the reign of Kalyanavati. are 
recorded in an inscription at the site,207 
Political and Social Functions of Religious Ceremonial 
Festivals were occasions which brought the community together 
_ 
and gave the patrons an. opportunity to gain prestige and popularity. 
For tho king and the upper classes it was an opportunity to demonstrate 
and to legitimize their political and social status. 
It is significant that 
many of the important cult objects including the Tooth. relic, the 
dhammadhitu brought from India in the reign of Silakala, the gold 
tablets bearing the Dhammasaigani, and the gold image of Mahinda 
were housed in shrines near the royal palace. 
Furthermore, the king is 
often mentioned as participating and taking the leading part in these 
festivals. 
The patronage and participation of the king in the festivals 
were an effective way of legitimizing his position. 
Such acts would have 
been of great political value, particularly to foreigners on the Sinha» 
lese throne like Nissanka Malla. 
Sena H, it was mentioned earlier, ts said to have celebrated 
the 
Vesikha festival in the company of the poor. 
However, it seems that by 
~ the beginning of the ‘‘Polonnaruva Period’’ the gentry and the com- 
moners, the high and the low, were not brought together in common 
worship at certain Buddhist ceremonies. 
An inscription from the reign 
of Vijayabahu I refers to the practice of assigning separate places at 
shrines to worshippers of different social status, 
According to this 
record, the king built a terrace enclosed by a wall which had gates fitted 
with locks and keys on the peak of Sumanakiita. 
This terrace was 
meant for people of *‘good birth’’ who came to honor the Foot-print of 
the Buddha. 
A second terrace was built on a lower level for men of 
“inferiot birth’? (adhama jatin)°8 
“Perhaps such arrangements reflect 
a situation in which social stratification was becoming 
increasingly 
206. 
&Z, Vol, 1, p. 80, Hl, 25-6; Vol. 1, p. 132, 1. 24-5. 
‘These figures are not very 
reliable, 
Nissanka Malla was given to exaggeration, 
In this case he contradicts, 
himself, 
Cf. figures given in £Z, Vol. I, p. 112, 4, B11. 
207, 
EZ, Vol. 1V, pp. 253-60, 
208. 
EZ, Vol. II, p. 214, i. 35-7, 
CULTS AND RITUAL 
2 
244 
rigid.2 
According to the Daladé-sirita arrangements based on official 
status were also known to have been made at the shrine of the Tooth 
relic, 
The sanctum had two antechambers attached to it, and no one 
but the attendants of the relic shrine was allowed inside the sanctum. 
The saigha, 
royalty, “royal officials permitted to enter the crown 
room,’ and 
the officials of the relic shrine were allowed to enter 
the first antechamber. 
“Those versed in the scriptures” (dharmadhara) 
were another group which enjoyed this -privilege of entering the first 
antechamber, 
Courtiers honored the 
relic from the 
second ante- 
chamber; all others had to perform their 
rites from outside the third 
doorway.?!° Here the distinctions were based primarly on rank and office. 
It is significant that during this period social distinctions of both birth 
and office were recognized and allowed expression in the organization of 
Buddhist ritual. 
The study of the development of ritual and ceremonial in Sinhalese 
" Buddhism reveals the absorption of elements from popular cults and 
Brahmanism, from the Mahayana and perhaps from Hinduism. 
In the 
course of this development it acquired a cultic system to cater to some 
fundamental religio-magical needs of society like “‘rain-making’’ and 
the prevention of illness and bad harvests. Moreover, it developed, under 
the stimulus of these religions and cults, a body of ritual and ceremon- 
ial enlivened by dance and music to serve the needs of mass religiosity. 
Buddhism, as it was known and practiced in Sri Lanka during the per- 
jod under review, had in fact become a composite religion which was: 
developed and modified to suit the needs of the majority of the com- 
munity and thus far different from its original form. 
: 
209. 
It is the same tendencies which are reflected in the disputes of _ period over 
caste privileges. 
See EZ, Vol. IL, pp. 303-12, 
210, 
Daladd-sirita, pp. 49,50.

--- PAGE 132 [DIRECT] ---

' 
i 
i 
' 
CHAPTER 
7 
Relations with Foreign Centers of Buddhism 
Sri Lanka commands the entrance to the Bay of Bengal from the 
west, and thus the geographical situation of the island helped to pro- 
mote its development as an important entrepét in the extensive sea trade 
which linked Europe in the west with the Chinese empire in the east, 
In the sixth century Cosmas Indicopleustes recorded that merchantmen 
from Ethiopia and Persia called at this emporium described 
as ‘“‘the great- 
est in those parts’? to purchase its products and other merchandise 
brought from lands as far as China in the east and Male, Kaliana, Sindh, 
and Adule in the west. 
He also noted that ships from Sri Lanka were 
sent to these lands to trade in cloth, spices, metalware, precious stones 
and elepharits.1. 
Even if the volume of trade with the west had dimini- 
shed by the beginning of the period under consideration, there is rea- 
son to believe that Sri Lanka continued to play an important role in tho 
trade of the Bay of Bengal, 
An eleventh-century record of the Java- 
nese king Airlanga mentions the Sinhalese among the communities of 
foreign merchants who lived at Javanese ports. 
Trade between Burma 
and Sri Lanka was thriving in the twelfth century; in fact, a. dispute 
about trade rights was one of the causes which led to the hostilities bet- 
ween the two countries during the reign of ParakramabahuI.2 
A variety 
of fine cloth imported from Sri Lanka is mentioned in the Réjataran- 
gini,* and presumably it was a similar fabric brought from Sri Lanka 
which was referred to as wdihan sithal in the Old Javanese inscriptions 
of the late ninth century.5 
A fabric called ‘‘Lanka cloth’’ is algo men- 
tioned in the Thai annals.¢ , 
1, 
The Christian Topography, ed. F. O. Winstedi, Oxford, 1909, p. 322 
2, 
G. Coedés: 
Les états hindauisés.., p. 268. 
3, 
Cy, 16, 17-21. 
: 
4, 
Réjatarangini, ed. R. S. Pandit, p. 35. 
5. 
Art. As., Vol, XXIV, 1962, p, 245. 
6, 
Notton, Histoire du Dhammardja et notre seigneur, Annals du Siam, Vol. 1, p» 75. 
[ 242 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM. 
243 
The trading vessels which plied the Bay of Bengal sometimes took on 
board monks and lay Buddhists bound for places of pilgrimage and 
centers of Buddhist learning. 
The Sihala-vatthu-pakarana and the Saha- 
ssa-vatthu-pakarana relate many stories about monks who sailed in mer- 
chantmen to ports in Bengal and the Coromandel coast; according to 
one of these stories, a group of such pilgrims went to Cinaloka.? 
The 
more detailed accounts of the travels of Fa-Hian and Vajrabodhi clearly 
illustrate how the extensive commercial intercourse which connected 
the lands round the Bay of Bengal helped movements of monks. 
Fa- 
Bian left Tamralipti in a large merchantman and reached Sri Lanka in 
fourteen days. 
On his return home he boarded another merchantman 
which carried two hundred men and reached Ye-po-ti® after sailing 
eastwards for ninety days, and from there he took yet another trading 
vessel to China? 
According to the biography of Vajrabodhi com~ 
piled by Suen-tchao in the ninth century, he set forth from South India 
on his way to China and reached Sri Lanka after sailing for twenty-four 
hours. 
Here ho saw thirty-five Persian trading vessels. 
Vajrabodhi 
sailed from Sri Lanka in the company of the Persian merchants and 
came to the Kingdom of Fo-chi!® ‘after spending one month at sea, 
From there he proceeded to China and arrived at the capital in A.D. 
720.1 
These accounts demonstrate that the position which Sri Lanka 
occupied as a center of the trade in the Indian Ocean provided the san- 
gha with ample opportunities to maintain regular contact with their 
brethren at Buddhist centers in India and Southeast. Asia. 
Relations with Eastern India 
During the period of Pala rule the Eastern regions of India witne- 
ssed, the efflorescence of Buddhist culture inspired by the monasteries of 
Nalanda, Vikramagila and Somapuri which emerged 
as the leading 
schools of Buddhist scholarship. 
Theso monasteries produced the most 
prominent exponents of the Tantra variety of Buddhism during this 
period, and at the same time, they provided a meeting place for scholars 
from different parts of the Buddhist world who represented varied Bud- 
dhist traditions, 
The influence of these centers of Buddhist learning 
spread to Nepal and thence to Tibet where Buddhism of the Tantra 
7. 
Sihvp., pp. 39, 42, 44, 136; 
Shsvp., pp. 36, 64, 145. 
8. Beal has suggested identification with Java or Sumatra. 
Chinese Accounts 
of India, p, 52. 
9. 
Beal, op. cit., pp. 51-4. 
10, 
Bhoja (Kimboja?). 
 I-tsing refers to a certain Fo-shi-pu-lo which was an ise 
Jand in the “Southern Sea.” 
J-tsing, op. cit., p. 10, 
11, JRASCB, Vol, XXIV, pp. 87-9,

--- PAGE 133 [DIRECT] ---

244 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
variety found a congenial home. 
Scholars from Eastern India like 
Santaraksita, Padmasambhava and Atisa,.and Tibetan teachers and 
translators who had studied in India contributed to the expansion of 
these influences. 
In Southeast Asia, though no such detailed informa- 
tion is available, the appearance of the so-called ‘‘pre-Nagari’’ script in 
inscriptions which speak of the presence of Mahayana and Tantric prac- 
tices suggests that these influences originated in Eastern India. 
In rare 
instances more specific evidence is available. 
The Kélurak inscription, 
dated A.D. 782, records the erection of an image of Mafijuéri by a cor- 
tain Kumaraghoga, a teacher from Gaudadvipa (Bengal).!2 
It is rea- 
sonable to expect that these currents. of influence which swept over Tibet 
in the northwest and the Javanese kingdom in the southeast at least 
caused ripples in Sri Lanka too. 
: 
The shrine of Buddha Gaya, which is sacred to all. Buddhists as the: 
site: 
df the Enlightenment of the Buddha, attracted pilgrims from Sri 
Lanka from the oarliest times.'? 
The Chinese source Hing-tchoan of 
Wang Hiuen-ts’e mentions that a special monastery was built at Bud- 
dha Gaya for the use of monks from this country.4 
Some of the monks 
have left records of their visits and the meritorious works they under- 
took'at the site. 
Apart from Mahandma, a monk of the sixth century 
who has left two inscriptions recording 
the donation of a dwelling and a 
Buddha image to the Buddha Gaya monastery, Prakhyatakirtti, another 
Sinhalese monk, claims to have belonged to the royal family of Sri Lanka 
ina donative inscription datable to the sixth or the seventh century.' 
Taranatha records a tradition about the Sinhalese monks who lived 
at Buddha Gay during the reign of Dharmapala (A.D. 770-810): 
Damals erklirten in Otantapuri die Saindhava-Cravakas, 
die 
Ménche hatten durch Zweifel sich geirrt und waren schlecht 
“geworden, und so behaupteten auch diese Bhikgus, als zu einer 
Zeit der Acarya in Nalanda weilte, Buddhajfiana sei ohne Dis- 
ciplin, ungeeignet zum Abt des Sangha, leisteten Widerstand, 
und schimpften auf die Tantras. 
In Vajrasana zerstérten die 
vielen Saindhava: 
und Singhala Bhikgus das in Silber gegossone 
Bild des Heruka und machten. sich eines Gewinn daraus. Und der 
_ 
12, 
JF.D.K. Bosch, “Die Inseriptie van Keleorak,” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde, Vol. LXVMIL, 1928, pp. 18-20, vv, 6-9. 
13, 
The Sifvp. contains several stories about monks going on pilgrimage to Bud- 
dha Gaya. 
One of the inscriptions, assigned to the second century B. C., records a 
donation made by a pilgrim from Tambapanni, 
ASTAR, 1908-9, p. 156. 
14, JRASCB, Vol. XXIV, p. 75, 
15.° 
CH, Vol. IIL, pp. 274-278; Indian Antiquary, Vol. XV, pp. 356-9; ASIAR, 
1908-9, pp. 156-7, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
245 
K&nig liess desshalb viele von den Singhala-Bhiksus tédten. 
Da 
er sich nun daran machte, auch die iibrigen Saindhavas zu vertil- 
gen, schiitze der Acarya sie in seinem grossen Erbarmen vor der 
Austilgung durch den Kénig.’6 
In another of his works Taranatha adds more information on the event: 
Zu der Zeit gaben einige Saindhavas, welche Crayakas aus Sith- 
hala u.s.w. waren, in einem Vadschrasana-Tempel das grosse aus 
Silber verfertigte Bildniss Herukas und viele Mantra-Biicher fiir 
ein Werk Maras aus, die Biicher benutzten sie als Heizmaterial 
und das Bildnis zerstiickelten sic und machten sich einen Gewinn 
daraus. 
Ferner iiberredten sie viele aus Bhangala nach Vikra- 
macila zur Verehrung Wandernde sich zu ihnen zu bekehren, 
indem sie behaupteten, dass dio Mahajana-Lehre ein Leben voll 
Verkehrtheit sei und dass sie die Lehrer des wahrhaften Gesetzes 
aufgeben sollten.!7 
Apart from proof of the presence of the Sinhalese monks at Buddha 
Gaya, some interesting facts emerge from these passages: 
(1) the Sinha- 
lese monks maintained a close relationship with the Saindhavas, (2) both 
groups opposed Tantric practices; and (3) the two tried to convert the 
followers of the Mahayana to their own teachings and achieved a 
certain measure of success, but by their excesses against the Mahayana 
and Tantric schools they seem to have provoked Dharmapila to take 
unusually severe measures against them. 
Very little is known about the Saindhavas. ‘In the first passage 
‘Tarandtha refers to the Saindhavas as a group of monks who lived at the 
16, A, Grinwedel, Térandthas Edelesteinmine, das Buch von den Vermittlern der Sie~ 
ben Inspirationen, p. 93, The English translation by B. Datta is not very accurate, 
and the following is a fresh translation of the passage: “When the Acirya was 
spending some time at Nalanda the Saindhava érévakas at Odantapuri (Otanta- 
puri) declared that monks had gone astray through doubt and become degenerate 
and commented that Buddhajfiéna was lacking in discipline and unsuitable to be the 
Abbot of the saigha. 
They became restive and vituperated against the Tantras. 
At Vajrésana many Saindhava and Simhala (Singhala) monks together destroyed 
the image of Heruka which had been made of silver and made profit thereof. 
For that reason the king put many Sirphala monks to death. 
He also made an 
attempt to silence the rest of the Saindhavas, but the Acirya through his great 
mercy protected them from destruction at the hands of the king.” 
17. A. Schiefner, Taranathas Geschichte des Buddhismnus in Indien, p. 221, 
The 
Passage may be translated into English as follows: “At that time some of the 
Saindhava érdvakas who had come from Simhala and elsewhere maintained that 
the image of Heruka made of silver and the many Mantra-books in the Vajrisana 
temple were the work of Mara. 
‘They used the books as heating material, and 
broke up 
the image and made profit thereof, 
Further they persuaded many people 
from ‘Bhangala, who had arrived at Vikramasila to worship, to come over to their 
side by commenting that the Mahayana-teaching was a life full of contradiction and 
that they were able to provide teachers of the True Law.”

--- PAGE 134 [DIRECT] ---

246 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
monastery of Odantapurt, and in an earlier context Taranatha main~ 
tains that Nagiirjuna refuted the dialectical polemics of the Saindhavas,!* 
Presumably they were opponents.of the Mahayana. 
According to 
Bu-ston, the fourteenth century Tibetan chronicler, the Saindhava érd- 
vakas devoted some time every evening to calculating the Buddhist era.t> 
An inscription from the Bihar-Sharif area, dated in the reign of Mahen- 
drapala of Kanauj (ca. A.D. 890-917), records a donation made to the 
Saindhavas.2° 
Probably, as in the case of the Sinhalese monks, the term 
Saindhava was a regional description. 
Hiuen-tsang noted that there 
were about ton thousand monks belonging to the Sammitiya school of 
the Little Vehicle in Sind.24 
Some of the stories in the Sthala-vatthu- 
pakarana testify to the prevalence of relations between the Buddhist com- 
munities of Western India and Sri Lanka.? 
The traditions recorded 
by Taranatha reveal that monks from Sri Lanka who probably repre- 
sented the Mahavihara nikaya united with the monks from Sind in their 
opposition to the Mahayana and Tantra practices in the latter part of 
the eighth century or the early decades of the ninth century, 
The shrines of Buddha Gay& continued 
to attract pilgrims from 
Sri Lanka—both monks and laymen—throughout the period under 
review. 
In an inscription datable on palaeographic gtounds to the ninth 
or the tenth century, Udayaéri, a Sinhalese, records the gift of a Buddha 
image to the shrine at tho site2> 
A tenth-century panegyrical record 
which speaks of the dedication of an image-house by a Rastrakita prince 
was composed by a Sinhalese scholar, a monk named Sri Jana.24 
Whon 
Vijayabahu I took contro] of Rajarattha he sent a mission to offer precious 
stones and pearls to the shrine of the Bodhi Tree at Buddha Gaya on his 
behalf.> 
The prominent position that the Sinhalese monks occupied 
among the clerical community at Buddha Gaya in the twelfth century is 
evident from an inscription dated in the year 51 of the era of Laksmana 
Sena (ca. A.D. 1157), It records an endowment made to the main shrine 
at Buddha Gaya and charges the leaders of the Sinhalese sangha with 
the responsibility of administering the endowment in accordance with 
18. 
Grtnwedel, op. cit., p. 17. 
Here it occurs as Sendhava éravaka. 
TOF Bu-ston, The History of Buddhisin in India and Tibet, ed., E. O. Obermiller, 
20, 
“HL. Sastri, MAST, No. 66, 1942, p. 105, 
21. 
Beal, op. cit., p. 461, 
22, 
Sthvp., pp. 57, 59, 63, 64, 67, 70, 74. 
23, ASTAR, 1908-9, p. 157. 
24, 
Rajendralal Mitra, Buddha Gayé, pp, 194-7, 
25, 
Cv, 60,23, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
247 
.the wishes expressed by the donor.26 
When the Tibetan monk Dhar- 
masvamin (Chag Lo-tsi-ba Chos-rje-dpal) visited Buddha Gaya between 
A.D. 1234 and 1236 he noted that there were three hundred monks from 
Sri Lanka, 
They were placed in charge of the main shrine and had 
the exclusive right to sleep within its sacred precincts,?” 
It is evident from the foregoing account and particularly from the 
last two records cited above that, apart from the occasional pilgrim who 
came to worship at the shrines of Eastern India, there was a community 
of Sinhalese monks who were permanent residents at the monastery of 
Buddha Gayd. 
Their numbers were augmented during times of poli- 
tical turmoil in Sri Lanka such:as the period of Cola rule. 
It is unlikely 
that the Sinhalese monks were confined to Buddha Gaya, 
Probably 
some of them would have been attracted to the centers of Buddhist learn- 
ing which flourished at short distances from this shrine. 
If some of the 
Sinhalese monks opposed the teaching of the Mahayana and the Tantra, 
as Taranatha reveals, it is possible that there were others who were fas- 
cinated by these ideas and carried their influence back to Sri Lanka and 
thus stimulated the development of Buddhist, thought in the island, 
Further, it seems reasonable to expect that, like the Sinhalese monks who 
yisited India, there were Indian monks from the Bihar-Bengal region 
who wént to Sri Lanka to disseminate their teachings. 
In this connection a single strophe of almost cryptic conciseness, 
which appears in the section of the Culavamsa dealing with the reign of 
Sena I (A.D. 833-853), seems to be of interest due to its unusual impli- 
cations: 
; 
katva virankurdramam vihire abhayuttare 
mahasanghikabhikkhiinam. theriyinam ca dépayi?® 
The translation presents no difficulties: “He (Sena 1) built the Viran- 
kararama in the Abhayagiri monastery and granted-it to the Mahasan- 
ghika monks and those of the Theriya school.” 
Apparently the author 
did not attach much significance to this episode since he dismissed it with 
asingle strophe. 
Perhaps he was merely recording a piece of informa- 
tion found in his sources without realizing its truc significance. 
It is also 
possible that the author considered the matter to be too controversial for 
further comment. 
But it is of extreme importance to the student of 
the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka since it is the only reference 
found in the chronicles to the presence of. the Mahasinghika (Maha 
saighika) school in the island. 
We learn from this strophe that the 
26, Cunningham, Mahdbodhi, pp. 78-9. 
27, 
G. N. Roetich, Biography of Dharmasyamin (Chag Lo-tsa-ba Chos-rje-dpal), 
@ Tibetan Monk Pilgrim, Patna, 1959, pp. 73-4, 
28, 
Cy. 50. 68.

--- PAGE 135 [DIRECT] ---

248 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
Viratkurarama was built at the Abhayagiri monastery for their use and 
this may suggest that a considerable numbér of monks were involved. 
Evidently Geiger had no compunctions about accepting this state- 
ment of the Cilavamsa. 
But Bechert, who brought out a posthumous 
. 
edition of Geiger’s writings, commented that he was inclined to read 
Mahimsasakabhikkhinam for Mahasaighikabhikkhanam, 
In support of 
this emendation he points out that Fa-Hian found a copy of the Vinaya 
Pitaka of the Mahimasasakas in Sri Lanka.” 
It is significant, how- 
evor, that the term Mahimsdsaka does not occur in any one of the many 
manuscripts consulted for three different editions of the Calavamsa; | 
they unanimously agtee with the present reading. 
Hence an emoenda- 
tion to suit our convenience, without further consideration of other pos- 
sible explanations, seems rash and unwarranted. It has to be admitted 
that the Calavamsa records in rather forthright though laconic terms 
that the Mahadsdnghikas and the Theravadins were given an drama at 
the Abhayagiri monastery. 
It is also clear that Sena I extended his 
patronage to the Mahasanghikas, 
, 
‘ 
The author of the Nikéya-satgrahaya,'a fourteenth-century work 
. which purports to be a history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, considered the 
reign of Sona I to be of such particular significance that he selected it 
‘for special consideration. 
He unleashes a rather strong attack on Sena 
and calls him an insane man untutored in the words of the wise. 
He 
says that, like a grasshopper who plunges into fire thinking it is gold, 
Sena was credulous enough to readily accept the false dharma to the 
neglect of the true. 
It was in retribution for his association with the 
false dharma, the chronicler adds, that the king had to surrender his 
capital to the Tamils and flee to Polonnaruva to die in disgrace.3? 
This account contrasts sharply with the description of Sena J in the 
Ctlavamsa. The Pali chronicle describes the defeat he faced at the hands 
of the Pandya invaders, but it also recounts the many instances of the 
patronage he extended to the satgha and refers to Sena as a king who 
performed ‘pious actions before unheard of.’ 
The chronicler regards 
him as an ideal ruler endowed with the ten qualities of kingship. 
Sena 
is further described as buddhabhimigatisayo, an aspirant, to Buddha- 
hood, who had his thoughts fixed on the ‘“‘ultimate.’”3!_ 
The use of the 
29, COMT, p. 208 n. 1; Beal, op. cit., p. 51. 
30. 
Miks, pp. 20-1. 
31,, buddhabhitmigatdsayo Cy. 30,65, 
sdradassono Cv., 50, 83; see also Cy, 501-3 
62, 
According to its colophon, the Siyabaslakara, an early Sinhalese work based on 
the Kévyddaréa of Dandi, was written by a certain king Salamevan Sen at the request 
of his brother, the minister Amaragiri Kasup. 
In the Cilavamsa, the only king 
of this 
name who had a brother called Kassapa was Sena I. 
If, on this basis, Sena J is identi- 
fied as the author of this work, it would appear that Sena also was a very learned 
Pa, ponteny i the statements of the author of Nikaya-sangrahaya, 
See Siyabas- 
jakara, vy. 
7, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
249 
term buddhabhami, which denotes the highest of the ten stages of pro- 
gressive spiritual development listed in the Satasahasrikd-prajidpara- 
mitd, strongly suggests Mahayana associations 
.3? 
The religious dignitary who wrote the Nikdya-sangrahaya seems to 
have been moved to use such harsh words because Sena extended pat~- 
ronage to an Indian monk who arrived in Sri Lanka during his reign. 
The Indian, the chronicler says, was a heretic of the Vajraparvata nikdya 
who came in the guise of a Buddhist monk. 
He settled at the Virankura- 
rima and used fifteen kaland of gold to bribe Girivasasen, a palace official 
through whose help he was able to approach the king. 
‘The king was 
deceived into accepting the Vajiriyavada which was preached as a secret 
doctrine. 
It was in this reign, he says, that ddstras like the Ratnakita 
were brought to Sri Lanka, and tho Vajiriyavada has persisted ever 
since as an esoteric doctrine practiced in private by the foolish.’ 
The 
last statement alludes to the prevalence of the Vajiriyavada at the time 
this work was written. 
Presumably the chronicler is recording a tra- 
dition, known in his time, which traced the origin of these practices to 
the reign of Sena I. « 
The difference between the traditions in the Calavamsa and 
the 
Nikaya-sahgrahaya in both content and point of view suggest that they 
were of independent origin. 
Tho Nikdya-satigrahaya does not ment- 
ion the Mahasanghikas or their corporate existence with the Theraya- 
dins. 
Jt speaks of the introduction of Vajiriyavada teachings and the 
bringing of the sastras, information which is not found in the Ca/avamsa, 
and it makes specific reference to the arrival in Sri Lanka of a monk 
from India, 
‘ 
-On the other hand, the tradition attested to in the Nikdya-saigra- 
haya confirms the information in the Calavamsa on certain important 
points. 
Both date the incident to the reign of Sena I and mention the 
Virahkurirama in this connection. 
Further, both these texts reveal, 
though not in the same terms, that a school which did not subscribe to 
the Theravada teachings gained the support of the king. 
The fact that 
the two chronicles contain two traditions which, though dissimilar, cor- 
roborate each other on main points, suggests that there was a historical 
basis for these traditions. 
However, the information in the two chronicles is too meagre to 
provide a coherent picture of this incident. 
Further, these statements, 
especially the one found in the Calavamsa, carry implications too grave to 
” 
be accepted without corroborative evidence. 
32. 
Ssp., 
1473.11; 1520.20; Edgerton, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit 
Dictionary, 
Vol, I, p. 411. 
33, 
Niks. pp. 20-1.

--- PAGE 136 [DIRECT] ---

250 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
© 
An inscription from Anuradhapura does, in fact, provide contem- 
porary evidence which corroborates and supplements the traditions in 
the chronicles. 
It has been pointed out that the Virankurirama was 
built, according to the Calavamsa, within the precincts of the Abhayagiri 
monastery, 
This record, erroneously called the Jetavandrima Sanskrit 
inscription, was found among the ruins of a hermitage situated to the 
north of-the Twin Ponds within the grounds of the Abhayagiri mon- 
astery.4* Close to the spot where this inscription was unearthed are 
found the ruins of a structure which reveal a ground-plan unique in the 
architectural tradition of Sri Lanka and strongly reminiscent of 
the 
style represented by the ruins at Paharpir in the Rajshahi District of 
Bengal.35 
F 
The published portion has some lacunae due to the fact that the 
middle and the bottom of the slab have been damaged, but on the whole 
_ ibis well-engraved. and renders a fairly satisfactory and reliable reading. 
However, it is only one part of an extensive record, for it begins with 
part of a conjoint word, and attempts made to recover the other parts 
have so far been of no avail. 
The inscription was composed in Sanskrit 
and inscribed in the Nagari script of the “‘nail-headed” variety. Some 
of the letters seem to have developed kutila forms. 
Wickremasinghe, 
who edited the inscription, remarked on the similarity of the script to that 
used:in the. Magadha area in about the middle of the ninth century. 
A 
more detailed comparative study seems to bear out these remarks. 
- 
It isnot possible to trace all the palacographic forms occurring in 
this record 
to any. one particular Indian inscription; but the script of the 
Abhayagiri inscription closely resembles that used in the Buddha Gaya, 
’ Nalanda, and Khalimpar inscriptions of Dharmapala.%* 
On the whole 
» the«palacographic forms of the. Abhayagiri inscription appear to be 
>. 
Older:than, those of the inscriptions dated in the reign of Devapala. 
Yet 
. certain individual letters appear to be more developed than their counter- 
parts in the inscriptions of Dharmapala, and parallels can be found only 
im the records of Devapala.?’ _ 
The script of this record gives the impres- 
sion that it'is. laterthan the Khalimpir record of Dharmapala, but 
“eatlier:than the inscriptions issued in the latter part of the reign of 
‘Devapala. 
It may not be too hazardous to assign this record, on these 
considerations, to the first half of the ninth century. 
(The reign of 
34. EZ, Vol. I, pp. 1-10. 
"35, ASCAR, 1894, 13th Report, p. 3, pl. XIII. 
36." 
Naland& inscription, MASI, No. 66, 1942, pl. Xa; Khalimpir inscription, 
JRAS, (Beng.), 1894, pp. 39-62, pl, Ll; Buddha Gaya inscription, JRAS (Beng,). 
1908, p. 101, pl..VI. 
37, Monghyr Plates, 2Y, Vol. XVII, plate facing p. 304, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
25h 
Sena I falls within this period.) 
Jt is clear that the palaeographic forms 
of the Abhayagiri inscription bear a very close resemblance to those of 
inscriptions from the Bihar-Bengal area of India. 
Presumbly the scribe 
who indited this record was either a person from the Eastern regions of 
India or at least one who was thoroughly familiar with the traditions of 
this region. 
The inscription deals with a variety of subjects including the allow- 
ances and emoluments of monks and employees, the procedure of ad- 
ministration and the conditions of residence at the monastery. 
The 
last six of the legible lines fix the number of monks who were to live at 
the monastery and detail regulations pertaining to filling any vacancies 
that may occur. 
It appears that this portion of the inscription deals with 
regulations instituted for a hermitage that had been recently founded. 
The hermitage was given to a hundred monks comprising twenty- 
five from each of ‘the four principal nikdyas.”’ 
There was also provis-~ 
ion for forty monks engaged in the study of the sdstras who were to be. 
tutored without affiliation to any of the nikdyas: 
ciitur-maha-nikdyesu paicavimésatih patcavimsatistapasvinah 
tena 
datannaivdsikanim, 
catvérimsat dastrabhiyukta tapasvinah nikéya- 
bhedavinipi grhitanisrayah....>8 
: 
-The term nikdya could be given three possible interpretations. 
It could 
be used to denote the divisions of the Canon, the main divisions of the 
Sutta Pitaka or schools of religious opinion. 
When the Canon is classi- 
fied under nikdyas the number is always five and hence the first mean- 
ing is not applicable in this particular case?” 
If the second interpreta- 
tion is accepted, the passage would mean that the four nikdyas were to 
be studied each by a separate group of twenty-five monks, while forty 
monks studied the exegetical treatises thereupon. However, the divis- 
ions of the Sutta Pitake are usually called dgamas in Buddhist Sanskrit 
works. 
The Sutta Pijaka contained fiye and not four divisions though 
the fifth, the Khuddaka Nikdya, was not accepted as an authentic col- 
lection in the early days. 
Moreover, it would be strange if arrange~ 
ments were made for the study of the éastras and the four divisions of 
the Sutta Pitaka without any similar arrangements for the other sections 
of the Canon. 
The construction of the relevant sentence with the term 
nikdya in the Locative Case also suggests that it was a faction of monks 
rather than a section of the Sutta Pifaka that was denoted by the word. 
The meaning of the word becomes clear when some of the regulations 
38, EZ, Vol. I, p. 5, if 33-4, 
39. 
See Smp., Vol. 1, pp. 26-8.

--- PAGE 137 [DIRECT] ---

252 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
are examined, 
If the number of monks from a particular nikaya living 
at the monastery were to fall below the prescribed number, the vacan- 
cies could be filled by monks from other nikdyas only with the approval 
of the nikdya concerned. 
In case of an expulsion, however, the vacancy 
was to be filled by monks from other nikayas.4° 
These regulations and 
the condition that the forty monks studying the édstras were to be 
‘tutored without affiliation to any one of the nikdyas leave little doubt 
that it was a group of monks that was denoted by the term nikdya in 
the Abhayagiri inscription. 
: 
According to the Cilavamsa, the Virahkurarama was given to the 
Mahdasiiighikas and the Theriyas. 
The term Theriya was generally 
used in the chronicle to denote the monks of the Mahavihara, but it 
could apply to the monks of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana schools as 
well. ;, 
Hence Theriya and Sthaviravadin were terms which could denote 
all three or.any one of the main nikdyas in Sri Lanka." 
If the strophe 
_ 
in question from the Calavamsa and the passage from the inscription 
explained as denoting the Mahasanghikas and the three Buddhist schools 
of Sri'Lanka, Thus the passage in the inscription would imply that 
each of the nikdyas was represented at Virankurairama by twenty-five 
,. Of their number. 
This explanation fits most of the known evidence, 
It does no séem likely, however, that the monks of the Mahiaivihara, who 
. always ‘regarded themselves as the orthodox faction and had earlier 
‘turned down'the request of a king to hold the uposatha festival jointly 
- with the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery, would at this time consent 
to live in'a hermitage within the precincts of the Abhayagiri monastery 
and -to. fraternize with monks of the other nikédyas including the Maha- 
sanghikas; Further, if a reconciliations among the three nikéyas of Sri 
Lanka ‘did in fact take place, one would expect that the chroniclers 
«Would: have treated this incident in quite a different manner and in 
much: gréater’ detail, 
: vAvstatement: of I-tsing, who visited India in the seventh century, 
eems'to’ throw valuable light on this problem: 
“"".) 
Throughout the five divisions of India, as well as the islands of 
voy 
the Southern Sea people speak of the four nikdyas....In Maga- 
-dha,'the doctrines of the four nikéyas are generally in practice, 
»yot ‘the Sarvastivada nikaya flourishes most....In the eastern 
: frontier countries, the four nikdyas are found side by side (literally 
i a frontier countries practise mixedly the four nikd- 
40, EZ, Vol. 1, p. 5, il, 35-7; see also p. 9. 
Al.” 
Seo supra p. 7. 
are taken to refer to the same incident, the term “four niktiyas”’ may be” 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
253 
Ltsing goes on to enumerate the four nikdyas as the Aryamilasar- 
vastivada nikaya, Aryamahasanghika nikdya, Aryasthavira nikdya and 
the Aryasammitiya nikdya.? 
As Bareau has remarked, I-tsing does 
not seem to draw any distinction between Sarvastivada and Millasar- 
vastivada.3 
It is evident from this passage that the term “four nika- 
yas’’ was used to denote the Sarvastividins, Mahasdtghikas, Sthaviras. 
and the Sammitiyas who, by I-tsing’s time, seemn to have emerged as the 
four leading nikdyas of the Buddhist satgha. 
I-tsing is not alone in giving this number of the major sectarian div- 
isions of Indian Buddhism. 
The Samayabhedoparacanacakre-nikdya- 
bhedopadarsana-satigraha attributed to Vinitadeva, 
an abbot of the 
Nalanda monastery who lived in about the eighth century, refers to the 
same fourfold division of the sangha into the Mahasanghika, Sarvasti- 
vada, Sthavira and the Sammitiya nikdyas and lists the other nikdyas 
as their subdivisions.“4 
Similarly, a Tibetan text datable to the ele- 
venth century follows the same pattern by listing the eighteen nikdyas 
under these four principat groups.“ 
These four main schools are’ also 
mentioned in Bu-ston’s fourteenth century history of Buddhism.‘ 
The correctness of the classification of the less important nikdyas as 
subgroups of the four principal nikdyas may arouse dispute, but the testi- 
mony of our sources leaves little doubt that the Mahasanghikas, Sarvas- 
tividins, Sthaviras and the Sammitiyas rose to the position of the four 
principal nikdyas of the Buddhist saigha by about the seventh century 
and that they continued to hold this position at least until about the ele- 
venth century. 
In this context it is interesting to note that the inscription from the 
Abhayagiri monastery uses the term cdturmahdnikdya or “the four prin- 
cipal nikdyas,’’ 
When this term is considered in the light of the fore- 
going discussion it seems reasonable to interpret it as a reference to the. 
Mahiasanghikas, ‘Sarvastivadins, 
Sthaviravadins 
and the Sammitiyas 
“ who had emerged as the four principal nikayas in India. 
The state- 
- 
ment in the inscription would imply that twenty-five monks from each 
of these, nikdyas were to live together at a hermitage attached to the 
Abhayagiri monastery. Probably it was the monks of the Abhayagiri 
monastery who represented the Sthaviravadins in this context. 
Unlike 
the residents of the Mahavihara, the monks of the Abhayagiri fraternity 
42, 
I-tsing, A Record of the Buddhist Religion, ed. 3, Takakusu, pp. 8-9. 
43, 
Bareau, Les sectes.., p. 153. 
44. 
A, Bareau, “Trois traités sur les sectes bouddhiques des a Vasumitra, Bhavya 
et Vinitadeva,” JA, 1954, pp. 229-33, Bareau; Les sectes....p. 24 
45. 
Bareau, Les sectes.,. .p. 26, 
46. 
These lists arealso quoted by Bu-ston. 
See Bu-ston, op, cit., Pt, Hi, pp. 98-100.

--- PAGE 138 [DIRECT] ---

254 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
had always been tolerant of and even receptive to the teaching of the 
non-Theravadin schools of Buddhism. 
As early as the third century 
they welcomed the teachings of the Vetullas.47 
Hiuen-tsang noted 
that they. “studied both vehicles and widely diffused the Tripitaka” 
unlike the monks of the Mahavihira who were “opposed to the Great 
Vehicle.’"48 
The exegetist Sumangala, who lived at the end of the twelfth 
century or the beginning of the thirteenth century, mentions a “here- 
tical’ view jointly held by the Mahasanghikas and the Abhayagirivasins 
in his commentary, the Adhidhammattha-vikisini. 
Presumably this 
Statement reflects the close relationship which prevailed between the 
~ two fraternities. 
As evident from the Chinese and Tibetan accounts of the Buddhist 
scholastic tradition which were prevalent in the Eastern regions of India, 
the practice of different nikdyas living together at the same monastery 
was not unknown. 
The rather incoherent statement of I-tsing cited 
earlier also seems to point to the friendly co-existence of the four nikdyas, 
This view is further supported by evidence in the Blue Annals. 
This 
work records the tradition that Dipankaraétijfiina, an. abbot of the 
Vikramagila monastery, studied the Canons of the four nikdyas. 
More 
over, this. text states that the Tibetan scholar Rwa Lo-tsa-bar Do-rje- 
grags sent one hundred sravs of gold to the Vikramaséila monastery as 
an endowment to pay for the regular recitation of the Arya-prajtipara- 
mitd-saficaya-gathi by “eighty-four panditay of the four nikayas,'5°. 
_ These statements seom to suggest that the Vikramaéila monastery was an 
institution where the monks representing the four nikdyas lived and that 
it was a center which encouraged the comparative study of their teach- 
ings. 
The Célavamsa recorded that the Mahasanghikas and the Theriyas 
were given the Viraikurarama built at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
Ac- 
cording to the Nidkya-saigrahaya, a monk, who belonged to a “here- 
.tical” school settled at the Virahkurarama and won over the king to his 
cause. 
Séstras such as the Ratnakdta were also. brought to Sri Lanka 
during the same reign, 
The Abhayagiri inscription records that monks 
from four nikdyas, at least one of which represented a school of thought 
distinct from the Theravada, lived at a hermitage attached to the Abha- 
yagiri monastery; it also makes special provision for the study of the 
daéstras by forty monks. 
In view of these remarkable instances of corro- 
boration it seems reasonable to suggest that all three sources—the two 
47, 
My, 36. 41. 
48, 
Beal, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 443. 
49, 
Abhidhammattha-vikasini. p. 46. 
See also supra p. 29, 
50. 
G,N, Roerich, The Blue Annals, Pt. I, pp. 243, 377, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
255 
chronicles and the inscription—are speaking of the same incident and to 
hold that the inscription dates back to the reign of SenaI. 
This dating, 
as pointed out earlier, is supported by palacographic considerations too. 
The Ratnakata or the Pao-chi is one of the seven categories of the 
Mahayana class of the Siitra Piiaka in the Chinese Buddhist Canon. 
It contains a collection of forty-nine sétras, 
The parallel division in the 
Tibetan Canon, the dkon-briseg, has forty-eight sitras, though some ed- 
ition have only forty-five.*! 
Edgerton has pointed out that the K@é- 
yapa Parivartta is sometimes called the Ratnakata.>? Most of the works 
in the Ratnakdéja class are short tracts dealing with a single problem, 
but some like the Pitéputra-samigama are analytical treatises of consi- 
derable length.°3 
In this connection it is interesting that a number of 
copper plaques discovered at the Iidikapusiya stipa at Cetiyagiri, a 
monastery which was under the control of the Abhayagiri nikaya, have 
been found to contain’ quotations from the Kasyapa Parivartta’s which 
are written in the Sinhalese script. 
Paranavitana believes that they may 
belong to the eighth or the ninth century.>5 Hence the tradition that the 
scriptures of the Ratnakiija class were’ brought to Sri Lanka appears 
to have a historical basis. 
The Nikdya-saigrahaya mentions that the Vajiriyavada was intro- 
duced to the island during the reign of Sena l. The ‘heretic’? who won 
the king over belonged to the Vajraparvata sect.5° 
The term Vajrapar- 
vata which is sometimes used in place of Vajiriya’ 
seems: to be syn- 
nomymous with the latter. 
Eliot is probably right in equating Vajiriya 
with Vajrayana.5® 
Though one cannot be certain about the historicity 
of a tradition which occurs in only one’ of our sources, the discovery 
of some stone slabs bearing Tantra dhdrapis within the Abhayagiri 
monastery and at a site not very far from that of the Sanskrit inscrip- 
tion under discussion may add weight to the possibility that Tantric 
teachings were brought to Sri Lanka during this time from the Eastern 
regions of India. 
Paranavitana has described the script on these slabs 
as a form of Nagari used in Eastern India in about the ninth century.%? 
51. 
Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism, Vol. UL, pp. 282, 283, 374, 
52, 
Edgerton, op. cit., Vol. TY, p. 374. 
53. 
C. V. Murti, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, p. 86, 
54, 
EZ, Vol. II, pp. 199-212, 238-42, 
55, 
EZ, Vol. IIE, p. 200, 
56. 
No information on a sect by this name is available. 
In the Avatamsaka Satra 
there is a reference to a place called the Vajraparvata situated in the sea where bodhi+ 
sattvas used to congtegate. 
Taisho Tripitaka, Vol. X, p. 241b. 
57, 
Niks. p. 10. 
58 
Eliot, op. cit., Vol. IU, 
p p. 40, 
59, ASGAR, 1940-45, p, 41.

--- PAGE 139 [DIRECT] ---

256 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
Some of the most important works of the Tantra and the Vajrayana were 
found in the Eastern region of India. According to the Tibetan sources, 
‘the abbots of the Vikramasila monastery were famous vajrdcdaryas from 
the time of Buddhaérijiiana. 
Some of the teachers, like Buddhaérijiiana 
aud Dipankaraérijfiana, are specifically referred to as monks of the 
Mahasanghika 
nikaya. 
Probably these 
Tantric 
influences 
came 
throtigh Indian monks from centers of Buddhist learning in Eastern 
India 
or through monks from Sri Lanka who had lived at these 
monasteries. 
The Abhayagiri inscription and the chronicles seem to record an 
interesting and important incident in the history of Buddhism in Sri 
Lanka. ..It.is evident from the information they provide that monks 
belonging to schools other than the Theravada, such as the Sarvistiva- 
dins, Sammitiyas and more. certainly the Mahasanghikas, lived in Sri 
Lanka,: Apparently an experiment was tried at the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery to‘ provide for the corporate existence within one hermitage of re- 
presentatives.of these four principal nikayas of the Buddhist saigha, 
’ 
-and.to initiate:a tradition of assiduous comparative study of their teach~ 
 ings-which would not be affiliated to any one of them. 
This was not 
- 
“necessarily the first time that the teachings of these schools and of the 
’ Tantra. were: propagated in Sri Lanka,®! but it was probably the first 
“systeniatic attempt made to integrate these elements with local Buddhist 
“traditions: 
"Presumably the monks representing schools other than the 
; 
hietavada ‘came from India, but one cannot be certain about this. 
However; the evidence in the Nikdya-satgrahaya and the fact that the 
“-sules-of ‘residence and monastic administration in the Abhayagiri ins- 
oription are in Sanskrit and not in Sinhalese, as is usual; may support 
this.supposition. 
«If the Nikdya-satgrahaya” is to be believed, Sena I, the next king, 
«did not welcome this type of foreign ‘‘heretical’’ influence. 
This chroni- 
cle ‘states that he stationed guards all around the coast to prevent the 
“entry of “‘pseudo-Buddhist monks.’’ 
To substantiate this statement thé 
“chronicler quotes a, stropho allegedly from the Calavamsa, but this stro- 
-phe is not found in the extant recensions of the Cilayamsa. 
© 
60, 
Schiefner, op. cif., pp. 257-61. 
:61,° When Amoghavajra visited Ceylon in the eighth century, Samantabhadra, a 
Tantrist of great repute, performed ‘the Vajradhatu and Garbhadbatu ceremonies. 
Amoghavajra and his two disciples learned the secrets of the five abhisecant from him. 
This would testify to the prevalence of Tantric practices in Ceylon before the events 
under discussion.. 
See W. Pachow, UCR, Vol. XH, Pp. 182. 
. 62. 
Niks. p21, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
. 
257 
Even if Sena II did take such steps, it is unlikely that they were eff- 
ective. Tdrandtha relates an account of the visit to Sri Lanka of Ratna- 
karasinti (Santi-pa), one of the most prominent teachers of the Vajra- 
yana in Eastern India. At the time of his visit to Sri Lanka Ratnakara- 
4anti was the abbot of the Somapuri monastery, the site of which has 
been identified with the ruins at Paharpir. He came to Sri Lanka with 
an envoy despatched by the king of the island to fetch him and brought 
along two hundred texts of the Mahayana school. 
He preached in the 
island for seven years.and, on his return to India, left behind five hun- 
dred monks of the Mahayana schoo!. 
During his stay in Sri Lanka, 
Taranitha maintains, 
the Siitra schools gained wide popularity. 
Upon his return to India he was requested by the king to live at the 
Vikramasila monastery and was assigned the post of dvdrapandita.® 
The historicity of Ratnakarasinti need not be questioned. 
He is 
also mentioned in the Blue Annals as the dvarapandita of the eastern gate 
of the Vikramagila monastery and as a teacher of great renown. 
Since the only known account which gives biographical details about him 
is the work of Taranatha, the evidence about his visit to Sri Lanka can- 
not be verified, but-it is clear from this account that Taranatha had at 
least two earlier histories before him. 
He mentions that they differed 
with respect to the name of the Indian king who patronized Ratnakara- 
nti.’ 
The silence of the chronicles of Sri Lanka does not invalidate 
the evidence of Taranatha since it is only very rarely that they concern 
. 
themselves with the affairs of the ‘‘heretics,’’ and hence it would be un- 
wise to reject this testimony as a mere legend in a late chronicle. The 
visit of a famous teacher like Ratnakaradanti, if it did in fact take place, 
must have greatly strengthened the position of the Mahayana schools 
in the island. 
; 
Information in Taranatha’s chronicle does not provide any definite 
clues regarding the date of Ratnakaraganti; 
According to his account, 
certain traditions identified the king who patronized the scholar as 
Mahipila (ca, A.D. 988-1038) while other chronicles identified him with 
another king named Canaka., 
Taranatha was inclined to accept the 
second view,” but there is no information on the chronological position 
of this king. 
However the account of the life of the Tibetan translator 
- 
63. ASIAR, 1927-8, pp. 105-6. 
. 
na This refers to the Siitra schools of Mahayana Buddhism as 
distinct from Tantra 
schools, 
65. 
Grtinwedel, op. cit., pp. 106-7, 
66. 
Roerich, op. cit., Pt. I, pp. 205-6, 
67. 
Griinwedel, op. cit, p. 107. 
68. 
Ibid.

--- PAGE 140 [DIRECT] ---

258 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
*Brog-mi which appears in the Blue Annals helps us to arrive at a fairly 
teliable dating, 
‘Brog-mi is said to have left his monastery to study in 
India when the Lo-tsi-ba Rin-chen bsai-po was nearing the age of fifty. 
At Vikramagila he studied the Vinaya under Ratnakaraganti, who was 
a dvarapandita.” 
In a prior passage the chronicle records that Rin- 
chon bsat-po was born in a year corresponding to A. D, 957.7° 
This . 
implies that Ratndikarasanti was already a well-known teacher at Vik- 
ramaéila by the beginning of the eleventh century and thus his visit to 
Sri Lanka should have taken place in the latter part of the tenth century, 
The Ciilavamsa refers to many scholars from Jambudipa who came 
to the island during the reign of Vijayabahu I (1055-1110), 
The king 
welcomed them and pleased them with gifts of money.7! 
it is not im- 
possible that some of these scholars were Buddhist monks from the East- 
ern regions of India. 
Finds from the relic chamber of the Mahiyangana 
stipa testify to the continuity of the relationship with this region. 
Among these finds is a figure of the Buddha cut in relief on a plaque of 
black basalt, 
On its back the Ye dharma... formula was inscribed 
“in Nagari characters of the Pala period.’’ 
As Paranavitana pointed 
out, the finds seom to have been deposited in the s#ipa in the course of 
restorations undertaken during the reign of Vijayabahu I.” 
Apart 
from the scholars who came to Sri Lanka to propagate their teachings 
it is possible that there were some who came to study at the monasteries 
“of the island. 
When the Burmese monk Chapata was in Sri Lanka 
he found a young monk from Tamalitti (Tamealipti) who had come to 
study the teachings of the Mahavihdra school. 
It may be surmised 
that in later times Muslim invasions and consequent political upheavals 
in India promoted migrations of scholars to places like Sri Lanka. 
In’ his Nissanka-dana-vinoda-mandapa 
inscription 
Nissanka 
Malla 
claims to have distributed gifts among many people who had come from 
foreign lands.™ 
However, there is no information in the Indian. or 
Tibetan chronicles concerning any such migrations. 
Relations with Nepal and Tibet 
The close relations that the monasteries of Eastern India main- 
tained with Nepal and Tibet during this period would have enabled 
visitors from Sri Lanka to come into contact with monks from these 
69, 
Roerich, op. ci/., pp. 206-7, 
10, 
Ibid, p. 123, 
VW, 
Cy, 60, 19 
72, ASCAR, 1951, p. 17, 
73, 
See infra p. 276, 
74, EZ, Vol, Ul, pp. 123-5. 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
259 
regions. 
Two manuscripts found in Nepal show that Sri Lanka was 
known and regarded by the Buddhists of Nepalas an important center 
of Buddhism. 
One.of these, a manuscript which contains many minia- 
ture paintings, was written at the Sri Hlam monastery in a year corres. 
ponding to A.D. 1015.75 
Three of these paintings represent cult objects 
from Sri Lanka, 
One is a painting of the Buddha Dipankara attended 
by two figures identified by Foucher as Avalokitesvara and Vajrapani; 
~ another depicts Jambhala, while the third carries the figure of ‘‘Arogya- 
Sila Lokanatha,”7° The second manuscript is a copy of the Prajitdpara- 
mité made by a resident of the Kisa... monastery in a year correspond- 
ing to A:D. 1071. 
This manuscript also contains three miniatures repre- 
senting images from Sri Lanka: Dipankara attended by Vajrapani, 
Jam~ 
bhala, and “‘Arogysaila Lokegvara.”?7 
In both the paintings of ‘‘Aro-- 
syasala Lokanatha’’ (or Lakeévara) he is attended by two female figures, 
one executed in red and the other in green. 
Perhaps these paintings 
were based upon reports of Nepalese pilgrims who visited Sri Lanka. 
It.is also possible that some of the Sinhalese monks who visited Eastern 
India ventured as far as the native land of the Buddha, but one cannot 
rule out the possibility that they were based on mere hearsay, on impres- 
sions gathered in Eastern India where visitors from the two lands met. 
The Blue Annals record a tradition about a saintly monk from Sri 
Lanka who, it would appear, lived in the twelfth century. 
A monk from 
'Kashmnit who heard of his fame visited him in the town of Ratnaciida- 
mani,”® and through him the Sinhalese monk sent greetings. to the 
Tibetan monks, Rin-chen-dpal and dbon'-ston Rin-po-che, whom he 
very much admired, 
This story is found in another Tibetan work where 
the name of the Sinhalese monk is given as Gunaratna.”” 
More relia- 
ble evidence concerning the relationship which prevailed between Tibet 
and Sri Lanka during this period is found in two Sinhalese manuscripts 
discovered by Rahul Sankrtyayana in the Tibetan monastery of Sa- 
skya. 
One of these texts, incorrectly identified as the Vessantara Jataka 
by Sankrtyayana,® is a manuscript of the Karmavibhaga. 
‘This manu- 
script, which has been deciphered by the present writer, deals with many 
78. 
Cambridge University Library M'S'No. Add. 1643. See also A. Foucher, Etudes 
sur Piconographie bouddhique de P' Inde, pp. 15-27. 
16. 
Cambridge University Library MS, 
No, Add. 1643 ff, 8, 80, 86; Foucher, 
op. cit, p. 79, 
71, 
Foucher, op: cit., pp. 27-30. 
78. No information on a town of this name is available. 
79, _ Roerich, op. cit., Pt. I, p. 315; Pt. I, p. 599. These Tibetan monks are said to 
have lived in the latter part of the twelfth century, 
80. Journal of the Bikar and Orissa Research Society, 1937, p. 32.

--- PAGE 141 [DIRECT] ---

260 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
topics varying from mutual duties of teachers and students, the advan~ 
tages of patronizing the satgha, the disadvantages of desire, and life in 
heaven and hell, to'a discussion on the ‘‘perfections’’ (paramita). 
The script of the manuscript is comparable to the palaeographic forms 
of the period from the eleventh to the thirteenth century compiled by 
P. E. B. Fernando; his comments on the peculiarities of the script of this 
period are also applicable in this case.% 
The round form of the initial a 
is similar to the illustrations (Nos. 13 and 14) in his table. The cerebral. 
na-is formed ofa small circle followed by two loops. 
The dental na 
with the triangular base is quite similar to his illustration number 13 
while tho ma resembles his examples 15 and 16 which he has described 
as typical of this potiod. It is also noteworthy that the ra of this manu- 
script has not developed the short curve on the top of the letter which. 
seems to be a chatacteristic feature of the manuscripts of the thirteenth 
and later conturies.®%. 
Hence, it is possible that the manuscript belongs 
to the twelfth ‘century or the early thirteenth century. Rahul Sankrtya- 
“ yana is probably reporting information preserved at the Sa-skya monas-_ 
tery when he says that the two Sinhalese manuscripts belonged to Anan- 
taéri, a monk from Sri Lanka who visited the monastery in the time of 
_Grags-pa’ rgyal-mtshan."* 
According to the Blue Annals Grags-pa 
“Ypyal-mtshan “occupied the chair of the monastery’’ in the year corres- 
“sponding to A.D. 1172, and he died in A.D. 1216." 
Itis evident from 
_- “the foregoing discussion that the palaeographic evidence agrees with this 
is date:.’ Therefore it is likely that the tradition quoted by Sankrtyayana 
has.a historical basis. 
: 
“The. Significance of Relations 
with Northern Centers of 
Buddhism 
‘When considering the importance of the relations that Sri Lanka 
‘qaintained with the northern centers of Buddhism, it is necessary to 
draw 4 distinction between Eastern India and other centers in Nepal and 
“Tibet? 
Sinhalese monk or pilgrim who occasionally found his way to 
‘Nepal ‘or Tibet is unlikely to have exerted an influence of noteworthy 
“gy. "The present writer is indebted to Ven. H. Saddhatissa, through whose good 
offices he has been able to obtain photographic copies of this manuscript. 
When 
examining this-work, the possibility that it is one of the lost works of the Abhayagiri 
nikaya has to be kept in mind. 
$2, 
P, EH. H, Fernando, “Development of the Sinhalese Script from the 8th century 
-* AD. to the 15th century A.D.,” UCR, Vol. VILL, pp. 222-43 (with two tables), 
». 
83. 
Ibid, P. 239. 
: 
"“g4.° 
“Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 1937, p. 32, 
85, 
Roerich, op. cit, Pt. 1, p, 211. 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
261 
magnitude, nor is any such influence evident. 
The same comment ap- 
plies to the rare visitors from these regions who may have reached Sri 
Lanka. On the other hand, there is reason to believe that the relations 
with the Bihar-Bengal area were established on a much more regular 
basis, The practice of going on pilgrimage to sacred places in this area 
and the existence of a permanent body of Sinhalese monks at the monas- 
tery of Buddha Gaya were both conducive to the absorption of the in- 
fiuences disseminated by the centers of Buddhist learning in this area 
These relations also provided the Sinhalese monks with an opportunity 
to propagate the teachings of the Theravada. 
There is hardly any doubt 
that the influence of the monastic centers of Eastern India which spread 
to Tibet and Southeast Asia also stimulated the development of Maha- 
yana and Tantric Buddhism in the island. 
The decline and the final 
destruction of the great monasteries in the Bihar-Bengal area would have 
" severely affected the strength of the influence of those sects in the island 
as well as the position of the monasteries which harbored their teachings. 
Apart from inscriptions written in a script which shows a resem- 
blance to that used in Eastern India, there is also evidence which sup- 
ports the contention that East Indian influences were felt in the Buddhist 
sculpture of Sri Lanka, 
Paranavitana has drawn attention to the afti- 
nity in style between the naga figures of the Ratanapasdda in the Abha- 
_ yagiri monastery and the sculptures of the Pala period.®6 
A figure of 
Avalokitesvara from the Nevill collection of the British Museum may 
be cited as another example. 
This figure with a roundish face, Mongo- 
loid in its appearance, is seated in the ‘‘pose of a great king’’ (mahdrdja- 
lil) ona lotus pedestal. 
It has a dhyini-buddha on the headdress. 
A 
lotus is held in the left hand; the right is in the varada mudra, 
‘An in- 
scription stating that it was “given by sazgha’' (satghadattap) is ins- 
eribed on the pedestal. 
Wickremasinghe, who read this inscription, 
has pointed out that 
it bears a close similarity in its palacographic forms 
to the Abhayagiri Sanskrit inscription discussed above; both inscriptions 
seom to have been written in the script of the East Indian regions of the 
ninth century.*? 
Hence it is likely that this sculpture was brought from 
- 
Eastern India during the Pala Period, or that it was the work of a sculp- 
tor trained in the traditions of this region. 
It has been suggested that the group of images at the Galvihara at 
Polonnaruva bears some resemblance to the works of the Pala Period. 
86. 
UCHC, Vol. I, Pt. 1, p. 404. 
87. Ananda K. Coom: 
s 
i 
Savas” TRAS, 1908, op eT ee i eaneane Buddhist Images from Ceylon and 
88. 
P. B. E. “Fernando, 
‘Tantric 
I 
i 
Polonnaruva,” UCR, Vol. XVII, Nes. i ences De! wap ee

--- PAGE 142 [DIRECT] ---

262 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
But it is not advisable to attribute them exclusively to the North Indian 
tradition since some of their characteristics like the technique of repre~ 
senting the folds of the robes by “‘double grooves,’’ the decoration of the 
back of the seat in the form of a makaratorana, the use of the “‘flame’’ 
design to decorate the haloes, and the method of depicting the padma- 
sanaas a thin cushion on the pedestal are also found in sculptures 
discovered at Nagapattana.®® Perhaps they represent influences of both 
these regions with which Sri Lanka maintained close relations. 
Relations with South India 
; 
Relations between the Buddhist communities of South India and 
Sri Lanka were always very close. 
As in Sri Lanka, Buddhism of the 
Theraviida school thrived in the Dravida lands. Hiuen-tsang recorded 
that there were about a hundred monasteries with ten thousand monks 
of the Sthavira school in the Ta-lo-pi-ch’a (Dravida) country. 
It is 
possible that the position of Buddhism in South India was affected by 
tho rise of militant Saivism and Vaisnavism which contested the tenets 
of both Jainism and Buddhism. 
Evidence concerning the rivalry bet« 
ween these religious communities is preserved in Tamil literary works 
such 
as the Periya Purdnam, Tiruvaiavarar Purdnam, Kuruparamparat 
and the Tirumalai, 
It is said that Tirufianagampantar defeated the Bud-. 
dhist inhabitants of the village Potimankai in a, debate and that subso- 
quently his opponents were converted to Saivism.2!_ According to the 
Tiruvitavarar Purdnam, Manikkavacakar, another Saiva ndyanar, took 
part in a debate at Gitamparam where he defeated a Buddhist monk 
from Sri Lanka.®2. 
Evidently the militant proselytizing activities of the 
nayandrs and the dlyars did not provoke the. Buddhists to develop a 
counter-movement to stem the growing influence of the Saiva and Vai- 
snava faiths. 
Itis possible that the decline of the influence of Buddhism 
led to migrations of South Indian monks to more favorable surroundings 
in nearby countries like Sri Lanka.?3 
: 
Tho important centers of Buddhism in the Coromandel coast sur- 
vived this difficult period and played an active role in the subsequent 
history of Buddhism. 
Of these, Kafici rose to a position of importance 
89. 
‘T. N, Ramachandran, The Ndgapattanam and other Buddhist Bronzes in the 
Madras Museum, Pls, 1 & XVI. 
90, 
Beal, op. eit., p. 429. 
91, 
H. W, Schomerus, Sivaitische Heiligenlegenden (Periyapivdnaand Tiruvatava- 
. 
rarpuréna), Jena, 1925, p, 155. 
92. 
Ibid. pp. 264-80, 
93, 
See supra p. 258, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
263 
during the time of the Pallavas, but its importance and influence out- 
lasted the political power of the Pallavas. 
As late as in the fourteenth 
century the Ndgara-Kértagama refers to Buddhaditya, 
a monk from the 
Sadwihara at Kafici who wrote a panegyric in praise of the Javanese 
king Hayam Wuruk.°4 
The port of Nagapattana (Negapatam), situated 
further to the south at the mouth of the Kaveri, was another important 
center which attracted pilgrims and scholars from many regions. 
The 
commentator Dhammiapala the Senior lived at the Dhammisoka-maha- 
raja monastery at, Nagapattana at the time of the composition of the 
commentary on the Nettipakarana,®> and Buddhadatta, an earlier com- 
mentator, lived for some time at Kaveripattana, another port nearby.%* 
It was at Nagapattana that two monasteries wore built in the time of the 
Colas by Maravijayottuigavarman, the king of Sri Vijaya.°? 
More 
than three hundred Buddhist images dating from about the ninth to 
‘ about the seventeenth century were found here, thereby revealing that 
‘Nagapattana was an active center of Buddhism for a very long period. 
The-influence of Buddhism was by no means restricted to the Coro- 
mandel coast; it spread across the central highlands into the Malabar 
coasts well, A copper plate from Vendaranyam, which is inscribed in a 
script datable to about the tenth century, records a grant ofland made 
toa Buddhist monastery called Sundaracolaperumpalli built by one Selet- 
tiyan.°® 
According to an inscription from the Shikarpur Taluk a Bud- 
dhist monastery with shrines for Tara, Loke’vara, Keéava and the Bud- 
~ dha was built at Balligave (Belugami) in A.D. 1055. 
It was probably a 
Tantric Buddhist institution since endowments were made for the main- 
tenance of yoginis.® 
A record from the same taluk dated in A.D. 1098 
qmentions another Buddhist shrine.t° 
The monastery of Milavasa 
located in the Malabar coast! was well-known among the Nepalese 
Buddhists of the eleventh century as an important center of Buddhism 
in the Dakginapatha.? 
A number of Buddha images datable to the 
Cola period have been found in many places spread throughout this area 
such as Tyaganur, Tanjore, Kafci, Tiruvatti, Tiruvalafijuli, Elaiyur, 
94, 
Theodore G. Th, Pigeaud, Java in the 14th Century, a Study in Cultural History, 
(The Nagara-Kértagama by Rekawi Prapaiica), Vol. IM, p. 111; Vol. IV, pp. 331-3, 
95, 
Nettipakarana, ed. E. Hardy, PTS, 1961, p. 249. 
96. 
Madhurattha-vilasini, ed, 1. B, Horner, PTS, 1946, p. 299 
97, 
EI, Vol. XXII, p. 242, if, 80-4, 
98, P.R. Sirinivasan, The Story of Buddhism, 1956, p. 158, 
99, 
Epigraphia Carnatica, Vol, VIL, Shikarpur taluk, No. 170. 
100, 
ibid., No. 106. 
‘ 
101, 
Travancore Archaeological Series, Vol. Wl, pp. 115-23. 
102. 
Foucher, op. cit., p. 194,

--- PAGE 143 [DIRECT] ---

264 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
Jayakondacolapuram, 
Manambady 
and Karadikkuppam.’® 
It has 
already been pointed out that the images from Nigapattana testify that 
Buddhism survived into the seventeenth century, and this is confirmed 
by certain inscriptions of the Yadavas of Devagiri, the Vijayanagara 
kings and the Nayakkas 
of Tanjore.1°*- 
Even if it cannot be said that 
Buddhism was in a flourishing state, itis clear that it was very much 
; 
alive at any South Indian centers during the period under review. 
The friendly relations between the Buddhist communities of South 
India and Sri Lanka can be traced back to a very early period. 
Many 
stories ‘in the Sthala-vatthu-pakarana and the Sahassa-vatthu-pakarana 
speak about Sinhalese monks who. visited South India. 
The port of 
Kaveripattana occurs frequently in these stories. 
Monks who were 
banished from the island for adherence to the teachings of the Vetulla- 
vida sought refuge in the Cola land where they found friends who were 
ready to:come to Sri Lanka to vindicate their position..°° 
South Indian 
commentaries such as the Andhakatthakathé were studied by commen- 
tators in Sri-Lanka. 
The works of Buddhadatta and Dhammapila the 
Senior’ are. products of the relationship which existed between these 
two countries. 
It has been. suggested that Ananda, the author of the 
Visuddhimagga-tika,.and Anuruddha, the author of the Abhidhammat- 
tharsangaha; were Indians. In the colophon of the Paramattha-vinic- 
chaya the:author states that his birthplace was Kaveri.1 
“*The'close contact between the Buddhist communities of the Coro- 
-mandel’ coast’ and of Sri Lanka continued until the end of the tenth 
: century when’ friendly. relations were vitiated by political develop- 
/ ments which led to the conquest of Rajarattha by the Colas. 
When 
Vijayabaliu T'restored. the Sinhalese power over Rajarattha it was to 
Burina and not td South India that he sent envoys to obtain monks to 
restore:the sdsana in the island. 
This too: has to be partly explained 
in, political’ terms ;107 presumably friendly relations between the’ two 
uuntries had. not been re-established by this time. 
“A strophe ina fragmentary inscription from Polonnaruva, which 
(owas probably issued during the reign of Vikramabahu I, mentions a 
hierarch by the name of Ananda who is compared to ‘ta banner raised. 
aloftin'the land of Lanka.’ 
The last two padas of the strophe which 
are readable only i In part refer to his connections with the sangha of 
103. _Sirinivasan, op. cit., pp. 62-101. 
104, “MRE, 1927, No. 292; 1927/8, No. 66; 1939/40, No, 144, 
105.. 
Mv., 36. 11-3, 
106. | 
Paramattha-viniechaya, ed. Devananda, p. 337, 
107. 
See also tufra p. 273, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
265 
Tambarattha and of the Cola land.!°* 
His importance is indicated by 
the fact that he received the patronage of the queen of Vikramabahu at 
a time when the, royalty were not well-disposed toward 
the saigha. 
Buddhappiya, a monk froni the Cola kingdom who claims to have pre- 
sided over “‘two or three monasteries including Baladicca (Baladitya)" 
states in the colophon of his Pali grammar called Ripasiddhi that he was 
a disciple of Ananda, “‘the banner of Tambapanni.’”"!°9 
The comment- 
ary on the Ripasiddhi adds that Cilamanikarma was one of the monas- 
teries which came under Buddhappiya’s control.!!° 
This may be iden- 
tified with the Ciidamanivarma monastery built at Nagapattana by the 
king of Sri Vijaya.t!! 
Buddhappiya claims to have made the sdsana 
shine. 
Perhaps he is identical with the monk of the same name who is 
jnentioned in the Vimati-vinodani as one of the leading figures who took 
part in the “‘purification’’ of the Order in the Dravida lands by suppres- 
sing loose interpretations of the Vinaya rules.1? 
Paranavitana is pro- 
pably right in identifying the teacher of Buddhappiya with the hierarch 
Ananda of the Polonnaruva tecord.’!? 
If this is accepted, it may be 
cited as an important example of the relationship which prevailed bet- 
ween the satgha of Nagapattana and of Polonnaruva, 
During the ten years he spent in Sri Lanka the Burmese monk Chap- 
ata met Ananda, a monk from Kafici who was: versed in the three 
pitakas%4 
Two Cola monks, Buddhamitta and Kassapa, were in Sri 
Lanka during the time of Parikramabaihu I.!'5 
Little is known about 
Buddhamitta. 
Kassappais probably identical with the author of the 
Vimati-vinodani and the Moha-vicchedani who lived at the time he com- 
posed the latter work at the Naganana monastery in Coladhinathapura, 
a town which was situated in the middle of the Cola country. 
Warder 
has identified Coladhinathapura with Nagapattana,''® but Nagapat~ 
tana is known in Cola inscriptions as Colakulavallipattana.!7 
The 
statement that Coladhinathapura was situated in the middle of the Cola 
kingdom also suggests that it should have been located further inland. 
Kassapa criticizes the Sinhalese hierarch Sariputta for interpreting the 
108, EZ, Vol. LV, pp. 71-2. 
109. 
Mahdripasiddhi Sannaya, ed. Sumangala and Dhammaratana, 1891, p. 444, 
110. 
Ibid. 
Wi. 
EI, Vol. XXII, p. 242, £83, 
112. 
Vimati-vinodant, ed. Dharmadhara, p. 100, 
113, 
Paranavitana, Journal of the Greater India Society, Vol. XI, 1944, pp. 17-25. 
114, 
See infra p. 276, 
115. 
See supra p. 160. 
116. 
Moha-viechedani, PTS, p. xvi. 
117. 
Ef, Vol, XXII, p. 242, 1.83.

--- PAGE 144 [DIRECT] ---

266 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
rule concerning the consumption of liquor too -permissively. 
This in- 
tetpretation, he points out, encouraged lapses in discipline in the Cola 
land and was rejected as an “unorthodox” interpretation by the leading 
monks of that country. 
They cleansed the saigha of monks who sup- 
ported such views.1!8 
This criticism is important since it reveals the influence that the 
views of monk-scholars from Sri Lanka wielded over the clergy of the 
Cola land, It is also evident from this that the South Indian monks 
claimed to be more “‘orthodox”’ than their counterparts from Sri Lanka. 
Kassapa accuses Sariputta of having been influenced by the monks 
of the Abhayagiri monastery. 
This criticism seems to indicate some- 
thing more than mere disagreement; it is possible to detect traces of re- 
gional rivalry in these writings. 
It is natural to assume that the intense 
political rivalry and hostility between the Sinhalese and the Cola king- 
doms that'the reign of Parakramabihu I witnessed found expression in 
the writings of the period. 
The Simdlankaéra, 
a work on the problems 
of demarcating ceremonial boundaries, provides another indication of 
such rivalry.. The author of the work claims to have vindicated the posi- 
tion of the Sinhalese monks, 
All those who knew the Vinaya rules and 
who. wished for the perpetuation of the sdsana, he maintains, should 
-accept the views of the Sinhalese monks which are in accordance with 
the scriptures and the commentaries and certainly should 
reject the 
views: of:the Coliyans which were false and contrary to these. 
It was a 
. Sinhalese:monk called Vacissara, he declares at the end, who wrote this 
Sinbladkiiea and the commentary upon it... 
vent Itswas pointed out earlier that the thera Ananda was described in 
the Polonnaruva record as a monk who had connections with the sangha 
of Tambarattha, a locale which is mentioned in three other sources. 
According ‘to ‘its. colophon, the Paramattha-viniechaya was written by 
.Anuruddha, a monk born.in “‘the township of Kavira. in the land of the 
city.of Kafici’’ who was:living at the time at Tafija in Tambarattha,120 
The author ‘of the Jindlankara speaks of his reputation among the learned 
men of Coliya-tambarattha.2! This term may be interpreted either as 
‘the Cola land and Tambarattha, or as Tambarattha in the Cola land. 
The thitd’ reference occurs in the Calavamsa. 
Parakramabahu IL sent 
two ‘missions to foreign lands to obtain monks to help reorganize the 
118. 
Vimatt-vinodani., pp. 96-100; see also infra p. 326-7. 
119, - 
Stmdlankava, ed, Buddhasiri, 1904, pp, 42-3. 
120. 
Paramattha-vinicchaya., p. 337. 
This statement seems to suggest that the 
Paramattha-vinicchaya was written at a time when the town of Kavira was under the 
control of the Pallavas. 
If this is so, the work has to be assigned to the ninth century 
or an earlier period. 
121. Jindlankara, ed., R. Palita, 1955, p. 31. 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
267 
Order in Sri Lanka, and one of these missions was to the Cola kingdom. 
The other was sent to Tambarattha for the specific purpose of inviting 
Dhammakitti, a monk reputedly of great virtue.!22 
Geiger was inclined to believe that Tambarattha was located in 
South India.23 
One possibility is to identify Tafija with Tafijavar in 
the Cola country, but the context of the reference in the C@lavamsa pre- 
cludes such an identification. 
It is clear from this passage that, at least 
in the thirteenth century, Tambarattha was distinct from the Cola 
country since separate missions were sent to these two places. 
Paranavitana has attempted to identify Tambarattha with the Ligor 
yegion of the Malay Peninsula.24 
He has pointed out that the Paja- 
valiya substitutes Tainalimgamu for Tambarattha in the account of the 
reign 
of Parakramabahu 
JI. 
The 
Hatthavanagalla-vihira-vamsa 
mentions a certain invader by the name of Candabhanu who raided the 
island during the time of Parakramabahu II. 
He came from Tamba- 
linga.’6 
The Elu-attanagalu-vamsaya, the fourteenth-century 
Sinha- 
lese translation of this work, gives Tamalimgamu in place of Tamba- 
linga.27 
Coedés has identified’ Candabhanu with a king who bore 
this title mentioned in a Sanskrit inscription from Caiya.1?8 Ostensibly 
this would strongly support the identification of Tambarattha with 
the Caiya region. 
Paranavitana goes on to suggest that there was a 
“Tanjong-pura somewhere in the Malay Peninsula which would very 
well have been the Tafija-nagara referred to in the Paramattha-vinicch- 
aya.’ “There is also,"’ he adds, “a Tanjong Tembeling.’"'?9 
But a closer examination reveals that this identification is not as 
dependable as it would appear to be at first sight, for there seems to have 
been some confusion in the use of the name Tamalimgamu in the Sinha- 
lese literary works. 
Furthermore, there was more than one region 
bordering the Bay of Bengal which could have borne the name Tambar- 
attha, 
The Saddharmdlankiraya relates a story about sixty Sinhalese 
monks who reached the roadstead of Tamlimgamu: on their way to the 
city of Pilalup (Pataliputra)."° 
In this context Tamalimgamu could 
hardly be any other place but the port of Tamralipti. 
In fact, certain 
122, 
Cv. 84, 9-16. 
123. 
Cy. trsl, Vol. Tl, p. 155, n. 2. 
12A, 
Journal of the Greater India Society, Vol. XI, 1944, pp. 17-25; JRASCBNS,, 
Vol.. VU, Pt. 1, p. 5. 
125, 
Pyv., p. 118. 
126. 
Hatthavanagalla-vihéra-vamsa, PTS, p. 32. 
127, 
Elu-attanagalu-vamsaya, ed, Simon de Silva, p. 45. 
128. 
Coedds, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Pt, Il, pp, 25-28, 
129, JRASCBNS, Vol. VII, Pt. 1, p. 5. 
130. 
Saddharmdlaikaraya, ed., Bentota Saddhatissa, p. 361.

--- PAGE 145 [DIRECT] ---

268 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
Sinhalese translations give Tamalimgam in place of Tamalitti (Tamra- 
lipti) in the Pali original. 
According 
to the Saddharma-ratnikaraya the 
ship bearing the sapling of the Bo Tree touched at Tamalingamtota on 
its way from Buddha Gayd to Sri Lanka.%! 
In place of Tamalitti 
which occurs in the Dafhavamsa, its Sinhalese gloss*%? gives Tamalim- 
gam while the Daladé-sirita retains the Pali form without change.13 
Tamralipti and Tamralinga were not the only places which had 
names beginning with témra, meaning “‘copper.’’’ 
The name Tamba- 
diparajtha was used to denote a part of Burma. 
Dhammasenipati, 
the Burmese monk who wrote the Pali grammar called Karikad states 
in the colophon that he lived at Arimmaddanapura (Pagan) in the Tam- 
badiparattha.34 
The Nighandu-tiki was composed by a Burmese min- 
ister called Caturangabala in about the fourteenth century. 
He ment- 
ions that he lived in the reign of Sihasira, the king of the Tambadipar- 
attha.43> 
G. H. Luce has quoted the Jambudipa Uchavi to point out 
that the region to the east and to the south of the Irrawaddy was known 
as Tambadipa while the region to the north and to the west of it was 
called Suniparanta,36 
This is supported by an inscription from the 
Shwezayan pagoda at Thaton which mentions a king called Makutaraja 
who is described as the lord of ‘‘the whole Tambaviseya.’"37_ 
Luce has 
identified Makutaraja with Manuha, the contemporary 
of Anawratha, 
who ruled over Lower Burma,'* 
As Dupont has suggested, Tambi- 
viseya may be compared with Tamravisaya,'? a term synonymous 
with the Pali Tambarattha, 
The Mahabhirata mentions an island called Tamra.4° 
The Diy. 
yavadina also refers to a certain Tamradvipa.’*! 
Edgerton has sug- 
gested that they denote Sri Lanka which was known at one time as 'Tam- 
bapanni (Skt. Tamraparni).“? 
The name of the South Indian river 
Tamraparni can be traced far into the past, and it is mentioned in the 
131. 
Saddharma-vatndkaraya, ed., Kosgoda Nanavimala, p. 361. 
“yey ere So. 
Stlilaikara ed., p. 81, quotéd by Paranavitana in JRASCBNS, 
133, 
Daladd-sirita, ‘ed. Sorata, p. 32, 
134, 
Pal? Sdhityaya, Vol. Il, p. 481. 
135, 
Ibid, p, 535 
136, 
Journal of the Burma Research Society, Vol. XLII, p. 39. 
137, 
Piorre Dupont, L’archeologie méne de Dvdravati, Vol.1, p. 9. 
138. 
G, H. Luce, Mons of the Pagan dynasty, p. 9. 
139, 
See fin, 137. 
140, 
Adbh,, 2.28. 46. 
141. 
Divydvadiina, ed., Cowell and Neil, p, 525, 
442. 
Edgerton, op. cit., Vol. IL, p. 251. 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
269 
Vayu Purina“ 
Probably it is the sameé river which is mentioned im 
the Asokan inscriptions.!*4 In the Matsya Purina and the Vigna Purtinay. 
Tamraparna occurs as one of the nine divisions of the Bharata-varga.!45 
It is possible that the land round the river Tamraparni was also known 
by the same name. 
The foregoing discussion demonstrates the difficulties involved in 
accepting Paranavitana’s suggestion that the Tambarattha of the Pali 
works should be identified with the Ligor region of the Malay Penin- 
sula. 
This identification was based merely on the similarity of the names.. 
But there were, apart from Sri Lanka, about 
four 
regions bor- 
dering the Bay of Bengal which did or could have borne similar names. 
It might be possibe to rely on this identification if the Calavamsa and 
the Pajavaliya, which speaks of Tambarattha and Tamaliigamu as the 
home of Dhammakitti, referred to Candabhanu as the king of the place.. 
But they do not do so, rather in these works Candabhanu is merely 
referred to as the king of the Javakas.'4¢ 
Paranavitana, has attempted to identify the town of Tafija men-. 
tioned in the Paramattha-viniechaya with Tanjong-puta which he pre- 
sumed to have been located in the Malay Peninsula, 
Chau-ju-kua 
mentions a certain Tan-jong-wou-lo 
as one of the dependencies of 
Java,” and this has béen interpreted by Coedés as a reference to Tan- 
jong-pura.!® 
A principal city called Tanjung-pura is listed among the 
tributaries and neighbors of the kingdom of Majapahit in the Ndgara- 
Keértagama. 149 
Pigeaud, who edited this chronicle, located Tanjung- 
puri in the island of Borneo.45° 
Internal evidence from the chronicle 
supports this identification which has found general acceptance among 
scholars. 
It is true that many places in the Malay Peninsula have the term 
Tanjong as a part of their conjoint names, for tanjong in the Malay 
language means ‘‘cape’’ or “promontory.’’ 
Tanjong-Tembeling, the 
place-name which Paranavitana. cites to support. his identification, merely 
means “the headland of the river Tembeling.”’ 
Had 
the author 
of the Paramattha-yinicchaya lived at one such place it is very unlikely 
143. 
Vayu Purana, Anandasrama, 
Poona, 1905, 77, 24-5. 
See also Brahndnda 
Purana, Sri Venkatesvara Press, Bombay, 1912, 16. 11. 36. 
144, 
CH, Vol. I, pp. 3, 46, 
145, 
Matsya Purana, Poona, 1907, 114, 8..Visnu Purana, Sri Venkatesvara Press, 
Bombay, Ik. 36. 
146, 
Piv., p. 117; Cv, 83. 36-51, 
147. 
F. Hirth and H.W. Rockhill, Chau-ju-kua, Amsterdam, 1966, p, 86. 
148. 
Coedds, Leds etats hindouisés. ., p. 340. 
149. 
Pigeaud, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 16, 
150, 
ibid,, Vol. TV, p. 31; see also pp. 128, 230.

--- PAGE 146 [DIRECT] ---

270 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
that he would have stated that he was living at Tatija without giving the 
actual name of the place. 
No place beating the name Tatija is known in Burma. 
On the 
other hand, there were at least two places by this name in South India. 
One of these was Tafijavir, modern Tanjore, which was the capital of 
the Colas for some time. 
But, as pointed out earlier, Tambarattha 
seems to have been outside the Cola country, at least in thetime of 
Paraékramabahu II. Another city by this namo is mentioned in the Sin- 
namannir plates issued 
in the sixteenth year of Rajasimha, the Pandya 
ruler. 
In this record Rajasimha claims to have ‘“‘defeated the king of 
‘Tafijai at Naippiir, to have fought a battle at Kodumbai which was a 
seat of one of the powerful Cola subordinates, and to have burnt Vaiiji 
and destroyed the king of Southern Tafijai at Naval.’’451 
If the first 
Tafijai is identified with the Cola capital, we may observe that another 
city by the same name, evidently to the south of the former, is mentioned 
in the inscription. 
Presumably a prince independent of Pandya author- 
ity was ruling there. 
This city finds mention also in the Tafgaivanan- 
kovai, a literary work assigned to the twelfth century by the scholar who 
edited it; but possibly about two centuries later than this date. 
The 
hero ‘of this poem was a feudatory of the Pandyas who ruled from ‘‘Tafi- 
gai of the south.’’ According to the poem this city was situated near the 
Podiyil-hills 
by the river Vaikai.'s? 
Byidently, the principality which 
had; been. independent earlier had, by-this time, accepted the suzerai- 
nty..of the. Pandyas. 
'y'The. difficulties involved in identifying Tambarattha with the Ligor 
atea of the Malay Peninsula induce one to consider other possibilities. 
Tambarattha occurs in all its known contexts in association with South 
India; | 
In one instance a person born in the city of Kaveri goes to live in 
Tambarattha while in the other three instances it is mentioned together 
‘with the. Cola country. 
This would suggest that it was situated near the 
Cola:Kingdom: “The Tafija of the Paramattha-vinicchaya could, there- 
fore;'very well be identified with ‘‘Tafijai (or Tafigai) of the south’’ men- 
tioned in the Sinnimannar plates and the Tafigaivinankévai. 
Hence 
it appears on the evidence available to us. that Tambarattha of the Pali 
sources has to be located in South India rather than in Southeast. Asia. 
Almost all the evidence cited concerning the relations between the 
monastic centers of South India and Sri Lanka relate to contacts with 
the Coroniandel coast. 
Also, they deal only with relations with centers 
151. - 
South Indian Inscriptions, Vol. TI, p. 449. 
152. 
Tafpaivanankovai, ed. 8. R, Ramasami Pillai, Madras, 1952, pp. 11, 16, 20 
27, 34, 30, 39. 
> 
» 1952, pp. 
11, 
16, 
20, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
271. 
which professed the Theravada faith. However, it is possible that impor- 
tant centers on the Malabar coast like the Milavasa monastery, were 
known in Sri Lanka. The contribution that South India made to the 
expansion of non-Theravada teachings in Sri Lanka in an earlier period 
is evident from the Mahdévamsa and the Mahayana records inscribed in 
the Pallava Grantha script, such as the Trikayastava inscription from 
Mihintale,5> 
The cooperation between the sangha of South India 
and Sri Lanka produced important results which are evident in the Pali 
. 
Buddhist works of this period.'4 
Interaction with the Sangha in Burma 
Buddhism was at a low ebb when Vijayabahu I ascended the throne, 
and all the Sources agree that it had been on the decline for some time. 
It is. possible that the neglect and lack of patronage during a long period 
of 
political turmoil forced the monks to give up robes or to seck shelter 
in centers of Buddhism outside the island. 
The Pdjdvaliya and the 
Rajavaliya lay the blame on the Colas who, they maintain, tried to des- 
troy the sésana,"55 
Vijayabahu I found it difficult to assemble monks 
in sufficient numbers to hold ecclesiastical ceremonies like that of ordi- 
nation. 
This does not necessarily imply that the number of monks in 
the island had been so severely diminished. 
Perhaps it merely means 
that the monks who were available were not considered sufficiently vir- 
tuous or worthy to preside over such ceremonies. 
In fact, according to 
the Pijavaliya and the Nikaya-saigrahaya, Vijayabahu could not find 
“even five virtuous monks.’’!56 
It is also possible that, as in later times, 
the ceremony of ordination had fallen into abeyance and, as a result, the 
monks in the island were not qualified to conduct it. The Velaikkara 
inscriptions at Polonnaruva, which is the source closest to the events, 
gives a slightly different account. 
According to this record, monks 
were invited from Aramana (Ramafifia) to ‘‘purify’’ the satgha of the 
three nikadyas.157 
The later Sinhalese chronicles agree with the statemont that Vijaya- 
bihu obtained monks from Atamana. 
For this purpose he is said to 
have sent emissaries bearing pearls and precious stones as presents. 
The Célavamsa adds a valuable piece of evidence when it states that it 
was to king Anuruddha that these emissaries were sent.5* 
Geiger 
153, 
EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 242-6, see also pp. 151-60, 
154. 
See supra p. 238. 
155. 
Piv,, p. 105; Rjv. ed., Gunasekara, p. 42, 
156. 
Pjv., p. 105; Niks, p. 23, 
157. 
Ef, Vol. XVII, p. 338. 
158, 
Cv. 60. 4-8

--- PAGE 147 [DIRECT] ---

272 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
was inclined to question the authority of the Calavamsa. 
He accepted 
the chronology worked out by Phayre which placed the reign of Anurud~ 
dha (Anawrahta) from A.D, 1010 to 1052 and-remarked that the as- 
sumption, of the contemporaneity of Anuruddha and Vijayabahu I was: 
“probably an arbitrary one on the part of the author of our part of the 
Mahavamsa or of his source.’"459 
But according to the Burmese chro- 
nology revised by Maung Hla, the reign of Anuruddha fell between 1044. 
and 1077! and thus overlapped the reign of Vijayabahu I (1055-1110). 
Hence there is reason to believe that the account in the Cilavamsa was. 
based on a reliable source of information. 
According to the Calavamsa the monks who came from Burma were 
thoroughly vorsed in the three pifakas. 
They initiated numerous cere~ 
monies of admission and ‘ordination and rehearsed the scriptures and 
their commentaries.6t 
The Pdjavaliya 
and the Nikéya-saigrahaya 
hold that the scriptures were. also brought from Burma.'* 
This would 
imply that, apart from the decline in the standards of discipline, there 
was a shortage of books as well as of monks at: the accession of Vijaya~ 
bahul. 
The accomplishments of the monks brought from Burma would 
seem to be nothing less than the re-establishment of Buddhism which had 
been severely affected during the period of foreign rule. 
But the silence 
of the Velaikkara inscription on this point makes one rather hesitant 
about accepting this interpretation. 
. 
As evident from the Hmawza inscription, assigned 
to a period from 
about the fifth to the seventh century, Pali Buddhism-was known in Upper 
Burma long before the reign of Anuruddha.'® 
The Burmese chroni- 
cles Malti Yazawinkyi and the Hmannin Yazawinkyi“ refer to the 
thriving community of monks of the Arafi (Ari) school who lived in the 
Mramma kingdom in the reign of Anuruddha, 
The capture.of the city 
of Thaton (Sudhammapura) in Ramafifiadesa inca. A. D, 1057 brought 
the Mramma conquerors into close contact with another school 
of 
Buddhism, 
Shin Arahan, a monk of this school, won over the sympa- 
thies of Anuruddha, the Mramma king, and eventually became his 
personal preceptor, 
Monks and the scriptures of this school were 
brought to his capital from the conquered Thiton, 
159, 
Cv. trsl Pd, p. 214, 1.4. 
160. 
Maung Hila, “The Chronological Tables of the Kings of Burma,” Journal 
” of the Burma Research Society, Vol. XU, p. 82. 
161, 
Cv, 60, 4-8. 
162, 
dgamayada genvd, Pjv., p, 105; patpot genvad. Niks., p. 23, 
163, 
C, Duroiselle, “Excavations at Hmawza,” ASIAR, 1928-9, pp. 105-7. 
164, 
Maha Yazawinkyi, ed. Saya Pwa, pp, 181-91. 
Hmannan Yazawinkyt, ed, 
translated into English as the Glass Palace Chronicle by Pe Maung Tin and G, Hl. 
Luce, pp. 71-80, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
273 
According to the sources from Sri Lanka the monks who officiated 
at the ‘‘purification’’ of the Sinhalese saigha came. from Ramafifia- 
desa;!% probably they, like the monks who went to Pagan, came from 
Thaton. 
However, Quaritch Wales pointed out that no evidence has 
been found at Thaton to show that Buddhism flourished there before the 
eleventh century. 
It has been suggested that the monks found there were 
those who had been forced to leave the kingdom of Haripufijaya by the 
invasion of Siryavarman or by the cholera epidemic mentioned 
in 
the Camadevivamsa,'®6 
As Paranavitana suggested, another possibility is that the monks 
brought to Sri Lanka in the reign of Vijayabaihu. I had originally gone 
there from Sri Lanka or were representatives of a community descended 
from them. 
He has pointed out that the inauguration of the ceremony 
of ordination by the monks who came to Sri Lanka from Burma. did not 
result in the establishment of a community named after Burma, as hap- 
pened later on when foreign monks were brought to initiate this cere- 
mony.’ 
It is also noteworthy that the Burmese annals do not refer to 
an instance of their monks taking part in a ‘‘purification’’ of the Order in 
Sri Lanka during the time of Vijayabahu I. On the other hand, they 
_ state that the Sinhalese clergy were in the line of direct descent from 
Mahinda.'® 
The Sinhalese monks who were forced to leave tho island 
during the period of Cola rule must have gone to centers of Buddhism 
outside the Cola kingdom, and it is quite possible that some of them went 
to Burma. 
The Calavamsa testifies to the prevalence of close relations 
between the king of Ramafiia 
and the Sinhalese military leaders who 
rose against the power of the Colas. 
The king of Ramajifia is said to 
have sent aid to Vijayabahu when the latter was engaged in campaigns 
against the Colas.1® 
Though most of the sources are not very helpful 
in determining the origin of the monks brought from. Burma, the Nikdya- 
sangrahaya provides some additional information. 
According to the 
printed version edited by Amaramoli, twenty-five monks were brought 
by Vijayabahu I; they are described as Aramanarafavasi, “residents of 
Aramana,’? 
The editor gives a variant reading--Aramanayata 
vadi, 
“those who had gone to Aramana.’’!7° 
All four manuscripts of this 
text at the British Museum. support the latter reading. 
They also state 
165. 
EF, Vol. XVUI, p. 338: 
166. 
.H. G. Quaritch Wales, “Anuruddha and the Théton tradition,” JRAS, 1947, 
p. 152. 
See also Coedés, Les dats hindouisés,..., p. 274. 
167, 
UCHC, Vol, I, Pt, 2, p. 564, 
168. 
Indian Antiquary, Vol, XXII, p. 29; Epigraphia Birmanica, 
Vol. TIT, Pt. 2, 
p. 189, 
169, 
Cv, 58, 8-10. 
170, 
Niks, 
p. 23 and note 1.

--- PAGE 148 [DIRECT] ---

274 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
that the number of monks involved was twenty;!7! the Pajavaliya gives 
the same number.'” 
If the reading in these manuscripts is accepted, 
it would add strength to the contention that the monks brought to the 
island in the time of Vijayabahu I were in fact those who had originally 
gone to Burma in the Cola period or their ‘‘descendants.’’ 
The Burmese chronicles supply some more details about the rela- 
tions between the two countries duringthis period. The Maha Yazawinkyi 
records that Anuruddha sent a minister to Sri Lanka with an elephant 
as a present for the king to ask for the Tooth relic, but he had to be satis- 
fied with a replica of the relic. 
He had several more replicas of the relic 
made and deposited them in shrines in various parts of the kingdom. 
Tho name of the Sinhalese king is given as Sirisanghabodhi, a title of 
Vijayabahu I.‘ 
The authors of- the Hmanndn believed that the 
Maha Yazawinkyi was wrong with respect to the last detail and concluded, 
on the strength of the evidence from’ their chronological calculations, 
that .the king should have been Dhatusena.!74 
Obviously the earlier 
chronicle-was correct. 
The Sdsanavamsa states that, after the capture of Thaton, Anu- 
ruddha, sent four envoys to Sri Lanka to obtain copies of the Canon. 
“These were compared with the scriptures brought from Thaton, and they 
were' found to be in complete agreement with each other.177 N. R. 
Ray’ has ‘accepted this account.17° 
But the Sdésanavamsa is a late chro- 
hidle compiled only in the nineteenth century and this account does not 
“occur in any of the earlier chronicles. 
Moreover, it is difficult to believe 
that Vijayabahu would have had to obtain the scriptures from Burma if 
they had been sent to Anuruddha only a few years earlier. 
The close friendly relations between Burma and Sri Lanka which 
evidently prevailed during the reign of Anuruddha persisted after his 
death. , 
The Burmese chronicles state that Kyanzittha, one of his suc- 
cessors, was sent nine relics by the king of Sri Lanka.!77 
If the dating 
of Kyanzittha’s. reign between 1086 and 1112 which is suggested by 
‘Maung Hla is.accepted, the Sinhalese king may be identified as Vijaya- 
Bahu -I,:. During the reign of Narathu (ca. 1167-1170), a period marked 
171. 
British Museum MSS Or. 2702, f. ke; Or. 6606 (10), f. kau; Or. 6606 (11), f. 
Kha; Or. 6606 (48), £. ka. 
t 
172. 
Piv., p, 105. 
173. 
Maha Yazawinkyi, p. 202. 
174. 
Hmannan Yazawinkyt, pp. 89-90. 
175. 
Sdsanavamsa, ed,, B. C. Law, p. 71. 
176. 
N.R. Ray, Theravada Buddhism in Burma, pp. 100, 101, 
177, 
Maha Yazawinkyt, p, 227; Hmannan Yazawinkyi, p. 110, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
275 
by violence and political assassination, Panthagu,'”® the royal preceptor, 
was disgusted with the vile ways of the king and left the kingdom in 
protest to live in exile in Sri Lanka. 
The king is also said to have 
attempted to laicize many monks who were also forced to flee to Sri 
Lanka?” 
Such movements of monks from -Sri Lanka to Burma and from 
Burma to Sri Lanka in times of political turmoil in either country must 
have promoted, and to some extent presuppose, friendly relations bet- 
ween the satgha of the two countries. 
Such relations helped the satgha 
to intervene when hostilities broke out between the two countries during 
the reign of Parikramabahu I.4% 
According to the Calavamsa, the 
monks were instrumental in restoring normal relations between the 
two kingdoms after the campaigns. 
!8! 
The best known visit by a Burmese to Sri Lanka is perhaps the pil- 
grimage of Uttarajiva who is mentioned in the Burmese chronicles as 
the preceptor of Narapatisithu.!® 
This monk arrived in Sri Lanka 
with a group of disciples among whom was one Chapata (Panthagu), 
a novice he had met at the port of Kusima (Bassein). 
Probably it is this 
association with Chapata which has added such importance to his visit. 
Accounts of this visit are preserved in the Kalyani inscriptions and in 
all the Burmese chronicles. 
Chapata received his ordination at a cere- 
mony in which monks from both: countries participated. 
Uttarajiva 
held discussions with the Sinhalese monks and returned to Burma after 
worshipping at the important shrines, while Chapata decided to stay 
behind to complete his studies.'53 
: 
According to the Kalyani inscriptions, the departure of Utarajiva 
to Sri Lanka took place in the year 532 of the Burmese era and six years 
after the “purification” of the satgha by Parakramabahu I.'"* 
Since 
the ‘‘purification’’ took place in A.D. 1165/6, the date of Uttarajiva’s 
178, 
As Than Tan has pointed out Panthagu, which is the equivalent of the Pali 
term pamsuliilika, is a title rather than a name, 
Than Tun, The Buddhist Church in 
Burma in the Pagan Period, Unpublished Ph. D, thesis, p. 240, 
: 
179. 
Maha Yazawinkyi, pp. 251-2; Hmannan, p. 133, Harvey has stated that Pan- 
thagu returned to Burma early in the reign of Narapatisithu and that he died at Pagan 
at the age of ninety. 
He has not cited any authorities. The present writer has found 
no evidence in the sources he consulted to support this statement. 
A certain Nga 
Sweshin Panthagu is mentioned in the account of the reign of Natapatisithu, but it is 
doubtful whether they are identical. 
See Harvey, History of Burma, 1925, p. 55. 
180. 
See supra p. 207. 
181. 
Cv, 76. 69-74, 
6 
182. 
Carsu (Sithu) in certain inscriptions and Narapatijayasira in the Kalyani 
inscriptions, 
183, 
Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXII, p. 29; Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol. IU, Pt. 2, 
pp. 189-190. 
184. 
Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXII, p. 29; See also infra p. 314,

--- PAGE 149 [DIRECT] ---

276 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
visit must be A.D. 1171/2. 
The years 526 and 532 of the Burmese era 
correspond approximately to the same years, 
Coedés has suggested that. 
Uttarajiva brought the message of peace mentioned in the Calavamsa 
which led to the cessation of hostilities between Burma and Sri Lanka. 
18 
The chronological evidence from our sources would, however, militate 
against the acceptance of this view. 
The war with Burma is mentioned 
in an inscription of Parakramabiliu dated to the twelfth year of his reign, 
ie. 1165/6. 
Nevertheless, it is possible that the visit of the preceptor 
of the Burmese king represents the restoration of friendly relations bet- 
ween the two kingdoms, even if he did not in fact bring the message of 
peace. 
The young novice Chapata!®® stayed in. Sri Lanka for ten years and, 
during this period, mastered the three pitakas together with their com- 
mentaries. 
When he returned to Burma he took with him four monks. 
from Sri Lanka who were well versed in the scriptures. 
Of these monks, 
Rahula was a native of Sri Lanka, Nanda was from Kafici and Sivali 
was from Tamalitti (Tamralipti), while Tamalinda was the son of the 
king of Kimboja, This group refrained from associating with the Burmese. 
monks who were in-Pagan and began to perform the eccleciastical cere- 
monies by themselves. 
This led to the rise of a separate school, the Si- 
halasangha, which drew its inspiration from the Sinhalese Buddhist. cen- 
ters. They won the support'of Narapatisithu who held an ordination. 
ceremony for them on a raft of boats at which new recruits were admitted 
to this school,'8? 
This is reminiscent of the ordination ceremony held 
under ‘the patronage of Parakramabahu I in a pavilion built on boats 
anchored in the middle of the river Mahavali.'®* 
Evidently it was a . 
ceremony that was performed in the Sinhalese fashion. 
The return of 
Chapata to Burma, which may be dated to about A.D. 1181/2, and the 
formation of a separate school in that country represents a very 
important stage in the expansion of Sinhalese Buddhism. 
With the 
foundation of the Sihalasangha a center was established at Pagan for the 
dissemination of this influence in Burma and to some extent in the rest. 
185. 
Cy. 69,74; Coedds, Les états hindouisés.., p. 323. 
196,° Jt has been suggested that Chapata was the author of the grammiatical treatise 
Suitaniddesa and of the Satikhepavannand, the commentary on the Abhidhammattha- 
satigaha (M. H. Bode, Pali Literature of Burma pp. 17-18; Coedés, Les états- 
hindouisés...p.232). 
Though the author of these works was a monk named Chapata, 
the coloplions of the works record that he visited Sri Lanka in the year 1990 of 
the Buddhist era (A.D. 1446/7) when a certain king Parékramabahu was ruling at 
Jayavaddhanapura. 
This king is probably Parékramabahu VI, who ruled from 
Kotte, 
The author has to be identified, as Buddhadatta rightly’ pointed out, with 
a@ second Chapata. 
Reravant Bauddhacaryayo, p 
PP. 163-9; Pali Sdhityaya, Vol. Il, 
pp. 468; UCR, Vol. TX, p. 
187, Indian Antiquary, Wot xxI, p. 30, 
188. 
Cy, 78, 28-30. 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
277 
of Southeast Asia. 
It is generally accepted that the establishment of 
Sinhalese Buddhism in Burma was not the result of missionary activities 
undertaken by Sinhalese monks. 
Evidently the initiative came mainly 
from the Burmese. 
The friendship between the ruling houses of Burma and Sri Lanka 
‘was strengthened at the end of the twelfth century when Vijayabahu II 
(1186-1187), the successor of Parakramabahu. 1, wrote a letter in Pali 
to the king of Arimaddanapura and signed a treaty of friendship,'89 
Nissanka Malla also claimed to have maintained friendly relations with 
Aramana.4° 
An inscription dated in A.D. 1197 found at the Dham- 
mayazika shrine records the enshrinement of four sacred relics sent by 
the king of Sri Lanka.!9! 
Probably it was Nissabka Malla who sent the 
- relics; the Burmese king has been identified with Narapatisithu.9? 
The 
establishment. of the Sihalasangha in Burma and the prevalence of 
friendly 
relations 
between 
the two 
kingdoms probably promoted 
regular movements of monks from one monastery to the other; unfor- 
tunately, however, evidence for this is lacking. 
Relations with the Khmer Kingdom and the Mon Lands 
It is noteworthy that the monk Tamalinda, who accompanied Cha- 
pata to Pagan, is described as a son of the king of Kamboja (Kamboja- 
rajatanuja).® 
A minor dynasty called the Kambojas ruled from Pri- 
yangu in Bengal for some time in the tenth and eleventh centuries,'* 
‘but it seems more likely that the Kamboja in question is the kingdom of 
Cambodia, 
According to the Calavamsa the king of Ramatfifia seized a 
princess sent by Parakramabahu I to Kamboja. 
He is also said to have 
apprehended and imprisoned some Sinhalese envoys on the charge that 
they were taking a letter to the king of Kamboja.’ 
Kamboja, along 
with Aramana, occurs in the inscriptions of Nissahka Malla. 
The 
Kamboja in these sources could hardly be any other than the Cambodian 
kingdom. 
As the correct name of the kingdom is, however, Kambuja, 
it has to be assumed that this has been changed. to Kamboja, a more 
familiar name to the Buddhists in Sri Lanka. 
Circumstantial evidence points to the existence of relations with 
Cambodia for some time before the reign of Parakramabahu I. 
 Bois- 
selier speaks of a Cambodian Buddha image, presently located at the 
189, 
Cv, 80, 6-7, 
190. 
-EZ, Vol, II, p. 151, 1. C3, 
191. 
Inscriptions of Burma, List No, 19b, 
192. 
Than Tun, op. cit., p. 268. 
193. 
See supra p. 277. 
194, B.C. Majumdar, The History of Bengal, Vol. I, p. 32. 
195. 
Cy, 76, 21-23, 35. 
196. EZ, Vol. II, p. 151, f. C3; 
p. 155, & 14,

--- PAGE 150 [DIRECT] ---

278 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
Musée Blanchard de la Brosse, which bears some similarity to examples 
in Sri‘ Lanka. 
It has been assigned to a period earlier than the ninth 
century. 
However, he was rather hesitant to conclude on this basis 
that the early Cambodian art was derived from Sri Lanka since diffe- 
renices are to be found in the sculpture of the two regions in their treat- 
ment of the face and the hair.’ 
Dupont has pointed out the simi- 
larity of some images of “the Buddha seated on the coils of a naga” 
found in Khmer art to images from Sri Lanka. 
They have been assigned 
to the'tenth century, 
As Dupont suggested, they probably represent 
the influence of Sinhalese art which spread into the Cambodian king- 
dom through the mediation of the Mons.1°° 
The indirect nature of 
this‘influence may to some extent explain the differences pointed out by 
Boisselier. 
On the other hand, certain ruins from Polonnaruva, which are uni- 
que.in the traditions of Sinhalese architecture, seem to show that the 
influences-of the Cambodian lands were at work in Sri Lanka. 
Bell 
has remarked that the so-called Potgul Vehera of Polonnaruva, built in 
the reign of Parakramabahu I, is in many respects comparable to the 
Hindu temple of Mi Baume.! 
The central shrine of the Potgul Vehera 
-is a rotunda with a vestibule attached to its eastern side. 
It is situated 
. dn-a'quadiangle at the four sides of which are four stapas, each of which 
measures. eighteen feet in diameter. 
The whole quadrangle is enclosed 
by.a wall... Below this is another terrace with four parivenas on the north 
and:four on the south. 
The number of terraces and walls, the deploy- 
" ment of the shrines on the top terrace, and the arrangement of the paris 
venas: onthe. second tertace are all reminiscent of the layout of the 
temple of Mi Baume, but there are some differences as well. 
The layout 
of the terraces is not as regular as at Mi Baume. 
On the second terrace 
the Potgul Vehera has only eight parivenas in contrast with the sixteen of 
Mi Baume.. The gateways of Mi Baume have given place to simpler 
entrances at Polonnatuva. 
Even so, the basic similarity of ‘the two 
shrines suggests that the Potgul Vehera, even if it was not modelled on 
the temple of Mi Baume, at least should be traced back to an antecedent 
common to both. 
Another structure which stands isolated in the architectural tradi- 
tions of Sri Lanka is the monument from Polonnarnva known as the 
Satmahal Prasaida, 
It is a tower of seven stories the preserved portion 
of which rises to a height of slightly less than fifty-three feet on a base 
197. 
J, Boisselier, La 
statuai 
kh 
i 
teati 
ig 
1955. pp 27ek 
» 
La statuaive 
khmere et son evolution, Publication de 
’EFEO, 
198.. Dupont, op. cit., p. 263. 
: ve ASCAR, 1906, p..17 and plates. See also A. Tissandier, Cambodge-Java, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
279 
measuring thirty-nine feet and two inches each way. Bell considered the 
possibility of Khmer influence? 
Jully pointed out the similarities 
with the Prasat Andel in Cambodia,?! but Dupont seems to be more 
accurate in his comment that analogies have to be traced in the Mon 
lands rather than in Cambodia proper. 
He has shown that the Sat- 
mahal Prasada comes very close to the examples at Wat P'ra Prot’on in 
what is now Thailand.2" 
Coeds has compared it with San Mahapon 
at Lamphun.?°3 
One difficulty in utilizing this evidence is that no dir- 
ect information is available concerning the date of the Satniahal Prasada, 
“put it is probable that it dates from the ‘‘Polonnaruva Period" since it is 
found among a group of ruins dating from the reign of Vijayabihu I 
to the reign of Nissanka Malla. 
The evidence cited above clearly points to the prevalence of rela- 
tions between Sri Lanka and the Khmer kingdom, and particularly with 
the Mon regions which came under its rule, 
Hence it is not difficult to 
believe that a prince of the Khmer ruling family came to Sri Lanka to 
study Buddhism at the monastic centers of Polonnaruva. 
Coedés has 
identified the father of Tamalinda with Jayavarman 
VII (ca. 1181-1218),2% 
but if the 
date 
for the return of Chapata suggested above 
is 
accepted, he should more probably be an earlier king. 
The Khmer 
stele from Sal Sin, edited by Coedss, testifics to the presence at Lavo 
(Lopburi) of Buddhist monks belonging to the ‘Mahayana and the 
Sthavira divisions’ in A.D. 1025 (in the reign of Suryavarman I).?° 
The presence in Sri Lanka of Tamalinda may be cited as evidence of the 
relations which prevailed between the Theravadins of the Khmer and the 
Sinhalese kingdoms, but, in contrast to the Burmese case, there. is 
no evidence to show that the Sinhalese Theravada gained popularity in 
the Khmer kingdom during the period under review. 
Sinhalese Buddhism in Sumatra and Java 
The Kalyani inscriptions relate an interesting anetdote about Ra- 
hula, the only Sinhalese monk in the éntourage of Chapata. 
Rahula, 
it seems, fell in love with a Burmese danseuse and decided to leave the 
Order. 
Chapata and the other monks failed to persuade him to change - 
200, ASCAR, 1933, p. 16, 
201. 
A. Sully, Bulletin trimestriel de Pacademie malagache, 1903, Vol. II, pp. 77-8 
quoted by Bell. 
See fin. 201. 
‘ 
202. 
Dupont, op. cit., pp. 95-6,.98, 
203. Coedds, BEFEO, Vol. XXV, p. 83 n. 2. 
204, 
Coedas, Les états hindouisés. ., p. 323. 
205. 
Coedds, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, 11, pp. 10-12,

--- PAGE 151 [DIRECT] ---

280 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
his mind but prevailed upon him to leave Burma before giving up his 
robes. 
He went to Kusima (Bassein) and thence set sail for the island of 
Malaya. 
There he taught the Vinaya to the king of Malaya and, with 
the bowl of precious stones that the king gave him, set up house as a 
layman.?°° 
The romantic element in the story casts some doubts on 
its reliability, but it is not very likely that the chroniclers would have 
made up a story which does not do credit to one of the leading figures 
associated with the establishment of the Sihalasaigha in Burma, 
Pro- 
bably it does have a historical basis. 
Malaya may be identified with 
Malayu in the Jambi region of Sumatra, 
An inscription of a Buddha 
image found from the Vat Hva Vian at Caiya and dated in A.D. 1183 (2% 
records that this image was erected on the orders of a king identi- 
fied as a ruler of Malayu,2” 
It is evident from this that Buddhism was 
patronized by the king of Malayu who ruled during this period. 
Henca 
it is. possible to accept the report that Rahula was welcomed in this king- 
dom); however the results of his visits obviously could not have been very 
impressive. 
: 
. 
‘There.is independent evidence which shows that the Sinhalese 
schools of Buddhism were known in this area. 
Three groups of nuns 
and a group of monks went from Sri Lanka to China in the fifth 
century. Such movements persisted at least until the eighth century. 
Pou ‘K’ong,: a monk from Sri Lanka, wielded great influence at the 
Chinese court. during the reigns of the T’ang emperors Sou-tsong and 
Tai-tsong,..It was:he who in A.D. 764 requested the emperor to waive 
the: imposts, levied on the monasteries.2°* 
The sea route to China 
which::these-religieux took lay past the ports of Java which had become 
important centers for the trade between China and the. Bay of Bengal. 
‘It. is quite reasonable to suppose’ that the Sinhalese satgha also 
maintained contact with these countries, 
More definite evidence on this 
question is found in a “pre-Nagari”’ inscription from the Ratubaka 
Plateau .in Central Java. 
This 
inscription, 
dated in A, D. 7923. 
records the foundation of a monastery. 
De Casparis who edited this 
inscription, translated the relevant Passage as follows: 
“This Abhay- 
agiri. Vih@ra there of the Sinhalese asceticts (%) trained in the sayings 
of discipline of the Best of the Jinas, was established.” 
Evidently this 
indicates that an institution named after the Abhayagiri monastery 
of Sri Lanka was founded in Java? 
4t is clear from this record that 
206, 
Indian Antiquary, Vol, XXII, p. 30, 
207, Coedlds, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Il, pp. 25-28, 
208. 
Pou Kong piao tche, k. 1, 
p. 831 
quoted 
économiques dit bouddhisme, p. 43, " 
PHS 
OY, ecaies, Gerict, Ler pect 
209, 
“Art, As,, Vol. XXIV, pp. 241-8, 
RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CENTERS OF BUDDHISM 
281 
the Abhayagiri monastery was known and probably was held in high 
regard in Java. It is also possible that there were close relations between. 
‘the Abhayagiri monastery and the Jayanese centers of Buddhism of this 
period though this does not necessarily follow from the evidence in the 
inscription. 
The foregoing discussion reveals that the Sinhalese satgha main- 
tained extensive contacts with centers of Buddhism in both South and 
Southeast Asia. 
The two-way movement of monks between these cen- 
ters and Sri Lanka introduced 
new elements of Buddhist thought into a 
land dominated by the Theravada school. 
Some of the most impor- 
tant developments in the history of Buddhism during this period were 
the waves of Mahayana and Tantric influences which spread from, the 
centers of Buddhist learning in Eastern India to the lands in Southeast 
Asia, 
These, as is evident from the discussion, touched the shores of 
Sri Lanka too. 
The evidence we have cited runs counter to the view 
held by certain scholars that the Abhayagiri monastery was purely nat- 
ional in its activities and influence.?!9 
As a school which welcomed 
and was receptive to new thought, it is hardly to be expected that it would 
be parochial in outlook. 
It is clear that it not only maintained close 
contact with centers of Buddhist learning in India but also inspired Bud- 
dhists in Southeast Asian countries such as Java as early as in the eighth 
century. 
‘ 
On the other hand, the influence of the Mahavihara made head- 
way in South India and later in Burma. 
Most of the Pali works attri- 
buted to South Indian scholars are expositions of the teachings of the 
Mahavihara. 
Even those writers like Kassapa who were critical of the 
views of their contemporaries in Sri Lanka claimed to adhere to the tra~ 
ditions of the Mahavihira school.2*! 
In Burma Sinhalese Buddhism 
found more fertile ground. 
The period under discussion represents an. 
initial but significant stage of its expansion into that country and into the 
other regions of Southeast Asia. 
Though this discussion has been mainly confined to movements of 
monks, undoubtedly movements of laymen were also an important me- 
dium for the spread of ideas, 
The bringing of the dhammadhdtu by a 
- 
* 
Sinhalese merchant who went to the K4si region in the sixth century was 
a significant event in the introduction of Mahayana teachings into Sri 
Lanka. 
But obviously 
the movements 
of monks were 
the most 
common means of transmission of Buddhist thought from region to 
region. 
210. 
See Paranavitana, UCHC, Vol. I, Pt. 2, p. 568. 
2\1. 
mahdvihdravésinam kamabhatanaydnugam. 
Moha-vicehedan’, p. 1.

--- PAGE 152 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 
& 
The Structure of the Sangha in Transition: 
The Rise of the Hight “Fraternities” 
_' A development of considerable importance in the organization of 
the saigha after the period of Cola rule over the island was the rise into 
importance of an institution called the dpatana. 
The significance of 
B this institution is reflected in the role it played in the religious as well as 
in the political affairs of the time and the deference and respect accorded 
to it by the rulers and the dignitaries of the land. 
The Calavamsa records 
that the monks of the dyatanas; together with other dignitaries of the 
: kingdom, met on the death of Vijayabihu I to decide on a successor to 
the throne.’ They bestowed the kingship on Jayabahu. and nominated 
Manabharana to the position of the upardja.! 
The Cilavamsa also- 
states that Parakramabahu I built eight three-storied mansions for the 
theras of the dyatanas.2 The account in the Pijavaliya differs in. details. 
It.was at Sagiri in Polonnaruva that the king built the mansions for the 
eight dyatanas; he endowed them with ‘valuable allotments from the 
fields’' of, Polonnaruva.’’3 
Parikramabahu II restored the lands and 
villages which had lapsed from their control‘ to the eight dyatanas. 
Both 
the Célavamsa and the Pajavaliya add that he also built monasteries for 
the eight mahatheras of the eight dyatanas in the outskirts of his capital. 5 
The Nikdya-sangrahaya® refers to Adipada Virabihu, who wielded de 
facto authority over the kingdom during the reign of Bhuvanekabahu V 
1. See.Cy, 61. 1-4, 
2. 
tattha dyatanavasinam therdnam thirastlinam 
mahagghe atthapasade kérdpesi tibkimake, Cv. 78. 33, 
3. polonnaruvé sdgiriyé ata dyatanafa mahapa karavd...ata dyatanata polonnare 
varupetin vatand pasa lava. 
Pjv., p. 105 
4. 
Cv, 84.4, 
5. 
Cy, 84, 18; Pyv., p. 118. 
6. Niks., ed. D. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe, p, 30. 
(2821 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
283 
(A.D. 1322-1408), as having appointed various monks. to the leadership 
of the dyatanas. 
: 
The term dyatana was translated by Geiger in the first two instances 
of its incidence in the Cié/avamsa as “‘district,” and as “‘sanctuary”’ in the 
third.? 
Ayatana bas also been used to denote “monastery” in certain 
instances. 
But the contexts of the passages cited above suggest that the 
term was being used in these cases in a more specific and technical sense, 
In this connection, it is interesting that the Calavamsa refers in its 
description of the meritorious deeds of Yasodhard, the daughter of Vija- 
yabahu I, to the patronage she extended to the Kappiiramilayatana.® 
Similarly, the Dalad@-sirita speaks of the monks of the Uturula-mula~ 
ayatén in connection with the rituals pertaining to the Tooth relic. 1° 
These two examples are important since they demonstrate that the term 
mitla and dyatana were used conjointly to refer to the same institution. 
Secondly, there is little doubt that these two institutions are identical with 
the two fraternities, Uttaromila (var. Uttaralha, Uturalu, Uturulu, 
Uturu) and Kappiiramila of the Abhayagiri nikaya. 
In the Sinhalese 
inscriptions of the tenth century these two institutions were known 
, 
by the term mula. 
The term muja meant ‘group’ or “collection” and 
is used in this sense in a contemporary literary work, the Dhampiya 
' Afuva Gitapadaya."" 
The Pali term mala which occurs in the chronicles 
is used in the same sense and seems to be, as Paranavitana has sug- 
gested, 
an, incorrect rendering of the Sinhalese term, 
. Thus it seems 
quite probable that the terms mula, miila, ayatin, Gyatana, mulu-ayatén 
and méléyatana were all similar in meaning and connoted a “fraternity 
of monks.’ 
The word samiha, meaning “group,"' has also been used 
in this special sense in certain instances,!? 
It is evident from the references cited above that there were eight 
“fraternities’’ within the body of the sarigha, each led, presumably, by a 
mahdthera, 
Apart from being organizations of monks, they were bodies 
which owned property including land and villages. 
The Cilavamsa also refers to the monks of eight establishments 
called malavihdras as having left Polonnaruva in protest against the con— 
fiscation of monastic property by Vikramabahu I (A.D. 1111-1332), * 
7. - 
Cy., trsl, Pt, I, p. 225; Pt. Il, pp. 105, 154, 155. 
8. See infra p. 307. 
9, 
Cy, 60, 83, 
10. 
Daladé-sirita, pp. 49-54, 
lt. 
DAG., p. 59. 
12. EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 1, p. 168, 
13. 
See infra 
p. 300, 
14, 
Cy, 61. 58-61.

--- PAGE 153 [DIRECT] ---

284 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
Geiger translated malavihara as ‘“‘original monasteries,’’ but it is not evi- 
dent from our sources that these terms were used to describe any one of 
the ancient monasteries like the Mahavihara and the Abhayagiri. The 
similarity of the numbers involved may suggest that there is a close re- 
Jationship between the two terms dyatana and milavihdra. 
Two instan- 
ces are known of monasteries being built at the capital for these eight 
mitlas or dyatanas. 
tis possible that it was these monasteries, the head- 
quarters of the fraternities, which were known by the term milavihara. 
The Four “Abhayagiri” Fraternities 
‘ 
The Uttaromila was one of the most important and influential of 
the eight fraternities. 
The Calavamsa presents an account of the origin 
of this fraternity in its chapter on the early life of Vijayabahu I.!5 One 
writer, who has based his conclusions on the context of this passage has 
dated. the foundation of the Uttaromiila to the reign of Vijayabahu.'* 
But a closer examination of the-chapter reveals that the passage from the 
fourth strophe to the twenty-sixth, which comprises the account of the 
origin’ 
of the Uttaromiila, stands independently. 
There is hardly any 
connection between strophes 3 and 4 or 26 and 27, and it is likely that this 
account was a legend preserved at the Uttaromala fraternity, It may have 
‘been inserted in the chronicle at a time when this institution had risen into 
importance as one of tho eight major units in the organization of the 
- 
sahgha. 
According to this account prince Mana I, son and heir to the throne 
‘of a certain King Kassapa, was blinded in one eye while performing an 
incantation before the god Skanda. 
He considered himself disqualified 
for. kingship due to this physical defect and requested the courtiers to 
crown his ‘‘younger brother’’ Mana (II) in his place. Mana (A) was sent 
for.and he came to Anuradhapura to be consecrated. 
After taking over 
the kingship, he took his elder brother to the Abhayagiri monastery and 
had‘him:admitted to the Order. 
Then he built the ‘Uttaromiila col- 
lege for him and placed him at the head of six hundred monks. 
The 
“seven supervisory officials’ (pafihdra) and the ‘‘five groups of servitors'” 
{pessavagga)*” were delegated to serve him, and the guardians of the 
‘Tooth relic were placed under his direction. 
The king is said to haye 
depended upon him for counsel concerning the administration of the 
country, 
15, 
Cv, ch. 57. 
16. Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fascicule A—Aca, p. 12. 
47. Fora discussion on these terms see supra pp. 106, 119-20, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
285 
Tt would appear from this story that the Uttaromila occupied 2 
prominent position in the organization of monks from the very. begin- 
ning ofits history. 
It had six hundred monks within its fold, was found- 
ed by a king and led by one who had been the heir to the throne. 
More- 
‘over, it had in its charge the Tooth relic which had come to be recog 
nized as one of the most valuable possessions in the kingdom, 
It is evi- 
dent from the Velaikkara inscription at Polonnaruva!® 
that the Tooth 
relic had in fact come to be in the charge of this fraternity at least by the 
time of Vijayabahu I. But one tends to doubt the authenticity 
of a 
story which claims that the college occupied such a high position from the 
time of its foundation. 
It would be natural to suspect that such a story 
originated later. 
Tn fact, certain contradictory elements come to light when an at- 
tempt is made to date the foundation of the Uttaromila on the basis of 
the story. 
At the end of the story Mana (ZI), the founder, is referred to 
as Manavamma, who founded -a dynasty of sixteen rulers with Agga- 
bodhi at its head. 
The reference to succession by a ruler called Agga- 
bodhi strengthens the possibility that the king in question was Mana- 
vamma, who captured the throne with troops from South India. 
This 
seems to be further confirmed by the Pajavaliya which ascribes the founda~ 
tion of the Uturalamula to Mahalipana, son of Pasulu Kasubu, who 
defeated Hunannaru Riyandala with South Indian troops.'9 
It may seem that corroborative evidence from all these works indi- 
catés that this institution was founded by Manavamma (A.D. 684-7 18), 
but certain-other facts in the story are not in accordance with this con- 
clusion. 
According to the legend it was an heir-apparent called: Mana- 
a son of a King Kassapa, who had the throne bestowed upon his ‘‘bro- 
ther’’ who bore the same name. 
Obviously the accession of Mana- 
vamma does not conform to this description. 
However, there is another 
instance from the history of the island which seems to agree, though not. 
completely, with these details. 
According to the 45th chapter of the 
Cilavamsa, the heir to the throne of Kassapa II (650-659) was his son 
Manaka. . 
But, since he was too young, the king summoned his nephew 
Mana from Rohana and placed him in charge of the government as well 
as the welfare of his children. 
Here it becomes apparent that Mana was 
a cousin of Manaka; according to the terms of kinship prevalent among 
the Sinhalese the sons of the father’s brothers are also called “brothers.” 
A comparison of the two accounts suggests that it was not King 
Manavamma but Mana of whom the earlier part of the legend speaks. 
18. 
EI, Vol. XVIH, pp. 330-40; EZ, Vol. IL, pp. 242-55. 
19, Pyv, p. 102. 
‘

--- PAGE 154 [DIRECT] ---

286 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
But there is a discrepancy between the two stories in that in chapter 
45 Mana does not become king but crowns his father as Dappula I, while 
in the other story Mana (ID) is consecrated king. 
In this connection it 
may be pointed out that even in the Pajavaliya and the Daladé-sirita®® 
the founder of the Uttaromila is described as dpano (=P. ddipada) and 
not.as king, 
Apano would be a more appropriate title for Mana than 
for Manavamma. 
This identification is of considerable value for testing the credibility 
of the legend. 
First, itis mentioned in the account in chapter 45 of the 
Calavamsa that Mana was invited to take over the government because 
Manaka was too young. 
This confirms our suspicions and gives us 
sufficient evidence to completely rule out that part of the legend which 
“presents Mana (I).as a person disqualified from. kitigship due to the loss 
of an eye. The second important fact about the account is that it was 
Manaka' 
who later became king as’ Manavamma. 
Hence we may be 
fairly certain that the latter part of the legend, which claims that the heir- 
apparent’Mana joined the Order and became the first chief incumbent. 
ofthe Uttaromiia, is-also a later fabrication which does not. stand criti- 
cal. scrutiny. 
Finally, according to this legend there were about sixteen 
kings:in the dynasty founded by Manavamma, but it is clear from the 
Cilavamsaitself that there-were more than sixteen rulers in this dynasty, 
. 
This may point, though. not necessarily, to the origin or the writing down 
of this legend during or not long after, the sixteenth king's reign, that 
. is during the reign of Kassapa V or soon, thereafter. 
~ Anmexamination of the evidence in the chronicles on the foundation 
“of the’ Uttaromila shows that there was a certain amount of confusion 
regarding the identity of the founder. 
This is understandable since the 
two claimants ‘to this honor, ‘Mana and Manavamma, were not only 
‘contemporaries but also cousins who shared the same name. 
The prob- 
Jem is:made even more complicated by the appearance of a third person 
who staked.a-claim in a snost unobtrusive yet romantic manner by scribb- 
ling two. verses’on the Mirror Wall at Sigiri to express his admiration 
forthe maidens of Sigiti.’ 
Below the two verses he wrote of himself as 
Uturolapirivana ‘karayu. le Riyandalmi, 
Translated into English this 
‘reads ‘1am Riyandal (P, Ratanadatha or Hatthadatha), the Scribe, 
who: founded the Uturola-pirivana.’’24, 
Uturola being a rather unusual 
hame, it is. probable that it refers to the Uturolapirivana of the 
» Abhayagiri monastery. 
If so, this record casts grave doubts on the 
réliability of the evidence from the chronicles. 
20.. Pjv., p, 102; Daladé-sirita, p. 42, 
21, 
Sigirt Graffiti, Vol, Il, p. 285, v. 463, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
287 
Paranavitana has commented that the graffito may be “taken as 
dating back to the period of MAanavamma,”’ and suggested that 
the 
chronicles of a later period have credited the king with the work of one of 
his subjects.27_ 
This would, of course, be one means of reconciling the 
discrepancies in our sources, 
But Paranavitana himself has dated the 
graflito on palaeographic grounds to the second half of the eighth cen- 
tury. 
Hence, in spite of the evidence of the chronicles, it seems most 
likely that the Uturola-pirivana was founded only in the eighth century 
and not soon after the death of Kassapa IL (A.D. 659) as the legend 
Suggests. 
z 
The earliest direct reference to this institution occurs in the account 
of the reign of Sena I (833-853) in the Calavamsa. 
Sena I built a resi- 
dence for monks (pariccheda), which was named after himself, at the 
Uttaralha.2* 
The context in which the passage occurs suggests that it 
was at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
His successor Sena II (853-857) 
erected a mansion on the grounds of the same institution.25 
It is pro- 
bable that the Uttaromila moved its seat to Polonnaruva after the ac- 
cession of Vijayabahu I, who built monasteries for the three nikdyas in 
the new city.26. 
The next reference to it occurs in the Velaikkara in- 
scription at Polonnaruva.?? 
According to this record Vijayabahu I 
built the temple of the Tooth relic within the precincts’ of the Uttorul- 
mila, which was “‘the principal dyatana of the Abhayagiri monastery, the 
chief fane of the city of Pulanari.’’?® 
This shrine housed the Tooth 
and Bowl relics as well as “‘the great stone image of the Buddha.’ 
It 
appears from this that the Uttaromitla and perhaps the Abhayagiri mon- 
astery itself were, by this time, established at Polonnaruva. 
Furthermore, 
this record establishes beyond doubt that the Uttaromila was a frater- 
nity attached to the Abhayagiri nikdya. 
It is noteworthy that this inscription was found near the so-called 
Vihare No. 2 at the “Quadrangle to the North of the Citadel”’ in Polon- 
naruva.2® 
This brick-built 
shrine comprising a vestibule and a gar- 
bhagrha occupies a space of roughly seventy-five by forty-five feet. 
The 
garbhagrha has thirty-six stone columns which are distributed in the 
22. 
Sigirt Graffiti, Vol. I, p. cexi. 
23, Ibid., Vol, I, p. 285,-v. 463. 
24, 
Cv, 50.77, 
25, 
Cr, 51.75, 
26, 
Cv. 60. 9-10. 
27. EI, Vol. XVII, pp. 330-40. 
28. pulandriyaha vijayardjapuratiu eduppitta milasthanamaglya abhayagiri-maké- 
vihdrattu agrayatanamaha uttorubmiilaiyil. EI, Vol. XVI, p. 337, Hl. 17-9. 
29, ASCAR, 1903, ‘pp. 8-11.

--- PAGE 155 [DIRECT] ---

288 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
pattern familar at Anuridhapura, with twenty of them standing flush with 
the walls and leaving wide intercolumniation in the middle, either way, 
in cross-like fashion. Paranavitana?® points out that stylistically it stands. 
midway between the ‘‘Anuradhapura Period’’ and the age of Parakra- 
mabahu I. 
Mason marks on the building contain the word dalada,- 
It 
seems to have also served as an image-house, for it has three images at 
the back of the garbhagrha which are placed against ‘‘curtain walls.’" 
On the left is a flight of stairs which led to an upper floor which was. 
probably built of timber. 
Perhaps the relics were kept there. 
All this 
conforms to the description of the shrine which is contained in the in- 
scription. 
Hence it may be said that the site of the “Quadrangle to the 
north of the Citadel’. belonged to the .Uttaromila, 
The Quadrangle 
was, however, within the city, and it is unlikely that the monastic estab- 
lishment of the Uttaromila was within the city. We may postulate that 
the Tooth relic was housed within the city and placed under the charge 
of the Uttaromila. 
_ 
ow [tis evident from this record that. by the end of the reign. of Vijaya- 
‘bahu, Lthe Uttaromiila had become important enough 
to call itself the 
chiefdyatana of the Abhayagiri monastery and that it had been vested 
with ‘the charge of the Bowl and Tooth relics which were important in the 
religious as well as the political life of the country. 
This association. | 
with ‘the two relics must have considerably enhanced the position of this 
‘institution in the eyes of the faithful. 
We also learn from the record that 
at the-time the mahdsthavira of the mila was Mugalan. 
He was des- 
cribed in the inscription as a scholar versed in the sastras and the dgamas; 
'-and'he'was also. the royal preceptor (rajaguru).*1 
The legend on the 
origin’ of the Uttaromila strongly suggests that this monastery had be- 
come a large institution which supported a multitude of monks and 
wielded considerable influence in both religious and political life, at least 
by 
the time of the origin of the legend. 
By the end of the reign of Vijaya- 
baht I this description had certainly become a reality. 
“It has already been mentioned that the monks of the eight milavi- 
. 
Adras left for Rohana during the reign of Vikramabahu I in protest 
"against. his ‘misdeeds.’ 
We can be fairly certain that the monks of 
the Uttaromila were among them since it is mentioned that the Tooth’ 
and. Bowl relics were also taken to Rohana.*? 
These relics were 
in .Rohana until they were captured 
and were 
brought back to 
30. ‘CSG, Vol. H, p. 163. 
JS We also has the title vydrini. 
Wickremasinghe interpreted this as “gramima- 
rian,” but this interpretation is not reliable, 
32. Cy 61, 61, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
289 
Polonnaruva during the reign of Parikramabahu 1.3 
° Probably the 
monks of the Uttaromiila followed the relics. 
More information about this fraternity is available in a literary work 
written in the time of Parakramabahu IV (1303-1326). 
The Daladé- 
sirita,>* 
which gives the history of the Tooth relic and lays down the 
procedure to be followed 
in the rituals pertaining to it, states that the 
casket containing the relic was to be removed from its shrine by the 
chief incumbent of the Uturulumula-ayatin with the assistance of suit- 
able people selected from two clans—the Ganavdsi and the Kilim— 
when it was taken in procession. 
After the procession the seals of the 
casket were to be broken in the presence of this dignitary and an expo« 
sition of the relics held for the benefit of the saigha, the king and the 
public, 
All disputes concerning the temple of the Tooth relic were to be’ 
settled by the chief incumbent of the Uturulumula-ayatan, who sat in 
session with the king’s ministers, 
Thus it is clear that the Uttaromila 
enjoyed the custodianship of the Tooth relic even as late as the fourteenth 
century. 
When the location ofthe capital was changed, this fraternity of 
monks followed the Tooth relic in its wanderings until it finally was 
settled at Kurunagalpura at the time the Daladdé-sirita was written. 
Perhaps this association with the relic helped its survival, This 
fraternity is mentioned as late as in the fifteenth century in the literary 
works of the hierarch Rahula, who lived at the Vijayabahu Pirivana in 
Totagamuva near Kotte. 
In the Kévyasekhara, one of his poetic works, 
he refers to himself as the grandson, in pupillary succession, of the mahd-- 
thera Rahula of the Uturumula.5 
Unfortunately little definite inform- 
ation is available on Rahula, the elder.*> 
In the Padasadhana-{ika,*” 
Rahula of Totagumuva traces back his pupillary succession. to Sariputta 
of Polonnaruva. 
This is significant since it seems to suggest that the later 
members of the Uttaromila placed little emphasis on the origin of this 
fraternity in the Abbayagiri nikdya and that by this time the doctrinal 
emphasis which distinguished it from other fraternities had. more or less 
disappeared. 
Another statement of particular interest is found in the 
33. 
Cv, 74, 67-8. 
34. 
Daladd-sirita, pp. 49-54, 
35. 
Kavyaéekhara, Sarga I, v. 23. 
36. 
Buddhadatta confounds him with Galaturumula mahdsvami of the Titthagama 
Vihara. He believes that the term Uturumula was derived from Galaturumula, but 
there is no evidence to warrant such an identification. 
37. 
sdriputtamahddisdmijanane jatassa sambhdvite 
‘ 
natté uttaramila-rahulamahatherassa sikkhagart Padasidhana-tiké quoted in 
Theravadi: Bauddhacaryayo, p. 15.

--- PAGE 156 [DIRECT] ---

290 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
Parevi-sandeéaya® by the same author. 
Here he claims to have ob- 
tained a boon at the age of fifteen from the god Skanda (Katida). 
This 
reminds one of the legend about the founder of the fraternity who was 
also described as a devotee of the same god. 
It is extremely difficult to 
determine the true significance of these two statements though they seem 
to suggest that the Uttaromila was associated, in some way or other, with 
the cult of Skanda. 
The Uttaromila seems to have produced yet another poet in the 
author of the Anuruddha-sataka who describes himself as the “upasthavira 
Anuruddha who was like unto a jewel in the necklace of the Uttaro- 
mila.’’%? 
This work testifies to a rather high standard of Sanskrit 
versification but fails to provide any definite evidence which would help 
us to determine its date. 
Equal-in importance to the Uttaromila was the Kaparamula or the 
Kappiramiila, a fraternity which is frequently mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions of the. Abhayagiri monastery. 
According to the Cdélavamsa,"! 
Dathopatissa II (659-667) built the Kappira Parivena at the Abhayagiri 
monastery. 
The Pijivaliya and the Sulurdjévaliya ascribe the building 
of the, Maha (Greater) Kapara Pirivana and the Kuda (Lesser) Kapara 
Pitiyena;to. Kassapa IV (898-914). 
However, these seem to represent 
a) gontusion Tather than evidence contradicting .the testimony of the 
Calavamsa, This is substantiated by the fact that these two works also 
os attribute. the construction of the Kapara Pirivana to Lamani Dalupatis 
@ 
opatissa IJ). Besides, in the Calavamsa the Kapara Pirivana is 
ioned: twice prior to the reign of Kassapa IV, i.c., in the reigns of 
“the: fourth (667-683). and. the ninth (831-833) kings who bore the name 
: Aggabodhi. 43° 
In ‘the light of the fact that Aggabodhi IV was the 
“immediate successor of Dathopatissa I, the testimony of the Cailavamsa 
appears | tobe trustworthy, 
‘Apparently’ the Kapara Pirivana attracted 
the indulgence of a 
= greater authber of Patrons than did the Uttaromiila. 
Poithakuttha, a 
"38, “kbs puir Kula upan-risdl totagamu piyasa 
seda-dat siyalu kay nalu magada saku basa 
katda kumariidu vara lad pasalos vayasa 
vadahala rahal vadi tan kala rav satdesa. 
Katidavurakula, if taken as derived 
“from Skandavarakula, would mean ‘“‘the clan which received a boon from Skanda,” 
but Katidavura also means “military camp.” Pareyi Sandedaya, v. 208. 
39. 
tdam 
vyadhattottaramiilahara—ratudrikuropasthaviranuruddhah. 
Anuruddha- 
8ataka,-v. 101, 
40. Some scholars have dated the poem to the , polonnaruva Period” on stylistic 
“grounds... CHJ, Vol. IV, p. 
96; UCHC, Vol. I, pt. 2, p. 3 
AL. 
Cv. 45, 29. 
/ 42. 
Pjv., p. 103; Sulurdjavaliya, p, 10, 
43, 
Cv. 46, 215 50, 77, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
291 
Tamil officer in the service of AggabodhilV, erected a mansion at the 
Kappira Parivena and granted a village to it.4 
During the reign of 
Aggabodhi IX, Sena, the mahddipdda, built a row of cells ( 2pariccheda) 
which bore his own name for the same institution.*® 
As mentioned 
earlier, Kassapa IV built the Kuda Kapara Pirivana so that there were 
two institutions called Maha Kapara and Kuda Kapara within the Ka- 
para fraternity.“© 
Kassapa V (A.D. 914-923) claims that he built the 
mansion Salameyvanpavu for the Kap&ra-mula in an inscription which 
is dated in his sixth regnal year and found in the “‘stone-canopy area’ of 
“the Abhayagiri monastery.4” 
There is hardly any doubt that the Sala- 
meyvanpayu mansion was the same as Silameghapabbata, mentioned 
in the Célavamsa, which he bulit at the Abhayagiri and endowed with a 
grant of villages.“8 
The same inscription decrees that an amuna of rice 
and four aka of gold should be set apart daily for the provision of alms 
to the inmates of the Maha Kapara Piriyana, 
Also, one 
thousand 
{kaland?) of gold were set apart each year for the provision of robes. 
It was mentioned earlier that the Maha Kapara Pirivana was one of the 
two major groups within the Kapara fraternity. 
These figures would 
enable one to estimate the number of its inmates at the time as having 
been slightly over three hundred. 
The Kap§ra fraternity is also mentioned’ in a Sanskrit inscription 
found within the precincts of the Abhayagiri monastery and assigned by 
Paranavitana to the year A.D. 995, three years after the conquest of the 
northerly parts of the island by the Colas.>! 
According to this record, 
Satghanandin, who calls himself sthavira-munivara and was most pro- 
bably an eccleciastical hierarch in the fraternity, gave 200 farkas? to 
provide ‘‘drinkables"’ (pdniya) for the monks at the Kapararama. 
This 
inscription is significant since it purports to be within the precincts of 
44, 
Cv. 46, 21-2, 
45. 
Cy. 50.77, 
46, 
Piv. p. 103, 
41, 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 47, 1, 13. 
48.. 
Cv, 52. 58, 
49, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 49, il. 48-50, 
30. An amuna would amount to 40 Iahas or 160 “measures” (séru) of rice, 
Con- 
servatively estimated, this should be sufficient to provide 640 meals, 
Considering the 
fact that two meals were served every day this would indicate that the population of 
monks was roughly 320, 
it has also been pointed out that the provision of robes was 
expected to cost about 3 kaland of gold per monk, each year, 
The fact that one 
thousand (kaland?) were set apart would suggest. the presence of a similar number. 
See supra p, 146, 
Si. EZ, Vol. V, Pt. 1, pp. 162-9, 
52. 
The tarikd, as it was known in India, was subject to a great degree of 
regional variation (about 43 to 62 grains). For’a discussion, see H. W. Codrington, 
Ceyton Coins....p. 5.

--- PAGE 157 [DIRECT] ---

292 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
the Kapararama and thereby helps to locate the site of the fraternity. 
It 
was discovered at the site of a monastery to the northwest of the Twin 
Ponds in the Abhayagiri 
area. 
Paranavitana 
believed 
that it was 
found at or near the original site. 
The main ruin’? found at the site today is a pafedyatana group sur- 
rounded by cloisters except on the east. 
In the east there was a stair- 
" way leading to a stylobate measuring sixty-three feet square, with pro- 
jecting bays. 
It was accessible from the north, the west and the south. 
Bell gave the following description of this ruin: 
This stylobate formed an open colonnade round the. central 
walled shrine, which. conformed generally to the basement plan 
and entrances, but‘in firet lines. 
Within, the four free-standing 
pillars were of the spreading-capital type. 
At the back was a 
small projection, perhaps once a portico on the east. 
No other 
tuin: has yet come to light at Anuridhapura approaching this 
unique building i 
in beauty of outline and choice ornamentation 
of some of its columns,54 
There is no evidence to determine the exact function 
of this: 
remarkable structure. 
The debris scattered around these ruins points. 
to the possible existence of other buildings, but the ravages of nature 
and of vandals have removed all clues about their form and function. 
“The whole complex of ruins was situated within a walled enclosure. 
A’ well-laid pathway which passed through a stone-built gatehouse con-. 
“nected them with the rest of the monastery. 
But, in all probability, this 
- gtoup. of ‘buildings was only part of the Kapariirama and should not 
. be mistaken for the whole. 
“Bell; ‘who ‘excavated the site of another ruined monastery at Puli- 
yankulam about two miles to the east of the Abhayagiri monastery, de- 
olared that it was “the largest and most complete monastery of its kind 
discovered. at Anurddhapura.’’*> 
The central feature of this monastic 
complex was a square terrace supporting four shrines. 
The terrace was 
surrounded by thirty-two cells, each measuring twenty-six feet square 
and supported by twelve pillars which were laid out in perfect symme- 
try. . 
Around these was 4 wide moat, while the outermost boundary was. 
marked by a.wall consisting of a double line of stones about six to seven 
feet in:width ‘and forming a rectangle measuring three hundred. and 
“thirty ‘by three hundred and sixty yards. 
Access to the central terrace 
was:open from all four sides, but the main entrance was on the south. 
53. ASCAR, 1894, p. 3, See also plate XIII of the Thirteenth Report of the ASC. 
54. ASCAR, 1894, p, 3. 
55. ASCAR, 1896, p, 
31; 1897, pp. 4-6; 1898, pp. 3-4, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
293 
A connecting street, twenty-five feet wide, extended from the gatehouse 
‘on the south and widened to ninety feet at about thirty-five yards from 
the terrace. 
The symmetry of the whole layout is reminiscent of the so- 
ealled Vijayarima.>® 
A path, which extended directly to the north of the terrace over the 
moat and part of the stone wall, connected this monastic complex with 
an image-house, situated on a succession of terraces, which was des- 
cribed by Bell as the best specimen of its kind. 
On the second terrace 
‘was a large shrine comprising a sanctum and a vestibule similar in pro- 
portions to the image-house at the Jetavana monastery.5” 
The vesti- 
bule was accessible from both the south and the east. 
Immediately around the image-house were four structures built of 
brick and mortar on 
stone 
plinths. 
Their floors were covered with 
lime concrete, and their layout suggests that they possibly had an upper 
floor. 
Two of them have been identified by Bell as ‘‘gatehouses’’ and the 
other two as residential quarters. . 
To the north of the image-house was 
a building of thirty columns, slightly detached from the rest, and a ruin 
identified as a ‘bathhouse’ was found to the southeast. 
Bell has re- 
marked that this group appears to be of a later date than the buildings at 
the moated site. 
Two inscriptions, assigned to the reign of a certain Abha Salamevan, 
were found at the monastery at the moated site.5* 
But it is a record 
found at the ruins of an image-house to its north that is most relevant 
to our purpose.” 
This inscription dated to the twelfth regnal year of 
Dappula IV (A.D, 924-935) identifies the site as the Uda-kitagbo-pavu, 
the hermitage built by Uda mahaya (mahadipada Udaya) and named 
after him and his son, Kitagbo dpé ( Adipdda Kittaggabodhi). 
It was 
generously endowed and granted to twelve monks from the Kapardémula 
vd vdtena Puyaramyehera. 
These monks are described in glowing 
terms as ‘adorned with ornaments of distinctive virtues such as modera- 
tion in desires, contentment and religious austerity.” 
The term vd has 
been used in both the Sigiri Graffiti and the Dhampiydé Aluva Gétapa- 
daya®* in the sense of ‘‘having originated,” and vd{ena from Skt. vrt 
occurs with the meanings ‘being’? and “existing.”’®* 
On this basis, it 
seems possible to trace the origins of the community of monks at the 
56, ASC, Fourth Progress Report, pp. 2-3; 
Sixth Progress Report, pp. 5-6. 
57, 
See supra pp. 35-6, 
58. ASCAR, 1898, p, 4, 
59. EZ, Vol. I, p. 182. 
60. £2, Vol. I, p. 186, i, 13-8. 
61. 
Sigir? Graft, Vol. II, pp. 10-1, ». 18; pp. 33-4, v. 55; DAG, ed. D. BL 
Sayatilaka, 1932, p. 5 
62. Ss&, Vol. it, 
p. 887. 
See also Dharmapradipika ed. Dharmarama, p. 323,

--- PAGE 158 [DIRECT] ---

294 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
Puvaram (P. Pubbarama) monastery to the Kapara fraternity of the 
Abhayagiri nikdya. And since the Udi-kitagbo-pavu was granted to 
monks from the Puvaram monastery, it is very likely that both these in- 
stitutions accepted the leadership of the Kapara fraternity. 
It is difficult to believe that the extensive monastery at the moated 
. site which has about thirty-two buildings devoted to residential purposes 
is identical with the hermitage built by mahddipdda Udaya for twelve 
monks. 
Hence it seems reasonable to identify the site of this inscript- 
ion with its ruins of moderate proportions. as the Uda-kitagbo-pavu, 
but this raises the problem of the identity of the moated site. 
The ar- 
chaeological evidence cited earlier provides us with some helpful clues. 
It.is evident that a very close relationship prevailed between the monas- 
tery of the moated site and the hermitage to its north. 
An examination 
of the building techniques reveals that the moated site was built earlier 
than the other complex. 
‘Also, the whole group was situated to the east 
of the city and the Abhayagiri monastery. 
: 
“Tt has already been mentioned that the twelve monks who occupied 
. this hermitage came from the Puvaramvehera. 
The inscriptions also 
state that whenever the number of residents at the hermitage fell short of 
the specified figures, the vacancies were to be filled with monks from the 
same monastery. 
It also declared that no objections were to be raised if 
any of the monks decided to. go and live at the main monastery.% 
According'to the Cilavamsa, the Pubbarima was built by Sena I (833- 
_ 853) and’his queen Sangha, about a century earlier than the Uda-kitag- 
bo-pavu:™. Finally, it may be pointed out that the name Pubbarama, 
‘*Bastern'.Monastery,’’ strongly suggests that it was to the east of the 
city, hence it seems very likely that it is the Pubbarama which is repre- 
sented today by the moated site at Puliyankulam. 
IE this is so, it can be 
asserted with ‘greater confidence that both monastic groups at Puliyan- 
-kulam came.under the leadership of the Kapara fraternity of the Abha- 
yagiri nikdya, 
63. : 
melt. unu ténakat saiigun el(va)t tand sang-vat-himiyanat satig sand vatd kivena: 
vat -himiyan veherin gannd isé meyin vehera gos visiyadl satig kenek hat sahak no vd gan- 
nd isd, EZ. Vol. I, 
p. 187, it, 30-3, We propose to read the last portion of /, 53 as dahak 
no vganné isa, 
Compare the letter with sain 11.34, 37 and dain/. 17, 
The absence 
of. 
the upward stroke in the center makes it clear that the particular letter was da and not 
sa... 
The:word. dahak occurs in the Dhampiyd Atuva Gétapadaya (p. 166) as the Sin- 
halese synonym for P. palibodha, “obstruction, hindrance, obstacle.” Wickremasinghe 
interpreted savigsand as the Sanghasenapabbatavihara. 
But such an interpretation 
points to the unusual implication that though the first batch of monks came to this 
hermitage from the Pubbarima, subsequent vacancies were to be filled with monks 
from the Sanghasenapabbata. 
Sorata’s suggestion that satigsand meant the assembly 
of monks. seems to be more plausible (SSS, p. 987). 
4. 
Cy. 50,69. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
295 
The Kappiramiila occurs for the last time in the Cilavamsa in the 
account of the reign of Vijayabahu I. Yasodhara, the king’s daughter, 
built a large image-house for the Kapptramilayatana. 
It is not 
clear from the chronicle whether this was at Anuradhapura or Polon- 
naruya, though it is possible that the Kappiiramila also had moved to ~ 
Polonnaruva during the reign of Vijayabahu I. Though no later instance 
of the Kapparamila being referred to by name is known in our sources, 
the references to the eight malas seoms to testify to its continued exist- 
ence. 
We have seen that the Uttaromila and the Kappiramiila are fre- 
quently mentioned as leading fraternities within the Abhayagiri nikéya. 
Probably they are identical with the ‘‘two fraternities’ (demula) of the 
Abhayagiri nikdya which are mentioned in the inscriptions of the tenth 
century. 
The Anuradhapura 
slab inscription of Kassapa V (A.D. 
914-923) contains the regulation that the accounts pertaining to certain 
of the main institutions of the Abhayagiri monastery were to be obtained 
from the two fraternities and written down at the end of the year in order 
to be presented at the genera! assembly of monks. 
Elsewhere we have 
cited the statement from the Mihintale Tablets of Mahinda IV (A.D. 
956-972) that the accounts of the Cetiyagiri monastery at Mihintale were 
to be settled by the committee of management in collaboration with the 
representatives of the two fraternities of the Abhayagiri nikdya.* 
These 
two passages have been greatly misunderstood. 
Wickremasinghe® 
believed that the second implied that the Cetiyagiri monastery belonged 
to the Kappiiramiila, a conclusion which is unwarranted and even con- 
tradicted by the evidence. 
Perera was led to believe that there were two 
mulas at cach of the two monasteries, the Abhayagiri and the Cetiya- 
girl. 
Certainly there is no evidence to show that there were any such 
fraternities at the Cetiyagiri; the Tablets of Mahinda IV clearly state that 
the accounts were to be settled in collaboration with the representatives 
of the two mulas of the Abhayagiri nikdya who had come to assist in the 
proceedings.” 
Hence we can be fairly certain in stating that the two 
mulas referred to in the Anuradhapura Slab Inscription of Kassapa V 
and the Mihintale Tablets of Mahinda IV were in fact the same, and we 
can identify them as the Uttaromiila and the Kappiramila, 
65. 
Cv. 60, 83, 
66, EZ, Vol. I, p. 48, f. 35-7, 
67. 
See supra p. 131. 
68. EZ, Vol. I, p. 81. 
69. 
LS, Perera, Institutions..., p, 1423, 
abahaygiri veherhi demulin sGhanuvat vadi satigun simatigin. EZ, Vol.1, p.-92,

--- PAGE 159 [DIRECT] ---

296 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
It is further evident from the facts cited in the preceding paragraph 
that these two fraternities occupied a place of prime importance in the 
organization of the Abhayagiri nikaya. 
They seem to have been dit- 
ectly concerned with the internal administration of the Abhayagiri mon- 
astery and were also responsible to the community of monks of the main 
monastery for the supervisory control over the monasteries and hermi- 
tages belonging to the nikdya. 
Inscriptions testify to their joint parti- 
cipation in the administration of the Cetiyagiri monastery for a period 
of more than half a century, and it probably continued for a much longer 
period. 
In this connection a regulation occurring in the inscription of Kas- 
sapa V seems.to be relevant. 
It decrees 7! that in the case of a dispute 
among the “unsupported monks”’ (apilisarana satgun), “recipients of 
incomes” (/ébha laduvan), or “the recipients of dwellings’ (avasladuvan), 
the monks of the relevant fraternity were to sit in session and resolve it. 
If the.fraternity failed to settle the dispute, an inquiry was to be held in 
collaboration. with the royal officials and, where necessary, suitable 
punishments 
were to be prescribed. 
It is significant that the head of the 
nikdya is not mentioned in this context. 
This evidence suggests that the 
nikdya was. a loosely organized corporate institution in which the fra- 
tornities had ‘great responsibility and importance. 
It is. to be expected 
that this.should be so since it would have been very difficult to bring all 
the affairs of a nikdya as large as the Abhayagiri under one central 
control.” 
: 
Ff 
ornate eulogy in a late tenth-century inscription at the Abhaya- 
giti monastery describes the four fraternities of the monastery as.four 
divine abodes.” 
“This is perhaps an indication that two more insti- 
tutions gained prominence and grew large enough to acquire the status 
of ‘‘fraternity.”’’. 
The inscription of Kassapa V, quoted earlier, refers to 
two. fraternities’. 
and 
six ‘ 
avasas 
(lit. “residences’’), 
Of these six 
avasas, 
it: names two—the Vahadii and the Mahanetpa—which were 
probably the most important.”3 . 
One tends to suspect that it was these 
twoavasas which later obtained the status of “fraternity.” 
‘This:indeed.seems to be what really happened. 
The Vahadii is 
probablyidentical with the Vadumula which, according to the Pajéva- 
liya,”4 ‘was built by Manavamma. 
But very little reliable information 
71. 
apilisarana. vat-himiyan sé lébha laduvan is& avas laduvan isa kalaha yana 
varadak ttapuvat mula satgun hindé nimavanu isd saiigun yvisin no nimat samdaruvan 
oH save vicdrakot nimavé pat pat seyin datiduvam karann isa. EZ, Vol. I, p. 48, i. 
-. 72,.satara mul satara maha div bavana. 
EZ, Vol. 1, p. 221, £8, 
73... mahaneipa vahadi. de avasatad me sirit karanis isd. 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 49, H. 47-8. 
74, 
Piv., p. 102; See also Daladé-sirita, p. 42. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
297 
is available concerning this institution. 
It is mentioned in a graffito 
at Sigiri which 
mentions 
a 
thera 
who 
belonged 
to 
Vahadi.?5 
According to the Cilavamsa, Aggabodhi VI (A.D. 733-722) built a 
paséda at the Vahadipa monastery,”° 
Udaya I (A.D. 797-801) built the 
‘Senaggabodhi-pabbata hermitage for the Vahadipa,”’ and Dappula IE 
(A.D. 815-831) 
built 
at 
Lavara-pabbata 
a 
hermitage 
for 
the 
Vahadipa monastery.” 
Div and dé@ are Sinhalese synonyms for the 
Pali term dipa,”® and it is possible that Vahadii and Vadu were synony- 
mous with Vahadipa.® 
The Cilavamsa records that Aggabodhi V (A.D. 718-724) built the 
Mahdanettadipadika pariccheda and gave it, along with the village Deva- 
tissa, to the Dhammarucikas.*! 
Sena I built an alms hall at the Maha- 
nettapabbata.®* 
Assuming that Mahanettapabbata was 
situated 
in 
Polonnaruva, Nicholas. has suggested that this fraternity was stationed 
in the vicinity of this city.83. But the validity of this assumption as 
well as the identification of the Mahanettidipadika with the Mahanetta- 
pabbata are questionable. 
The Mahanetpi fraternity is referred to as a 
mila in the Pijavaliya, which records that Vijayabihu IV (A.D. 
1270-1273) built a monastery on the top of the Vatagiri rock for the 
. mahathera of the Mahanetpamula.** 
This is confirmed by the Calavamsa 
in which the fraternity is referred to as the Mahanettapasida dyatana.* 
The Vatagiripabbata has been identified with the present Vakirigala in the 
K&galla district.** 
It is thus clear that the headquarters of this fraternity 
had shifted to the southwest along with the capital of the Sinhalese 
‘Kingdom and that the fraternity continued. to enjoy the patronage of 
royalty. 
15, 
Sigiri Graffiti, Vol. I, p. 137, v. 224. 
76, 
Cv. 48. 65. 
71. 
Cv. 49, 33, 
78. 
Cv. 49,76, 
Geiger's translation of this strophe is inaccurate, 
79. 
See SSS, Vol. I, pp. 420, 431, 
80. 
Paranavitana has suggested that the Vahadipa college of the Abhayagiri monas- 
tery was so named because it was founded by traders from Vreadvipa, which he identi- 
fied as Malaysia. 
(Ceylon and Malaysia, 1966, pp. 20-1), 
For comments on this 
identification, see R. A. L. H. Gunawardana, “Ceylon and Malaysia; A Study of Pro- 
fessor S. Paranavitana’s Research on the Relations between the Two Regions,” UCR, 
Vol. XXV, pp. 39ff, 
~ 
Cy, 48. 2 
82. 
Cv. 50,74 
83, JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 34, 
84, Pjv., p. 140. 
85. 
Cy. 88. 46-7, 
6, 
See JRASCBNS, Vol. IV, p. 123.

--- PAGE 160 [DIRECT] ---

298 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
The author 
of the Péjayaliya also mentions that the monk who bene- 
fited from this munificence of the king, Sumaigala of the Mahanetp4- 
* mula, was his contemporary.*? 
Attempts have been made to identify 
Sumangala with the author of the Abhidhammattha-vibhavini, a pupil of 
Sariputta. 
It has been suggested on this basis that monks of the Maha- 
vihara nikdya were appointed over the Mahanetpamula after the unifi- 
cation of the nikdyas,®® 
but it is significant that Buddhaputra, the 
author of the Pdjavaliya, mentions that Sumangala was a “brother” 
of his: 
This, in ecclesiastical terms, would mean that they were fellow- 
pupils of the same teacher. 
The Pajdvaliya was written in the thirty- 
fifth year of Parakramabahu II (A.D. 1270), and it is not very likely that 
he or his contemporary could have been pupils of Sariputta who was a 
senior thera during the reign of Parakramabahu I (A.D. 1153-1186). 
In the Vutiaméla, which was written during the reign of Parakra- 
mabalu V (A.D. 1344-1359), the hierarch of the Mahanettapasadamila 
was extolled as a teacher of renown and a monk of great virtuo.®? 
It 
appears from this work that. he was at D&digama, the capital of Parak- 
ramabahu V. Riimacandra Bharati, a Brahmin from Bengal who camé.to. 
Sri Lanka during the reign of Parakramabahu VI (A.D. 1412-1467), 
wrote the Vrttamdlakhyd,° a biographical eulogy of Dipanhkara of 
Ramyasthala, who was then the hierarch of the Mahanettapisada fra- 
tornity. 
It is. also interesting that he was mentioned in this work as the 
disciple of the hierarch of another fraternity, the Sailantaramiila (Gala- 
turumula).*! 
It is quite likely that .Dipankara was succeeded by 
Vidigama Maitreya. 
In the Kavlakunu-minimal,® a work on ptosody 
written in the fifty-fourth year (1465) of Parakramabahu VI, Maitreya 
refers to himself as the chief monk of this fraternity (mahanet-pd-mula 
mahateriidy). 
He continued in this position into the next reign. The 
Buduguydlankéra,®> another verse work by him, was composed in the 
87, Pjv, p. 140, 
88. 
A.D. Buddhadatia, Théravadt Bauddhdcéryayo, p. 103. 
89, 
sasissaga 
kanfthohitadhammamalo—virdjeti_ ragadipdpappahiro 
gunodara-hdranijéro 
dharanto—mahdnettapasadamiloruthero. 
Br. Mus, Ms, 
Or, 6611, (178) folto i. 
% 
90. 
Br. Mus. Ms, Or 6611 (180), 
91, 
Lbid, folio ki. 
92, 
viyaiun sir met maha—net pdmula mahateritdu 
melaka eksat kala—sirt parakum nirividu hata 
Panas sive vas. me kelem—kivilakunu mipimala nam. Kivilakwountipimal, y. 87. 
93, 
diyagos patiri bhuvaneka bhuja niritdu satda 
pirivas tunehi siri laka raja bisev lada 
met maha net pamula maha teriftdu satda 
satvida vas meda kale met sitin nada. 
Buduguna Alamkaraya, 
vy, 609-11 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
299 
third year (1472) of Bhuvanekabahu VI. 
In the Madagoda Plate,” this 
king records a grant of land made to Maitreya after listening to a dis- 
course during a tour of the Jaffna peninsula, 
The fact that he accom- 
panied the king on his tours would suggest that he was very close to the 
king. 
It is evident from the preceding discussion that the Abhayagiri 
nikaya was constituted of four main fraternities. 
Of these, the Uttaro- 
mila and the Kappiramila played an active and vital role in the affairs 
of the nikaya but the other two fraternities came to the fore only by 
about the end of the tenth century. 
Itis also evident that, of the fra- 
ternities of the Abhayagiri nikdya, at least the Uttaromila and the 
Mahanettapasidamila survived late into the fifteenth century. 
The Four Additional Fraternities 
A slab inscription from the grounds of the Jetavana monastery, 
dated in the reign of Mahinda IV, refers to the Seneviradmula as a frater- 
nity within this monastery. 
The record lays down regulations for 
the guidance of the residents of the Ratna-ma-pirivana and the Senevi- 
radmula regarding the use of a certain “‘water-pavilion'’ 
(pan miéddi) 8 
It is possible that the Seneviradmula was the same as the Senapatimiila 
mentioned in the Vuttamala.9® 
In this work the hierarch of this fra- 
ternity is described in laudatory terms as a devout ascetic and a kind 
monk. 
The Seneviradmula is mentioned for the last time in the Pal- 
kumbura Sannasa’? which records a grant of a village by a king identi- 
fied as Bhuvanekabahu VIL (A.D. 1521-1551) to the chief incumbent of 
the fraternity at the time. 
It is significant that four of the five fraternities cited above repre- 
sented the Abhayagiri nikdya, while only the Senapatimila may be 
traced back to the Jetavana, 
This does not necessarily mean that there 
was only one “fraternity” in this nikdya. 
Perhaps there were more, 
but it is possible that they did not survive the period of Cola rule or were 
not strong enough to play an active role in the affairs of the Buddhist 
sangha in the period of the Polonnaruva kingdom. 
94. A reading of 
this inscription was published by Sir D, B. Jayatilaka in his Simhalor 
Sahitya Lipi, 1956, p..139, but no critical edition of the record has been published so far. 
95, 
EZ, Vol. III, pp. 226-9. 
It appears from the inscription that this “pavil- 
ion” was a two-storied building situated near the gate where water-pots and “other 
utensils” were kept. 
’ 
96. pajdpuritabijappitodarakhetto—tapotoyasuddhikatdégamghanogho 
dayasthatelassa sovannapatto—virdjeti senapatimiilathero. 
Br. Mus, Ms, Or.. 
6611 (178), folio kz. 
fi 
97. EZ, Vol. UI, pp. 240-7.

--- PAGE 161 [DIRECT] ---

300 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
Similarly, to identify any of the known fraternities 
as being 
related 
to. the Mahavihaira nikdya is problematic. 
In fact, it is 
difficult to trace the origin of the other fraternities to any one of the three 
nikdyas. 
tis not even possible to say that their original centers were at 
Anurddhapura or Polonnaruva, or in the immediate environs of these 
cities. It is quite possible that some of them, if not all, were mere pro- 
vincial fraternities which gained recognition due to the fame of the tea- 
chers who led them and the strength and extent of their influence. 
As in the case of the account of the Uttaromila, the chronicle devo- 
tes ‘nine strophes in the chapter on the “Subjugation of the Enemies of 
Rohana’’ by Vijayabahu I to a description of the origin of the Selantara 
Fraternity.?. 
And, as in the earlier case, this account bears little con- 
nection with the passages which precede and follow it. 
According to the chronicle a, grandson of a certain King Dathopa- 
tissa took up robes and practiced asceticism in a solitary spot. 
Soon he 
gained fame as a man of virtue and discipline. 
The sovereign of Lanka. 
(laikindo), who heard of him and valued his counsel, built a large mans- 
ion:and had him brought to live there. The fraternity of monks which 
Stew up. around him was called the Selantarasamitha ‘“‘as he had left his 
 Tocky abode to come and live at the. mansion at the behest of the king.” 
Then the chronicle goes on to make a very interesting statement: 
» Since that time the sovereigns of Lanka make a monk spend a 
co: night in the devapalli and if he is approved by the deity, appoint 
him to the position of the hierarch of the fraternity, and they abide 
“by the counsel of the monk occupying this leading position in 
“4. protecting’ the world and the Buddhist Order, 
. 
.... 
The whole passage poses a number of problems. 
Geiger pointed 
Out that it is impossible to determine whether the Dathopatissa in quest- 
ion was the first or the second king who was known by this name.!% 
Nor can we proceed any further. 
Geiger has su ggested that the “sover- 
eign'of Lanka" ‘might have been Minavamma,!0 
Perhaps it is so, 
but ‘again it is merely a guess. 
‘However, there were only two kings who bore the name Dathopa- 
tissa, and they ruled within a decade of each other. Thus if we rely on the 
tradition of; the Calavamsa, the origin of the fraternity may be dated to 
98. . 
Cy. 57.31-9, 
99.° tato. palthdya vaseiva palliyam devapalli any 
devatanumatam bhikkhum milatthane thapenti hi 
milatiam . 
dvasantiénam yatinam anusdsana 
lankissaré pavattantt palenté lokasésanam. Cv. 57, 38-69, 
160. 
Cv, trsi., Vol. I, p. 196, n. 1, 
101. ° 
Ibid, n. 2. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
301 
the seventh century, but it is important to note that this information is 
not corroborated by the other chronicles or the epigraphic evidence. 
The passage in question occurs in the account of the reign of Vijayabahu 
T and could very well be a legend inserted into the chronicle after a con- 
siderable period of development. 
The first direct reference to the Selan- 
tarasamiha is also from the reign of Vijayabahu I. Yasodhara, the 
daughter of the king, is said to have erected a mansion for this frater- 
nity.102 
' 
The second problem is one of location. 
It is not clear whether the 
fraternity was based in Rajarattha or Rohana. 
In the account of the 
origin of the fraternity it is mentioned that it was a ‘‘sovereign of Lanka’ 
who built a dwelling for the ascetic and invited him to be his counsellor. 
Also the ‘‘sovereigns of Lanka’ who succeeded him are said to have 
followed the counsel of the chief monk of the fraternity regarding affairs 
of state, and it is unlikely that a ruler of Rohana would be called a “soy- 
ereign of Lanka."’ 
It has already been mentioned that Yasodhara, the 
daughter of Vijayabahu I, built a mansion for this fraternity. 
This does 
not necessarily imply that it was situated close to Polonnaruva, but it is 
also significant that, according to the chronicle, the monks of the eight 
milaviharas left the capital and set forth for Rohanain protest against 
the confiscation of monastic property by Vikramabahu I! 
If the 
Selantarasamiha is included among these eight fraternities, it would 
also point to its presence at Polonnaruva, 
| 
f 
However, there are other reasons which suggest that the fraternity 
was located in Rohana, 
Parfikramabahu I, when he requested the 
~ monks from various regions to take part in the deliberations leading to 
the unification of the saigha nominated Nanda of the Selantdrayatana 
to lead the monks of ‘all the three nikéyas in Rohana,’ 
It could also 
be argued that the silence of the Cilavamsa concerning the history of 
this fraternity right up to the time of Vijayabahu I is due to its origin and 
early development in Rohana. 
Nicholas locates the seat of the Selan- 
tarasamiiha near Mahapama,'°> though there is no direct evidence to 
. 
support such an identification. 
On the other hand, the presence of 
monks belonging to this fraternity in Rohana during the reign of Paraik- 
ramabihu I does not necessarily mean that the original center was at 
Rohana. 
If the monks of the Selantarasamiha left the capital during. 
the reign of Vikramabahu I, as suggested by the chronicle, it is quite pos. 
sible that they settled down in Rohana. 
Unfortunately, the available 
102. 
Cv. 60, 84, 
103. 
Cv. 61. 58-61, 
104. 
Cy, 78. 10. 
105, UCHC, Vol. I, pt. 2, p, 431.

--- PAGE 162 [DIRECT] ---

302 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
evidence is inconclusive. 
The absence of any direct evidence pointing 
to the continued presence of the fraternity in Rajarattha or Rohana 
makes one hesitant about accepting either hypothesis. 
The statement which occurs in the latter part of the account of the 
origin of the Selantarasamiiha is of particular interest. 
The mannor 
in which the prospective chief incumbent of the fraternity was made to 
seek the ‘approval of a deity’’ by spending the night in a devapalli sheds 
interesting light on the relationship which prevailed between Buddhism 
and the popular cult of deity worship. 
The chronicle states that the 
custom had been current since the formation of the fraternity (tato 
Palthdya), and this seems to imply that it was known at the time the 
chronicles came to be written. 
The very fact that this account was inserted in the chronicle suggests 
that the Selantarasamiiha, like the Uttaromila, had grown into one of 
the most important centers of Buddhist activity during this period. A 
monk who belonged to the fraternity is mentioned in contemporary 
literature, 
Satgharakkhita, who became the head of the Buddhist 
church in the timo of Vijayabahu IIE (A.D.. 1232-1236), mentions in the 
Vuttodaya, a work on prosody, that his teacher was the, thera Sila of 
Sclantarayatana.'9 
But in the prologue of the Sumangala-pasadant, 
Sangharakkhita refors to Sariputta as his teacher.°? 
Presumably he 
learned prosody from Sila and the Vinaya from Sariputta. 
It appears, 
therefore, that Sila and Sariputta were contemporaries. 
Nanda of 
‘the Selantara fraternity, who led the monks of Rohana at. the proceed- 
ings of the unification of the satgha, was also a contemporary of Sari- 
putta, From this we may infer that Nanda and Sila also were contem- 
poraries. 
The close relations that the disciples of Sariputta had with monks 
of the Selantarayatana are not, necessarily, indications 
of the affilia- 
tions of this fraternity. 
On the other hand, Paranavitana is also mis- 
taken when he says that it belonged to the Abhayagiri nikdya.!° 
In 
fact, there is no evidence at all concerning the sectarian affiliations of 
this fraternity, 
106, 
selantardyatanavasika-silathera-pado 
guri gunagart: jayatam mameso. 
Vuttodaya, Burmese ed., 1898, p, 123, 
107, 
sdriputtany mahdsamin nekasattha visdradam 
mahdgunam mahapuiitany namo me sirasé garum, 
 Sumahgala-pasddani, 
od,, Dangedara Sumanajoti, p. 1, 
108, UCHC, Vol. I, Pt. 2, p. 568. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
303 
The next reference to this fraternity occurs in the Vuttamdlater 
where the mahdsthavira of Upalantaramila is extolled as a monk intent 
upon service, pure in mind and endowed with many virtues. 
He was 
living at Dadigama, the capital of Parakramabahu V, when this work 
was composed. 
In Sanskrit, upala is a synonym for sai/a,'! and the 
term Upalantaramila is explained as the Sailantaramila in the Sinha~ 
lese paraphrase. 
The author of the Saryaéataka Sannaya, who intro- 
‘duces himself as the hierarch of the Vilgammula fraternity, claims that 
he was the principal disciple of Galaturumula mahdsvémi who lived at 
the Tirthagama monastery.!!"!_ 
In the Vimukti-satigraha, written in the 
-oighteenth year of Vikramabahu who is identified as the third king of 
this name (A.D. 1357-1374), both Galaturumula mahdsvami and Vil- 
gammula mahdthera are mentioned as the teachers of the author.!!2 
Galaturumutla is’ the exact Sinhalese equivalent of the Pali Selantaramila. 
‘The title mahdsvami suggests that this monk was the highest dignitary 
among the sarigha at the time."3 
The other epithets attributed to him, 
‘such as sakalakalésarvajiia, sadbhasaparamesvara and tripitakavagisvar- 
dcarya, reveal that he had won a reputation as a man of letters and an 
-expositor of the doctrine, 
If he is identified with the monk mentioned in 
‘the Vuttamala, it may be presumed that he left’ Dadigama, after Parak» 
ramabahu, V lost his kingdom and settled down at Tirthagama, which is 
probably identical with Totagamuva, 
But it is also possible they were 
‘two different persons, 
The Nikdya-sangrahaya states that Maitreya, 
mahathera, another monk 
of the Galaturumula, assisted the hierarch 
Dharmakirtti I] to carry out a reform of the sarigha under the patronage 
of Virabahu who was the de facto ruler of the island during the latter 
part of the reign of Bhuvenekabahu V (A.D. 1372-1408).""4 
The last 
reference to this fraternity occurs in the Vrttamalékhyé, which mentions 
Sailantaramilesa mahasvami as the teacher of Dipankara, the hero of 
the eulogy.5 
Presumably the highest office in the community of 
snonks had again passed to the Sailantarasamiha.!!¢ 
109. 
saka-atthahitépi parattharato 
Jinasdésana-paélana-suddha-mano 
Upatantaranty mobethovia 
Lt (17 
as 
2 
‘i 
Poli 
1 is omitted and 2. is taviro in Or. 6611 (179), eh da he PLE 
Mi) BGuS Be 
dias See PTS Pali-English Dictionary; Monier Williams, Sanskrit-English Dici- 
lil. 
Stryosaraka, ed. Batuvantudaye, 1949, p, 54, 
412. 
Vimukti-satgrahava, ed, Homégama Silaratana, 1925, p. 215. 
113. 
For a discussion on the interpretation of this term see infra pp. 332-4, 
114, 
Niks, ed, Wickremasinghe, p. 630, 
US. 
Br. Mus. Ms. Or, 6611 (180) folio £7. 
416, 
See infra pp, 332-4,

--- PAGE 163 [DIRECT] ---

304 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
The Vilgammula, alternatively called the Velgammula, Sarasigama- 
miila and the Sarogamamiala, is mentioned for the first time in the Abhi- 
dhanappadipika,""” a Pali lexicon compiled not long after the reign of 
Parikramabahu J. Later on it. was to become one of the most eminent 
fraternities in the fields of literary and religious activity. 
Moggallana, 
the author of the Abhidhdnappadipikd, states that he lived in the Saro- 
gamasamiiha of the Jetavana monastery at Polonnaruva and that he 
took to writing under the patronage of Paradkramabahu. 
From this 
it may be deduced that Sarogimamila was one of the eight fraternities 
brought together by Parakramabahu. I and established at the Jetavana 
monastery, and that Moggallana was a contemporary of the king, 
The origin of this fraternity is shrouded in mystery. 
The Dhdtu- 
vamsa'!® mentions a certain Vilgamvehera as one of the monasteries 
built by Kakavannatissa. 
It appears from the same work, that the stdpa 
and the monastic establishment he founded near Lake Seru was one of 
his most important works, but it is not possible to determine from the 
contexts of these references whether the Vilgamvehera was identical with 
the monastery near Lake Seru. However, it-is important in this con- 
nection. that the Simhala Bodhivamésa, written in the fourteenth century, 
states that one of the offshoots of the Bo Tree at Anuradhapura was 
planted at “‘Vilgama of the ndgas,’’ near Seruvila.49 
This reference 
suggests that the two places were identical. 
The value of this reference 
is enhanced 
by the fact that the Simhala Bodhivaméa 
was 
the 
work. of the chief incumbent of the monastery at Kilaniya, who was 
himself the hierarch of the Vilgammula fraternity in the time of Parik- 
ramabahu IV (A.D. 1302-1326). 
One might suppose that no better authority could be cited to con- 
firm the identification that this monastery was the original seat of the 
Vilgammala. 
But the casual way in which this monastery is mentioned 
casts some doubts on such an identification. 
Vilgama is introduced as 
the “monastery of the ndgas situated near Lake Seru.”’ The author does 
not specifically state that it was the original seat of his own fraternity. 
The identification is rendered more doubtful by the appearance of several 
places under this very name. 
A fourth-century inscription from Ni-maluva, near. the boundary 
between the Panama Pattu of the Amparai District and the Monarigala. 
117. 
Abhidhdnappadipika Sannaya, ed, Totagamuve Pafifiitissa, 1895, p, 161. 
118, 
Dhdtuvamsa, ed. Dhammakkhanda, see pp. 19 and 48. 
119, 
seruvila samipayehi nayinge 
vileam veherada, 
Simhala Bodhivaméa, ed, 
Dhammaratana, p. 190, 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
305 
District, refers to Vilgama among other places. 
Similarly, a pre-Christ- 
ian cave inscription from Hennamnegala in the Batticaloa District ment- 
jons Vilgama.!° 
A place called Sarogimatittha is referred to in the 
Calavamsa'! in connection with the campaigns of Parakramababu | 
against Manabharana.. 
It was one of the fords on the river Mahavali 
where Kesadhatu Rakkha defeated Mahalekha Mahinda. 
Soon after- 
wards Sankhanayaka Natha, a general of Paraikramabahu, led a foray 
into enemy territory from. this place. 
It is probably the same as Sarag- 
gama in the Mahatila District (present Matale) where Parakramabahu is 
said to have lived during the period of his estrangement from his uncle 
Kittisirimegha. Codrington has identified Sarogamatittha with the pre- 
sont Vilgamuva, about fifteen miles to the north of Mahiyangana.!?? 
lis not impossible that the Ni-maluva and Hennannegala inscriptions 
cited above also refer to the same place, 
The Galpata Vihara inscription of Parakramabahu, the first or the 
second king of that name, seems to indicate that there was another con- 
tender for the position of the original seat of this fraternity. 
It records 
that the Galpata monastery belonged to the Saddharmaraja college of 
the Velgammula.!#3_ 
The reference to the fraternity as Velgammula is 
interesting, and it is most probably tho same 
as Vilgammula. 
The 
change of ¢ to i is not unusual. 
In a tenth-century inscription for ii- 
stance, Veluvana occurs as Viluvana.'?4 
It is also possible that the two, 
words vil and vel could sometimes be synonymous and were interchange- 
able. 
As Paranavitana has commented, ‘“‘the Sinhalese word vil which, 
in literature, means ‘lake’ and is synonymous for sara is used in com- 
mon: parlance for a marshy land which, in the rainy season, is converted 
into,a sheet of water and is capable of being formed into paddy fields.’'!25 
‘The Papiliyana inscription'® gives an actual instance of the word vil 
_ 
being used in the fifteenth century in place of vel, in the same sense as 
“fields,”’ 
The occurrence of the term Velgammula and the -interchangeability 
of the words vil and vel might lead one to postulate that the Vilgammula 
grew round the Velgam Vehera of the inscriptions. 
This monastery is 
120, JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, pp. 23, 31-2. 
121, 
* Cv, 72, 1-2, 31-2, 
122, 
CHYJ, Vol. IV, p. 134, n, 5; ZRASCBNS, Vol. V1, p. 36. 
123. 
EZ, Vol. IV, p. 205, i. 3-4, 
124, 
EZ, Vol. I, p. 222, f. 22. 
125, 
EZ, Vol. IV, p. 126, 
126. 
kehelséna vilin yalaka vapa ha, AIC, p. 106,

--- PAGE 164 [DIRECT] ---

306 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
represented today by a complex of ruins near Periyakulam in the Trin~ 
comalee District which stylistically is closely akin to Dravidian archi- 
tecture.27_ 
One inscription at the site is dated in the teign of Bhatika- 
tissa (A.D. 143-167). 
After the Cola conquest it was renamed Raja- 
rajaperumpalli, and it is evident from the records at the site that it was 
patronized by Dravidians during the reign of Rajaraja and Rajendra, 
It seems to have been considered an important monastery for this is the 
only known instance of a Buddhist monastery in Sri Lanka being pat- 
ronized by the Colas. 
It continued to attract patrons after the capture 
of political power by the Sinhalese, as would be expected, and two in- 
scriptions dated in the reign of Vijayabahu i have been found within the 
precincts of the monastery.1?8 
Altogether about twenty-five inscriptions 
have been found here, and they testify to its importance as a center of 
Buddhism. 
In the Pritiddinaka Mandapa rock inscription, Velgam 
Vehora is mentioned together with other monasteries 
at Majidiligiri, 
“Mahagama, Devunuvara and Kalani as a sacred place visited by 
Nissanka Malla, 
But all these facts do not provide conclusive grounds for identify- . 
ing the Velgam Vehera as the, original seat of the Vilgammula. 
In no 
instance has the ruined site at Periyakulam been referred to as Vilgama; 
it has beon consistently referred to as Velgam Vehera in the inscriptions 
at the site. 
On the other hand, according to the Ciilavamsa, Vijaya- 
bahu I repaired a monastery called Velagimivihara and endowed it with 
a grant of villages.34 
If this be identified with the Velgam Vebera, as 
Nicholas has suggested, 
'3* it would discourage the identification of the 
latter with Vilgam Vehera, for the Pali term ‘Sarogimamila was known 
and used to refor to this fraternity as early as in the time of Moggallana, 
the lexicographer. 
There is some circumstantial evidence which might suggest that the 
origin of the Vilgammula has to be traced to the Southwestern region 
of the island, 
All the known monasteries attached to this fraternity 
such as the Vapasinii at Kottange, the Kalaniya monastery and the Gal- 
pala monastery near Bentota, were in the southwest. 
The Cilavamsa 
mentions that Parikramabahu I invited two ‘monks, Moggallana and 
Niagindapalli, to come with other monks of the Yuvarajarattha 
to 
127, ASCAR, 1953, 
pp. 9-12, 
See also ASCAR 1934, 
p. 8; 1954, 
pp. 124: 
CISG, Vol. Ul, p. 199.” 
B 
Meret 
128. 
ASCAR, 1954, p, 39. 
129. 
EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 165-78, 
130, 
Cv, 60, 62, 
131. JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 45. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
; 
307 
participate in the proceedings which led to the unification of the sai- 
gha.!? 
Jf the first is’ identified with Moggallana of Sarogima; who 
claimed to have enjoyed the patronage of Parakramabahu JI, it might 
again point to a southwestern origin of the fraternity. 
‘It has to be admitted that neither of these arguments is decisive, 
Nevertheless, our inference gathers strength from information of a more 
specific nature which is found in this region. 
.-An inscription dated in 
tho reign of Lokeévara II (A.D. 1216-1211) and located a Kottange in 
the Madire Korale of the Vi-udavili Hatpattu, Kurunigala District, 
records a grant of land made to a certain general, Loke Arakmana, 
with the’ proviso 
that 
disputes 
concerning the property 
were 
to 
be referred for settlement to the abbot of the Vapasind dyatana of the 
Vilgammula.'33 
According to a later inscription from the sanie site, 
this and some other property were granted by mahdthera Abhaya of the 
Vilgammula to the whole community of monks.34 
It is evident from 
this that an important monastery of this fraternity was 
found in this 
area. 
Ruins of a monastic establishment are found at the site of the 
inscriptions, but so far no attompt to uncover them has been made. 
In 
this connection it may be significant that certain inscriptions from Raja- 
igane in the same‘district, datable to a period between the fifth and 
seventh centuries, mention, among others, a place called 
Vilgama.'5- 
The very name of the Vilgammula suggests that it was a fraternity 
of provincial origin. 
Many places from different parts of Sri Lanka 
claim recognition as its original home.36 It is tempting to favor the 
. hypothesis which affirms a southwestern origin of the fraternity, but it 
has to be admitted that we do not possess sufficient evidence to warrant 
a definite conclusion. 
© 
. 
Monks who belonged to this fraternity gained recognition for their 
literary and intellectual eminence. 
Moggallana is the earliest whose 
name is known. 
The Nikiya-sangrahaya speaks of a scholar called 
Sahitya Vilgammula.37 
The Simhala Bodhivaméa was written at the 
request of Parakramabihu IV (A.D. 1302-1326)!38 by a mahisthavira 
132, 
samoggallana theratica theram. ndgindapalliyan 
yuvarajassa ratthasmim atte sabbe ca bhikkhavo, 
Cv, 78.9. 
133, 
Kottange Inscription No. 1, EZ, Vol. LV, p. 87. 
134, 
Kotfange Inscription No. 2, EZ, Vol. IV, pp. 89-90, 
135, 
JRASCBNS, Vol. VI, p. 93. 
136, 
The Tisara Sandesaya refers to another Vilgama in the Southwestern ‘region. 
The messenger-bird is requested to go past Vilgama, Nivapu and Doravaka to Dadi- 
gama (vy, 124). Yet another monastery called Vilgam Vehera is found in the Uda Bera- 
gama area of the Southern Province. 
ASCAR, 1933,p. 16, 
437, 
Niks. p. 28, 
138. 
Simhala Bodhivansa, pp, 2, 200-1.

--- PAGE 165 [DIRECT] ---

308 
' 
‘THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
of Vilgammula who was also the abbot of the Kalaniya monastery. 
This 
passage makes it clear that the monastery at Kdlaniya had come under 
the control of the Vilgam fraternity. 
The author describes himself as. 
belonging to the Gatgatala-karambavalan clan. Presumably it was 
the same monk who was responsible for the Kitsirimevan Kalani Vihara 
inscription of the year 1887 of the Buddhist era (A.D. 1344)." The 
in 
the record bears the same titles with the exception that he is. 
cae Lone (P. mahadsimi). 
This may indicate that he had been ap 
pointed to the position of the hierarch of the whole Buddhist satgha,'40, 
In this record he claims to have repaired the monastery with the help of 
Nissaika Alagakkonjra, the minister, and requests that the work be 
carried on by the abbot of the Gatara college and other successors, 
: 
In the colophon of the Vuttamala, written during the reign of Para- 
kramabahu V (1344-1359), the abbot of the Gatra college claims to be 
the nephew of the Sarasigdmamila-mahasami and refers to the presence: 
of this hierarch at Didigama."4' 
This suggests that the latter changed 
his residence sometime after A. D. 1344. 
The author of the Vimukti- 
sangraha, written in c. 1374, mentions that the Galatarumula mahisvami 
and Vilgammula mahdsthavira were his teachers.' 
It is perhaps to a 
new head of the Vilgammula that the Vimukti-saigraha refers here. 
It is 
possible that he is identical with the Vilgammula mahathera, the author 
of the Stryasataka Sanyaya,'? who claims to be the principal disciple 
- 
of. Galatarumula. mahasvami. 
Evidently the leadership of the sai- 
‘gha:has passed on to a representative of the Galatarumula. 
It was. 
- also a mahathera of the Vilgammula who composed the Sarida-kintduru- 
da-kava,'"* but it is not possible to determine its exact date. 
The identity of the eighth fraternity is a problem which has taxed the 
ingenuity and the patience of students of the history of Sri Lanka for a 
long time. 
Of the more serious attempts made to solve this problem 
‘the most: significant seems to be the work of Mida-uyangoda Vimala- 
kitti.” 
His identification has also been accepted by Buddhadatta.™4* 
According to the Mahavamsa, Voharika Tissa (A.D. 209-231) 
built 
“parasols” for cight stdpas, 
including 
those 
at the Abhayagiri, 
139. 
CALR, Vol. I, p. 153. 
140. 
See infra pp, 132-3, 
141, 
Br. Mus. Ms, Or. 6611 (178) folio khi. 
: 
142, ou 
a 
p. 215, 
143, | 
Sdrayasataka, p. 54, 
144, ids lendctb anchor ed., Alavu Isi Sabihela, 1961, p. 254. 
145. 
The relevant sections of an article by Vimalakitti are reproduced by A. P. 
Boddhadatta in his Theravadt Bauddhacdryayo, pp, 89, 101-5. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
309 
the Dakkhinamala and the Mariccavatti monasteries.!46 The Vamsatthap- 
pakéasini explains “Dakkhinamiila’’ ‘as Dakkhinamilanamake viharo34? 
The context in which this passage occurs suggests that the monastery was 
situated at Anuradhapura. Vimalakitti and Buddhadatta have identified 
it as the Dakkhinarama built by Uttiya, a minister of Vattagamani, '48 
They have suggested that it was one of the eight principal fraternities. 
Ostensibly the name Dakkhinamila seems to support this identifi- 
cation. 
: 
But the Dakkhindrama, though it bears the appellation milla in the 
Mahavamsa, does not occur in- any of the known sources belonging to 
the period when the eight fraternities rose to prominence. 
In fact, it 
seems to have lost its prestige much earlier and does not occur in-the 
Cilavamsa after the seventh century. A closer examination of the rele- 
vant passage in the Mahdvamsa helps one to understand the means by 
which this monastery came to be known as the Dakkinamiala: 
One of the seven warriors (of the king), Uttiya, built, to the south 
| 
of the city, the so-called Dakkhinavihara. 
In the same place, 
the minister named Mala built the Miilavokasavihara, which 
was, therefore, called after him,’ 
It is thus evident that there were two monasteries, Dakkhina and Mila, 
' ¢lose to each other. 
It is possible that they later amalgamated to form 
the Dakkhinamiilavihara, hence the presence of the term mila in the 
name Dakkhinamila may not necessarily indicate that it was one of 
the eight fraternities. 
On the other hand, a reference to another fraternity which flouri- 
shed during the time of Parakramabahu I is found in the Cilavamsa. 
When the young prince Parakramabahu left home after disagreements 
with Kittisirimegha, the latter sent a royal official and Abhaya, the chief 
monk of the Paficaparivenamiila, as emissaries to persuade the prince 
to come to his capital.5° 
The Paficaparivenamiila seems: to be distinct 
from the ‘Paficavihdra, which occurs later on in the chronicle;15! the 
latter has to be located between Polonnaruva and the river Mahavali. 
The selection of this monk for such an important political assignment is 
an indication of the esteem in which he was held in the kingdom of Maya. 
— 
146. 
Mv. 36, 33. 
147. 
Vap. Vol. I, Pp. 662, 
148. 
My, 33, 88, 
149. 
My. trsL, Vol, I, p, 236, 
. 
150. 
pahini so kiithéiradisabhondyakameva ca 
151. 
Cy. 72, 116,

--- PAGE 166 [DIRECT] ---

310 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
itis likely that the Paficaparivenamila was a fraternity which arose and 
flourished in this kingdom. 
It is probably identical with the Paficapari- 
venasamiha mentioned in the Bhesajja-matijisd which was compiled dur- 
ing the reign of Parakramabahu I. The author of the work describes 
himself as the head of the fraternity and as a membet of the Brahmana 
caste.5? 
The Yogaratndkaraya, compiled at the end of the fourteenth 
century, gives the name of the author of the Bhesajja-matijisé as Attha- 
dassi and dates the work to the year 1183 of the Saka era.!53 
We hear 
of this fraternity for the last time in the reign of Bhuvanekababu VI (A.D, 
1470-1478) when, according to the Kalyani inscription of Dhammaceti, 
Mangala of the Paficaparivena is said to have officiated at an ordination 
of Burmese monks held in Sri Lanka'54, 
It has to be udmitted that no 
evidence which would indicate that this fraternity was present at Polon- 
naruva, is available in our sources, but it is evident that the Paiicapari« 
venamiila was recognized as a mila from the time of Parakramabahu I 
at least until the reign of the socond king of this name. 
Hence it does 
not seem unreasonable to consider it to have been one of the fraternities 
constituting the eight fraternities which played an important role in the 
affairs of the saigha during this period. 
The Ruvanvilislya’ inscription of Queen Kalyanavati!5> records 
that a certain Pirivatubim Vijayanivan and his wite gave alms and robes 
to the monks of this Ruvanvili monastery (Mahdvihara) led by the sen- 
ior monks of the “‘seven gavas.”” 
On the strength of this evidence Para- 
navitana'®® has suggested that the Buddhist church of Sri Lanka was 
divided into seven confraternities during the “Polonnaruva Period.” 
Tt 
-is relevant in this connection that the Nikdya-sargrahaya refers to a 
viyatpat-ataganaya as an institution restored by Parakramabahu [,157 
It has also been suggested that the afagapvaya are identical with the eight 
mitlas.'°°> 
Both these interpretations imply that the Bara was. an insti- 
tution similar to, if not identical with, the mala. 
152. 
sake parakkamabhujavhanarinda jambu 
ddoni puramhi nivasam gajakitasankhye 
brahmanvaya yativkast bhisakkatanta 
metatica paticaparivenasamihandtho, 
Bhesajja-maijisd, ed, K, D, Kulatilaka, 1962, p. 872, 
The phrase gajakitasankhye 
gives the year A.D, 1183. 
153, 
Bhesaffa-mafijisd, pp. 872-3, 
154, 
Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol. Wi, Pt. 2, pp. 231-2. 
155, 
£2, Vol. 1V, pp. 253-60, 
: 
156, 
EZ, Vou IV, p. 269, n. 2. 
157, 
Niks. p. 24, 
158. . 
Theravddi Bauddhacaryaye, p. 101. 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
3th 
Tt is clear from evidence in the Gatvihara inscription of Parakra- 
mabahu 1159 and the Dathbaden Katikavata!® of the reign of Vijaya~ 
bahu IIL (A.D. 1232-1236) that the gana was an institution distinct from 
the mila. 
Especially in the latter, references are found to both the mula 
‘and the gana. 
The gana seems to have been a group of Junior monks 
placed under the charge of a senior teacher.'6! 
The Ruvanvalisiya 
inscription apparently refers to the seven ganas of that particular monas- 
tery rather than to fraternities of the saigha as a whole. 
The term gana could also be used to denote a group in a secular 
sense, and the context in which the phrase vipat pat ata ganaya occurs 
suggests that it is in a similar sense that it is used in the Nikipa- 
sangrahaya. 
The viyatna, according to the same work, was a palace 
official.’ 
Viyat could mean “learned,’! and the term viyat pat ala 
ganaya may connote ‘group, of eight learned men’’ or “eight groups of 
learned men,” who attended the king at his court,’ 
The foregoing discussion, which represents a long and deliberate 
digression transcending the usual chronological limits of our study, was 
necessary in order to throw light on an important development which 
took place during the period under survey. 
Eight monastic establish- 
ments, some of which were founded as early as about the seventh century, 
grew during this period into large fraternities which replaced the three 
nikdyas in the organization of the sangha. 
‘This does not imply, however, 
that all the hermitages and monasteries in the island had passed under 
their control. 
The Dathbadeni Katikavata, for instance, lays down 
regulations pertaining to colleges attached to mulas and then goes on 
to discuss “the other colleges,’165 
Presumably there were institutions 
which stood aloof from the control of the eight fraternities. 
It is thus clear that the main organizational. unit which came into 
prominence during the period of the Polonnaruva kingdom and supp- 
lanted the nikéya was the mala and not the gana. 
At least five of these 
eight fraternities grew from minor “colleges” within the nikayas into 
organizations wielding considerable authority and responsibility, 
Tt 
appears that they soon loosened the bonds of the nikéya, assisted per- 
haps by the unrest and disorganization resulting from constant warfare 
459, 
EZ, Vol. Ul, p. 270, #2. 18, 21; p. 273, IL 49-51, 
160, 
D. B, Jayatilaka, Katikeévar Satigara, 1955, pp. 13-4, 16. 
161, 
The term gana is also used to refer to a group of monks who specialized in a 
particular section of the Canon such as the Vinaya or the Sutta, 
See DAG, p, 54, 
162, 
Niks. p. 19, 
F 
163. 
See, for instance, viyatmi yana manin nosihiya henuye. DAG, p. 54. 
164, 
See UCHC, Vol. I, Pt. 2,p. 2, 541, 
165. 
Katikavat Saigaré, p, 13.

--- PAGE 167 [DIRECT] ---

312 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE SANGHA IN TRANSITION 
during the period of Cola rule. 
Itis true, at least in the case of the Ab- 
hayagiri, that the growth and expansion of the mala represented, to some 
extent, the dismemberment of the nikdya. 
The eight fraternities gained recognition possibly by the end of the 
reign of Vijayabahu I, or at the latest by the time of Parakramabahu I, 
. and they continued to flourish at least until the reign of Pardkramabahu 
TL (A.D. 1236-1270). 
We have demonstrated that some of them sur- 
vived even up to the sixteenth century. 
The individuality and inde- 
pendence of these fraternities, however, was to some extent undermined 
in the latter days of their existence. 
There are instances of a monk 
educated under the hierarch of one fraternity becoming the hierarch of 
another. 
This could have been partly due to the fact that the appoint- 
ment of a hierarch was no longer the internal affair of a fraternity, 
A 
candidate had to win the approval of the king and the members of the 
other fraternities in addition to the support of the monks and, in certain 
instances, the consent of the patron deity of his own fraternity !166 
166. 
mé taramva nidrayamuktavuvada mula kimati yuvada ayatin yalatata hé mat- 
erun mulanddt piriven ddiva balavat pirivenatada sarghasammuti-rdjasammutinma tikiya 
yutu.. 
Katikévatsangard, p. 13, Nadi occurs in the sense of “attached to” (P. naddha 
from Vv nahy in the Ruvamalnighandu, ed. Wijesekera, 1914, entry No. 446, See also 
Supra p. 302 for the practice of “consulting the patron deity.” 
CHAPTER 
9 
A New Organization for the Sangha: 
The Unification and its Significance 
The reform of the saigha during the reign of Parikramabahu 1, 
which brought about the unification of the community of monks under a 
single leadership, was hailed by chroniclers as an event of great signi- 
ficance in the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. 
To some, it marked 
the end of dissension and factional strife which had persisted within the 
body of the saiigha for more than a millennium. 
The Ca/avamsa states 
that Parikramabahu brought together the various factions of the saigha 
“into a union as inseparable as milk and water.’’ 
This was no easy task 
for the king, who found it twice as strenuous and exacting as his attempts 
to gain royal power.! 
To the author of the Nikdya-satgrahaya, who 
lived during the fourteenth century, the reforms meant the expulsion of 
the “sinful monks"’ of the Dharmaruci, Sagalika and the Vaitulyavadi 
nikayas who had disgraced the Order and defiled its purity.2 
The Gal- 
vibara ins¢ription of Parakramabahu I, inscribed not long after the 
events, presents it as a personal achievement of the king and proceeds to 
illustrate the significance of the event. 
It points out that the satgha 
had been divided for one thousand two hundred and fifty-four years. 
In reconciling the differences between the various contentious factions, 
it maintains, the king had accomplished a task which his predecessors, 
who lived in more propitious times, had attempted but failed to catty 
out.3 
Accounts of the reforms are preserved in several chronicles and 
other literary works, the most detailed of which is the Calavamsa. 
In 
fact, the Calavamsa contains two accounts. 
In the first, found inthe 
i. Cv. 73, 21. 
2. Niks. p. 25. 
3, EZ, Vol. U, p. 268, il, 4-5; p. 269, Hl, 12-3. 
[313]

--- PAGE 168 [DIRECT] ---

314 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
chapter on the rebuilding of Pulatthinagara, the emphasis is on the role 
of the king. The second account, which occurs in the chapter on the 
pious works of the king, provides more details about the council of the 
. 
clergy which carried out the “purification,’’5 
Presumably the author is 
faithfully reproducing the material found in two sources without attempt- 
ing to weave it into one coherent account. 
A statement in the first ac- 
count suggests that such an explanation is tenable. 
While describing 
the conditions prior to the unification, it states 
that disunity prevailed 
among the saigha ‘‘despite efforts made in every way by former kings 
down to the present day (yavajjadivasé).’® 
Evidently, the chronicler is 
reproducing an account of the unification written soon 
after the event. 
The difference in emphasis between the two accounts preserved in the 
Cilavamsa is explicable if it is assumed that the author is merely repro- 
ducing the accounts he found preserved in the royal and thd monastic 
archives. 
On the other hand, the statement quoted above may also 
imply that this part of the chronicle was written not long after, if not 
during, the reign of Parakramabahu, 1.7, 
The Galvihara inscription, which probably dates from the reign. of 
Parakramabahw J, is extremely important since it records the code of 
rules and regulations adopted by the satigha after the “purification’’ 
and thus enables us to form an idea about the nature of the reforms. 
Literary, works written during and immediately after the reign of Para- 
kramabahu I and chronicles like the Pijévaliya and the Nikéya-sahgra- 
haya, though not as detailed as the first two sources, add more informa~ 
tion to complete the picture. 
, 
; 
Reliable information about the date 
of this event is found in the 
Galyihara inscription. 
This record states that the unification of the 
satigha took place one thousand two hundred and fifty-four years after 
the first schism in the Sinhalese Order, and adds that the first schism oc- 
curred four hundred and fifty-four years after the death of the Buddha.® 
Thus. the unification of the satgha should be dated to one thousand 
seven hundred and. eight years after the death of the Buddha, i.e., in 
A.D, 1164/5, the twelfth regnal year of Parakramabahu 1.9 
4. °-Cy, 73, 1-22, 
5. Cp, 78, 1-27. 
6. 
Cv. 73, 19. 
7. R. 8S. Coppleston suggested, on the basis of other evidence, that the account of 
the reigt of Parikramabahu I up to the end of ch. 77 was written by an eye witness, 
IRASCB, Vol. XT, p. 62. 
But, as Sirima Wickremasinghe has pointed out, this is 
not the only possible explanation. 
For a detailed discussion on the authorship and 
date of this part of the chronicle, see Sirima Wickremasinghe, The Age of Parékrama- 
bahu I, Unpublished thesis, University of London, pp, 11-9. 
8." EZ, Vol. I, p. 268, H. 4-5, 
9. The Nikdya-sangrahaya, however, dates the synod to the fourth regnai year of 
Parakramabahu I. 
See Niks. p, 52. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
315 
As mentioned earlier, the first account in the Ciilavamsa lays great 
emphasis on the role of the king in bringing about the reforms. 
Para- 
kvamabahu had “‘already in the past oxistences striven after the unifica- 
tion of the satgha as something which must be attained,” 
It was he 
who assembled qualified monks to officiate at the “purification’’ of the 
Order, 
He was himself versed in the Vinaya and took part in the pro- 
ceedings of the council. 
Though this is obviously a biased account 
which overemphasizes the role of the king and makes no mention of the 
contributions of the other participants, the fact that the king took the 
initiative in bringing about the reforms is confirmed by other traditions 
too. 
The second tradition in the Calavamsa lists the prominent monks 
who took part in the synod which reformed the sangha but also mentions 
that they attended it at the king's request. 
It further states that the king 
was present during the sittings of the ecclesiastical court which inquired 
| 
into the complaints made on grounds of discipline against members of 
the savgha. 
It was he who expelled the monks who had been pro- 
nounced guilty of transgressing the rules of discipline by the eccleciasti- 
calcourt. 
The Galvihara inscription also states that it was the king who 
invited Maha Kassapa of Udumbaragiri to officiate at the “‘purificat- 
- 
ion’’ of the Order and in so doing, to save it from decline.!° In the pro- 
logues and the colophons of their works Sariputta and other contempo- 
raries of Parakramabahu I record their gratitude to him for the uni~ 
fication of the satgha.’* 
Both the Galvihara inscription and the Cala- 
vamsa compare the roles of Pardkramabaihu and Maha Kassapa with the: 
parts played by Asoka and Mogalliputta Tissa in the third council,!2 
All these sources agree in stating that Parakramabahu played an 
active and important role in the proceedings which led to the reform 
of the satgha. 
However, it is reasonable to expect that the importance 
of the part played by the king would be exaggerated in works written 
during his lifetime. 
Though the formal initiative was taken by the king, 
it is likely that by this time the members of the sangha had come to rea- 
lize the desirability of teform and the need for unity. 
Buddhist kings 
usually associated themselves with such ecclesiastical reforms as ““puri- 
fications.’ 
Parakcamabahu was playing this traditional role by lend- 
ing the force of his political authority for the execution and enforce- 
ment of the decisions of the synod. 
Maha Kassapa of Udumbaragiri, who presided over the synod, was 
a scholar versed in all the three pifakas of the Canon, though the Vinaya 
10, EZ, Vol. Il, pp. 268-9, i. 6-11. 
Ul. 
Sérattha-diapani, p, 1; Pali Séhityaya, Vol. I, pp. 257, 261; Vol. II, p, 287. 
12. EZ, Vol. ML, p. 268, i, 4-5; Cv. 78. 6,

--- PAGE 169 [DIRECT] ---

316 
7 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
was his speciality.4? 
The Galvihara inscription refers to him as a monk 
of the Mahavihara school.'4 
Even so, it is noteworthy that the leader- 
ship of the movement for reform came not from the main monasteries at 
the capital but from an institution of the Arafitika (forest-dwelling) sect. 
This does not come as a surprise. 
The devotion of the Arafiiiika monks 
to the austere life in the forest sharply contrasted with the ease and com- 
fort of the life of the residents of the large monasteries at the capital, 
It is even possible that the growth and the popularity of the Arafifiika 
sect reflects a reaction to this change in the way of life of the Buddhist 
monk. 
To the lay population the Araiifiika monk represented the clos- 
est approximation to the ideals of religious life. 
There is evidence from 
the ninth and tenth centuries to show that the monks of this fraternity 
wore held in high regard and respect by the laity.!5 
The active partici- 
pation of monks of the Arafifiika sect in the reform of the saigha marks 
an important stage in their rise to prominence and recognition, 
Many 
of the monks who gained fame as scholars and hierarchs during the 
period after the reforms came from this sect, particularly from’ their con- 
ter at Udumbaragiri. 
: 
Among the many monks from the main provinces of the kingdom 
who were invited to take part in the synod were four dignitaries who 
seom to have assisted Kassapa in conducting the proceedings of the 
synod, 
‘Their names are found only in the Célavamsa: 
He (Parakramabahu) 
invited 
to Pulatthinagara 
the thera - 
Nanapala of Anuradhapura with his disciples, the monks of 
the Sapara province!’ with the thera Mogallana, the thera’ of 
Nagindapalli‘7 with all the monks of the province of the yayariija, . 
and the monks of the three nikéyas in Rohana after he had 
placed 
at 
their head 
the distinguished 
thera Nanda who 
belonged to the Selantarayatana, !% 
This passage further substantiates the observation that the leader- 
ship of the synod came from the provinces rathor than the major 
monasteries at the capital. 
Another characteristic of the leadership is 
that the representation was regional rather than sectarian. 
This is 
particularly clear in the choice of Nanda to represent the monks of the 
13. 
Cv. 78. 7. 
, 
14, 
EZ, Vol, Il,-p. 269, if. 10-1. 
15. 
See supra pp. 45-7. 
16, 
Geiger identifies Sapararattha with the present day Sabaragamuva Province, 
Cy, trsl., Pt UL, p, 102, n. 3. 
17. 
For comments on the significance of this title, see supra p, 219. 
Macs 78. 8-10, 
For Geiger’s translation of these strophes, see Cy. trsl., Pt: IL, 
pp. 
102-3, 
. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
317 
three nikdyas from Rohana. 
The participation of monks from the 
various provinces must have helped to implement the decisions made 
° 
at Polonnaruva in the regions from which they came: 
It is rather unfortunate that no other information is available on the 
four monks who played such a prominent role in what was perhaps the 
most important event in the history of Buddhism in their times. 
The 
name Moggallana, however, occurs in three other contexts in the period 
of the Polonnaruva kingdom: as the abbot of the Uttaromiila in the Vel- 
aikkara inscription at Polonnaruva, as the author of a well-known P§li- 
grammar, and as the compiler of a lexicon, the Abhidhanappadipika.¥ 
The last two Moggallanas seem to have lived during the reign of Parak- 
ramabahu [2° 
Wickremasinghe and Buddhadatta have suggested that 
the grammarian, the abbot of the Uttaromila, and the dignitary who 
attended the synod were the same person,”! but there are strong reasons 
against such an identification. 
Elsewhere we have shown’ that the Vel- 
aikkara inscription should be dated in A.D. 1{10-1111.22. 
Moggallina 
is mentioned in this record as the senior monk who was in charge of the 
Uttaromila. 
Also, he is described as rdjaguru, and probably he was the 
personal preceptor of Vijayabahu I. 
It is most unlikely that a monk of 
such seniority would have been alive in A.D. 1164/5 to take part in this 
synod. 
It is also unlikely that the abbot of the Uttaromila, who was 
the traditional custodian of the Tooth relic,?? would have lived away 
from the capital during this time. 
. 
In the colophon of his work, Moggallana the grammarian states that 
he lived during the reign of Parakramabahu and claims to have “cau- 
sed the sésana to shine." 
It seems likely that he participated in the 
synod. 
But one possible objection to this identification is that, accord- 
ing to the commentary on this work written by Rahula of Totagamuva, 
’ 
the grammarian lived at the Thiparama in Anuradhapura.5 
Rabula 
was a leading scholar of his time, and his testimony cannot be brushed 
aside lightly even though he lived during the fifteenth century, about 
three hundred years after Moggallina. 
Herice the identification remains 
doubtful, although it is not impossible that Moggallana went to live at the 
19. 
EI, Vol. XVUI, p. 337, i. 26-7; Abhidhanappadipika, ed. Topagamuvs Pan-. 
fatissa, p. 161; 
Pali Séhityaya, Vol. I, pp. 512-3. 
‘f 
20. 
See supra pp, 161-2. 
: Mane Vol. Il, pp. 249-50. 
A. P. Buddhadatta, Theravadi 
Bauddhécaryayo,. 
p, 
83-7, 
22. 
See supra pp. 90-1, 
23. 
See supra pp, 287-9. 
24, 
Pali Sahityaya, Vol. YW, p. 513. 
25, 
Theravadt Bauddhacaryayo, p. 84,

--- PAGE 170 [DIRECT] ---

B48 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
Ehiparama after the synod was over. 
In the colophon of the Abhidhd- 
nappadipikd its author states that he became a writer due to the encou- 
ragement of Parakramabahu. 
He seems to have completed the work 
after the death of the king,?* and it does not seem probable that he was 
an important hierarch during the early part of the king's reign, From 
this discussion it should be evident that it is not possible to establish the 
identity of the participants in the synod with monks of this period 
’ Known from other sources. 
- 
Presumably the four monks mentioned above, Nanapila, Moggal- 
lana, Nagindapalli and the chief monk of the Selantarayatana, con- 
stituted an ecclesiastical court presided over by Kassapa to give rulings 
on points of dispute which arose during the “purification”? The 
Nikéya-sangrahaya states that sittings of the court were held at a place 
called Latamandapaya.?”? 
Of the monks who were accused of indis- 
cipline, those who were “capable of being corrected” were “led to puri- 
fication,’ while many were expelled from the Order. 
This was no easy 
task. 
Some monks are said to have gone abroad to avoid submission 
- 
to the judgment of the ecclesiastical court. The king gave lucrative posix 
tions to the monks who had been laicized to prevent them from creating 
trouble, 
The “purification' was followed by the unification of the Or- 
der, 
The monks of the Mahavihara nikdya were themselves divided into 
a mumber of factions, and these were reconciled and persuaded to unite 
with the adherents of the other two nikayas.2* 
- 
By presenting the unification of the satigha as the personal achieve- 
ment of the king and a few monks, the accounts in the chronicles tend to 
overemphasize the significance of the synod. 
Since they contain to 
reference to the changes which had taken place within the organization 
of the satigha or to the development of relations between various fact- 
ions up to tho time of the unification, they tend to give a distorted view 
of the event. 
Secondly, these traditions, particularly the account in the 
Nikéya-sangrahaya, suggest that the “‘purification’’ amounted to the 
suppression of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikdéyas and that the uni- 
fication was in fact the imposition of the supremacy of the Mahavihara 
over the other two nikdyas. 
We have already cited the statement in the 
- 
Nikéya-saigrahaya that “the sinful monks’? of the Dharmaruci, the 
Sagalika and the Vaitulyavadi nikdyas, “who defiled the purity of the 
26. 
Abhidhinappadipika, p. 161. 
27. 
Niks, p. 25, 
28. 
Cy, 78. 12-27, 
The second pada of the straphe 78.13 is translated as “some 
‘wished for a sitting in the secret court of justice.” Cy., irsl., p. 103. 
But the passage is 
‘corrupt. 
Variant readings give nisajjamalina viniechaya which would mean the op- 
wosite, viz, that they wanted an open court. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
319 
Order,” were laicized during the “purification.” 
This would imply that 
the “purification” did not affect the monks of the Mahavihara faction, 29 
Evidently Eliot accepted this tradition, as being trustworthy. 
For he 
states that as a result of the “‘purification’’ of the sangha, “all nikayas 
(even the Dharmaruci which did not conform to the Mahavihara) were 
suppressed’’ and that “no more is heard of the Vaitulyas and the Vajiri- 
yas.’"5° 
Paranayitana also has suggested that the ordination received 
by monks of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikdyas “was obviously consi- 
dered not valid and, if they desired to remain members of the satigha, 
they had to receive the ordination afresh from a chapter of the Maha- 
vibara,”’ 34 
A closer examination of the evidence yields a picture somewhat 
different from that drawn by Eliot and Paranavitana. 
It is true that, 
according.to the Célavamsa, not a single monk of the Abhayagiri and 
Jetavana nikdyas was found to be without fault, 
Many had to be laici- 
zed, and several were readmitted only as novices.32 
However, this 
does not necessarily imply that all the monks of these two nikiyas were 
either expelled or admitted only as novices; probably some were merely 
“corrected” as the monks of the Mahavibira had been, 
It is important 
to remember that, even according to the biased account of the Calavamsa, 
the “‘purification’’ equally affected all the three nikayas in the island. 
It'is clear that there were two distinct aspects of the reforms: the 
“purification’’ and the “unification.” 
There is reason to believe that 
the ‘‘purification’’ was confined to matters of discipline while the uni- 
fication merely amounted to an arrangement providing for the 
co- 
existence of the varied factions under a common leadership. 
The stand- 
ards of discipline were at a low ebb at the time of the accession of Para- 
kramabahu I. The long period of warfare among the diminutive king- 
doms which arose after the death of Vijayabahu I, and the consequent 
neglect and loss of patronage, had a detrimental effect on the satgha, 
Laxity in matters of discipline became common. Even as a provincial 
ruler, the Ciilavamsa maintains, Parakramabahu. noticed that the monks 
had abandoned the Dhamma and the Vinaya, neglected their duties and 
dived as they pleased. 
Some monks even maintained wives and children 
in the villages which belonged to the satgha, and the presence of “many 
unscrupulous monks whose sole concern was 
the filling of their 
29. 
Niks., p. 25, 
30. 
Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism, Vol. TH, p. 41. 
31. 
UCHC, Vol. I, Pt. 2, pp. 567-8. 
32. 
Cv. 78, 25-6,

--- PAGE 171 [DIRECT] ---

320 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
bellies” detracted from the integrity of the Order.3? 
It was these 
conditions which prompted the king to convene a synod. 
As the Galvihara inscription reveals, the katikdvata, or the code of 
tules and regulations adopted at the synod for the future guidance of 
the satigha, confines itself to matters of training and discipline of monks 
and the organization of monastic living. 
This is particularly relevant 
and noteworthy, for, had the questions of doctrinal teachings been a 
subject of dispute at the synod, it would most probably have been men- 
tioned in the katikavata. 
The fact that Nanda of the Selantarayatana 
was chosen to represent the monks of all the three nikayas in Rohana 
also supports the hypothesis that the ‘‘purification’’ of the Order was 
confined to matters of discipline. 
Such an arrangement would not have 
been ‘feasible if the validity of the teachings of these nikdyas had been a 
subject of dispute. 
Even if the reformers did want to suppress the teachings of the 
‘schools opposed to the Mahavihiira, this would not have been a prac- 
‘tical proposition. 
It is unlikely that all the monks in the island were 
‘sufamoned ‘to the synod. 
As the Célavamsa reveals, even those who 
were ‘present at ‘the capital could avoid facing the ecclesiastical court 
‘by ‘leaving the country, perhaps to returm at a quieter time.*5 
The 
‘chroniclés ‘themselves testify to the persistence of “‘heretical’’ views 
‘among ‘meéinbers<of ‘the Sangha even after the “purification,” 
The re- 
‘tuark ‘of the ‘author of the Nikdya-saigrahaya that the Vajiriyavada had 
survived in the island 
and that it was being practiced in secret by foolish 
‘men ‘even in ‘his-own time suggests that those teachings prevailed in the 
fourteenth century.36 
The Calavamsa comments that the Order was 
corrupt-atthe timo:of the accession of Parikramabihu due to the in- 
‘fluence of “a ‘hundred false doctrines."’ 
But it likens the unification of 
» 83; 'Cv:69.3-45-73:5-6; 
78,2, The interpretation of the last strophe is controversial. 
‘satighagdmesu ‘sanghassa puitadaradiposanam 
‘evan 'silam: tato.anfiam nevaithi stlamiceapi, 
Cv. 78.3 
‘Wijesinha ‘interpreted 'this ‘strophe ‘as a ‘reference to the maintenance of wives and 
Children ‘on ‘monastic property. 
Géiger based -his rejection of this interpretation on 
the argument that‘members of the sagha as such could. not have children and wives 
though ‘individual ‘ménks: could. 
This does not seem, however, to-be a valid ob- 
{jection ‘to ‘Wijesinha’s ‘translation. 
‘For, as Sirima Wickremasinghe has pointed out, 
‘the atithor must have thearit that, as a general rule, the monks had taken to these cor- 
‘rupt: practices, ‘'Buddhadatta ‘also suppotts Wijesinha’s interpretation in his trans- 
Hation'of the passage which follows: 
He having perceived that (some bhikkhus) had. 
none’ of'the'st/as apart from the maintenance of wives and children and so forth in the 
villages ‘belonging to ‘the community...” Cy, trsl., Pt, U, p. 101 nJ; Sirima Wick- 
‘remasinghe, ‘The Age of Parékramabahu I, p. 309; CCMT, p. 248. 
34, 
‘EZ, Vol. U, pp. 256-83, 
35. 
Cw. 278. 113, 
36. 
-Niks.:p. 21, 
See also supra:pp. 248, 255-6, 
A NEW. ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
32k 
the monks of the Mahavihara with the adherents of the Abhayagiri and 
Jetavana nikdyas ‘who gave out as Buddha’s word the Vetulla Pitaka 
and the like which were no words of the Buddha” to an attempt to ‘‘mix 
precious jewels with glass stones.’ 
Even the beneficent influence of 
the monks of the Mahavihara, the chronicler observes, had no effect 
upon their unworthy colleagues who refused to accept the true teachings 
of the Buddha.” 
More specific evidence on the persistence of the 
teachings of the Abhayagiri nikdya after the unification is found in the 
Abhidhammattha-vikasini of Sumaigala, a disciple of Sariputta. 
In no 
less than five passages in this work, the author criticizes the views that 
the Abhayagiri nikéya was propagating and in one case points out the 
similarity of their views with those of the Mahdsinghikas.3® 
This 
suggests that the disagreements between the followers of the Mahavi- 
hara and the Abhayagiri traditions on matters of interpretation of the 
doctrinal teachings of the Buddha continued even after the unification. 
Moreover, it is noteworthy that none of the works which can be reliably 
dated to the time of the synod even remotely suggests that the reforms 
amounted to the suppression of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikayas 
and the imposition of the authority of the Mahavihara, 
The Galvihira 
inscription and the literary works written during this time such as the 
Sérattha-dipani, Anguttara-(ikd, 
Vinayattha-maiijisa 
and the Vinaya- 
sdrattha-dipani speak merely of a reconciliation of the various fac- 
tions of the satgha. 
In these works the authors.record the gratitude of 
the sangha of the time to Parakramabahu for making it possible for 
them “‘to partake of the divine drink of unity.” 
If, on the strength of 
this evidence, it is accepted that the reforms of the reign of Parakrama- 
bahu I did not amount to the suppression of the Abhayagiri and 
Jetavana nikdyas, we have to look for a fresh explanation of the 
unification of the saigha. 
. 
The period from the first schism to the unification of the Sinhalese 
sangha saw nine attempts at “purification.”’ 
Of these, the fourth, 
which took place during the reign of Silamegha (A.D, 619-628), is of 
special interest in this context. It did not concern.the whole satgha but 
was restricted to the Abhayagiri monastery. 
At the request of Bodhi, 
37. 
Cv, T3.4; 78. 21-4, 
38. 
mahésaiighikd pana abhayagirivasino ca ditthujjukaminane visune paihakiriva- 
bhdvena na gavhanti. 
tathahi te dénam silam bhdvand samsuti desandnussatimodé 
veyyavaccam pujé saranam patti pasamsda cati attand katapuiidnusaranam buddhadisa- 
randgamanam paragunappasamsiti imani tint pakkhipitva ditthujiukammany agahetvd 
dasapuitiavatthini patitdpenti. 
Abhidhammattha-vikdsini, ed. A, P. Buddhadatta, p. 
46. 
See also pp. 128-9, 136, 169, 352, 364-5, 387. 
39. 
Sérattha-dipant, p. 1; Vinayattha-manjisd, pp.1, 329; see also Pali Séhityaya, 
Vol. I, pp. 249, 257, 260, 287.

--- PAGE 172 [DIRECT] ---

322 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
an enthusiastic young monk from the Abhayagiri nikdya, Silamegha 
authorized the carrying out of ‘an ecelesiastical act” and purged this 
nikaya of many undisciplined monks, 
The laicized monks had Bodhi 
assassinated 
in revenge. 
But the king completed the task of reforming 
the nikaya and severely punished the malefactors responsible for the 
crime by reducing some to servitude and by banishing others to India, 
Then he invited the monks of the Mahavihara to hold the uposatha cere- 
mony in the company of the monks of the Abhayagiri monastery, but 
this request was turned down by the monks of the Mahivihara.”? _ 
It 
was the first instance of an attempt being made, though in vain, to bring 
about a reconciliation between the two main rival nikayas of Buddhism 
- 
in Sri Lanka. 
A greater spirit of mutual tolerance is noticeable after the ninth 
century and we find the monks of the three nikapas working in collabo- 
ration to mediate in important political matters during the teigns of 
Sena I, Udaya IL], Gajabahu II and Pardkramabahu I.“ From as early 
as the tonth century there is evidence to suggest that the three nikayas 
assembled together even for matters concerning religion. 
According to 
the Cilavamsa, Kassapa V (A.D. 914-923). arranged a recitation of the 
paritta by monks of the three nikdyas to ward off the dangers of plague 
and bad harvest.‘2 Of course this does not necessarily imply that the 
monks of the three nikayas assembled together for the ceremony, but 
there is a clearer example from’ the reign of Sena IV (A.D, 954-956), 
The Cilavamsa records that this king, who was a scholar versed in the 
teachings of the Buddha, used to explain the scriptures to the monks of 
the three nikdyas who together assembled in the Lohapasada.*3 This 
statement clearly suggests that friendly intercourse among the monks of 
the three nikéyas was prevalent, thereby making it possible for them to 
meet together at the Mahavihara, 
It is possible that the efforts of the 
kings to promote amity among the three factions of the satgha would 
have been at least partly responsible for this development. 
Further evidence concerning this trend in the relations between the 
three n/kéyas is found in an inscription from the site of the Mahapali 
alms hall at Anuradhapura which has been assigned to the last quarter 
of the tenth century. 
The inscription records a decision taken by all 
the monks who received alms at.the Mahapali to donate their share of 
rice to meet the cost of repairing the stipa at the Jetavana monastery.44 
40. 
Cy. 74.81, 
41, 
See supra pp. 204-8, 
42, 
Cy, 52,80. 
See also supra pp. 227, 233. 
43, 
Cv. S44, 
44, 
£Z, Vol. TU, p. 132. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
323 
This seems to point to a period of exiguous patronage when monks 
found it extremely difficult to keop their monasteries in good repair, 
It would be, as Paranavitana remarked, more representative of the 
reigns of the successors of Mahinda IV than of his own reign or those 
of his immediate predecessors.4® 
The most important fact about this 
record is that all the monks who received alms at the Mahapali are said 
to have consented to this decision. 
The Mahapali was an alms hall 
for monks of all the nikéyas. 
The fact that these monks decided to 
- forgo their alms 
to contribute to the restoration of the Jetavana shipa 
reinforces our inference that the relations between the nikéyas bad de- 
veloped, by this time, to a level which enabled them to make this ges~ 
ture of solidarity in a time of difficulty. 
This feeling of solidarity would 
have been strengthened during and after the period of Cola rule when 
Saivism gained popularity in the island and found patrons even among 
the Sinhalese rulers, 
The revival of the sangha after the period of Cola rule brought with 
it the revival of the nikdya divisions, 
But the nikayas of this period 
were probably less organized and more amenable to attempts at recon- 
ciliation than before. 
In this connection a statement in the account 
of the reign of Vijayabahu I is most valuable. 
The king is said to have 
built a large monastery which was capable of housing many hundreds 
of monks, to have endowed it with the whole district of Alisira, and 
then to have given it to the monks of the three nikdyas. 
Of course it 
is possible that this merely means that the monastery was donated .to 
the saigha as a whole and not to ary one nikdya. 
But, on the other 
hand, if this statement is accepted in its literal meaning, it would imply 
that a significant step was taken in persuading a considerable number 
of monks from the three nikdyas to live within one monastery and to 
perform the religious acts together, 
It is likely that the difficulties that 
the satigha bad.to face during the period of Cola rule brought the ad- 
herents of all the three nikdyas closer to each other. 
Thus it would 
seem that. the cordial relations among the members 
of the threo 
nikdyas, which had been growing for quite some time before the 
accession of Parakramabahu, assisted the king and the leading monks 
in bringing about the unification of the s@igha. 
At is reasonable to expect that the development of friendly relations 
between monks of the three nikdyas and their joint participation 
in 
groups to study the scriptures would have also promoted the exchange 
of ideas and the extension of mutual influence, 
Jn fact, there is some 
45. EZ, Vol. II, p. 135. 
46. Cy, 60, 11-5,

--- PAGE 173 [DIRECT] ---

324 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
evidence which suggests that during this period the Mahavihara came 
to be influenced by some ideas of the “‘heretical’’ schools of Buddhism. 
- Some evidence of such influence is found in the Dhamplya Aluva Gdta- 
padaya, 4 commentary on the Dhammapadaithakatha. 
The colophon 
of this work states that it was written by “‘the great king Abha Salame- 
van, born of the twice consecrated queen.'’47 
There is hardly any doubt 
that the author was Kassapa V (A.D. 914-923), who refers to himself’ 
in the same manner in his Madirigiriya and Bilibaiva inscriptions.‘® 
Kassapa: V was hailed in the Calavamsa as an ideal ruler who was. 
“‘pious, wise as one who possesses supernatural powers, a preacher 
of the true doctrine, and adroit in what. is right and not right. 
He 
stood fitm in the teachings of the Leader on the path of deliverance and 
could’ not be shaken by all storms of other opinions.”’ 
In fact, the 
chronicler claims that “‘he had reached the path of salvation’ 
It 
follows that he was considered to be an ideal follower of the Theravada. 
ag taught by the Mahavihara. 
He was supposed to be so well versed in 
the scriptures and: so “‘orthodox”’ in his interpretations that monks used 
togather 
at the Mariccavatti monastery which belonged to the Mahi- 
vihara nikdya in order to listen to his discourses on the Abhidhamma.*® 
Hence:one may reasonably suppose that his opinions were at least. 
acceptable to the Mahavihira even if they did not in fact represent the. 
views held: 
by the Mahavihara in his time. 
“The Dhampiya Aluva Gitapadaya makes an interesting statement in. 
the course. of commenting upon a passage from the Devadatta-thera- 
Vatthus. 
. 
“°' sadhituppidanakammam, katvi. 
16 salvana kam kota, 
tumun 
vuhut selin bitdi budun pitipaya hunu lé tanin salayi séyi. 
budun 
siruru-vajrakdya vana bdvin sili pahara hotuju lé buvi noviya yet. 
vajrakaya hot jivakayan ata satin kumata kakdaviya yat. 
 vajra- 
kaya nam parépakramayen nobitdena biva. jivakayan sit pa- 
hara paropakrama nam 
noveyi. 
eheyin 
vajrakdyatévata 
hani 
nati yet. 
_esé hot terun sdli pahara hi lé tanin kumata siliya yar. 
viduru nobitdetuju avuvehi tubuva hunu tavahi vana seyin uvakum 
hamiyehi nobikdetuju antascalana matrayek vé. eyin yajrakéyata~ 
vata hini noveyi séyi.s* 
After stating that 4 splinter from the rock that Devadatta hurled at 
the Buddha hit him on the sole of his foot and “‘disturbed the blood at 
47, 
debiseva j& abhisalamevan kasup maharaj-hu. DAG, p. 295. 
48. EZ, Vol. Il, p. 30, i, A7-11; p. 41, i. A9-19, 
49. 
Cv, 52, 37-41. 
50, 
Cv. 52, 48-9, 
Si, 
DAG.,p. 50. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
325 
that spot,’” the author comments that since the Buddha possessed a 
vajrakaya (diamond-body) he would not bleed even if he were hit by 
astone. 
Then he goes on to examine how it was possible for Jivaka to 
make an incision with his scalpel on the body of the Buddha, if indeed 
the latter possessed a vajrakaya. 
The nature of the vajrakdya is such, 
he explains, that it would not be damaged by ‘enemy design’’ (paré- 
pakrama). 
The fact that the scalpel was used on the person of the Bud- 
dha does not imply that the nature of the vajrakdya was affected, since 
Jivaka’s action does not fall within the category of “enemy design.” 
Taking the case of Devadatta, he points out that though diamond does 
not break, it is liable to become heated if kept in the heat of the sun. 
Similarly, though the vajrakdya cannot be injured by “enemy design’’ it 
is subject to ‘a minute internal disturbance’ (antascalanamdatrayek) 
which. does not affect the real nature of the vajrakdya . 
The idea that no physical harm can befall the Buddha seems to be 
Present in its germinal form in several of the stories in the Buddhist Pali 
Canon.” 
But the concept of the vajrakdya as such is foreign to Pali 
Buddhism. 
This is primarily a Tantric concept. 
Treatises of the Tan. 
tric school such as the Paficakarma speak of the kdyavajrasvabhdva, vd- 
- 
gvajrasvabhiva and the cittayajrasvabhdva as essential attributes of the 
Supreme Buddha and prescribe means by which the devotee may ac-: 
quire such attributes.5? 
As de Ja Vallée Poussin pointed out, the ac- 
quisition of those attributes takes the position of a principal rite in Tan- 
tric Buddhism.5+ 
Around this abstract concept of the vajrakdya grew 
‘the idea that one who acquired it was immune from harm, 
Taranatha 
states that Nagarjuna possessed a vajrakaya and hence could not. be kil- 
led.55 
The teachings of the Vajrayana spread from centers 
like the 
Nalanda and the Vikramaéila monasteries to Southeast Asia from as 
early as the end of the seventh century. 
In an inscription from Talang 
Tuwo near Palembang, dated A.D, 684, Jayaniisa speaks of the vajra- 
sarira.5® 
Elsewhere we have cited the tradition in the Nikdya-sangra- 
haya that Vajrayana teachings were introduced to the island during the 
time of Sena I (A.D. 833-853).57 
52. 
Vinaya Pitaka, Vol. I, pp. 24 ff; Suttanipdta Atthakathd, Vol. I, p. 239. 
53. 
Louis de Ia Vallée Poussin, Etudes et textes tantrique, Université de Gand, 
ecueil de travaux publis par la Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres, Fasc, 16, 1896, pp. 
54. 
Louis de la Vallée Poussin, Bouddhisme, études et materiaux, 1898, p, 146, 
55. “...da nun der Acarya einen Vajrakérper hat, kann er nicht sterben.” 
A. 
‘Griinwedel, Téranathas Edelesteinmine, das Buch von den Vermittlern der Sieben In- 
spirationen, p, 18, 
56. BEFEO, Vol. XXX, pp, 42, 55-8. 
57. 
See supra pp. 255-6,

--- PAGE 174 [DIRECT] ---

326 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGRA 
Evidence from the site of a ruined building situated to the south of 
the Thiiparama: seems to lend further support to the hypothesis that 
monks of the -Mahavihara nikdya came to be influenced by non-Thera- 
vada schools of Buddhism. 
This building, erroneously called the Tem- 
ple of the Tooth relic, was built on a platform measuring eighty-four 
feet by fifty-seven feet and itself was sixty-two feet six inches long and 
twenty-seven feet six inches wide. 
The sanctum had sixteen free stand- 
ing pillars. 
Of these, the four at the corners were square. 
The four at 
the center. were also square and had wide abaci and highly 
polished 
smooth surfaces. 
The remaining eight pillars, cut into an octagonal 
shape, are of great interest. 
Their capitals are ornamented with repre- 
sentations of the vajra. 
These representations were sculpted in such a 
. way that the vajra was visible from whichever side a devotee looked at 
the pillar.58 
; 
The vajra symbol is particularly associated with the Tantric school. 
To be sure the use of this symbol as a decorative motif need not neces- 
sarily indicate association with this school, however, when considered 
in the light of the evidence from the Dhampiya Afuvi: Gdjapadaya cited 
above it seems to represent Tantric influences at the Mahavihara, 
It 
‘ would be rash to suggest on the basis of these two instances that Kas- 
sapa V was a Vajrayanist or that the monks of the Mahavihara and the 
Thiparama had taken to Tantric: practices. Presumably their approach 
was ecclectic; they would have adopted views of other schools as long 
as they wore not in conflict with their own teachings. 
But it has to be 
admitted that this passage indicates that by the tenth century Tantric 
~ 
influences had penetrated into an institution which claimed to be the 
citadel-of orthodox Pali Buddhism. 
oo 
Some. evidence which suggests that the Mahavihara came to be 
influenced by the teachings of the Abhayagiri nikaya is found in two com- 
mentarial works written after the time of the unification of the saigha, 
Commenting: on the term sacittapakkha in the Samantapasidika, Sari- 
putta states in his Sdratthd-dipani that a novice who consumes liquor 
without intent and not knowing that it was liquor incurs no sin, though 
an ordained. monk in the same circumstances would be committing a 
pacittiya offence. 
To support his position he quotes from the Culla- 
santhipada and the Majjhima-ganthipada which comment that, just as, 
one who mistakes a, serpent for a stick and kills it without intent incurs 
no. sin, a person who consumes liquor without intent, taking it to be the 
unfermented drink from the coconut palm (ndlikerapana), commits no 
offense: *°. 
But Coliya Kassapa, the author of the Vimati-vinodani, did 
58. 
C/SG, Vol, II, pp. 80-1, Pls, LU, LUI; ASCAR, 1895, p. 3, 
59. 
Sérattha-dipant, pp. 425-6, 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
327 
not agree with this ruling, and he devoted a long polemical discussion to 
refute it. He stated that the ruling that only intentional consumption of 
liquor amounts to an offense was a view held by ‘heretical’? schools 
like the Abhayagiri which the authors of the ganthipada works had in- 
corporated in their writings without realizing that it was “unorthodox.” 
As a result, Kassapa remarks, it had been corrupting the sdsana up to 
his own time. 
He goes on to say that in the past-a “‘heretical’’ monk 
called Nagasena had propagated this view in the Damila country, but it 
was suppressed by the mahathera Buddhappiya who “purified” the sa- 
sana. 
The recurrence of this view in the Sdrattha-dipani helped monks 
with corrapt thoughts to regain their lost stature. 
It was examined, re- 
jected and suppressed by distinguished monks for the second time. 
Kassapa claims to have indulged in this detailed discussion to completely 
refute this view and prevent it from bringing the sdsana into disrepute.® 
The testimony of the Vimati-vinodant suggests that some of the 
views of the Abhayagiri nikdya found their way into the commentaries 
of the Mahivihara. 
It is also noteworthy that these ideas appeared in 
a work of Sariputta which was.written after the “purification” of the 
saigha, 
Though the differences of opinion between the nikdyas were 
not completely forgotten, the absorption of some of the “heretical” 
views of the Abhayagiri nikdya by the Mahiivihara probably reflects a 
change of attitude conducive to reconciliation. 
One may also surmise 
that the waning of the influence of the monastic centers of Eastern India 
must have weakened the position of the Tantric schools, deprived the 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana monasteries of an important source of inspira- 
tion and influence, and made them more amenable to the idea of accom- 
modation with the Mahavihara.®! 
Tt has been pointed out elsewhere that the nikdyas of Sinhalese Bud- 
dhism were not mere fraternities which subscribed to a particular school 
_ 
of thought. 
In fact, it seems unlikely that, during this period, they pro- 
fessed a consistent body of thought to which they demanded unswer- 
ving adherence from all the inmates of their constituent: monasteries. 
This is particularly true of the Abhayagiri and the Jetavana nikdyas, 
The nikdya also possessed large landholdings and had supervisory con- 
trol over the administration of the property of its constituents. The 
growth of monastic property and the development of bureaucratic or- 
ganization provided the nikdya with an element of cohesion and the 
main monastery with opportunities to assert its position. 
It is evident 
60, 
Vimati-vinodani, pp. 94-100. 
61. 
See supra pp. 49-50, 
62, 
See supra pp. 32, 34-5,

--- PAGE 175 [DIRECT] ---

328 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
from the inscriptions of the Abhayagiri monastery that the regulations 
of the nikdya requires its dependent institutions to submit their annual 
statements of income and expenditure for ratification by the assembly 
’. of monks of the main monastery or by committees appointed by this 
assembly. 
Monks from the main monastery were present. at the sittings 
of the committee of management of .the Cetiyagiri monastery when it 
settled its annual accounts.®} 
The Buddhannehila inscription reveals 
that the main monastery sometimes enjoyed the privilege of appointing 
the abbots of the minor institutions attached to it.“ 
° The main mon- 
astery also had the responsibility of maintaining the number of monks 
‘at the branch institutions of the nikdya at the strength stipulated by. 
its lay patrons.® 
The Vessagiriya inscription of Mahinda IV gives 
an instance of the chief monk of the main monastery making represent- 
ations to the king on behalf-of a branch monastery. 
A study of the 
administrative organization of monasteries reveals that it was one of the 
principal links that brought the main monastery close to the minor 
constituents of the nikdya and strengthened its unity, 
The loss of property that the savgha suffered during the period of 
~ 
Cola rule and the final confiscation of wealth by Vikramabahu I, there. 
fore, had an extremely detrimental effect upon the corporate existence of 
the nikdya. 
With the loss of its property, the nikdyq lost the very basis 
of its administrative organization. 
There is no evidence to suggest 
that the administrative organization of the monasteries ever reached the 
standard it had attained in the ninth and tenth centuries.6” 
The con- 
sequent loss of centralized control is reflected in the very fact that the 
leadership of the movement for reform came from the provincial monks 
representing their particular regions.and not from the main monasteries 
of the nikéivas at the capital. 
The confiscation of monastic property 
by Vikramabahu united the sangha in a different way. 
It brought them 
together in concerted action against the king; the monks of all: the 
“eight milavihdras’'® are said to have left the capital in protest and to 
have gone to Rohana. 
Such concerted action, though it turned out to 
be fruitless, was unprecedented and, in fact, unique. 
Adversity intro. 
duced an element of unity among members of the saigha which super- 
ceded their nikéya affiliations. 
This probably stimulated subsequent 
developments which eventually led to the unification. 
63. 
For a detailed discussion, see supra p. 131, 
64, 
EZ, Vol. 1, pp. 191-200, 
BZ, Vol, p. 4, 11; p. 48, Wl. 41-2. 
66. 
EZ, Vol. I, pp, 29-38, 
67, 
See supra p. 136, 
68, - 
For an explanation of the term see supra pp, 283-4, 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
329 
The preceding chapter highlights an important development in the 
structure of the saigha which 
reflects the weakening of the argani- 
zation of the nikéya. 
Eight monastic establishments, some of which can 
be traced back to about the seventh century, grew into large fraternities 
by the time of the death of Vijayabihu I and replaced the nikityas as 
the main groups representing the sazigha in religious as well as political 
activities. 
Four of these fraternities—the Uttaromitla, Kappiiramila, 
Mahanettapasddamila and the Vahadipamtla—grew from minor colleges 
within the constitution of the Abhayagiri nikaya into institutions wield- 
ing considerable authority in the organization of the satigha, 
The 
Abhayagiri nikdya seems to have been a loosely organized corporate 
institution in which these milas (var. mula, dyatana etc.) played an im- 
portant role, even in the ninth and tenth centuries. 
A fifth, the Sena- 
patimila, seems to. have originally been a constituent institution within, 
the Jetavana nikdya. 
The growth and the expansion of these milas, 
to some extent, amounted to the dismemberment of the nikéyas to which 
they belonged. 
The corporate existence of the nikdyas, it would appear, 
had come to an end by the beginning of the eleventh century and had 
been replaced by an organization of the satigha based on the mala, This 
_ does not imply that the threefold division of the sargha on a nikaya 
basis had been completely forgotten. 
‘The five malas mentioned above 
continued to be associated with the nikdyas to which they originally be- 
longed, and the records continue to refer to. the three nikdyas, 
But in 
these later references the term nikiya was ptobably used in a conventional 
sense, for the nikdya had ceased to be an effective unit in the organiza- 
tion of the satrgha. 
; 
: 
The observations made above Place the unification of the saigha 
in a fresh perspective. 
The reforms of the time of Parakramababu, 
it would appear, amounted more to a unification of the eight milas than 
to a unification of the three nikdyas. 
Evidence su pporting such a hy- 
pothesis is found in the Ca/avamsa in the passage which describes the 
building activities of Parakramabahu, I. The chronicle credits the king 
with the construction of eight monasteries at Polonnaruva, 
Of these, 
the Jetavana monastery was perhaps the largest group of monastic dwell- 
ings. 
Within its premises were a round stone temple for the Tooth 
relic, the Tivahka image-house, a. stiipa, three sermon halls, two libraries, 
seventy-five parivenas, seventy-five large mansions and a hundred and 
seventy-cight small residences. 
Eight ponds were built for the use of the 
inmates. 
In all there were five hundred and twenty buildings within the 
monastic grounds. 
; 
69. 
Cv. 78, 31-47,

--- PAGE 176 [DIRECT] ---

330 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
Geiger presumed that the so-called Quadrangle at Polonnaruva 
represents the site of the Jetavana monastery,7° but it is unlikely that this 
large monastery was within the city of Polonnaruva where the Quadran- 
gle is located. 
Paranavitana is probably right when he suggests that the 
site of the Jetavana monastery should be identified with the precincts 
of the Tivanka image-house,7! known today as the Demalamahasiya, 
a curious misnomer.” 
Remains of old buildings around this ruin cover 
an area more than a mile in width and seem to represent the site of a 
latge monastic establishment. 
-Seven ponds have been located within 
those precincts. 
Paranavitana has also suggested that the remains of a 
circular shrine to the south of the Tivanhka image-house should be identi- 
fied with the shrine of the Tooth relic though it seems to have been built 
of brick and not of stone as stated in the Céilavamsa. 
The chronicle 
states that an irrigation canal called Narmada flowed across the grounds 
of the Jetavana monastery.?3 
An irrigation canal seems to have flowed 
across the precincts of the Tivanka image-house too. 
If, on the basis 
of these considerations, Paranavitana’s identification. is accepted, it is 
clear that: Jetavana was certainly the largest monastery at Polonnaruva 
and is comparable in extent with the Abhayagiri monastery at Anura- 
dhapura, 
: 
“~~ Apart from the buildings mentioned above, Parikramabahu I is 
Said to have erected eight mansions each three stories in height, within 
the preciricts of the Jetavana monastery. ‘These mansions, which he is 
“said to have built at great cost, were intended for the use of the theras 
of the.“‘fraternitios’’ (éyatana). 
Another large mansion, complete with 
‘chambers and terraces on the upper floors, was built for the thera Sari- 
putta:”’ 
The Pijavaliya confirms the tradition, reported in the Céla- 
vamsa, that Parakramabahu erected mansions for the eight fraternities,75 
These statements are of particular interest since they indicate that Sari- 
putta, together with the chief incumbents of the eight fraternities, lived at 
the Jetavana monastery. 
It was ‘mentioned earlier that a shrine was 
built 
at the same monastery to house the Tooth relic, The Vélaikkéra 
inscription reveals that in the eleventh century the Tooth relic was in the 
charge of the Uttdromilla, a fraternity which originally belonged to the 
Abhayagiri nikdya,’6 and it is evident from the Dalada-sirita that the 
720, 
TL. 
72. 
73, 
74, 
75. 
76, 
Cy. trsl, Pt. I, p. 106,n. 3. 
This shrine has the remains of a tivanka o¢ “triple-bent” image. 
CISG, Vol. Il, pp. 169-73, 
Cv, 79, 48, 
"Cv, 78, 33-4, 
Piv, p. 105, 
EE, Vol. XVIII, p. 237, i. 18-21, 
i 
3 Se 
ase 
SS 
“eist 
sotacs’ 
= 
POLONNARUVA 
32 
16 
32 CHAINS 
es 
sates 
SE 
8 SS S 
oe 
SO 
mesrneres 
satetete® 
@ DAMILATHGPA 
a 
Rook = cut Statues 
Biwapevele 
te 
UTTARARAMA 
Latkatitaka Image House 
jaddhasima Prasada 
Siva Dovilo @ 
ALAHANA PARIVENA 
@ narwivart stOen 
KH Kovit mM Viggu Devito 
ta Siva Davitte 
@stipa 
f 
fo 
4, 
sss5 
mSiva b evile 
@Pabalu Vohera 
Satmahal Praskda 
f~S 
oN Tooth Rol 
Thitpériima Image House 
PARAKRAMA SAMUDRA 
Rook - cut Status 
BB roraucvenenn 
Fig. 3. Map of Polonnaruva showing the location of the principal 
monasteries and shrines.

--- PAGE 177 [DIRECT] ---

332 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
same fraternity was vested with the care of the relic even in the four- 
teenth century.” 
This further conficms the observation that leaders 
of fraternities which originally belonged to the Abhayagiri nikdya were 
among the hierarchs of the eight fraternities who took up residence at 
the Jetavana monastery. 
In this connection it is interesting that in works like the Vinaya- 
Sérattha-dipani and the Sumangala-pasédani, written by his disciples, 
Sariputta is given the appellation mahasdmi (var. mahasvami, mikimiy® 
which means “great lord.’’ 
The Nikéya-saigrahaya also applies the title 
mahasvami to Sariputta.” . 
Evidently it was used in a specific and tech- 
nical sense and does not seem to have been a mere honorific term; for in 
the Nikiya-saigrahaya a number of renowned teachers like Buddha- 
ghosa, Buddhadatta, Dhammapila, Ananda and Anuruddha are called 
mahasthaviras, while in the same sentence Sariputta is referred to as 
mahdsvimipida. 
Geiger tried to explain the meaning of this term as 
“the superior abbot of the monastery,’’®? but from the contexts of its 
occurrence it seems to denote a post of greater importance. 
The preamble of the Dambadeni Katikavata, drafted by the sav. 
gha during the reign of Parakramabahu II, and the Nikdya-sangrahaya 
mention a synod which was held during the reign of Vijayabahu TIL 
(A.D.. 1232-1236) under the leadership of the mahasvami Sanghark- 
‘Khita, the disciple of the mahasvimi Sariputta. 
He was assisted by the 
mahasthavira Medhankara of the forest-dwelling fraternity at Dithbula- 
gala. Sangharakkhita is described in these two sources as the monk 
who ‘administered ‘the édsana in his time’’ (tatkiilasasananusasaka).* 
The title mahasydmi is applied to Sangharakkhita even in the Calavam. 
sa.” 
Later on, duting the seign of Parakramabahu IT (A.D. 1236-1270), 
another synod was 
held under 
the leadership 
of the mahasvami 
Medhantkara of the forest-dwelling fraternity, disciple of the mahistha- 
vira Buddhavamsa Vanaratana.*} 
It was probably the same monk who 
helped Sangharakkhita during the reign of Vijayabahu III that we now 
find inthe position of the mahasvami during the reign of Parakrama- 
‘ babu IE. 
, A third synod was held during the reign of Bhuvanekabahu IV 
in the year, 1894 of the Buddhist era, i.e., A.D. 1350, under the leader- 
71. 
Daladé-sirita, pp. 49-54, 
For 
evi 
a 
Selavane, agnor e 
on 
evidence on the presence of Selantaramila at 
78, Pali Séhityaya, Vol. WL, pp. 287-94, 
79. 
Nils, pp. 26, 27. 
80. 
Cy., trsl., Pt. I, p. 174, n. 1. 
81. D.B. Jayatilaka, Katikayat Satigard, p. 8. 
82, 
Cy, 81, 76. 
83. 
.Niks."p. 27. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
333 
ship of the mahdsvami Vanaratana of Amaragiri.®4 
All these instances 
‘are indicative of the discriminative use of the titles mahdsvami and maha- 
sthavira when referring to the hierarchs who took part in the clerical 
conventions of their times. 
The person who presided over the synod 
always bore the title mahasvami. 
Furthermore, the monk who bore this 
title was sometimes described as the hierarch “who administered the 
sasana in his time.’ 
In one instance a monk is called mahdsvami while 
his teacher is called mahasthavira. 
No instance of the title mahasvami 
being borne simultaneously by two different individuals is known. from 
these sources. This discernment on the part of the author of the Nikaya- 
sahgrahaya is but to be expected, for he himself bore the title mahdsvami 
at the time he wrote this work. 
Further evidence concerning the sig- 
nificance of this title is found at the end of the chronicle. 
When the 
author mentions the synod held under his own leadership he refers to 
himself as ‘‘the mahasvami Dharmakirtti the second who administered 
the sdsana at this time.’’ 
Later on, in the colophon, he describes him- 
self as one who has attained the rank of the satghardja.*5 
On the 
strength of this reference, it seems not unreasonable to equate the term 
mahasvami with the title satghardja, “the king of the sangha.” 
The regulations embodied in the Dathbadeni Katikavata provide 
more specific information concerning the significance of these titles. 
The section which deals with the organization of the satgha stipulates 
the two senior monks who had completed twenty-five years since their 
ordination and.were impartial and exemplary in their character should 
be appointed to the position of the mahdsthaviras of the ‘‘village-dwell- 
ing’’ (gdémavasa) and the ‘forest-dwelling’ (Grafifiika) sections of the 
sahgha and placed immediately below the mahimi (mahdsdmi) in rank. 
These posts were formally conferred by the king who ruled over all three 
principalities in the island. 
Since the presence of too many leaders 
would be detrimental in its effects on the sargha, it warns, no monk 
other than those two should be raised to the position of a mahdsthavira. 
And should the post of the mahimi fall vacant as a result of the death of 
the incumbent, a suitable person from among those two monks was to 
be appointed to that position.*6 
The statements in the Darhbadeni 
Katikavata clearly reveal that the terms mdhimi and mahdsthavira de- 
noted specific ranks in the hierarchical organization. 
And the evidence 
in all the sources cited so far leaves no doubt that the term mahdsdmi 
84, 
Niks. p. 29, 
85. 
Niks. pp. 34, 37. 
86. 
Katikavat Satgara, pp. 12-3,

--- PAGE 178 [DIRECT] ---

334 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
was the title of the supreme hierarch who was placed in charge of the 
satgha of the whole island. 
: 
It was only after the unification of the satgha during the reign of 
Parakramabahu I-that it was possible to appoint a mahdsimi over the 
entire community of monks in the island. 
The post was certainly in 
existence from the time of Vijayabihu III. 
One may suggest that this 
institution was needed during the reign of Parakramabahu I to help 
consolidate the unification. 
‘These considerations, together with the 
fact that Sariputta is called mahasdmi in even the literary works written 
during the-reign of Parakramabahu I, suggest that he may have been 
appointed the supreme hierarch of the satigha by the king. 
One would expect Kassapa, who played such a significant role in 
the “purification” of the sangha, to be the first choice for this rank. 
It is possible that he was advanced in age at the time of the “‘purification” 
and that his death took place not long after the synod. 
On the other 
hand, it is also possible that this saintly monk from the forest-dwelling 
fraternity preferred the quietude of the forest retreat to the busy life of 
the head of the Order. 
In fact, Sariputta refers to his teacher as-one 
who was totally committed to the life in the woods (sadératihavasi),§7 
The evidence cited in the foregoing discussion helps us to under- 
stand the nature of the unification of the satgha which took place in the 
time of Parikramabahu I. It is clear that the unification was accom 
‘plished by reconciling the eight fraternities which had replaced the nika- 
yas as the primary units in the organization of the community of monks, 
and by persuading their leading monks to live at the same monastery and 
to accept a common leader in Sariputta, 
It did-not amount to the vic- 
tory of the Mahivihdra and the suppression of the other nikdyas, as-some 
later chroniclers and certain modern writers claim. 
It is true that a 
monk who followed the Mahavihara tradition took the lead in initiating 
the. “‘purification" of the satgha while his disciple, Sariputta, was ap- 
pointed the head of the Order after the unification. 
In this regard the 
leadership came from the Mahavihara. 
But it certainly cannot be main- 
tained that the leadership came exclusively from the Mahivihara, and 
it is evident from the Calavamsa that the “purification” affected all the 
participants in the synod regardless of their sectarian affiliations. 
More- 
over, the unification of the satgha did not bring about a complete fus- 
ion involving the loss of the identity of the fraternities concerned, for 
some of these fraternities survived for more than three centuries after 
the unification, 
87. 
Sérattha-dipani, p. 1. 
88, 
See supra pp. 289-90, 298-9, 303, 307-8, 310. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
335 
In Sariputta the satgha found an ideal leader at a time when the 
prime need was the consolidation of its unity. 
He was a great scholar 
and a renowned teacher of his time. 
Little information is available 
about his life prior to his appointment to the leadership of the sangha. 
He mentions in his works that he was a disciple of Kassapa,® yet it is 
nowhere recorded whether he was a monk from the monastic settlement 
at Ditibuligala to which Kassapa belonged or even whether he belonged 
to the ‘‘forest-dwelling’’ fraternity. 
As an exegetist he tried to develop 
a commentarial tradition which would be acceptable to the whole sav- 
gha and adroitly avoided those issues which had been the causes of ser- 
jous disagreement among the nikdyas. 
It is significant that his Sdratiha- 
dipani does not claim to represent the traditions of the Mahavihara. 
Though it was.a subcommentary on the Samantapdsddikd, this work 
abstains from commenting on passages in this work which dealt with 
differences 
of opinion 
between 
the Mahavihara’ and 
Abhayagiri 
nikdyas. 
Yet, as pointed out earlier, Sdriputta was not averse to 
accepting certain views which had been propagated by the Abhayagiri 
nikaya, 
It is not sutprising that Sariputta, with his tolerant and ec- 
lectic approach to doctrinal teachings, was an acceptable leader and suc- 
ceeded in the delicate task of keeping these eight fraternities together. 
However, it seems unlikely that the unification of the sangha was the 
blending of milk and water that the Ca/avamsa suggests it was. 
Later 
statements in the.same chronicle contradict this account. 
There is rea-. 
son to believe that the differences of opinion and the rivalries among the 
groups of monks who came to live at the Jetavana monastery persisted 
after the unification and that factional strife broke out not long after 
the death of Parakramabahu I. 
In his inscription at the Dambulla 
cave monastery Nissanka Malla claims to have reconciled the disputes 
among the monks of the three nikdyas.°' 
It is not very likely that this 
statement concerning the Order, made in a record inscribed at one of the 
most prominent monasteries at the time, was a mere idle boast. 
In its 
account. of the reign of Vijayabahu III, the Padvaliya states that he es- 
tablished tnity among the saigha which had been divided for a long 
time, “and this is corroborated by the Cilavamsa and the Nikdya- 
saigrahaya.” 
The testimony of these sources confirms that the uni- 
fication of the satgha did not bring about the end of factional rivalry 
within the community of monks. 
: 
89, 
See supra p, 157, 
90. 
Sce supra p, 327, 
a Pah kal bhinnava tubit tun nakdhi satiguruvan samaiiga karavé. 
EZ, Vol. 3, 
‘p. 
131, 
2 21, 
92. 
bohé davasak asamatgava sanghaya samaiiga kota, Pjv. p. 110; Cv. 8. 147; 
Niks., -p. 26,

--- PAGE 179 [DIRECT] ---

336 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
The reforms of Parakramabahu I weeded out undisciplined elements 
in the sangha and brought together the community of monks which 
had remained disunited and divided, as the Galvihara inscription points 
out, for one thousand two hundred and fifty-four years. 
The reforms. 
seem to have ushered in a period of intensive activity for the satgha, 
particularly in the literary field. 
Sdriputta and the group of devoted 
scholars who gathered around him produced an extensive exegetical 
literature, both religious and secular.’ 
This period also saw the expans- 
ion of the Sinhalese Theravada to Burma and to other parts of South- 
east Asia. 
The decline of the Indian centers of Buddhism may partly 
explain the rise of Sri Lanka as a source of inspiration to the Therava- 
din monks of Southeast Asia. 
But there is little doubt that the revival 
of Buddhist activity during this period, to a great extent, should be 
attributed to the reforms of the reign of Parakramabahu I. 
By creating the post of the mahdsami, the reforms introduced a 
very significant institutional change which helped to keep the satgha 
together. despite recurrent factional rivalry. 
For the first time in the 
history of the island, the community of monks was organized under a 
single leader, 
In the early centuries of its history the organization of the 
Buddhist sagha was presumably based on the model of the Indian’ 
tribal: state with which the Buddha was quite familiar.°3 
But in the 
context of the political and social organization that was known in early 
- 
medieval Sri Lanka, such a system. was incongruous and anachronistic. 
From the time of the introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka, the san- 
gha gradually acquired an organization similar to that of the body poli- 
tic, a development that spanned more than a thousand years. 
This 
tendency must have grown even stronger after the monasteries acquired 
‘landed wealth and administrative privileges and began to perform cer- 
tain functions which usually fell within the purview of the state. 
The 
monasteries 
and the nikdyas seem 
to have been 
headed by chief 
incumbents and abbots, 
There is no evidence, however, to believe 
that the hierarchs of the nikayas played an important role in adminis- 
trative affairs, 
.The appointment of a head of the satgha, who in later 
times came to be called “the King of the saigha,”’ appears to mark an 
important stage in the development of institutions similar to those of 
the body politic within the clerical organization. 
One would expect that the creation of a unified church under a 
single leader should have effected important changes in the structure of 
93. 
The conversation that the Buddha had with Vassakara, the minister. of Aja- 
tasaltu, reveals that the Buddha knew of the constitution of the Licchavis and admired 
the system. 
Anguttara Nikdya, Vol. IV, pp. 17 ff; Digha Nikéya; Vol, Il, pp. 72 ff. 
A NEW ORGANIZATION FOR THE SANGHA 
337 
power in Sinhalese society; but in practice the situation was different. 
The Vinaya rules prevented the monks from directly wielding Political 
authority, and as such they would not have been a real threat to the 
power of the king. 
Furthermore, though the sargha was unified, in 
certain respects the monks wielded less power than they did during the 
ninth and tenth centuries. 
The loss of monastic property and privileges 
and the collapse of the monastic administration deprived the satgha 
of some of the most important sources of power. 
The participation of 
the king in the reforms and the reorganization of the satgha gave him 
control over clerical affairs and appointments to the more important 
positions in the hierarchy. 
The Dathbadeni Katikavata stipulated that 
when appointing the abbots of the eight fraternities and the chief incum- 
bents ‘of the principal monastic establishments only those monks who 
are acceptable to the king (rdjasammutin) should be selected.% 
As 
mentioned earlier, it was the king who formally conferred the higher 
posts in the clerical organization. 
Such arrangements would have been 
effective in establishing cordial relations between the clerical and the 
temporal powers as also in preventing the satgha from developing 
again into a force which could challenge the authority of the king. 
94. 
Katikavat Satigara, p. 13,

--- PAGE 180 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 
10 
Conclusion 
The purpose of this final chapter is not merely to review the main 
findings presented in this book but to elaborate some of their implica- 
- tions and, in passing, to situate this study in the context of previous 
research on the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. 
The period of about 
four, centuries covered in this study witnessed noteworthy changes in 
the character and the organization of the Buddhist clerical community 
in Sri Lanka. 
In the preceding chapters, in which detailed data from a 
wide variety of sources have been meticulously examined, an attempt 
was made to delineate and to understand the significance of these pro- 
cesses of change. 
Special attention has been devoted to two main trans- 
formations in the history of the clerical community, 
One was the di- 
‘vergence between practice and the dictates of the codes of conduct in 
the Vinaya brought about by changes in life and attitudes of the cler- 
ics.. The adaptation of monastic life in response to pressures emanating 
from developments within a hydraulic society has been described in 
~ 
‘detail without attempting to present it in terms of a “decline.” 
The 
second transformation. was organizational, and, by the end of the period 
‘under study, it brought into being a unified clerical community under 
‘common leadership. 
This book presents a new interpretation of the 
character and significance -of this unification. 
“In regard to the period selected, this study is a continuation of the 
work of Adikaram and Rahula on the history of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. 
-"In-certain other respects it differs from these two and other previous 
historical writings on Buddhism in the island, 
This book is a history of 
“the Buddhist clerical community rather than of Buddhism. 
Of course 
‘this does not mean that the doctrinal aspects have been totally ignored. 
Two aspects of doctrine have been isolated for special consideration in 
this study: the relative importance of doctrine as an integrative force in 
maintaining the cohesion of intermonastic groupings like the nikaya, 
and the function of doctrine as a referent for, and as a restraint upon, 
(338 4 
CONCLUSION 
339 
the actions of clerics. 
However, the main focus of attention in this 
book has been the economic and social aspects of the history 
of the 
satgha which, up to this time, have been largely neglected. 
Jn the early medieval economy of Sri Lanka the Buddhist monas- 
tery was a locus for the concentration of wealth, a center of “primitive 
accumulation.’’ 
By the ninth century the larger monasteries in the is- 
land had accumulated extensive sources of income. based mainly upon 
irrigation works and land, 
In certain instances their interests extended 
to enterprises like salterns and trade stalls. 
The clerical community 
continued to enjoy the generous patronage of the royal family and the 
official strata throughout almost the entire ninth and tenth centuries. Evi- 
dence concerning monastic property in early medieval Sri Lanka is at. 
variance with Karl Wittfogel's assumption that ‘Oriental despots”’ suc- 
ceeded in curtailing the growth of religious property.! 
Monastic pro- 
perty was certainly one of the strongest and least tramelled types of pro- 
perty in Sri Lanka. 
Unlike lay property, it was not affected by frag- 
mentation in the course of its transmission from one generation to the 
next. 
Despite being subjected to spoliation in times of war, corporately 
owned monastic property consistently tended to. accumulate. 
In this respect it is possible to see a certain similarity between the 
early medieval monastery in Sri Lanka and its counterpart in medieval 
° 
Europe. 
However, there are also certain noteworthy differences bet~ 
ween the two monastic types. 
As Weber emphasized,’ the cheap labor 
of the monastic celibates was a major factor behind the expansion of 
monastic wealth in medieval Europe. 
The Buddhist cleric, on the other 
hand, totally abstained from productive physical labor. 
Codes of con- 
duct in the Vinaya prescribed such a life and, understandably, there 
were no casuistic attempts to by-pass this injunction. 
The monastic 
community was a corporation of ‘“non-producers’’ who depended upon 
the surplus produced by share-croppers and craftsmen-agriculturists, 
Thus the monastic community represented a group of superior land- 
holders similar in certain respects to joint-owners of villages in the Raj- 
put areas that Baden-Powell has described.> 
Even the Rajputs culti- 
vated their own ‘“thome-farms” (sir) while exercising their rights as “land~ 
lords’' over other cultivators who were. their tenants. 
Owing to the 
nature of the ideology which governed their lives, the Buddhist monks 
and nuns of early medieval Sri Lanka were completely alienated from 
agricultural and craft production. 
This was the essential feature which 
1. Karl A. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism, p. 98. 
2, Max Weber, Economy and Society, Vol. U1, p. 586. 
3, B, H. Baden-Powell, The Indian Village Community, London, 1896, pp. 20-37,

--- PAGE 181 [DIRECT] ---

340 
CONCLUSION 
distinguished the Buddhist monastic community from all models of 
“village communities’’ and from monastic communities 
in’ medieval 
Europe. 
Donations by kings and wealthy patrons constituted an im- 
portant factor behind the expansion of monastic wealth in early medic- 
val Sri Lanka; monasteries themselves tried to augment this process by 
using surplus income for further investment. 
: 
Clerics living at the early medieval monasteries in Sri Lanka owned 
the monastic property in common (saiighika) as an undivided estate, 
though certain parallel instances of individual clerics enjoying “private” 
(puggalika) property rights are also known. 
Membership in the mon- 
astic community entitled ‘all inmates to supplies of vital requisites like: 
food, clothing and medicaments, while certain senior members were 
also entitled to a share of the net income from the common property of 
the monastery, 
These ‘“‘shares’’ were not allocated on a strictly “‘egali- 
tarian’’ basis; in addition to the seniority of the cleric, his knowledge of 
the scriptures seems to have been taken into consideration when deter- 
mining the number of “shares” be or she was to be given. 
It-is most 
likely that these ‘‘shares’’ reverted to the common monastic pool upon 
the death of a beneficiary. 
The monastery thus represented a “pool of 
shates.'" 
There are instances of “shates’’ being sold, and such sales 
amounted either to the creation of fresh endowments or to a transfer 
from a beneficiary to another person. 
: 
On the basis of the size of their ruins and their reported numerical 
strength, the monastic communities of Anuridhapura, and the Abhaya- 
giri monastery in particular, appear to have ranked among the largest 
monastic communities in the medieval world. 
The functioning of such 
large monastic communities depended upon an economic system, by 
which large landholdings, the tillers on this land and several professional 
caste groups were integrated. 
‘The network of relationships which held. 
the monastic economy together was perpetuated by hereditary tra- 
dition, and there wete sanctions against the violation of hereditary right. 
Different types of workmen and functionaries, who provided products. 
and services for the upkeep of the monastery, may be categorized as 
follows: 
(1) -agriculturists who gave a share of the produce from plots of 
land allocated to them; 
(2) professional caste groups (e.g., lime-burners) who supplied 
products to meet the needs of the monastery in recognition of 
the rights the monastery held over their villages; 
(3) craftsmen (c.g., potters, makers of. water-strainers) who pro- 
vided the monastery with specified quotas of products in return 
for the right to till allotments of land; 
CONCLUSION 
a4t 
(4) craftsmen (¢.g., carpenters) who provided the monastery with 
labor in return for the right to till allotments of land; 
(5) specialists (e.g., physicians, astrologers, painters) who pro- 
vided services in return for 
i. allotments of land or, 
ii. 
allotments of land and daily allowances of grain or, 
iii. 
allotments of land and ‘shares’ or, 
iv. 
the proprietary share due to the monastery from the 
produce of an estate or part thereof; 
(6) administrative functionaries who provided services in return for 
i. allotments of land and allowances in grain and gold or, 
ii, allotments of land, “‘shares’’ and allowances in gold or, 
iii. 
allotments of land and daily allowances of grain or, 
iv. 
allotments of land and “‘shares"’ or, 
y. 
the proprietary share due to. the monastery from the 
produce of an estate or part thereof; 
(7) functionaries who performed nominal services and were en- 
titled to daily allowances of grain; 
(8) domestic workers who provided services in return for 
i, daily allowances of grain or, 
ii. allotments of land and daily allowances of grain or, 
iii. 
allowances in grain and gold; 
: 
. (9) slaves who provided services of mainly a domestic character; 
(10) residents in monastic estates who provided unspecialized labor 
as corvée, 
: 
: 
Monetary payments enter into only a few of the relationships listed 
above, 
At the Mihintale monastery only two functionaries were en- 
titled to payments in gold, while in the case of the domestic employees it 
was specified that the gold was for the purchase of clothing. 
On. the 
whole there is evidence concerning the use of gold in the monastic eco- 
nomy for paying stipends to chief abbots and a few officials; gold was 
also set apart for the-provision of robes for monks and clothing for do- 
mestic employees and for repairs to monastic buildings, 
Though some 
monasteries had settlements of weavers under their control, evidently 
there were other monasteries which had to purchase the cloth they 
needed. 
It also seems likely that certain raw materials needed for re- 
pairs and the work of craftsmen, when not available locally, had to be 
bought. 
It would thus seem that trade was important for these mon- 
astic economies and that monetized exchange did take place. 
The cash 
income that thé monastery needed for its expenses was derived from 
the sale of produce from monastic estates, and from investments like 
money 
deposited in “guilds’’ which brought a regular income in 
interest.

--- PAGE 182 [DIRECT] ---

342 
CONCLUSION 
~ 
However, the overwhelming majority of the relationships described 
above represents a system by which the monastic community was pro- 
vided with products and services in exchange for land and/or grain. 
A fair amount of grain collected by the monastery was redistributed in 
the form of daily allowances in exchange for a variety of services, 
To 
this extent the monastery played a “redistributive” role within the 
economy. 
But the most important mediating factor in this network of 
relationships was certainly land. 
A question of theoretical interest which arises at this point is whet- 
her the monastic economy outlined in this book represents typologically 
an earlier, extra-Indian variant of the jajmani system described by 
Wiser, Gould, -Beidelman, and more recently by several other. writers 
in their studies of Indian villages.4 
In a comparison of the two systems 
certain specific features of the monastic system stand out. 
In his ana- 
lysis of the jajmani system Beidelman has stressed that the significance 
of ritual and ceremonial services performed by certain service castes for 
the jajman can be explained in terms of the latter’s need to avoid ritual 
pollution.’ 
The functioning of the monastic system can be explained 
in economic terms, though in the division of labor caste was obviously 
an important factor, 
The monastery’s dominance over the clients who 
provided it with services was more pronounced than that of the Jajman 
overt his Kamin. 
Presumably pressure on land worked in the monas- 
tery's favor, and it became necessary for the king to issue edicts pro- 
hibiting irregular ejection of tenants. 
This dominance was further 
‘accentuated in certain instances where the monastery owned the tools 
which the craftsman used, thereby making-him totally dependent on the 
Monastery with respect to the practice of his craft. 
The monastery's 
total domination of the craftsman implicit in this situation was some- 
what tempered by sanctions which fixed the upper limits of the rights of 
the monastery,. 
The arrangement between the monastery 
and 
the 
craftsman was of a “contractual” type whereby the quantity of products 
or the number of workdays he had to contribute as well as the remunera- 
tion he received were fixed. 
The monastery did not employ these crafts- 
men continuously, 
At the Abhayagiri monastery, for instance, they 
worked only for two months and five days each year. 
This is under- 
standable since crafts were not divorced from agticulture 
and the 
“4. W.EL Wiser, The Hindu Jajmant System, Lucknow, 1936; FH. Gould, “The Hindu 
Jajmani System: 
A Case of Economic Particularism,” Southwestern Journal of An- 
thropology, Vol. XIV, 1958, pp. 428-37; T. O. Beidelman, 
A Comparative Analysis 
of the Jajmani System, Monographs of the Association for Asian Studies, No. VII, 
New York, 1959. 
5. Beidelman, op cit., p. 27, 
CONCLUSION 
343 
craftsmen also had to till their allotments of land in order to produce 
food for their upkeep. 
3 
The monastic setting with its elaborate organization and the pre- 
sence of a special group of administrative functionaries was not con- 
ducive to the development of the strong personal tie that the relation- 
ship between the jajman and the kamin represents. 
The monastery 
was also a center of power and authority in its own locale. 
A particul- 
arly important outcome of the relationships between the satgha and 
the king in early medieval Sri Lanka was the voluntary transfer to the 
monasteries of the fiscal rights and the administrative and judicial 
authority that the state had enjoyed over monastic property. 
This 
resulted in a substantial addition to the resources of the monastery as 
well. as to its power. 
Immunities, including those associated with 
brahmadeya status that certain monasteries enjoyed, elevated the clerical 
community to a position above. the tenants in an economic as well as 
in a: political sense, 
Like their counterparts-in the state administra- 
tion, the monastic officials performed fiscal, administrative and judicial 
functions and went on official tours to supervise the administration of 
outlying properties belonging to the monasteries. 
The monastic offi- 
cials in early medieval Sri Lanka were an important and powerful group 
comparable to the ministeriales in medieval Europe. 
It is quite clear that in Sti Lanka the Buddhist ethic was not a hind- 
rance to the accumulation of property or to the exercise of rational 
“economic judgment. 
Buddhist commentarial works carried 
sensible 
advice for the management of monastic estates, and monasteries ad- 
hered to elaborate 
accounting procedure. 
Detailed records 
of alk 
“receipts” and “expenditure” as well as labor arrangements were main- 
tained. 
Daily, monthly and annual statements of accounts were pre- 
pared, and, at the end of the financial year, the accounts were submitted 
for approval by the monastic assembly. 
It is evident from the records 
of the Abhayagiri, Mihintale and Kaludiyapokuna monasteries that a 
comprehensive system 
of bookkeeping, remarkable for an economy 
that was only marginally monetized, was in operation at the monasteries. 
Due to the dominant economic position that the monastery occu- 
pied in its locale and the powers and privileges it enjoyed, the interests 
of the Buddhist clerics and their officials were closely linked with those 
of the king and the nobility. 
The king must have regarded the clerical 
community as useful allies who could help him to strengthen his hold 
over the people. 
In times of war and civil disturbance they were help- 
ful mediators who could initiate negotiations between the combatants, 
In the king the clerical community found a generous 
patron whose 
authority was useful in the execution of its ecclesiastical decisions.

--- PAGE 183 [DIRECT] ---

344 
CONCLUSION 
During times of foreign invasion and internal disorder their position 
— 
and property were adversely affected, hence maintenance of order and 
the stability of the ruling dynasty was in their interest as well. 
The 
mutually beneficial aspects of the relationship between the saiigha and 
the king find expression in the political ideas of the time. 
According 
to these ideas the position of the king was legitimized by the support of 
the sangha. 
These ideas also emphasized the interdependence of the 
two institutions. 
Hocart’s idea that church and state were one does not adequately 
take into account the subtleties of the power structure in early medieval 
Sri Lanka.® 
It would be a more serious distortion to suggest, as Rahula 
has done, that’the monastic organization was a mere extension of the 
state apparatus, a “state department.” 
The economic position of ‘the 
monastery and the prestige and authority that the sangha enjoyed in 
society afforded thé ecclesiastical organization a significant degree of 
autonomy. 
The transfer of fiscal and judicial authority to the monas- 
tery and the acceptance of the idea that monastic estates were out of 
bounds for the royal officials further ‘strengthened its autonomous posi- 
tion, 
Thus, if the relationship between the. saigha and the king. was 
symbiotic in character, it was to a remarkable degree an antagonistic 
symbiosis, since the expansion of the temporal authority of the monas- 
tery was, to that extent, a limitation of the authority of the king. 
“A 
feature that Hocart himself noticed in later medieval society® js already 
evident, though in its embryonic form. 
The monastery and its estate 
were a court and kingdom in miniature as was the system of “vassal- 
age’’ in late medieval times that Hocart described, 
Though the ec- 
cleciastical organization and the state were not rival centers of power 
and in general they worked in cooperation with due regard for the 
identity of their interests in many’ fields, there was a certain degree of 
tension, and even some instances of friction, between the two over ques- 
tions of prestige and authority. 
As would be expected, there was no 
clear definition of the relative bounds of monastic and royal authority, 
Disputes arose concerning relative rights between monastic. and royal 
officials as well-as between the sangha and the royalty. 
Monks some- 
tinies tried their hands at king-making, with disastrous consequences 
when rival claimants displaced their nominees and occupied the throne. 
On the other hand; monasteries jealously guarded their privileges and re- 
sisted all attempts to infringe on their traditional rights. 
The incidents 
6. A.M, Hocart, Caste, p. 67. 
7, 
W, Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, p. 72, 
8. 
Hocart, op. cit., p. 68. 
CONCLUSION 
345 
from the reigns of Udaya I and Vijayabahu I, discussed earlier, de- 
monstrate that the kings were obliged to respect these rights. 
Thus 
the early medieval Sinhalese polity does not conform to a concept of 
centralized, 
bureaucratic 
system 
of despotic 
rule. 
Immunities 
en- 
joyed by the monasteries entrenched their property rights and introduced 
a feudal element into the body politic. 
: 
The growth of monastic property had a decisive effect on the life of 
the cleric. 
The areas of contact between the clerical community and 
the laity became wider. 
On the other hand, the cleric was relieved of 
his total dependence on voluntary donations of the laity. 
The cleric who 
lived in one of the larger monasteries in Sri Lanka during the period 
under review differs sharply from the ideal set out in the codes of disci- 
plinary rules in the Pali Canon. 
During the ninth and tenth centuries 
the larger monasteries in Sti Lanka had assured sources of income, while” 
some of their inmates led lives of ease and comfort with access to special 
stipends and personal incomes, changes which necessitated casuistic 
reinterpretations of the disciplinary rules. 
In Sri Lanka injunctions 
against the ownership of land and slaves appear to have shared the same 
fate as the injunctions against usury in the medieval Christian church. 
This divergence between ideal and practice represented an adaptation to 
a changing social milicu.. 
Thus the casuistry of the Pali commentaries 
appears to have performed a positive function by bringing the ideals up 
to date and redefining them in the light of experience. 
The life of ease that the monasteries offered and the social privileges 
and the immunity from the demands of the state that the clerics enjoyed 
drew many undesirable elements into the Order. 
This made periodical 
laicizations and a strict control over admission, necessary. 
In return 
for the amenities it provided, the monastery demanded from its inmates, 
on pain of expulsion, adherence to its codes of rules and total allegiance. 
The monastery of this period attempted to strictly regulate the daily rou~ 
‘tine of the incumbents even in its details, 
The Sinhalese satgha of this period maintained 
close contact with 
centers of Buddhism on the Coromandel coast, the Northeastern re- 
gions of India, and Burma. 
The presence of a permanent community 
of Sinhalese monks at Buddha Gaya and visits of pilgrims and scholars 
-helped to bring in diverse influences which enriched the traditions of 
Buddhist thought in the island. 
The influx of Tantric elements was 
a particularly important result of this relationship. 
The attempts of 
the Sinhalese monks to propagate Theravada Buddhism in the Bihar- 
Bengal area did not meet with success. 
On the other hand, in South 
India they found many followers who worked usually in close collabora- 
tion and sometimes in rivalry to expound the teachings of the Maha- 
vihara, nikdya. 
Though the Abhayagiri nikéya had followers in Java,

--- PAGE 184 [DIRECT] ---

346 
CONCLUSION 
even as early as the eighth century, it was the relations that the Sinha~ 
lese clerics maintained with Burma which had the more durable effects, 
The establishment. of the Sihalasangha in Burma in the twelfth century, 
in which the initiative of the Burmese clergy was a significant factor, 
marked an important stage in the expansion of Sinhalese Buddhism in 
Southeast Asia, an event which produced a lasting impact on the cul- 
ture of this region. 
The present study brings out the multifarious and significant role 
of the Buddhist satgha in the development of Sinhalese culture, 
In a 
sense, the saigha formed an important link for the continual transfusion 
of Indian cultural influences into Sinhalese society and for the trans- 
tnission of Sinhalese influences to lands around the Bay of Bengal. 
On 
the other hand, the monks used their dominant position in culture to 
wield a restrictive influence which acted as a sieve to hold back certain. 
influences. . 
It is remarkable that in Sinhalese culture there are only a 
few traces of the two Indian epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, 
which were denounced in the writings of Buddhist clerics in Sri Lanka as 
useless works which should be totally ignored. 
This restrictive influ- 
ence of the satyha largely accounts for the distinct character of Sinha- 
lese culture. with its predominantly Buddhist flavor, 
- 
It'is possible to distinguish two main levels in. the integrative fun- 
. 
ctions of the institutions and influence of the satgha in Sinhalese 800- 
| 
jety. 
One was at the level of the monastic community. 
The integrative 
function of the monastic economy has already been discussed. 
It is 
further evident that the ceremonial and ritual which gtew up around 
Buddhism and the cultic practices it absorbed turned the monastery into 
a place where regular gatherings of the lay community of the locality 
* took place.. The monastery was also a center of learning, and the 
monks were the dominant element ‘among the Sinhalese literati. 
By 
employing painting, sculpture, music, dance and drama in. the service’ 
of religion the monastery became a patron of the arts. 
Secondly, at a 
national level Buddhist influences were a vital integrative force which 
cut across territorial and social divisions and emphasized the unity of the 
island. 
The predominance of Buddhist influences gave the culture of 
the Sinhaleso.an individuality and unity which acquired a political signi- 
ficance during a period of intense political rivalry between the Sinhalese 
kings and the Hindn rulers of South Indian kingdoms. 
The Sinhalese 
kings were quite aware of this political significance since, in their edicts, 
they emphasize the legendary relationship between the island, their dy- 
nasty and the Buddha. 
In his characteristic way Nissanka Malla de- 
veloped an adroit propaganda ploy when he stated in his edicts that no 
non-Buddhist was entitled to the throne of Sri Lanka. 
| 
q 
CONCLUSION 
347 
The organizational transformation of the satigha which took place 
during this period is one of the key issues investigated in this book. 
The three nikayas, which had constituted the main groups within the 
sangha for about six centuries, are found at a high level of organizat- 
ional development in the ninth and tenth centuries. 
One of the most 
important events inf the history of Buddhism in the island was the uni- 
fication of the satigha during the reign of Parakramabahu I, which for 
the first time in the history of the island, created a unified ecclesiastical 
organization under a common leadership. 
The traditional view pre- 
sented by the chroniclers that the unification of the satgha involved the 
suppression of the “false teachings” of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana 
nikdyas and that it amounted to the vindication of the “‘pure Theravada’ 
of the Mahavihara school, has influenced historical writing and obfus- 
cated understanding of the significance of this event. 
- 
Of the three nikdyas, the Mahavihara appears in the most favor- 
able light in the extant Pali and Sinhalese sources which, with two ex- 
ceptions, are works of its members or supporters. 
The bias of those 
Sources precludes a correct assessment of the extent of the influence-of 
the other two nikayas or of their relative positions in the organization of 
the saigha. 
Little evidence is available on the Jetavana nikdya. 
From 
whatlittle is known, it appears that its influence was more restricted than 
that of the other two. 
However, the picture of the Abhayagiri nikaya 
which emerges in our study 
‘is that of an extensive organization with 
an influence which rivalled that of the Mahavihara, 
This’ group of 
monks represented several schools of Buddhist thought, and the great 
majority of its followers seem to have adhered to a school of Theravada 
Buddhism which based its teachings. on a canonical and commentarial 
tradition different from that of the Mahivihara, 
The “orthodoxy” of 
the two traditions was 
a matter of prolonged dispute; each ntkaya 
accused the other of professing ‘‘unorthodox” -views. 
The scholastic tradition of the Abhayagiri nikdya was not restricted 
to the study of the Theravada. 
The nikdya had within its fold groups 
‘which were receptive to Mahayana and Tantric ideas. 
New evidence 
presented in this study reveals that representatives of other main schools 
of Indian Buddhism—the Sammitiyas, the Sarvastivadins and certainly 
the Mahasinghikas—were welcomed and invited to take up residence 
at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
And; perhaps in emulation of the tra- 
ditions current at Vikramasila and Nalanda, the monks of the Abhaya- 
giri nikdiya made an attempt to make a comparative study of their teach- 
ings. 
The fame of the high standards of scholarship and discipline of the 
monks of the Abhayagiri nikadya reached lands as far as Java, where in 
the latter part of the eighth century a monastery was named after “the

--- PAGE 185 [DIRECT] ---

“348 
CONCLUSION 
Abhayagiri of the Sinhalese.” 
The tolerant attitude that the monks 
-of the Abhayagiri nikdya adopted towards different schools of Buddhist 
‘thought, and the importance of the cult-objects like the Tooth and the 
Bow! relics which they possessed, gained a wide popularity for them 
and accorded a prominent place in the religious life of the people to their 
monastery. 
The ruins of this monastery, which are the largest in the 
‘island, testify to the extensive patronage which it enjoyed, and to the 
immense resources which it controlled. 
: 
The scholastic traditions of the Abhayagiri monastery illustrate 
a significant feature of its constitution: 
It seems most improbable that 
this nikdya did or could require its members to adhere to any one school 
of Buddhist thought or that as a whole it represented a single systema- 
“tized body of doctrine. 
Hence it is most unlikely that the unity of the 
nikéya depended on the uniformity of religious opinion. Of all the three, 
nikayas, only the Mahavihara can be reasonably defined as a representa- 
‘tive of a school of Buddhist thought. 
The ideological unity of this 
nikéiya was also affected during this period when the influences of the 
Abhayagiri nikéya and of non-Theravida teachings penetrated into the 
Mahivihira. 
The appearance of a number of rival factions within the 
Mahavihara by the reign of Parikramabahu I probably came about 
cas a result of this development. 
It is the contention of the present writer that the significance of 
‘doctrine for the unity of the Buddhist nikayas in Sri Lanka has been 
_ 
‘overemphasized by students of the history of Buddhism, This was the 
result of too much reliance on ‘textual evidence and the neglect of the 
‘social and economic aspects of the history of the sangha. 
Though 
‘doctrine did contribute to the unity of intermonastic groupings, the 
simple definition of the nikdya as a school of Buddhist thought proves to 
bo inadequate, and even misleading in certain’ contexts. 
Nikéyas did 
maintain their cohesion despite doctrinal disagreements and the presence 
of several schools of Buddhist. thought within their fold. 
One. of 
“the main arguntents developed in this book is that the basis of the unity 
of a nikdya cannot be sought in the realms of doctrine alone and that in 
‘certain contexts a definition of the nikdya as an economic and social 
“institution is more meaningful for the study of the history of the sav- 
gha, 
This book brings out the fact that the nikdya in Sri Lanka, has 
also to be viewed as a corporate property-owning institution. 
For 
-certain ‘legal’ purposes such as the granting of immunities, and for 
‘accounting purposes, all estates belonging to monasteries within the 
nikéiya were treated as a single composite unit. 
The administrative 
organization for the management of estates 
and 
the supervision of 
finances was an important link which strengthened the cohesion of the 
unikidiya by bringing the dependent institutions under the-control of the 
CONCLUSION 
349 
main monastery. 
Thus the property of the nikdya. and the organiza- 
tion evolved in response to its administrative needs were vital factors 
in establishing and maintaining the unity of this intermonastic group- 
ing. 
; 
At the end of the tenth century. when the northern plains of Sri 
Lanka were brought under Cola rule, the saigha was placed in a severe 
plight. 
Though there is no evidence of: a suppression of Buddhism, the 
clerical community certainly suffered from loss of patronage and from the 
destruction and confiscation of its property. 
The victory of Vijayabahu 
J and the reestablishment of unified political power brought about 
a revival of Buddhist activity and a certain degree of prosperity. 
But 
very soon the clerics created another crisis by arousing the hostility of 
Vikramabahu I by their injudicious association with an attempt to de- 
prive him of his rightful place in the line of succession. 
Vikramabahu 
captured the throne and. proceeded to confiscate monastic 
estates. 
Some clerics made an attempt to defend their possessions and privileges 
by enlisting the support of the Tamit mercenaries; but this proved to be 
° 
futile. 
If, as suggested above, the possession of property had been an 
important element behind the unity of the nikaya, the loss of wealth 
that the satgha sustained during the eleventh and twelfth centuries 
would have had a disruptive effect on the organization of the nikaya. 
One of the developments in the organization of the saigha which 
was noticeable in the latter part of the period under consideration was 
the rise. into prominence of eight fraternities which supplanted the nik- 
dayas as the main groups within the clerical community.. 
Three of these 
fraternities were of provincial origin and seem to have grown outside the 
nikaya organization. 
The origin of the other five fraternities can be 
traced to the Abhayagiri and Jetavana nikayas; their development into 
independent groups represents the disintegration of the nikayas. 
The emergence of new groupings supplanting 
the three nikdyas, 
the difficulties they all encountered during the period of Cola rule and 
during the time of political instability which followed the death of 
Vijayabahu I, and the loss of property they suffered during the reign of - 
Vikramabahu I contributed towards moderating traditional factional 
rivalry among various groups within the saigha. 
These developments 
prepared the ground for the reforms introduced during the reign of 
Parakcamabahu I. 
In the light of our study the unification appears to 
be the bringing together of the eight fraternities under a common leader- 
ship rather than an attempt to impose the authority of the Mahavihara 
over the other two nikéyas as has been hitherto supposed. 
The role of the forest-dwelling ascetics, the Arafiiikas, is of critical 
importance in the transformation of the. organization of the sangha,

--- PAGE 186 [DIRECT] ---

350 
CONCLUSION 
This group of monks, who represented a dissident trend within the cleri- 
cal community, emphasized the adherence to the vita contemplativa and 
asceticism at. a time when life at some of the larger monasteries tended to 
be comfortable if not luxurious. Though their numbers do not appear 
to have been large, the appeal of the forest-dwellers’ attitudes and style of 
life won prestige and influence for them among the laity and endowed 
them with the authority to play a dominant role in the reforms of the 
sangha during the reign of Parakramababu I. Kassapa of Dithbuligala, 
a senior monk 
of the forest-dwelling group, 
presided 
over 
the 
council which carried out the reforms, and his disciple Sariputta became 
the head of the Order after the unification. 
If the reforms could be des- 
cribed as a victory for any one of the groups within the sangha, it was 
clearly a triumph for the forest-dwellers. 
A deliberate attempt was made to extend the scope of the present 
study in order to bring out the interrelationship between the intellectual, 
cultural, social and economic aspects of the history of the sangha. 
Though the evidence from canonical texts suggests that the Buddhist 
clerical community sought to stand aloof from the economic and social 
bonds of lay life, the relationship between changes in economic relations 
and transformations in the clerical community is one of the main points 
which emerge in this study/” 
Due to its involvement in agricultural and 
‘craft production, the monastery was particularly receptive to the in- 
fluence of economic and social changes in the lay sector. 
The monastery 
was, however, riot the passive subject or reflector of changes in the lay 
-sector. 
Some of the developments within the monastic economy, such 
as.its special types of property, appear to have been unique, while the 
relative, autonomy it came to enjoy: within the state promoted trends 
towards foudalization in society. 
It is impossible to understand clearly 
certain actions of the clerical community and the changes in their life 
and organization duting the four centuries studied in this book without 
reference to the economic interests that they had developed by this 
poriod. Thus it appears that the historian of religious institutions in 
Sri Lanka must pay close attention to their economic aspects; 
in 
‘fact, in certain contexts he must be more concerned with these economic 
aspects than with matters of doctrine. 
Bibliography 
I, LITERARY SOURCES 
Note: Unless otherwise stated, references in footnotes are to editions 
marked with an asterisk, 
: 
: 
A. 
P§li and Sanskrit 
pes 
Abhidhammtnvilajikd, Burmese edition published by the Burmese Bud- 
dhist Society, 3 vols., 1960-2, 
: 
Abhidhammatthavibhavini, 
ed, Paiifasara and Vimaladhamma, 
1933, 
Abhidhammatthavikasini, ed, A. P. Buddhadatta, Colombo, 1961, 
: 
Abhidhammavatara, ed. A. P, Buddhadatta, P.T.S., London, 1915, 
Abhidharmirthsaigrahaya, ed. Nandirama Tissa and M. Dhammara- 
tana, Colombo, 1938. 
: 
Anuruddhasataka, ed. D. A. de 8, Batuvantudawa, Colombo, 1879. 
Atthasilini, ed. E. Miller, P.T.S., London, 1897, 
Bhesajjamatijisd, ed. K. D, Kulatilaka, Colombo, 1962. 
Bodhicaryavatara, ed. D, Dharmananda, Colombo, 1959, 
Cillavamsa, ed, W. Geiger, 2 vols., P.T.S., London, 1925, 1927, 
» trsl, W. Geiger, translated from the German into English by 
C. M, Rickmers, 2 pts., Colombo, 1953, 
: 
Dithivamsa, ed, B, C. Law, Lahore, 1925, 
Dighanikdyatthakathé Linatthavannand, ed, L. de Silva, 3 vols., P.T.S., 
London, 1970, 
Dipavamsa, ed, and trst. H, Oldenberg, London, 1879, 
Hatthavanagallavihéravamsa, 
ed. C. Godakumbura, 
P.T.S,, London, 
1956, 
, 
Jinélankara, ed. R. Palita, Matara, 1955, 
Kathavatthupakarana-atthakatha, ed. 1. P. Minaev, Journal of the Pali 
Text Society, 1889, pp. 213-223, 
Mahdripasiddhi, ed, H, Sumangala and B, Dhammaratana, Colombo, 
1891, 
aa 
[351 }

--- PAGE 187 [DIRECT] ---

352 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Mahavamsa, 
ed. H. Sumangala and D. A. de S. Batuvantudawa, 
Colombo, 1877, 1883, 
=, *ed. W. Geiger, P.T.S., London, 1908. 
, 
ed, A. P, Buddhadatta, Colombo, 1959. 
-————, *trsl. W. Geiger assisted by M. H. Bode, Colombo, 1950, 
Mohaviechedani, ed. A, P, Buddhadatta and A. K, Warder, P.T.S.,,. 
London, 1961, 
Nvidimoggillayana, 
Burmese edition, Rangoon, 1900, 
Paramaithavinicchaya, ed, Devananda, Colombo, 1926. 
Rasavihini, ed. Satanatissa, Colombo, 1928, 
Saddhammasangaha, ed, Nedimale Saddhdnanda, Journal of the Pali 
Text Society, 1890, pp. 21-91, 
Saddhammopayana, ed. R. Morris, Journal of the Pali Text Society, 
- 1887, pp. 35-99, 
Sahassavatthupakarana, ed. A, P, Buddhadatta, Colombo, 1959, 
Samantapasadika, ed, J. Takakusu and M, Nagai, P.T.S., 1924-47. 
Sambandhacinté, Burmese edition in the Sadda Ngiy coilection, Ran- 
goon, 1898-1900, 
Sammohayinodani, ed, A, P, Buddhadatta, P.T.S., London, 1923. ' 
Sératthadipani, *ed, Bihalpola Devarakkhita, Colombo, 1914. 
——-~-——; ed. Mabopitiye Medhankara, n.p., 1933, 
Sdsanavamsa, trsl, B. 
C, Law, London, 1952. 
Sthalavatthupakarana, ed. A. P, Buddhadatta, Colombo, 1959. 
Similankara, ed. Buddhasiri Tissa, Colombo, 1904. 
Sumatgalapasidani, ed, Dangedara Sumanajoti, Colombo, 1898. 
Stuyadataka, ed, D, A. de S, Batuwantudawa, Colombo, 1949, 
Stirdlatkéra, trsl. E, Huber, Paris, 1908, 
Vamsatthappakasini, ed, G. P. Malalasekera, P.T.S., London, 1935, 
Vimativinodani, ed. Boratudive Dhammadhara Tissa, Colombo, 1935. 
Vimuttimagga, ed, Galkitiyagama Siri Ratanajoti and Karaliyddde Siri 
Ratanapila, Colombo, 1963. 
Vinaya Pitaka, ed, H. Oldenberg, 5 vols., London, 1879-83, 
Vinayatthamatjiisa, ed. Uyangoda Piyatissa, Colombo, 1901-15, 
Vinayavinicchayasahgaha, Burmese edition by Maung Lin, Rangoon, 
1909, 
Vinayavinicchayasatgahatika, *ed, Kottagoda Dhammananda, 3. pts, — 
(incomplete), Colombo, 1907. 
———, Burmese edition, Rangoon, 1903. 
Visuddhimagga, ed. H. C. Warren and D. Kosambi, London, 1950. 
———-—-, translated as the Path of Purity by Pe Maung Tin, London, 
1923, 
: 
Visuddhimaggalika,* Burmese edition by U. Hpye, 2 vols., Rangoon, 
1909-10. 
siete 
Sie 
SS, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
353 
~~, ed, Morontuduve Dhammananda, Colombo, 1928, 
Vuttodaya, Burmese edition, 1898. 
B. Sinhalese and. Tamil 
Abhidhinappadipikté Sannaya, ed. Totagamuve Pafifiatissa, n.p,, 
1895. 
Abhidharmarthasaigraha Sanyaya, ed. Totagamuve Pafifidmoli, P&liya~ 
goda, 1897, 
Daladapijavaliya, ed. Kanadulle Ratanaramsi, Colomto, 1954, 
Daladisirita, ed, Valivitiye Sorata, Colombo, 1955, 
Dhampiyé Aluvé Giétapadaya, 
ed, Mada-uyangoda 
Vimalakirtti and 
Néhinne Sominda, Colombo, 1960, 
: 
Dharmapradipikd, ed, Ratmalane Dharmarama, Kalaniya, 1951, 
Dhituvamsa, ed, Gintota Dhammakkhanda, Dodandiiva, 1890. 
Elu-attanagaluvamsaya, ed, Simon de Silva, Colombo 1944, 
Jétaka Atuvé Giitapadaya, ed, D, B, Jayatilaka, Colombo, 1943. 
Jataka Gathi: Sannaya, ed. B, Dharmmaratana, Valigama, 1927, 
Kudusikha hai Purétana Sannaya, ed, Hikkaduve Sumangala, Colombo, 
1954, 
Mahibodhivamsa Ganthipada Vivaranaya, ed, Ratmalane Dhammarima, 
Piliyagoda, 1910, 
Mahiripasiddhi Sanyaya, ed, H. Sumangala and B, Dhammaratana, 
Colombo, 1891. 
Muvadevda, ed, A, Vimalanandi, Ambalangoda, 1949, 
Nikiyasahgrahaya, ed, D. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe, Colombo, 1890. 
, "ed. Veragoda Amaramoli, Colombo, 1955, 
: 
Paddasidhana Sanyaya, ed. Ratmaline Dharmananda, Kalaniya, 1932, 
Periyapurinam and. the Tiruvataviirarpurdnam, translated into German 
as the Sivaitische Heiligenlegenden by H. W. Schomerus, Jena, 1925. 
Pijavaliya, ed, Bentara Saddhitissa, Panadura, 1930, 
—-—, *ed. A. V. Suravira, Colombo, 1961, 
Rajavaliya, ed, B. Gunasekara, Colombo, 1953, 
: 
Ruvanmal Nighantu, ed. D, P. de Alwis Wijesekara, np. 1914. 
Saddharmaratnikaraya, ed. Kosgoda Nanavimala, Colombo, 
1931, 
Saddharmélatkara, ed. Bentara Saddhatissa, Panadura, 1934, 
Satidakitduruda Samara, ed. Alavu Isi Sabihela, Colombo, 1961. 
Simhala Bodhivamsaya, ed. B. K. Dharmaratana, Matara, 1911, 
Styabaslakara, ed, H, Nanatilaka and H. Nanasiha, Colombo, 1933. 
Taitcaivanankéyai, ed. S. R. Ramasami Pillai, Madras, 1952, 
Vimuktisangrahava, ed, Womagama Silaratana, Homagama, 1925. 
Vesaturuda Sanne, ed. D. B. Hetbtiaracci, Colombo, 1950, 
Visuddhimargamahdsanyaya, ed. Bentara Saddhatissa, Kalutara, 1949-55,

--- PAGE 188 [DIRECT] ---

354 
; 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
C. 
Other Languages 
Beal, Samuel, Chinese Accounts of India, Calcutta, 1957-8, 
The Blue Annals, trst. G. N, Roerich, 2 pts., Calcutta, 1949, 1953, 
Bu-ston, The History of Buddhism in India and Tibet, trsl. E. O. Ober- 
miller, Heidelberg, 1931. 
Griinwedel, A., Taranathas Edelsteinmine, das Buch yon den Vermittlern 
der Sieben Inspirationen, Petrograd, 1914, 
Hmannan Yazawinkyt, translated into English as the Glass Palace Chroni- 
cle by Pe Maung Tin and G. H. Luce, London, 1923, 
° 
I-tsing, A Record of the Buddhist Religion, trsl. J. Takakusu, Oxford, 
1896, 
Maha Yazawinkyi, ed, Saya Pwa, Rangoon, 1926-32, 
Notton C., Histoire du dhammarija et notre seigneur, Annales dy Siam, 
Vol. I, Paris, 1926, 
2 
Rekawi Prapaiica,. The Nagara-Kértégama, translated into English as 
Fava in the t4th Century--A Study in Cultural History by Theodore G. 
Th. Pigeaud, ‘The Hague, 1960-4, 
: 
Schiefner, A., Taranathas Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, Peters- 
burg, 1869, 
Vimuktimdrgadhutagunaniradesa 
(Rnam-par grol-bahi 
lam-las Sbyows- 
paki yon-tan btsan-pa zes bya-ba), ed, P, U. Bapat, Asia Publishing 
House, Bombay, 1964, 
D, Manaseripts . 
: 
a 
a 
la Cambridge University Library MS. Add 
1643, 
. 
Karmmavibhdga, Sinhalese Manuscript from the Sa-skya monastery in 
Tibet, K, P. Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna, 
Vetiamélikhyé, British Museum Manuscript Or. 6611 (180). 
Vuttamélé, British Museum Manuscripts Or. 6611 (178); Or. 6611 (179). 
Il, EPIGRAPHIC SOURCES 
Annual Report on South Indian Epigraphy, Madras, 1887—(in progress), 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Progress Reports and Annual Reports, 
Colombo, 1890—(in progress). 
Archaeological Survey. of India, Annual Reports, Calcutta, 1903—~(in 
progress), 
» Memoirs, 1919—(in progress). 
Bosch, F, D. K,, “De Inscriptie van Keloerak,” Tijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal, Land—, en Volkenkunde, Vol, LXVIIE, 1928, pp. 1-64. 
Coeds, G., Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Bangkok, 1924-9, 
isola 
ithe 
ei 
tegie 
lap 
lie 
walla 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
355 
———, “Les Inscriptions malaises de Grivijaya,” BEFEO, Vol, XXX, 
1930, pp. 29-80. 
. 
» Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, Deuxieme partie: Inscriptions 
de Dvéravati, de Grivijaya et de Lavo, Bangkok, 1961, 
‘Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum: 
Vol. I: Inscriptions of Asoka, London, ed, E: Hultzsch, London, 1925, 
Vol, Il: Inscriptions 
of the Early Gupta Kings, ed, J. F, Fleet, London, 
1883. 
, 
: 
Epigraphia Birmanica, Rangoon, 1949—(in progress), 
Epigraphia Indica, Calcutta and Delhi, 1892—(in progress). 
Epigraphia Carnatica, Bangalore, 1886—(in progress). 
Epigraphical Summary, Ceylon Journal of Science, Sec. G, Vols. 1 and II, 
Colombo, 1924-33, 
; 
Epigraphia Zeylanica, London and Colombo, 1904—(in progress), 
- Gunawardana, R, A, 
L, H., “Some Economic Aspects of Monastic 
Life in the Later Anuradhapura Period: Two New Inscriptions from 
Madirigiriya,” CJHSS, New Series, Vol. Il, No. 1, 1972, pp. 60-74. 
Kanapathi Pillai, K., “A Pillar Inscription from Moragahawela,"" UCR, 
Vol, XVIH, 1960, pp. 157-62. 
' 
Luce, G, H. and Pe Maung Tin, Inscriptions of Burma, 5 Portfolios, 
Oxford, 1933-56, 
: 
Miiller, Eduard, Ancient Inscriptions in Ceylon, 2 vols,, London, 
1883, 
Paranavitana, S., Sigiri Graffiti, being Sinhalese Verse of the Eighth, 
Ninth and Tenth Centuries, 2 vols., London, 1956, 
: 
Sein Ko, Taw, “A Preliminary Study of the Kalyani Inscriptions of 
Dhammaceti,” Indian Antiquary, Vol. XXII, 1893, pp. 11-7, 29-53, 
150-9, 206-13, 236-43, 274-5, 
South Indian Inscriptions, Madras, 1890-—(in progress). 
30, MODERN WORKS 
A, Published Papers and Monographs 
Adikaram, E. W., The Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon (or The State 
of Buddhism.in Ceylon as Revealed by the Puli Commentaries of the 5th 
Century A.D.), Colombo, 1953. 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Progress Reports and Annual Reports 
Colombo, 1890—(in progress). 
, Memoirs, Colombo, 1924—(in progress). 
Ariyapala, M.B,, Society in Mediaeval Ceylon (The State of Society in 
Ceylon as Depicted in the Saddharmaratnivaliya and other Literature 
of the Thirteenth Century), Colombo, 1956.

--- PAGE 189 [DIRECT] ---

356 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Arunachalam, P., “Polonnaruva Bronzes and Siva Worship and Sym- 
bolism,” JRASCB, Vol. XXIV, No, 68, 1915-6, pp. 189-222, 
Bagchi, P. C., Le canon bonddhique en Chine, 2 vols., Paris, 1927, 1938. 
Bapat, P. V., Vimuttimagga and Visuddhimagga, Poona, 1937, 
Bareau, André, “Trois traités sur les sectes des A Vasumitra, Bhavya et 
" Vinitadeva,” J4, 1954, pp. 229-33. 
; 
~———, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit véhicule, Saigon, 1955, 
Bhattacaryya, B., The Indian Buddhist Lconography, London, 1924, 
Bhattasali, M. K., Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanic Sculptures in 
the Dacca Museum, Dacca, 1924, 
Bode, M., The Pali Literature of Burma, London, 
1909, 
Boisellier, J., La statuaire khmére et son evolution, Saigon, 
1955, 
Bosch, F. D. K.; Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, The Hague, 
1961. 
Briggs, L. P., “The Syncretism of Religions in South East Asia especially 
in the: Khmer Empire,” Journal of the American Oriental Society, 
1951, Pt. 2, pp. 30-49, 
: 
Buddhadatta, A. P., “Were there Two Elders by the Name Chappata,” 
UCR, Vol, EX, 1951, pp. 69-75. 
» Theravadi Bauddhicaryayo, Colombo, 1960. 
» Pali Sthityaya, 2 vols., Ambalangoda, 1960-2. 
Chen, K.,:“The Economic Background of the Hui Chang Suppression 
of Buddhism,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, Vol. XIX, 1965, 
: pp. 67-105, 
Codrington, H: W., Ceylon Coins and Currency, Colombo, 1924, 
: 
» Ancient Land Tenure and Revenue in Ceylon, Colombo, 1938. 
» “Notes on Ceylon Topography in the Twelfth Century,” 
JRASCB, Vol. XXIX, No. 75, 1922, pp. 62-74; Vol. XXX, No. 78, 
* 
1925, pp. 70-91, 
. 
Coedés, G.,. “Note sur l’apothéose au Cambodge,”’ Bulletin de la com- 
mission archéologique de l'Indochine, Paris, 1911. 
» Les états hindouisés d'Indochine et @’ Indonesie, Paris, 1964. 
Coomaraswamny, A. K., “Mahayana Buddhist Images from Ceylon and 
Java,” JRAS, 1909, pp. 283-97. 
» Bronzes from Ceylon, Memoirs of the Colombo Museum, Ser. 
A, No.1, Colombo, 1914. 
~ 
» Catalogue of the Indian Collection in the Boston Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston, 1923, 
Cunningham, A., Mahabodhi, ov the Great Buddhist Temple under the 
Bodhi Tree at Buddha Gaya, London, 1892, 
Dalton, George (ed.), Tribal and Peasant Economics, New York, 1967. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
357 
de Casparis, J. G., “New Evidence on Cultural Relations between Java 
and Ceylon in Ancient Times,” Artibus Astae, Vol. XXIV, 1962, pp. 
241-8. 
Demiéville, P., L'origine des sectes bouddhiques d'aprés Paraméartha, 
Meélanges chinois et bouddhiques, Tome I, Bruxelles, 1932; 
de Silva, W. A., “A Contribution to the Study of Economic and Social 
Organisation in Early times,” JRASCB, Vol. XXXI, No. 81, 1928, 
pp. 62-76. 
Devendra, D. T., The Buddha Image and Ceylon, Kandy, 1957, ~ 
Dhammavisuddhi, Yatadolawatte, “The Date of the Galpata Vihara 
Rock 
Inscription,’ JRAS, 1971, pp. 44-51, 
Dupont, Pierre, L’archéologie méne du Dviravati, Paris, 1959, 
Dutt, ‘Nalinaksa, arly Monastic Buddhism, 2 vols., Calcutta, 1941-5, 
Dutt, 8., Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India, London, 1962, 
Eliot, Charles, Hinduism and Buddhism, 3 vols., London, 1954, 
Fernando, P. EB. E., “Development of the Sinhalese Script from the 8th 
Century A.D. to the 15th Century A.D.,” UCR, Vol. VIII, No. 4, 
1950, pp. 222-43. 
————~, “Tantric Influences on the Sculptures at Galvihara, Polon- 
naruva,"’ UCR, Vol. XVIU, Nos. 1 and 2, 1960, pp. 50-67, 
_ 
Foucher, A., Btudes sur t ‘iconographie bouddhique de l'Inde d’apris des 
documents nouveaux, Paris, 1900-5, 
Geiger, W., Culture of Ceylon in Mediaeval Times, Wiesbaden, 1960, 
Gernet, Jacques, Les aspects économiques du bouddhisme dans la soéieté 
chinoise du Ve au Xe sidcle, Saigon, 1956, 
Godakumbura, C , “References to Buddhist Sanskrit Writers in Sinha- 
lese Literature,” UCR, Vol. I, No. 1, 1943, pp, 86-93, 
» “Bronzes from Polonnaruva,” JRASCBNS, Vol. VII, Pt, 2, 
1961, pp. 239-53, 
Goloubew, V., ‘The Art of India and Indo-China with Special Refer- 
ence to Ceylon,’’ JRASCB, Vol. XXXI, No. 83, 1931, pp. 455-70, 
_ 
Grlinwedel, A., Mythologie des. Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei, 
Leipzig, 1900, 
Gunawardana, R, A. L, H., “Buddhist Nikayas in Medieval Ceylon,” 
CIHSS, Vol. IX, No. 1, 1966, pp. 55-66, 
» “Ceylon and Malaysia: 
A Study of Professor 8. Parana- 
Vitana’s Research on the Relations between the Two Regions,” UCR, 
Vol. XXV, Nos, 1 and 2, 1967, pp. 1-64, 
» “Irrigation and Hydraulic Society in Early Medieval Ceylon,” 
Past and Present, No, 53, 1971, pp. 3-27.

--- PAGE 190 [DIRECT] ---

358 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
~~, “The Kinsmen of the Buddha: Myth as Political Charter in the 
Ancient and Early Medieval Kingdoms of Sti Lanka," The Sri Lanka 
Journal of the Humanities, Vol..I, No. 1, 1976, pp. 53-62, 
Harvey, G. E., History of Burma, London, 1925. 
Hla, Maung, ‘‘The Chronological Tables of Kings of Burma,” Journaf 
of the Burma Research Society, Vol. XU, 1923, pp. 82-95, 
Hocart, A. M., Caste, London, 1950, 
Jayatilaka, D. B., Simhala Sahitya Lipi, Maharagama, 1956, 
Kalupahana, D. J., “Schools of Buddhism in Early Ceylon,” The Ceylon 
Journal of the Humanities, Vol, I, No. 2, 1970, pp. 159-90, 
Kern, H., Histoire du bouddhisme dans !"Inde, Annales du Muste Gui- 
met, Bibliotheque d'litudes, Tome XI, Paris, 1903, 
Levi, M. Sylvain, “Chino-Sinhalese Relations,” trsl. from French by 
John M. Seneviratne, JRASCR, Vol, XXIV, No, 68, 1915-6, pp. 74-106, 
Liyanagamage, Amaradasa, The Decline of Polonnaruva and the Rise of 
Dambadeniya (circa 1180-1270 4.D.), Colombo, 1968, 
Luce, G, H., “Monks of the Pagan Dynasty,” Journal of the Burma 
Research Society, Vol. XXXVI, 1953, Pt, 1, pp. 1-20. 
Majumdar, R. C., The History of Bengal, Dacca, 1943, 
Malalasekera, G. P., The Pali Literature of Ceylon, London, 1928, 
Masson, J., La religion populaire dans le canon bouddhique pati, Louvain, 
1942, 
: 
Minaev, I. P., Recherches sur le bouddhisme, Annales du Musée Guimet, 
Boliotheque d'litudes, Tome IV, Paris, 1892, 
. 
Mitra, Rajendralal, Buddha Gaya, the Hermitage of Sakyamuni, Calcutta, 
1878. 
: 
Mode, Heinz, Die Buddhistische Plastik auf Ceylon, Leipzig, 1963. 
: 
Mudiyanse, Nandasena, Mahayana Monuments in Ceylon, Colombo, 
1967. 
: 
Murti, C. V., The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, London, 1960, 
Nicholas, C. W., Historical Topagraphy of Ancient and Mediaeval Ceylon, 
JRASBNS, Special Number, Vol. VI, 1959, 
, “Additions and Amendments to the Historical Topography 
of Ancient and Mediaeval Ceylon,’? JRASCBNS, Vol, Vi, 1960, 
pp. 225-30, 
Nilakanta Sastri, K, A., The Célas, Madras, 1955, 
» The Pindyan Kingdom, London, 1925, 
» “Sri Vijaya”, BEFEO, Vol. XL, 1940, pp. 239-310. 
Oboyesekera, G., “Tho Great Tradition and the Litile Tradition in the 
Perspective of Sinhalese Buddhism,”’ Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. 
XXH, No. 2, 1963, pp, 139-53, 
Pasi 
¢ 
eck 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
359 
Pachow, W., “Ancient Cultural Relations between Ceylon and China,” 
UCR, Vol. XII, 1954, pp. 182-91, 
Pandita, V., “Buddhism during the Polonnaruva Period,” CHJ, Vol. 
IV, 1954-5, pp. 113-29, - 
Paiifiasdra, D., Sanskrit Literature Exiant among the Sinhalese, Colombo, 
1958, 
Paranavitana, S., ““Mahayanism in Ceylon,” CJSG, Vol. II, 1928, pp. 
35-71, 
, ““Pre-Buddhist Religious Beliefs in Ceylon,” JRASCB, Vol. 
XXXI, No. 82, 1929, pp. 302-28, 
. 
» “Buddhist Festivals in Ceylon,” Buddhist Studies, ed. B. C. 
Law, 1931, pp. 528-46, 
‘ 
» “Religious Intercourse between Burma and Siam in the 13th— 
15th Centuries,” JRASCB, Vol. XXXII, No. 85, 1932, pp. 190-213. 
» “‘Negapatam 
and Theravada Buddhism 
in South India,” 
Journal of the Greater India Society, Vol. XI, 1944, pp. 17-25, 
~~~-———, *“Sigiri—the Abode of the God-king,"” JRASCBNS, Vol. I, 
1950, pp. 129-83. 
. 
» “The Art and Architecture of the Polonnaruva Period," 
CHY, Vol. IV, 1954-5, pp. 69-90, 
: 
‘ 
» “Ceylon and Malaysia in Mediaeval Times,’ JRASCBNS, 
Vol. VII, 1960, pp. 1-42, 
: 
, The God of Adam's Peak, Ascona, 1958. 
» Ceylon and Malaysia, Colombo, 1966, 
Parker, H., Ancient Ceylon, London, 1909, 
Perera, L. &., “Proprietary and Tenurial Rights in Ancient Ceyfon,"' 
CJHSS, Vol. UH, 1959, pp. 1-36, 
Pieris, P.E., “Nagadipa and Buddhist Remains in Jaffna,” JRASCB, Vol. 
XXVI, No. 70, 1917, pp. 11-47;.Vol. XXVIU, No. 72, 1919, pp. 40-67. 
Polanyi, Karl et al (ed.), Trade and Market in the Early Empires: Eco- 
nomics in History and Theory, lllinois, 1957, 
Poussin, Louis de la Vallée, Etudes et textes tantriques, 
Université de 
Gand, Recueil de travaux publis par la Faculté de Philosophie et 
Lettres, Fasc, 
16, 1896, 
» Bouddhisme; études et materiaux, London, 1898, 
Quaritch Wales, H, G., “Anuruddha and the Thaton Tradition,” JRAS, 
1947, pp. 152-6, 
; 
Rahula, Walpola, History of Buddhism in Ceylon Grd Century B.C— 
10th Century A.D.), Colombo, 1956. 
, 
Ramachandran, T, N,, The Nagapattinam and other Buddhist Bronzes 
in the Madras Museum, Bulletin of the Madras Museum, New Series, 
1954,

--- PAGE 191 [DIRECT] ---

360 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Ray,N. R., An Iniroductionto the Study of Theravada Buddhism in 
Burma, Calcutta, 1946. 
; 
’ 
Satkrtyayana, Rahul, “Second Search of Sanskrit Palm-Leaf MSS. 
in 
Tibet,” Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, Vol, XXII, 
1937, pp. 1-57. 
Seneviratne, John M., ‘Some Notes on the Chinese 
References 
to 
Ceylon,’’ JRASCB, Vol. XXIV, No. 68, 1915, pp. 106-18. 
Srinivasan, P. R., The Story of Buddhism with Special References to 
South India, Madras, 1960, 
Stein 
B., “The Economic Function of a Mediaeval South Indian 
Temple," Journal of Asian Studies, Vol. X, 1959-60, pp, 163-77, 
Twitchett, D. C., “Monastic Estates in T’ang China,’ Asia Major, 
Vol. .V, 1956, pp. 123-45, 
; 
; 
; 
».““Monasteries 
in China’s Economy in Mediaeval 
Times, 
Bulletin of. the School of Oriental and African Studies, Vol, XIX, 1957, 
pp. -526-49, 
; 
University of Ceylon History of Ceylon, ed. H, C, Ray and 8, Paranavitana, 
Vol, I, Pts. 1 and 2, Colombo, 1959-60. 
Weber, Max, The Religions of India, London, 1958, 
; 
———, From Max Weber, ed, H. W. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, Lon- 
«don, 1961. 
- 
; 
———,, Economy and Soc:ety, New York, 1968. 
, 
- 
Warnakulasuriya, W. A., “‘Inscriptional Evidence bearing on the Nature 
“of Religious Endowments in Ancient Ceylon,” UCR, Vol. I, 1943, 
pp. 69-74; Vol. II, 1944, pp. 74-82, 92-6. 
: 
- 
Wickremasinghe, M., ‘“Tantrism in Ceylon and the Tissa Veva Lithic 
Diagram,” CHJ, Vol. I, No. 4, 1952, pp. 287-92. 
.Wickremasinghe, Sirima, “‘Ceylon's Relations with South East Asia 
with Special Reference to Burma,’ CJHS'S, Vol. III, 1960, pp. 38-58, 
Wijesckara, O.H. de A., “Pali and Sanskrit.in the Polonnaruva Period,” 
CHJ, Vol. IV, 1954-5, pp. 91-7. 
Wittfogel, Karl A., Oriental Despotism, Yale, 1957. 
“Wright, A. F., ‘The Economic Role of Buddhism in China,’ Journal 
of Asian Studies, Vol. XVI, 1957, pp. 408-14. 
B.. 
Unpublished Monographs. 
Perera, L, S., Institutions of Ceylon from Inscriptions, Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Ceylon, 1949, 
Prematilleke, 
P. L., Religious Architecture and Sculpture of Ceylon, 
Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, 1964. 
Than Tun, Maung, The Buddhist Church in Burma during the Pagan 
Period, Ph.D. Thesis, University of London, 1955, 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
36k 
Wickremasinghe, Sirima, The Age of Parakramabihu I, Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of London, 1958. 
< 
Wijetunga, W. M. K., The Rise and Decline of Cola Power in Ceylon, 
Ph.D, Thesis, University of London, 1962, 
, 
C. 
Reference Works. 
- 
Bibliographie bouddhique, Paris, 1928—(in progress). 
‘Clough, Benjamin, 4 Sinhalese-English Dictionary, Colombo, 1892, 
Edgerton, Franklin, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary 
2 vols., London, 1953, 
, 
Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed, G. P. Malalasekera, Colombo, 1961— 
(in progress). 
, 
Geiger, W., A Grammar of the Sinhalese Language, Colombo, 1938, 
‘Goonetileke, H. A. 1, A Bibliography of Ceylon, Bibliotheca Asi- 
atica 5, Zug, Switzerland, Vols. I and Uy, 1970; Vol. LU, 1976, 
Malalasekera, G. P., Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, 2 vols., London, 
1937, 
‘ 
Rhys Davids, T. W. and Stede, William, The Pali Text Society's Pali- 
English Dictionary, London, 1959, 
; 
Sorata Vilivitiye, Sri Sumangala Sabdakosaya, 2 vols., Colombo, 1952, 
1956, 
‘Tamil Lexicon, University of Madras, Madras, 1926-39, 
‘Williams, Monier, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Oxford, 1892,

--- PAGE 192 [DIRECT] ---

Chronological Chart 
BC. 
AD, 
250 — 210 
161 — 137 
19 — 109 
89 77 
143 — 167 
209 — 231 
249 — 262 
214 — 301 
406 ~~ 428 
455 — 473 
473 — 491 
491° — 508 
508 — 516 
518 — 531 
571 — 604 
DEVANAMPIYA TISSA 
Mahinda, the Buddhist missionary, arrives in Sri Lanka. 
and converts Devinampiya Tissa. 
DUTTHAGAMANT 
Unification of the island. 
Some of the most important - 
religious buildings of the Mabavihara are built during this. 
reign. 
LANSA TISSA 
: 
Earliest recorded instances of irrigation reservoirs and tracts: 
of arable land being granted to the sangha. 
VATTAGAMANT 
Foundation of the Abhayagiri monastery and the first schism: 
in Sinhalese Buddhism, 
BHATIKA TISSA 
Dispute between the Mahavihara and the Abhayagirivibara. 
is referred by the king to a minister who gives the verdict 
in favor of the Mahavihara, 
VOHARIKA TISSA 
King suppresses Vaitulyavada. 
GOTHABHAYA 
Schism in the Abhayagiri nikaya leads to the formation of 
the Sagalika nikdya. 
King suppresses Vaitulyavada. 
MAHASENA 
Dispute between the Mahavihara and the Abhayagirivihara.. 
King builds the Jetavana monastery for the Sagalikas, 
MAHANAMA 
. Visit of Buddhaghosa and translation: of the Sinhalese com- 
mentaries on the Canon into Pali. 
DHATUSENA 
KASSAPA I 
MOGGALLANA I 
KUMARA-DHATUSENA 
SILAKALA 
Dharmadhétu brought from India, 
Begioning of the annual. 
festival during which it is taken to the Jetavana monastery. 
AGGABODHI I 
An Indian monk defeats the followers of Vaitulyavada in 
debate. 
t 3624 
614 — 619 
619 — 628 
659 —~ 667 
684 — 118 
718 — 724 
733 — 722 
797 —~ 801 
833 —~ 853 
853 — 887 
887 — 998 
898 —- 914 
914 — 923 
923 — 924 
924 — 935 
935 — 938 
938 — 946 
946 — 954 
954 — 956 
956 — 972 
972 — 982 
982 
992/3 
1017 
1035 
1070 — 1110 
1110 — 111 
1141 — 1132 
1132 — 1153 
1153 — 1186 
1186 — 1187 
1187 — 1196 
1196 
CHRONOLOGICAL CHART 
363 
MOGGALLANA III 
SILAMEGHAVANNA 
Attempt to reconcile the three nikdyas. 
DATHOPATISSA H 
Two monks from the Abhayagiri and Jetavana monasteries 
jointly prepare a common edition of the Vinaya Pitaka. 
Foundation of the Kapara college. 
MANAVAMMA 
Foundation of the Vahadipa college. 
AGGABODHI V 
Foundation of the Mahanetpa college. 
AGGABODHI VI 
UDAYA I 
SENA I 
Representatives of the “four great nikdyas” are housed in 
the Virankurarama hermitage at the Abhayagiri monastery. 
SENA II 
‘ 
UDAYA II 
KASSAPA IV 
KASSAPA V 
DAPPULA III 
DAPPULA IV 
UDAYA Il 
King faces revolt in opposition to his violation of the im— 
munity rights of monasteries. 
SENA IIT 
UDAYA IV 
SENA IV 
Monks of the three nikdyas assemble 
together 
at the 
Lohapasada. 
MAHINDA IV 
SENA V 
Accession of MAHINDA V, 
: 
Invasion of Rajarija Cola and the conquest of Rajarattha.. 
Invasion of Rajendra Cdla and the capture of Mahinda V. 
VIJAYABAHU I becomes king in Rohana. 
VIJAYABAHU I conquers Rajarattha and rules over the 
unified kingdom of Sri Lanka. 
Grants monastery to monks 
of the three nikdyas. 
JAYABAHU I 
VIKRAMABAHU f 
Confiscation of monastic wealth. 
The island remains divi- 
ded into a number oF rival principalities during this and the 
next reign. 
GAJABAHU II 
PARAKRAMABAAHU I 
Reunification of the island. 
Refortns of the savigha which 
bring about the unification of the Order under a common 
leadership. 
VUAYABAHU IL 
NISSANKA MALLA 
VIKRAMABAHU II

--- PAGE 193 [DIRECT] ---

i 
364 
1196 — 1197 
1197 — 1200 
1200 — 1202 
1202 — 1208 
1208 — 1209 
1209 
1209 — 1210 
1210 — 1211 
1211 — 1212 
8212 — 1215 
4215 
CHRONOLOGICAL 
GHART 
COPAGANGA 
LILAVATI (ist reign) 
SAHASSAMALLA 
KALYANAVATE 
DHARMASOKA. 
ANIKANGA 
LILAVATI (2nd reign) 
© 
LOKESVARA 
. 
LILAVATI (3rd_ reign) 
PARAKRAMA PANDU 
Invasion of MAGHA 
Index 
abbots, appointment of 300, 302, 312, 
328 
Abhayagiri 7, 9-11, 13, 16, 55,-60, 64, 
67, 69-70, 85, 102-3, 107-9, 113, 117-9, 
127, 129-34, 
136, 
168, 
172, 181-2, 
196, 201, 217, 222, 239, 261, 285-90, 
295-6, 299, 302, 308, 312, 318-22, 
327-30, 332, 335, 342; affiliated 
in- 
stitutions of 17, 19-21, 55, 70, 106, 
427, 284-99; archaeological remains of 
18-9; origin and growth of 14-9; of 
Java 17, 280; patronage received by 
17-8, 54-5, 70-1; relations with Jeta-— 
vana 33-5; relations with Mahavihara 
326-7; role in Sinhalese society 347-8; 
views of 21-32, 141, 231, 252-4, 321 
Abhidhamma “205, 
324; 
festivals 
in. 
honor of 141 ; specialists in 141 
Abhidhammatthasangaha 
154-8;-tika 21, 
29 
: 
Abhidhammatthavibhdvini 
159-60, 298 
Abhidhammatthavikdsini. 
22, 
30, 
158, 
160, 254, 321 
Abhidhammavatéra 21-2, 158-9 
Abhidhanappadipika 
162, 
304, “317-8; 
-tikd 120 
accounting: see bookkeeping 
Adikaram, E. W., 1, 338 
admand:. grain measure 110, 113-7, £19, 
238 
; 
Aggabodhi: I 10, 34, 54, 173, 217, 233; 
TI 36, 60, 98; IV 62, 97, 121, 173, 281, 
290; V 297; VI 297; VIL178; VIII 
165, 178, 204; IX 153 
Agni 221-2 
ahimsd: concept of 165-6 
aka: currency 71-2, 105, 109, 414, 130, 
132 
Alahéra: sée Atisira 
. Alavaka Sutta 213 
Afiséra: Buddha image 232; canal 54; 
district 122, 323 
- 
Alms Bow! relic 91-2, 172, 210, 228, 
287-8 
Ambattha Sutta 140, 196 
Amitodana, Sakya 173 
amuna: measure of grain and land 69, 
71, 93, 105 
Ananda: 
author 
of Malaika 
154; 
author 
of Saddhammopéyana 
22; 
author 
of 
Visuddhimaggatika 
264; 
Buddha’s disciple 227 
Andhakatthakatha 264 
Andhakavinda Sutta 140 
Anantaéri: Sri Lankan monk in Tibet 
260 
Avguttaratika 321 
Annapasana rite 220 
antaranga 186 
Anumana Sutta 140 
Anuruddha: 
Buddhist 
scholar 
155-6, 
264; King of Ramafifia 271-2, 274. 
Anuruddhasgataka 290 
Apannaka Jataka 120 
apilisarana 65, 
127;-satigun. 128, 296; 
-vat-himiyan 129 
: 
arakming M19 
Aramana: see Burma 
dramika 
97-9, 119-20; -gama 59, 62, 
97-8; duties of 98-9 
Arafifiika sect 40, 45-7, 93, 316, 333; role 
in the unification of the sargha 315-6, 
£365]

--- PAGE 194 [DIRECT] ---

366 
332, 334, 
349-50; 
scholars 
among 
‘156-61 
: 
Arimaddanapura 277 
Aritthapabbata monastery 41, 43, 277 
Ariyavamsa; preaching of 46 
Arogyaséla, Lokanatha 259 
Arthaséstra 196 
artists 238 
Arya-praftdpiramité-saicaya-gatha 
254 
Asoka 178, 315 
astrology 124, 157 
Apanatiya Sutta 214 
Ataragallava 232 
Atisa: Indian monk 244 
atsam(u) 101, 104-5, 111-2, 114 
Atthadassi: author of Bhesajjamaiijiisa 
310 
Atthasdlint 21, 50 
AvalokiteSvara 223, 259, 261 
avas laduvan 128, 132, 296 
: Avatamsaka Sutra 236. 
Avukana 232 
dyatana (ayatin): see fraternities 
Ayrton, E. R, 43-4 
g 
Baden-Powell, B. H. 55, 339 
badu 64 
Bagchi, P. ©, 17, 23 
a 
bahirahga 186 
Balayabodhana 164 
balat réhin: whip-cracking 189 
balibhatta (bilibat) 188 
batbadeya 
(baribadesa): 
see brahma- 
deya 
banishment of monks 191 
Bapat, P. V. 23 
barbers 146-7 
Bareau, André 2, 7-8, 21, 253 
Batuwantudawa, H. A. de 8. 47 
bat vasag: see vasag 
Bechert, H. 248 - 
beef, eating of 166 
Beidelman, T. O. 342 
Beli, H. C. P. 9-11, 66, 278-9, 292 
Bhaskara Ravivarman, 167, 199 
Bhatika Tissa 25, 306 
Bhesajjamatijisa 310 
Bhillivina (Bilivana) monastery 12-3 
bhoga 60-1, 99;-gama 55, 59-60 
bhuttagama 63 
INDEX 
Bhuvanekabahu: [V 332; V 303; VE 
299, 310; VII 299 
bilisdl 188 
Bimbisira 97, 190 
blacksmiths 118 
. 
Blue Annals 254, 257-60 
Bodhicaryavatéra 239 
Bodhisattva: cult 67, 172-3, 175-6, 210, 
217, 221-4, 232, 259, 261 
Boisellier, J, 278~ 
bookkeeping at monasteries 
101, 104, 
111, 125-30, 136, 182, 328, 343 
Bo Tree 55, 64, 119, 127, 132, 217, 
230-1 
Brahma 221-2 
brahmadeya tenure 196-9, 343 
Bréhmana: caste 168, 219-20; monastic 
employees 221; monks 
168-9; 
tea- 
chers 165; villages 220 
Brahmanic: gods 221-2; rituals 219-22 
Brazen Palace: see Lohapasada 
brickmakers 118, 258, 
“‘Brog-mi 258 
buddhabhimi 248-9 
Buddhadasa. 55,97, 173 
Buddhadatta: ancient scholar 332 
Buddhadatta, A. P. 47, 125, 155, 308-9, 
37 
; 
Buddhagayé, 8, 244, 246-7, 261 
Buddhaghosa 8, 21, 23, 26, 43, 46, 50, 
57-8, 77, 80, 82-3, 125, 154, 171, 332; 
on asceticism 40-1; on monastic pro- 
perty 57-9, 66, 82-3, 
Buddhamitta 158, 160 
Buddhaniga 158, 163-4 
Buddhannehila monastery, 73, 76, 83, 
202 
Buddhappiya 161, 265, 327 
Buddhaérijiiana 256 
Buddhavamsa Vanaratana 
332 
Buddhist-Saiva rivalry 225 
Budugundlankdra 298 
Buduruvegala 223, 232 
Burma 39, 268, 271-7; missions to 207, 
274, 277; monks from 163, 258, 265, 
271, 273, 275-6, 279, 310 
Bu-ston: Tibetan chronicler 161, 246 
Butsarana 175, 186, 213, 232 
INDEX 
: 
367 
Cakkavatti: concept 170 
Camddevivamsa 273 
Cambodia 277-9 
Candabhanu 267-8 
candélas 120 
Candragomi (Candra) 157, 161 
Candravyékarana 161 
Caviki Sutta 196 
carpenters 117, 124 
caste 119, 120, 165-6, 168-9, 172, 219-21, 
240-1 
cattle owned by monastéries 77, 96, 184 
Caturveda Brahmapura 220 
: 
Cotiyagiri (Cetiyapabbata) 7, 13, 19, 31, 
64, 69-73, 78, 83, 106, 113-4, 118, 
123-4, 
130-2, 
134, 
136, 
141, 
164, 
180-2, 216-7, 233-4, 237, 239, 295-6, 
319-20, 328; association with Abhaya- 
giri 19, 129-30; hospital at 19; patron- 
age received by 19-20 
Chapata 
(Chappata): 
Burmese monk 
258, 265, 275-6, 279 
Chau-ju-kua 269 
China 16-7, 37, 91, 243, 280 
chipnapatadhatuka 228 
clans 169, 308 
Codrington, H, W. 68, 70, 184, 305 
Coedds, G. 267, 269, 276, 279 
Cojadhinathapura, identification of 265 
Cola nionks: in Sri Lanka 158, 160, 
168, 326-7; rivalries with Sri Lankan 
monks 266; Sri Lankan influences on 
265-6. 
_ Cola occupation 119, 136, 177, 201 
, committee 
of 
management 
(Kamtin) 
101-6, 126-9, 187 
consecration: 
of images 235-6; royal 
176; Tantric rite 31-2 
cooks 124 
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 218 
corvee 76, 116-7, 122, 138, 167, 184-5, 
188, 200, 341 
cowherds 77 
3 
craftsmen 117-8, 124, 339-43 
Cilavamsa 55-6, 60-3, 66, 71, 80, 84, 
86-7, 90-1, 93-4, 275-6, 282-4, 286-7, 
290, 294-5, 297, 300, 305, 306, 309, 
319-20, 322, 324, 329-30, 334-5 
Culla Dhammapila 155 
Culla-ganthipada 326 
Ditdigama 303 
Dakkhinadesa 86-7, 89, 219 
Dakkhinagiri monastery 12, i4 
Dakkhinamfila 309 
Dakkhinaraima 33, 36, 309 
Daladapijavaliya 49 
Daladésirita 
115, 
123, 229, 235, 237, 
241, 268, 283, 286, 289, 330 
Damhbadeni Katikavata 215, 239, 311, 
332-3, 337 
Dambulla 70, 234 
i 
Damila: Buddhists 202-3; country 327; 
monks 47-8, 262-71; see also Deme]. 
Damilathipa 229 
Dappula: I. 54, 297; 1V 10, 55, 78, 
134, 174, 190, 293 
Dasadhamma Sutta 139-4] 
dasakiird tenure 122-3 
Dathandga 141, 154 
Dathévamsa 157, 159, 16t, 268 
Dathopatissa: I 91; 11 20, 34, 55, 67, 290 
de Casparis, J. G. 280°” 
demel:—-kibali 108; kuli 185; -vehera 48 
Demalamahasdya 330 
deruvana dekamtin 106, 187 
Devanagara 
(Devnuvara) 
monastery 
87, 305 
: 
devapalli 222, 301-2 
dhammadhdtu (dharmadhatu) 34, 230-1, 
240, 281 
as 
Dhammakitti: envoy 
160; lay scholar 
158-9; monk 154, 157 
Dhammamitta 141 
Dhammapadatthakathad 205, 324 
Dhammapila 155, 263, 332 
Dhammaruci 
(Dharmaruci) 
14, 
16-7, 
19-20, 49, 297, 313, 318-9 
Dhammasangani 
(Dhamsaiigum) 
50, 
201, 230, 240 
Dhammasenépati: Burmese monk 268 
Dhammisoka monastery 263 
Dhamma Sutta 141 
Dhampiyé Atuwa Gdtapadaya 
75, 123, 
127-8, 205, 218, 283, 293, 324, 326 
Dhényakataka 235 
dhdrant: incantations 227, 255 
Dharmakirtti mahdsvaimi 303, 333 
Dhétuvamsa 227, 304 
Dighanikdyatthakatha — 
Linatthavannana 
20, 25, 27, 195

--- PAGE 195 [DIRECT] ---

368 
; 
INDEX 
Dimhbulagala 45-6, 93, 142, 159, 163, 
179, 316, 332, 334-5, 350 
Dipévali 129 
Dipankara of Mahanettapisada 298 
Dipankaraérijfidna: 
Indian monk 254, 
256 
diyel tenure 68, 74, 122-3 
Divydvadana 97 
Dupont, Pierre 268, 273, 279 
Dutthagémant 189, 220 
dyers 98 
Edgerton, Franklin 97, 255, 268 
education, monastic 161-6, 204-5 
lara 189 
Eliot, C. £, 255, 319 
emoluments: of craftsmen 119; of mon- 
astic functionaries 105, 110, 113, 124, 
450; of monks 141, 147-8, 152-3; of 
service employees 
152-3 
evil spirits 
214 
Fa-Hian’ 16, 19, 31, 113, 144-5, 172, 
221, 228-9, 237, 248 
: 
female employees 146 
Fernando, P. E. E. 260 
festivals 114, 225-34, 240 
feudal tendencies 4, 199, 343, 350 
florists 124, 236 
food, provision of 98, 144-6, 188 
- foreign invasions 4, 30, 119, 136, 177, 
200-4, 225 
fraternities, monastic 93, 129, 131, 135, 
210, 282-312, 328-30, 349 
Foucher, A. 259 
functionaries, 
monastic 
57-8, 
95-7, 
99-101, 110, 114, 120, 133, 182, 194; 
appointment 
of 100; emoluments 
of 
105, 110, 
113, 
124, 150; monks as 
126, 130-4, 142; qualifications of 142; 
royal appointees as 110, 180-1 
Gajabahu: 
1 57; 11 90, 93, 204, 206, 
322. 
Galaturumula: 
mahdsvami 
303, 
308; 
mahdthera 308; see also Selantaramila 
Galinduru Gomajidala 69, 96 
Galpata monastery 77, 94, 306 
gima, definition of 54, 59-60 
gana 
310-1 s-detutera 
139; 
-~fete 
116; 
-ndyaka 116; -santakagdma 84; -vaser 
333; -vdsikula 169 
ganaka 127 
Gandhavamsa 154-5 
Gatara college 308 
~ 
_ 
gavu; measure of distance 166, 234 
gedatd: penalty 194-5 
Geiger, Wilhelm 2, 12, 47-9, 55, 62-3,, 
87, 97, 106, 120, 172, 207, 228, 248, 
267, 2714, 283-4, 300, 330, 332 
gekuli; dues 113 
general assembly of monks 133 
Gernet, Jacques 134 
Gilimalaya 233 
Godakumbura, C. 202 
Golapaénugima 
69 
Gonniva 
69 
gorokun 127-8 
Gophabhaya 
31, 204 
Gould, H. 342 
Grags-pa 
rgyal-mtshan 
260 
.. 
granthadhura 
139 
oe 
Grhyasiitras 220 
Gritnwedel, A. 230 
guardian deities 221 
; 
Gunasekara, B 105, 110, 112, 114-6 
Hair relic 11, 179, 227-8 
haskaru 75 
Hatthavandgallavihdravamsa 
267 
helkult 185 
Hemamandira 220 
Heranasikha 139 
a 
Hindu temples: administration of 105-6, 
110 
Hitiginivifi 70 
Hing-tchoan 244 
Hiuen-tsang 172, 215, 235, 262 
Hocart, A, M, 43-4, 344 
hospitals, monastic 19, 75, 147 
hydraulic civilization 
4, 338. 
see also: 
irrigation 
implements, 
agricultural 
125 
immunities, monastic 68, 96-7, 108-10, 
142-3, 
134, 
138-9, 
181-4, 
187-92, 
194-6, 208-9, 218 
incense 236 
income, annual distribution 
of 147-8 
India 76, 106, 110, 115, 158, 160, 163, 
patente 
bah 
gt 
ai 
INDEX 
369 
168, 
177, 
183, 
196, 199, 215, 218, 
222, 227, 243-59, 260-71, 326 
liidikatusiiya 
31, 231, 255 
Indra 222 
investment 
of monastic 
funds 
78-80, 
110 
irrigation: activities 54, 58; income from 
97; 
officials 
186; 
monastic 
rights 
53-4, 58, 73, 185; society 
4, 338, 
works 
owned 
by 
monasteries 
69, 
95-6, 99 
TIssarasamana 
(Isutamenu) 
monastery 
9, 11, 62, 73, 108, 208 
Itihdsa 163 
T-tsing 76, 85, 126, 133, 164, 252-3 
Jajmadut 
system 
342-3 
Jambudipa 
Uchavi 
342-3 
Jatnbhala 223, 259 
Jétaka Atuva Gdtapadaya 120, 128, 166 
Jatakarma rite 220 
Java 17, 280 
Jetavana 
6-7, 
32-7, 
54-5, 
69-70, 
93, 
96, 216, 222, 232, 293, 299, 318-9, 
321-3, 329, 332; affiliated institutions 
35-6; association with dhammadhdtu 
34; relations with Abhayagiri 
34-5; 
relations 
with 
Mahavihira 
33-4; 
royal patronage of 35-6; Vaitulyavada 
at 35 
Jetavanarama 
at 
Polonnaruva 
157, 
304, 329-30, 335 
Judicial 
administration, 
monastic 
in- 
volvement in 97, 109-10, 190-6 
keibalt (keibiliy 106-8 
kahipana 
(kahavayut): 
currency 
80-1, 
12t, 225 
kaland; currency 
and 
unit of weight 
7-2, 105, [t4, 
118, 130, 231, 236, 
249 
Kalani 67, 234, 306, 308 
Kalavaipi: 
reservoir 6t;-vihara 
12 
Kalyanavati 136, 238 
kamassam 
(lh, 116 
Kamboja 
(Kambuja): 
see 
Cambodia 
Kamatthanasangaha 
157 
kamidn: see cominittee of management 
Kan& reservoir 63 
Kafici 262-3 
Kanirajénutissa 
190 
Kannavedha rite 220 
Kantale 204, 220 
Kapiira: see Kapptira 
kappiyakéraka 
57-8, 95-7, 99-100, 
120 
Kappitira fraternity 17, 19, 70, 8f, 127, 
129, 
132, 
146, 
283, 
290-2, 
294.5, 
299, 329 
Kapugam monastery 
14 
kara 57, 74-5 
kira 74-5, 200 -pdkaruman 74 -widdru- 
man 74 
karavuvara 75 
karavathala 77 
Kartsa: seo kiri 
Karmavibhdga 
259 
Karunaratna, W. 8. 67 
Kassapa: 1 20, 61-2, 236; IT 1t, 285, 
287; IV LO, 17, 19, 20, 55, 62, 64, 
73, 98; 165, 178-80, 191, 205, 255, 
290; V 10,-17, 62, 66, 68, 137, 168, 
173-4, £78, 181, 183, 191, 205, 227, 
230, 286, 322, 324, 356 
Kassapa: Cola monk 158, 160, 168 
Kassapa of Dithbuliigala (Udumbaragiri) 
142, 156, 163, 179, 315-6, 318, 334-5, ° 
350 
Résyapaparivartta 231, 238 
katikaé 118 
. 
Kajumahasiiya 
118 
Kautilya 164 
Kaveripattana 263 
Kavlakiuininimeal 298 
Kdvyasekhara 289 
Kesadhatuvamsa 
227 
Kerala 227 
Kereligama 
191 
Kern, H..1, 31 
Khadira]i 
Uppalavayma, 
cult 
of 222 
Khema 
159 
Khmer: see Cambodia 
Khuddasikiche 
149, 151, 
156, 
181 ike 
140, 158 
Kinigam 
{4 
kinship among monks 167-8 
z 
kiri: land measure $4, 64, 69, 71, 83, 
102-3, 
105, 
110, 
113-4, 
117-9, 
124, 
238 
Kirivehera 
229 
Kolambahilakaparivena 
35

--- PAGE 196 [DIRECT] ---

310 
INDEX 
Kolayunu 
70 
Kofipassivana monastery: 
of Abhaya- 
giti 20; of Mahavihara 12.3 
Kudakadavuka 
69 
kudhanya 117 
kudin 184 
, 
kulasamsaggadosa 24 
Kulagekhara 
Pandya 
180 
kidassam (kulatsam) 
111 
foul: 1855-meldtsi 186 
Kulu Tisarad monastery 13 
Kumaradhatusena 178 
: 
Kuiicanaiga 91 
Kurunda monastery 51, 54, 87 
" 
Kurundiya monastery 87 
kuruni: grain measure 71. 
kusalén 66-7 
kusala &rdvana 67 
Kiitatissa monastery 56, 63 
ldbha ©O;-géma 59-64;-laduvan 60, 81, 
128, 296;-vasin 80-1 
labor 
force 
at monasteries 
78, 
117, 
121-3 
léha: grain measure 64 
Limani: see Lambakanna 
Lamani Dalupatis: see Dathopatissa IL 
Lambakannas 169, 227 
land grants, withdrawal of 66 
land tenure 68, 74-5, 108, 122-3, 196- 
200, 343 
Lankatilaka: at Padaviya 202; at Polon. 
© 
nafuva 232 
lapidaries 118 
Latémandapaya 318 
Jay preachers 164, 237 
Jay teachers at monasteries 164 
le daru 110 
leyd 101, 104, 116. 
liquor, consumption of 326 
Lilavati 159, 209 
lime-burners 118 
Linatthavarmané: 
see Dighanikeyattha- 
katha Linatthavannana 
local deities 221-2 
Lohapasida 8-9, 61, 201, 205, 322 
Lohicea Sutta 196 
Loholuvila 70 
Lokeévara 84 
Luce, G, H, 268 
ma: {and measure [81 
maddabiya 102 
Miadirigiri 
(Mandalagiri, 
Masdiligiri) 
56, 63, 87, 197, 201, 206, 234, 306 
Magha 4, 30, 202, 225 
magical practices 214, 225-9 
Mahabharata 165, 215, 218, 268, 346 
Mahabodhivamsa 224, 227, 321 
Mahidhammarakkhita 50 
Mahigama 201, 234, 306 
Mahagipiyova 70, 192 
Maha Kapira: see Kappira 
Mah& Kassapa: 
see Kassapa 
Mahaniiga: 54 
Mahanima: king 12, 20; monk, 344 
Mahanettapasida fraternity 293, 296-9, 
329 
matdovvak 147 
Mahapali alms hall 201, 322-3 
mahapurisa 170 
Mahar&hulovada 
Sutta 140 
Mahdrapasiddhi 
161;-sannaya 
120 
Mahisamaya Sutta 221 
makdsami 
(mahdsvami, 
mahimi) 
159, 
303, 332-4, 336 
Mahasanghikas 31, 247-9, 252-4, 256, 
32l 
é 
mahésattva 173 
Mahisena 9, 25, 33, 67, 87, 171, 204 
Mahatantra 89 
mahdthera 
(makdsthavira, — 
mahatera, 
materay 
83-4, 
89, 
139, 
283, 
332-3 
Mahathiipa 8, 67, 93, 119, 201, 212-3, 
227, 229, 235, 237 
Mahitissa 24 
Mahfvairocana Sutta 32 
Mahdvamsa 9, 13, 33, 35, 37, 49, 57, 
171, 173-4,°183, 189, 204, 212, 215, 
220, 224, 226, 233, 271, 308-9 
makavar 185 
Mahavibira 
8-14, 
19, 24, 55, 64-5, 
69-70, 93, 171, 191, 196, 224, 231, 246 
310, 315, 318-22, 324, 334-5; affiliated 
institutions 
8-9, 
12-4, 
37-8, 69-70, 
87, 96, 191-2; archaeological remains 
9-11; 
attitude 
to 
Mahayanism 
32, 
224, 254; attitude 
to Tantrism 
32, 
326; origin and growth 8-15; relat 
ions with Abhayagiri 
30, 326-7; re- 
lations with Jelavana 33-4; relations 
pee 
tas 
ns 
INDEX 
with Mahanettapasada fraternity 293; 
teachings of 8, 29, 
125, 
163, 
258, 
326-7 
: 
Mahavotiya 166 
Mahayanism 31-2, 222, -224, 254, 257, 
261. 
See also Vaitulyavada 
Mahdyazawinkyt 272, 274 
Mahimsisakas 248 
Mahinda; II 219, 221; IV 10-1, 18, 35, 
61-3, 73, 78-80, 140, 142, 154, 172, 
174, 179, 208, 323; adipada 205. 
Mahinda thera 213, 233 
Mahiyatgana 56, 63, 79, 87, 201, 213, 
224-5, 258, 303 
Majjhima-ganthipada 326 
Makkodaipalli 203 
Malabar 263 
Malalasekera, G, P, 1, 22, 154, 156 
Malaya (Malayarattha) 56, 85 
Malayu 280 
Miligavela 232 
Mana 106, 120, 284-6 
Manabharana 93, 172, 206 
Minavamma 285-6, 296 
Mangala 310) 
. 
Mangala Sutta 140, 157, 214 
matigiv pegiv (maigiva, pegiva, pivagiva, 
piyadiv) 185-6 
mangul jet 105, 114 
Maniar Math 218 
Manikkavacakat 225 
Maniniga 217-8 
Manipadma 217 
Mafijusii 223 
Manorathapivant: (57 
Mintai 166 
Marlccavatti 9-11, 48, 55, 57, 62, 70, 
201, 205, 228, 231, 235, 309, 324 
masuran: currency 240 
Matsya Purina 269 
Mayarattha 233, 309 
Medhajanana rite 220 
Medhankara 46, 159, 332 
meditation 140 
melats? (meldeci) 185-7 
merit, transfer of 214 
Metta Sutta 214 
Mib&ligama 193, 196 
Mi Baume 278 
Mihintale: see Cetiyagiri 
3aL 
Mininal 217 
Mitta 210 
Moggallina: 
I 20, 36, 178, 180; 
III 
54, 60, 178, 191 
Moggallana: 
author 
of 
Abhidhdnap- 
padipiké 304; grammarian 159, (61-2, 
317; lexicographer 306; of Naginda- 
palli 218, 316, 318; of Sarogama 162, 
307; of Uttaromila 32, 89-91, 160, 
205, 210, 288, 317, 
, 
Moggaliputta Tissa 315 
Mohaviechedant 160-1, 168, 265, 315 
Monastery: autonomy of 356; cultural 
functions 
of 163-6, 
236-40, 
346; 
economic functions of 56, 78-80, 110, 
180, 
338-44; 
organization 
of 56-7, 
96-7, 
100, 107, 113, 131-2, 143.5, 
182, 
328, 336-7; social functions of 
166-9, 344-6, 350 
monastic buildings: 
maintenance 
110, 
117-9, 144-5 
monastic discipline 24, 32, 142-4, 182-3, 
191, 315, 326 
monastic 
property: 
accumulation 
of 
53-7, 69-72, 79, 96, 130; alienation of 
57-8, 
68; misappropriation 
of 58, 
183, 345; nature of 57-67, 80-6, 129, 
181; spoliation of 66-7, 86, 90-1, 110, 
210, 283, 328 
monks: daily routine 143-4; laicization 
137, 139, 179, 319; recruitment 137-8, 
179 
Moragoda, 70, 96 
Mucela monastery 54 
Mudiyanse, N, 2 
Mugalan: see Moggalléna 
Muhundnarw; in the Eastern region 96 
Muhannarm; in Dakkhinadesa 70 
mula (milla); see fraternity 
Milasarvastivada 
115, 253 
Mitlasikicha. b4\ 
Miilasoma monastery 156 
Milasovehera 
113 
Mitlatika 21, 29, 154 
Miulavisa monastery 271 
nrilavihdra 283-4, 288, 301, 328 
Miller, Eduard 70, 103, 105, 110, 12, 
141-6 
musical instruments 189 
musi¢ in ritual 237-9

--- PAGE 197 [DIRECT] ---

372 
INDEX 
ndga cult 215-9 
Nagai, M, 22-3 
Néganaéna monastery 160 
Nagapattana 262-3, 265 
Nagara-Kértigama 263, 269 
Nagarjuna 325 
Na&gindapalli 219, 306, 316, 318 
Nagirigala 83 
Naisrita 222 
naka balona himiyan 101, 104, 130, 133 
Nalanda 133, 243, 325 
nili (afi): grain measure 71, 104, 114, 
180 
Namakarana rite 220 
Némaripapariccheda 
141, 
156, 
159 
Nanapala 316, 318 
Nanda of Selantara fraternity 301, 316, 
320 
Navagrahaéanti 220 
Negapatam: see Na&gapattana 
Nell, A, 223 
Nepal 3, 5, 258-9 
Nettipakarana 263 
Nevill, Hugh 223, 261 
Nicholas, C. W,, 12, 47, 297, 301, 306 
nikdya ‘7, 48-50, 85, 101, 127, 131, 135-6, 
178, 194, 196, 205-6, 224, 251-3, 287, 
296, 311-2, 327-9, 334-5, 338; dis- 
memberment of 311-2, 329; interpre- 
tation of 7-8, 251-2, 348-9; monaster- 
ies ,independent of 51; relations with 
mila .295-6,311-2 
Nikdya-sangrahaya 
14,° 33-4, 46, .49, 
55, 62, 72, 80-1, 86, 89, 159-60, 230, 
248-9, 254-6, 271-2, 282, 303, 307, 
310, 313-4, 318, 320, 325, 332-3, 335 
nima 123 
nirvénapada 174 
Nissatka ‘Alagakkonéra 308 
Nissahka Matla 78, 94,.119, 139, 163, 
165, 168, 177, 179, 191, 220, 222, 224, 
229, 234, 237, 258, 277, 279, 306, 
335, 346, 
nissaya 128, 139, 142;-samucchanaka 128, 
140 
nivapa 99, 123 
niyi 123 
niyam (niyama, niyama) 103; Jet 101-3, 
105-6 
novices 139-42 
nunneries 34, 37-9, 69, 191 
nuns, order of 37-9; advisers to 140; 
disappearance of 39; origin 37 
Odantapuri monastery 244 
officials, monastic: see functionaries 
officials, royal 109, 112-3, 181-99; see 
also immunities 
. 
Okavas (Okkéka) 174 
olkdmi 115 
ordination ceremony 138,-140 
‘pa& (pide): land measure 
69-71, 80-1, 
102, 110, 114, 115, 117-9, 124, 183 
Padasadhana 46, 162, 289 
Padaviya: 
land 
at 70; reservoir 
96; 
ruins 202 
Padmasambhava; 
Indian 
scholar 
244 
Paintings, 
Buddhist 
238-9 
Pajjamadhit 162 
pdéla: grain and tand measure 105 
palatiga: interpretation 175 
Palembang 325 
Palimuttaka-vinayavinicchaya-sangaha 
157 
Pamsukilikas 40-5, 51, 92, 168, 208 
Pamune tenure 64-6, 68, 83-4, 200 
paftcakammalar 120 
Paitcakarma 325 
_ 
paitcakaulika 119 
patcamahdparédha 193 
Paficaparivenamtila 206, 309-10 
paticapessavagga 120 
Pakiciké 157 
Paicikilankara 163 
Pandita, V. 1 
Paiduvasnuvara 70, 203 
Pandya invasion 200-1 
patjikd 104, 125;-sthavira 126 
Panini 157 
F 
Pao-chi: see Ratnakita 
Paréktamabahu: 
I 22, 30-1, 
35, 37, 
49, 79, 90, 93-4, 120, 136, 138, 145, 
157, 161, 
163-4, 
172, 179, 186-7, 
201-2, 204, 207, 219-21, 226-9, 234, 
265-6, 282, 288-9, 301, 304-5, 309-10, 
312-7, 
319, 
321-3, 
329-30, 
334-6, 
346-50; II 61, 120, 229, 266-7, 282, 
289, 298, 304, 307, 332; V 293, 303; 
VI 298 
INDEX 
373 
Parékrama Pandya 180 
Paramatthapakdsint 157 
Paramatthavinicchaya 
156, 264, 266, 
269-70 
paramité 173, 260 
Paranavitana, S. 1-2, 14, 31, 60, 66-7, 
‘il, 74, 76, 79, 101-2, 107-8, 111, 115, 
129, 149, 163, 166, 186-7, 497, 217-8, 
223, 255, 258, 261, 265, 267, 269, 
273, 283, 286, 288, 291-2, 302,305, 
310, 319 
Parevisandesgaya 290 
paritta 225-6, 229, 322 
parivahana 102-3, 105-6, 110, 124, 131 
Parivena: interpretation 9 
Parjanya 22t 
pas (pasak, paspot) 101, 104-5, 136 
pasa 93-4 
pasladu 190 
pat (prastha): measure of grain and oil 
71, 113, 115, 117, 236, 238 
Pataliputre 267 
patihéyva (pratthdra) 106 
pata tenure 74, 107-9, 200 
Pattini 218-9 
. 
‘paya: see pa 
pegiv: see maiigiv pegiv 
perelakkan (piralikkan) 192-3 
perend{ti 
(perendstiyam, 
perendttiyam, 
perend{{u) 186-7 
Perera, L, S, 2, 55, 59, 68, 74, 101-2, 
107, 113, 150, 183, 295 
perfumers 236 
periodization of history 2-3 
personal incomes of monks 132 
pesiyavagga 120 
physicians 71, 147 
Pigeaud, Theodore G.Th. 269 
Pilgrimages 233 
pindakara 151 
pirtvahanné (pirtvahanu): see parivahana 
pitassam (pitatsam) 110, 112 
Pitdputrasamagama 255 
poets, monks as 162 
political 
activities 
of monks 
177-8, 
203-11 
political 
ideas, 
Buddhist 
171-8, 
339, 
344-5 
Polonnaru Katikavata 139 
potters 124 
Poussin, Louis de ta Vallée 325 
Potthakuttha 121, 290 
Poya: see uposatha 
Pradaksindpatha 232 
Prajfiéparamitd 31, 231, 259 
Prakhyatakirtti 244 
Pratityasamutpdda 230 
production 
in monastic 
estates “N-7, 
125, 339-42 
Pubbarania (Puvaram) 20, 180, 293-4 
Property, 
individual 
80-6. 
See 
also 
monastic property 
Pujavaliya 93, 119, 138, 145, 169, 1m, 
201-2, 
225, 
229, 269, 
271+ 3, 282, 
285-6, 282, 290, 296-8, 314, 330, 335 
Puliyankulam hermitage 20, 183 
pinakami 116 
purgulsatu 82-3 
Purdnas 163 
. 
purifications of the Order 137-8, 159, 
179, 321-3 
Quaritch Wales, H. G., 273 
Rahera canal 69 
-Rahula of Totagamuva 289, 317 
Rahula, Walpola 
1, 134, 190 164, wh 
198, 338, 344 
Rajaraja Cola 202 
Rajarattha 80, 86-7, 89, 203, 4, 221, 
233, 301-2 
Rajévaliya 274 
talge updni kami 110, 112, 124 
Raémafitiadesa; see Burma 
Ramayana 165, 346 
Raémedvaram 222 
Rankotyehera 229 
Ratanajoti, 
G, 
22 
Ratanapasada 9, 127, 132, 228, 261 
Ratana Sutta 214, 226 
Ratnakarasanti of Somapuri 257-8 
Ratnakita 
édstra 
254-5 
Ratnapala, K, 22 
Ratnaviluka: see Mahathipa 
Ray, N. R, 274 
refectories, monastic 145-6 
reforms, monastic 
159, 178, 313-37 
relic worship 
111-2, 116, 171-2, 217, 
227-8, 233-4, 240-1 
revenue, collection of 107-9

--- PAGE 198 [DIRECT] ---

374 
ritual $7, 111, 115, 164-5, 221, 227-34, 
236, 
238; 
social 
status 
in 240-1; 
Tantric 255 
robes, provision of 146 
Rohana 56; 80, 86-7, 89, 92-3, 172, 
191, 201, 205, 208, 210, 218, 221, 
285, 288, 301-2, 316-7, 328 
Rohanadheera, M. 2 
: 
royal authority, limitations 
on 
177-8, 
344 
Ruvanmat-nighandu 118, 128 
Ruvanvali: see Mahathipa and Maha- 
vihara 
Saccasankhepa 135, 159 
sacittapakkha 326 
Saddhammasangaha 157-9 
Saddhammopdyana 22, 30 
Saddharmdlankéra 22,171, 229-31, 267 
Saddharmaratnékaraya 235, 268 
Saddharmaratnivaliya 94, 214 
Saddhatissa 13, 209. 
Sagalikas 20, 28, 33, 49, 313, 318 
Sagiri: see Cotiyagiri 
Sagiri at Polonnatuva 282 
Sahassavatthupakarana 
45-6, 
61, 63, 
16, 98, 188, 213, 243, 264 
* 
Sahitya Vilgammula 307 
Sailantara; see Selantara 
Saindhava monks, 245-6 
Saivism. 86, 202, 204, 225, 262, 323 
Sakka 225 
sakti 223, 232 
Sakyas 173-4 
Salamevan Abhaya 173 
Salavana monastety 12 
salterns 54, 96 
Samanola: see Sumanakiita 
Samantabhadra 223 
Samantakijavanpand ‘234 
Samantapasadika 21-3, 27, 57-8, 66, 72, - 
77, $2-3, 
119-20, 
122-3, 
140, 157, 
181, 326, 335 
Samayabhedoparacanacakre-nikaya- 
bhedopadaréana-sangraha 
253 
Sambandhcinté 159, 161 
Samgamuva monastery 206 
Satumitiyas 31, 246, 253, 256 
Sammohavinodani: 
21 
Satidakinduruda-kava 308 
INDEX 
Sangha 294 
sanghabhoga 61 
satghakdrya 234 
Sanghamitta 204 
Sangharakkhita 158-9; mahdsvaémi 302, 
332 
satigharaja 
333 
satigsatu 83 
Sanghasenapabbata 
college 
17 
Satghatissa 191 
satgvila 113 
Sankptyayana, Rahul 259-60 
Santarakgita: Indian monk 244 
Sarasigimamila 
mahdsydmi 
308, 
See 
also Vilgammula 
Sératthadipant 
9, 18, 21-2, 
98, 
112, 
122, 140, 157-8, 321, 326-7, 335 
Sdratthamafijisé 
157-8 
Sarogima: see Vilgammula 
Sarvastivadins 115, 253, 256 
Sésanavamsa 81, 154, 159-60, 274 
Sa-skya monastery 260 
Sisseruva 232 
Sastras 160-1, 251-2 
satalosa piriniviyan vahanse 174 
satar banavar 139 
sattra 231 
Sautrantikas 31 
Sekhiya 139, 142 
~ 
Selantara fraternity 222, 298-303 
Sena: I 3, 8, 35, 55, 119, 121, 173, 219, 
228, 247-9, 255, 287, 294; II 8, 17, 19, 
35, 55, 61, 63-4, 141, 178, 205, 220, 
222, 226, 256-7, 287, 287, 322; INI 18; 
IV 155, 170, 182, 205, 322 
Senapatimiila 299 
“Senayarman 217 
Seruvila 304 
service employees 
at monasteries 
118- 
25, 143, 145-7 
share-cropping: see tenants 
shares, distribution of: see vasag 
Siddbag&maparivena 155 
Sigiri 13, 20; graffiti 103, 106, 293 
Sihalasangha in Burma 276-7, 280 
Sthalavatthupakarana 
243, 
246, 
264 
Sikhakarant 143 
Sikhavalatdavinisa 
141, 150-1 
Silakéla 
55, 80, 230 
Silimegha 321-2 
i 
Hy 
j 
{ 
INDBX 
495 
Silameghavanna 121, 178 
Stmalatkdra 266 
Simphala Bodhivaméa 119, 304, 307 
Sirimeghavanna 13, 97, 172, 233 
Sirisanghabodhi 173 
sirit (cdritta) 137, 181-2 
Sirivallabha 93 
Stidharana: see Ramdyana 
Sitthagamaparivena {55 
Styabaslakara 175 
Skanda 222, 284, 290 
slavery 97-8, 120-2 
Somaputi monastery 243, 257 
Sonadanda Sutta 196 
Sorata, Valivitiye 115, 133 
Sri Hlam monastery 259 
Sit Jana 246 
. 
Sri Vijaya 263 
Stein, B. 76, 115 
stone masons 117-8, 124 
store-house, monastic 80, 98, 141, 113-4 
Subodhdlankdra 159,162 
Suddhodana 173 
Sugalé 172 
. 
Sulinnaru 96, 192 
Sulurdjavaliya 290 
Sumanakiita 87, 222, 233-4, 240 
Sumangala: 
disciple of Sariputta 
22, 
154, 158, 354 
: 
Sumangala, H. 47 
Sumangalapasidant 150-1, 
158-9, 
302, 
332 
Sumangalavildsini 21, 196, 213-4, 226 
Sumatra 280 
Sundaramahadevi 92 
Sung Shi 16 
Siryasataka 303, 308 
Siryavarman 174 
Susaddasiddhi 159 
Stitrélankara 161 
suvar 185 
svastika 218 
Tamalinda 277 
Tamalimgam (Tamalimgamtota, Tama~ 
limgamu) 267-9 
Tambadiparattha 268 
Tambarattha 265-70 
Tamils: see Damila 
Tamralipti (Tamalitti) 258, 268 
Taficai (Taiijai) 266-7, 270 
Taftcalvanankovat 270 
Tantrimalait 232 
Tantrism 
31-2, 36, 162, 227, 255-6, 
261, 325-7 
Tapassin: envoy 207 
Tapovana 206, 208 
Tara 217-8, 223, 227 
Taranatha 244-6, 257, 325 
taxation 
57-9, 
66-7, 
74-5, 96, 107, 
109, 187, 226 
tenants in monastic estates 57-9, 62-7, 
71-7, 107, 109, 167-8, 182, 194, 199. 
200 
Theravadins 
78, 
163, 
175, 
205, 252, 
254, 261-2, 324 
Thilatthana 209 
Thiiparama 9-10, 48, 60, 98, 201, 224, 
227,229, 232, 317 
Tibet 259-60 
Tilaka 157 
Tilokasundari 209 
Tintinigima 69 
Tiputthulla monastery 20 
Tirokudda Sutta 140 
Tirufanagampantar 225 
Tirupati temple 76, 115 
Tivanka image-house 232, 239, 330 
Tooth relic “10, 90-2, 124, 175, 201, 
210, 221, 228-9, 235, 238, 283, 285, 
287-9, 329-30 
treasury, monastic 104, 107, 109, 113, 
153 
treedeities 221 
tun radola 190 
trade, monastic 
involvement: 
in 78-9 
ubbahika: 
committee 
[28 
Uda-kitagbo college 20, 134, 180, 182, 
293-4 
Udatisa monastery 14 
Udaya: I 56, 61, 66, 81, 163, 297; IL 
10, 67, 73, 179; ILI 206, 208, 322; LV 35, 
119; mahddipdda 134, 182 
Udumbaragiri (Audumbaragiri, Udum- 
barapabbata): 
see Dimbulagala 
ulpédu 185 
ulyddu 186, 192-3 
Upalantaca; see Selantara

--- PAGE 199 [DIRECT] ---

i 
| 
bs 
{ 
| 
| 
376 
INDEX 
Upanayana rite 220 
Upatissa: 1 226; Lf 173 
uposaiha 
10, 79, 140, 165, 167, 200, 
234-5, 322 
Uppalavanna 225-6 
Uttaromiila 
(Uttarajha, 
Uturola) 
£7, 
106, 120, 222, 283-90, 295, 299-300, 
329-30 
Uttaravihira: see Abhayagiri 
Uva(Hiiva) 35, 233 
Vécissara 207 
Vaihadipa 
(Vadu, 
Vahadi) 
fraternity 
296-7, 329 
vahara dtasama 111 
vaharala 121 
Vaitulyavida 33-4, 49, 230, 313, 318-9, 
321 
Vajiriya: see Vajrayana 
Vajjiputtaka (Vatsiputriya) 14, 31 
vajra: symbol 326 
Vajrabodhi 16, 243 
Vajrapani 223, 255 
Vajraparvata 249, 255 
Vajrasattva 223-4 
Vajrayana 16, 243, 249, 255-6, 320, 
” 
325-6 
Valaijiyar 89 
Vitligama 223 
Vamsatthappakasin’ 21, 24-5, 33-5, 49, 
176, 309 
Vanaratana mahasvami 333 
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J. E, 224 
Vapasindé dyatana 306-7 
wirt (vdrika) 
121-2, 
184-5; -perendttu 
187; sat 188: 
varjefu’ 116 
Varsdgraprechdsitira 
7 
Varuna 222 
‘ 
- 
Vasabha 54 
vasag 114, 146-53 
vasigit 149 
vdsalabhdrtha 60 
vasegint 149 
vatndvari 114 
vatsikakémi 114-5 
Vattagamani 7, 14, 24, 54 
Vayu Purépa 269 
| 
Velagimi monastery 203, 306 
Velaikkarar 89-90, 202, 210 
Velangama 96 
veldyut pasdené 190 
vel: -bidi 14,190;-kami 
185, 190;-vasi 
144, 185, 190 
Velgamvehera 
77, 305-6 
Velgammula: see Vilgammula 
Vesals 226. 
Vesaturuddsanne 175 
Vetulla: see Vaitulyavada 
Vibhisana 221 
Vidigama Maitreya 298-9 
vidaréanddhura 139 
Vijayabahu: 
1 37, 78-80, 
87-91, 
94, 
122, 136, 138, 141, 160, 172, 176, 
179, 201, 203-4, 208, 220, 222, 228, 
234, 240, 258, 264, 271-2, 282, 287, 
300-1, 306, 312, 317, 319, 323, 329, 
349-50; 
IL 277; IIL 175, 302, 332, 
334-5; IV 297 
Vijayardja-catutveda-mangalam 
220 
Vijayérama 227 
Vikramabahu 
(I) 37, 42, 89-92, 204, 
210, 288,° 301, 323 
Vikramasila monastery 243, 254, 256-8, 
325 
Vilgammula 303-8 
Vimalakitti, Mada-uyangoda 308-9 
Vimativinodant 21-2, 25, 160, 265, 326-7 
Vimuktimarga-dhutaguna-nirdesa 22 
Vimuktisangraha 308 
Vimuttimagga 17, 22-3, 27, 40 
Vinaya Pitaka 24-6, 35, 95,97-8, 123, 140, 
170, 243, 248 
Vinaydrthasamuccaya 128, 159, 16 
Vinayasahgaha 157 
Vinayasératthadipant: (57-8, 160-1, 321, 
332 
Vinayatthamatjasdé 159, 321 
Vinayovinicchaya-sangaha 
21; -tikd 150-1 
Vinitadeva 7, 253 
Virahkurarima 
17, 113, 156, 247-50, 
252, 254 
: 
Visnu 222 
Visnu Puréna 369 
- 
Visuddhimagga 21-3, 40; -ftkd 21, 23 
29, 154 
Visuddhimérgamahdsanyaya 
22-3 
Visuddhipathasatgaha 
157 
Voharika Tissa 31, 308 
Vetiamalakhyé 298, 303 
INDEX 
377 
Vutiamalé 298-9, 303, 308 
Vuttodaya 159, 162, 302 
Wang-Hiuen-ts’e 244 
wealth, attitude. to 53, 77-86 
Weber, Max 95, 339 
Wickremasinghe, D. M. de Z. 68, 73-4, 
77, 90, 101-5, 112, 114-7, 123, 126-7, 
132 
Wickremasinghe, Sirima 2, 314, 320 
Wijesinha, L. G. 228, 320 
Wijetunga, W. M. K, 2 
Wittfogel, Karl A. 339 
yakkhas, cutt of 212-4 
Yodayapura (Ayuth’ya) 157

--- PAGE 200 [DIRECT] ---

Composed by Wesley Press, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
Printed in the U.S.A, 
i 
: 
: i
