# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1983-sherburne-atisa-lamp-for-the-path.pdf
# Total Pages: 240 | Direct: 223 | OCR: 1 | Blank/Sparse: 16
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:02:25
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

A Lamp for the

Path and
eS |

By ATISA
translated & annotated by
Richard SherburneS.J.

foreword by His Holiness
the Fourteenth Dalai Lama

The Wisdom of Tibet Series-5

--- PAGE 2 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 3 [DIRECT] ---

A Lamp for the Path 
and 
Com.m.entary 
of 
ATISA 
Translated and Annotated by 
Richard Sherburne, S.J. 
FOREWORD BY HIS HOLINESS TENZIN GYATSO, 
THE FOURTEENTH DALAI LAMA 
London 
GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
Boston 
Sydney

--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

©Richard Sherburne, S.J., 1983 
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. No reproduction 
without permission. All rights reserved. 
George Allen & Unwin (Publishers) Ltd 
40 Museum Street, London WClA lLU 
George Allen & Unwin (Publishers) Ltd, 
Park Lane, Heme! Hempstead, Herts HP2 4TE, UK 
Allen & Unwin Inc., 
9 Winchester Terrace, Winchester, Mass 01890, USA 
George Allen & Unwin Australia Pty Ltd, 
8 Napier Street, North Sydney, NSW 2060, Australia 
First published in 1983 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Atisa 
Lamp for the path and commentary. 
I. Lamaist doctrines-Early works to 1800 
I. Title 
II. Sherburne, Richard 
294.3'4 
BQ7950.A874 
ISBN 0-04-294124-5 
ISBN 0-04-294129-6 (pbk) 
Set in 11 on 12 point Times by Bedford Typesetters Ltd 
and printed in Great Britain 
by Billing and Sons Ltd, London and Worcester

--- PAGE 5 [DIRECT] ---

To my lama and kalyanamitra, Tulku Kunga Labrang, 
the Dezhung Rinpoche: 
for his patient guidance and tutelage; 
To my mentor, Turrell V. Wylie: 
for his continual scholarly insistence; 
To my colleague and collaborator, 
Nancy Moore Gettelman: 
for her unfailing trust and spirited encouragement; 
To my reader and editor, Gerald Yorke: 
for priceless and valued help in the English language. 
For all their wise assistance and kind friendship, 
I could barter only my own ignorance and this result. 
-Richard Sherburne, S.J. 
Seattle University 
Spring, 1983

--- PAGE 6 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 7 [DIRECT] ---

THE DALAl LAMA 
Foreword 
THEKCHEN CHOELING 
McLEOD GANJ 176219 
KANGRA DISTRICT 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 
Atisa, the author of A Lamp For The Path To Enlightenment 
(Bodhipathapradipa), is held in special regard by Tibetans. He 
had a vision that he would not live so long if he left India and went 
to Tibet. Nevertheless, this Indian saint and scholar made the 
arduous journey across the Himalayas and travelled throughout 
Tibet teaching and giving guidance in the full realisation that by 
so doing he would shorten his life by many years. The place 
where he died, not far from Lhasa, was and remains to this day an 
important place of pilgrimage for Tibetans. 
Atisa's life itself exemplifies the religious path taught by the 
Buddha. He travelled far and wide to study with teachers who 
could explain the practices from their own experience, and 
having learned the importance of altruism directed. towards all 
living beings, strove to transform himself into an embodiment of 
love and compassion. He recognised the importance of ethical 
conduct, meditative stabilisation and wisdom and practised all 
three. Before coming to Tibet he was accepted in his own land as 
foremost authority on discipline, meditation and Buddhist 
philosophy. Like other great and kind Indian masters who taught 
Buddhism to Tibetans, he also gave due importance to Tantra. 
Atisa taught that Buddha's message was primarily a method 
to relieve the suffering of living beings. He sought to heal the 
division which threatened the spread of Buddhism in Tibet by 
emphasising the central Buddhist teachings and by showing 
clearly that each teaching was relevant at the appropriate time 
and for the appropriate person. He stressed the value in all 
branches of the Buddha's teaching. 
This book, which was written by Atisa with special needs of his 
Tibetan disciples in mind, is the prototype of the stages of the

--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

V111 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
(Lam rim) literature which reached its full bloom amongst later 
Tibetan teachers and scholars. It presents the important 
practices in a concise and easily understandable manner and 
orders them in terms of the development and ability of the mind. 
Such practices as these are timeless and of benefit to all. Just as 
we Tibetans have benefited greatly from them through the 
centuries, I hope those in other countries will find here a method 
to attain the lasting peace they desire. The translation of the text 
into English here by the noted Christian scholar, Richard 
Sherburne, S.J., illustrates cooperation between religions that 
enhances mutual understanding and draws the world together in 
recognition of the common goal of bettering humankind. 
July 14, 1982

--- PAGE 9 [DIRECT] ---

Contents 
Page 
Foreword 
vii 
Introduction 
x 
Abbreviations 
xiv 
A Lamp for the Enlightenment Path [Poem] 
1 
Commentary on the Lamp for the Path 
Stanzas 
DEDICATION AND THEME 
1-6 
15 
Vehicle of the Perfections 
Part One: Higher Conduct 
CHAPTER 1 THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
7-9 
23 
CHAPTER2 THEENLIGHTENMENTTHOUGHT 10-19 
41 
CHAPTER3 THEMONASTICLIFE 
20-21 
65 
CHAPTER4 THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
22-33 
87 
Part Two: Higher Meditation 
CHAPTER 5 THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 
Part Three: Higher Insight 
CHAPTER 6 INSIGHT AND MEANS 
Vehicle of Mysticism 
CHAPTER 7 TANTRA 
COLOPHONS 
Appendices 
Chart I: The Five Paths 
Chart II: Tantric Initiations 
Glossary 
Bibliography 
Index 
34-40 
113 
41-59 
129 
60-67 
165 
68 
181 
190 
191 
192 
204 
221

--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

Introduction 
The Lamp for the Enlightenment Path and its Commentary 
are eleventh-century Buddhist texts which were written 
at Tho-ling ("High-flying") Monastery in the central 
Himalayas near Mount Kailas. Although little known to 
"outsiders", these texts have been used and cherished by 
the Buddhist communities within Tibet and inner Asia for 
well over nine centuries. The monk who composed them 
wrote originally in Sanskrit (now lost) while simultaneously 
translating them into Tibetan, and they were included as 
authentic commentary in the earliest canon of Mahayana 
scripture. 
The Lamp proved to be a unique model for a religious 
literary style that received much attention and development 
in Tibet: the concise but comprehensive manuals that show 
the "steps of the path" (lam-rim, as the genre is called) and 
are kept as lifelong guides for the spiritual endeavour. Both 
beginner and adept find a map for the Path in the poem, 
which was to be memorised, while the Commentary 
p:r:ovides the eminently practical explanation for further 
reflection and study. The Lamp and its companion were a 
new direction and emphasis for Tibetan Buddhist life 
because they presented for the first time the harmonious 
relationship between Buddhism's essential monastic basis 
and the compassionate Bodhisattva's high ideal, flowering 
in the true and necessary mystical experience of Tantra. 
Compassion, Calm and Insight, Emptiness and Bliss 
become key concepts because of the emphasis in these 
texts, well supported not only by the authority of Siitra but 
by the brilliance of Buddhist minds for centuries. The 
fascination of so integrated a goal in the Lamp and 
Comfnentary made them into the curriculum for training 
and study in Tibet's first distinctive religious order, the 
Bka'-gdams-pa ("Word-Instructed"). While the author 
was not the Order's founder in actual fact, it was his 
charisma and insight (and dying wish) that led his 
immediate disciples to found the group of monks who now

--- PAGE 11 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCTION 
XI 
are popularly known in the West as "Yellow Hats"- the 
order to which the Dalai Lamas. have belonged. The 
spirituality of these texts has consequently exerted a very 
strong influence on the religious and cultural development 
of the Buddhist peoples of the Roof of the World. 
The so far unmentioned author of these works is Atisa 
(AD 982-1054), an Indian monk known to Tibet as Jo-bo-rje 
("The Noble Lord"). All Tibetan historians mark his 
arrival at Tho-ling in 1042 as the rebirth of Buddhism in 
their country - the "Second Spread" (phyi-dar) of the 
religion that had first crossed their mountains in the seventh 
century. 
Born in western Bengal of noble family in the final 
century of Buddhist glory in India- just prior to the Muslim 
destruction- AtiSa was a gifted student in both secular and 
religious learning. As a young man, it is said, he travelled to 
north-west India and the valley of Swat where he was 
initiated in the prevalent mystical experience of his day, 
studying and practising Tantra for some years. At the age of 
twenty-nine he took the vows and ordination of the 
Buddhist monk, continuing his Mahayana studies for ten 
years in far-off Sumatra, then a great monastic centre with 
close ties to Pala Bengal. When he returned to India it was 
to the great monastery at Vikramasila, a Pala foundation, 
where, then in his prime, he held the post of respected 
Elder (sthavira) and became a popular teacher (acarya)-
popular especially with Tibetan student monks, by whose 
eagerness he was attracted and whose language he quickly 
mastered. He was of course already an accomplished master 
of Sanskrit, a pa1J.qita. 
While Atlsa does not reach the stature of a Nagarjuna or 
Asanga, the great Buddhist ornaments of earlier centuries, 
he is nevertheless a man of deep personal holiness and 
charisma coupled with considerable literary ability and 
productivity. His insight is balanced with the practical, as is 
evidenced in the many short incisive texts he wrote for 
his students both at Vikramasila and at neighbouring 
Odantapurl. All his biographers record his charm and wit, 
and Pis adventuresome spirit needs little testimony: he 
was sixty years old when he arrived at Tho-ling, after a

--- PAGE 12 [DIRECT] ---

Xii 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
year's journey that would tax even the modern traveller. 
His missionary labours in Tibet extended over thirteen 
years, beginning at Tho-ling, where he composed the Lamp 
a,nd Commentary in 1042-3; he then moved east to Bsam-
yas and to Lha-sa, teaching ?t many monasteries, writing, 
and counselling renewal of spirit. He died at Snye-thang 
just south of Lha-sa where his relics are enshrined in a 
temple overlooking the Skyid-chu near its confluence with 
the mighty Brahmaputra. 
If Tibetan monastic life in Atisa's time was somewhat in 
disarray, it was due to both political and religious 
influences. After Buddhism's original royal patronage in 
the seventh century, temples and monasteries had fanned 
out as far as the reaches of the Tibetan empire itself- from 
within the borders of Tang China to what is now Russian 
Turkestan, sweeping the entire arc of the Himalayas from 
Kashmir to Burma. But two centuries of growth was 
summarily stopped in a merciless persecution that began in 
836 under Glang-dar-ma, upon whose assassination the 
Tibetan empire itself fragmented. After a century and a 
half of suppression and decline, refugee monks began 
slowly to return to ancient ruins and find patronage under 
local princes and families. Direct descendants of the old 
royal family in western Tibet were particularly eager to 
restore Buddhist life, building impressive monasteries like 
Tho-ling and financing the education of promising Tibetan 
youths in Kashmir and northern India. 
It was a prince of this line, Byang-chub-'od, grand-
nephew of the builder of Tho-ling and an ordained monk, 
who heard about Atisa through the Tibetans who had 
studied at Vikramasila, and pressed the urgent invitation 
for him to come and assist in the work of restoring true 
observance of monastic life. 
The urgency of the invitation was not so much that 
corruption existed because of the years of suppression and 
isolation, but rather that serious misinterpretations of 
Buddhist ideals and practice had arisen through the pitfalls 
of Tantra. This movement of a devotional and mystical 
system had been growing among Brahmanists and 
Buddhists in India for some centuries and held great appeal

--- PAGE 13 [DIRECT] ---

INTRODUCTION xiii 
for the Tibetans. But it is well known that the subtle and 
profound elements of much of the "swift path" are clothed 
in sexual imagery that lends itself to misuse by the 
uninitiated and unguided. Atisa was the first to integrate 
and balance the Buddhist paths and win an audience that 
would carry on his teaching. The Lamp and Commentary 
show his views and are his major work.

--- PAGE 14 [DIRECT] ---

Abbreviations 
AK(LVP) 
BCA 
FBT 
L'Abhidharmakosa de Vasubandhu by La 
Vallee Poussin (1971) 
, 
Bodhi-caryii-avatiira by Santideva 
Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras by 
Lessing and Wayman (1968) 
Ot. 
ss 
TBT 
Tibetan Tripitaka - Peking Edition kept in the 
1;-ibrary of Otani Univ,ersity 
Sikshii-samuccaya of Santideva, translation by 
Bendall and Rouse (1922) 
The Buddhist Tantras by Wayman (1973) 
MANUSCRIPT PAGE NUMBERING 
OF THE TIBETAN TEXTS 
Byang-chub lam-gyi sgron-ma 
(Ot. 5344: Dbu rna: Khi: 274b-277b] 
Byang-chub lam-gyi sgron-ma'i dka' 'grel 
[Ot. 5345: Dbu rna: Khi: 277b-339b]

--- PAGE 15 [DIRECT] ---

A Lamp for the 
Enlightenment Path 
[Root Text: Poem] 
DEDICATION AND THEME (Three Persons) 
Stanzas 
1-5 
Page 
5 
VEHICLE OF THE PERFECTIONS 
HIGHER CONDUCT 
The Triple Refuges 
The Enlightenment Thought 
The Monastic Life 
The Bodhisattva Vow 
HIGHER MEDITATION 
The Superknowledges 
Calmness 
HIGHER INSIGHT 
The Means and Insight 
Higher Vision 
VEHICLE OF MYSTICISM 
Path of Mantra 
COLOPHON 
6-9 
5 
10-19 
6-7 
20-21 
7 
22-33 
7-8 
34-37 
8-9 
38-41 
9 
42-46 
9-10 
47-59 10-11 
60-67 11-12 
68 
12

--- PAGE 16 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 17 [DIRECT] ---

A Lamp for the 
[274bJ 
Enlightenment Path 
COMPOSED BY ATISA 
IS CONTAINED HEREIN. 
In the Sanskrit language: 
Bodhi-patha-pradipa. 
In the Tibetan language: 
Byang-chub lam-gyi sgron-ma. 
Homage to the Bodhisattva Maftjusri, 
the ever-youthful!

--- PAGE 18 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 19 [DIRECT] ---

A LAMP FOR THE ENLIGHTENMENT PATH 5 
1 I bow in great reverence to all past, present, and 
Future Victors, to their Doctrine and Communities. 
I shall light a Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, 
At the request of my good disciple Byang-chub-'od. 
2 In that they are Inferior or Mediocre or Superior, 
Persons should be understood as three: 
The characteristics of each are very clear, and 
I shall note how they differ from one another. 
3 One who by every means he finds, 
Seeks but the pleasure of sarpsara, 
And cares but for himself alone, that one 
Is known as the Inferior Person. 
4 One who puts life's pleasures behind 
And turns himself from deeds of sin, 
Yet cares only about his own peace, 
That person should be called Mediocre. 
5 One who wholly seeks a complete end 
To the entire suffering of others because 
Their suffering belongs to his own [conscious] stream, 
That person is a Superior. 
6 For those pure beings whose desire 
Is the highest of Enlightenments, 
I shall explain the right means 
Which were taught me by my Gurus. 
7 Facing a painted image of the Perfect Buddha, 
Or in front of holy reliquaries and the like, 
Give worship with flowers and incense 
And whatever objects may be at hand. 
8 Then with the Sevenfold Worship expressed 
In the Deeds of Samantabhadra, 
And a mind that does not tum back until 
The Heart of Enlightenment is reached, 
9 With great faith in the Three Jewels, 
Bending knee to the ground, 
And folding the hands, [275a] 
First take the Three Refuges thrice.

--- PAGE 20 [DIRECT] ---

6 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
10 Then, because the Thought of Love for 
All creatures is the prerequisite, 
One looks out on all the world, 
Suffering in death, transmigration, 
And r~birth in the three bad destinies: 
11 At sight of that suffering, one suffers; 
And he who wants to free the world 
From the very cause of such suffering, 
Must beget this Thought of Enlightenment 
That is pledged never to turn back. 
12 Every quality that belongs to 
Begetting thoughts of such Resolution 
Has been well explained by Maitreya 
In his siitra, the Stalks in Array. 
13 Read that siitra or hear it from a Guru, and when 
The infinite benefits of Pedect Enlightenment Thought 
Are seen, then for that very reason you 
Will· beget the Thought again and again. 
14 The merit of this is shown extremely well 
In the siitra called the Questions ofViradatta; 
And to give the essence of it, 
I quote three of its verses here: 
15 "If a form could be had for the full 
Merit of the Enlightenment Thought, 
It would surpass even one 
That filled the whole realm of space." 
16 "Or take a man who owns jewels, and with them 
Fills every one of the Buddha-fields-
Reckoned as more than the grains of Ganga's sands-
Then offers all this to the Lord of the World;" 
17 "Yet another who merely folds his hands, 
And inclines his thought to Enlightenment. 
The latter's worship is higher by far, 
Because in it there is found no limit." 1 
18 When you get the thoughts of aspiring to Enlightenment, 
Then with great effort strive to expand them fully;

--- PAGE 21 [DIRECT] ---

A LAMP FOR THE ENLIGHTENMENT PATH 7 
And to recall your resolve in your other births, 
Observe fully the Training I explained to you. 
19 A right resolve will not be furthered 
Without vows that have progress in mind; [275b] 
Therefore he who seeks growth in the resolve for 
Perfect Enlightenment, earnestly takes them. 
20 Only he who has lasting vows in 
One of Pratimoksa's seven ranks 
Is fit for the Vow 'of the Bodhisattva; 
There is no other way for it to be. 
21 
The Tathagata has said that of 
The seven ranks of Pratimoksa, 
The glorious Pure Life is highest; 
By which he meant the vows of a Monk. 
22 According to the ritual given in the 
Conduct Chapter of the Bodhisattva Levels, 
One takes the Vow from any good Guru 
Who has the proper characteristics. 
23 One who is learned in the ritual of the Vow, 
And himself lives the Vow he has taken, 
And has the compassionate forbearance 
To impart it- know him to be the good Guru. 
24 But if, after trying, one cannot 
Find just such a Guru as this, 
I will explain another ritual 
For taking the vow in a correct way. 
25 In this latter way, Mafijusri in a former life 
As Ambaraja begat the Enlightenment Thought; 
And as told in the sutra called 
The Ornament of Manjwri's Buddha-field, 
I write it down clearly here now: 
26 "In the presence of the Lords, I beget 
The Thought of Perfect Enlightenment, 
And issuing invitation to all creatures, 
I will save them all from the cycle of rebirth."

--- PAGE 22 [DIRECT] ---

8 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
27 "Beginning from this moment and henceforth, 
Until I obtain the Highest Enlightenment, 
I shall not permit ill-will or anger, 
Avarice or envy, to occupy my mind." 
28 "I shall practise the Pure Life, 
And renounce sin and base desire; 
I shall imitate the Buddha 
By rejoicing in the vow of Conduct." 
29 "Myself, I am not keen to reach 
Enlightenment in some swift way; 
I shall remain until the final end 
For the sake of but a single creature." 
30 "I shall purify the innumerable [276a] 
Inconceivable fields of the universe, 
And from the taking of this [new] name, [henceforth] 
I shall live in the ten directions." 
31 
"Purifying the actions of 
My body and speech entirely, 
I shall cleanse my mind's activity as well; 
No unvirtuous deed will ever be mine. " 2 
32 In essence, one's purity of body, speech and mind 
Means keeping vows with a mind for progress; 
For by practising well the Three Conduct Trainings, 
Appreciation of those same Three becomes greater. 
33 Hence, when one has striven in the vows which make up 
The pure and perfect Bodhisattva Vow, 
He will bring to complete perfection 
The very Equipment for Perfect Enlightenment. 
34 All the Buddhas have held that 
Perfecting this Equipment, 
The nature of which is Merit and Knowledge, 
Lies essentially in the superknowledges. 
35 
Just as a bird with unfledged wings 
Cannot fly up into the sky, 
So without the superknowledges' power, 
One cannot work for the good of others.

--- PAGE 23 [DIRECT] ---

A LAMP FOR THE ENLIGHTENMENT PATH 
9 
36 The merits which a man with the 
Superknowledges gains in a single day 
Could not be had in a hundred lives 
By one who lacked those knowledges. 
37 He who seeks to bring to perfection swiftly 
The Equipment for Perfect Enlightenment 
Strives hard for the superknowledges, 
For they are not accomplished by sloth. 
38 As long as Calmness is not attained, 
The superknowledges will not occur; 
Therefore, in order to achieve Calmness, 
One must keep striving over and over. 
39 One who neglects the Limbs of Calmness, 
Even though he strive to meditate 
For thousands of years, never 
Will achieve Concentration. 
40 Therefore, when well established in the Limbs 
That are stated in the Chapter on Concentration Equipment, 
One can then set the mind in virtue, 
Fixed on any Topic he chooses. 
41 
When yogic Calmness is achieved, 
So too are the superknowledges; [276b] 
But obscuration is not destroyed 
Without the Perfection of Insight. 
42 Hence, to remove all obscuration 
Of his affliction and his knowledge, 
The yogin must continually cultivate the 
Perfection of Insight together with Means. 
43 Scripture says that bondage is from 
Insight being divorced from Means, 
And the Means from Insight as well. 
Therefore, neglect not this union. 
44 To remove any doubts about 
What Insight is, and what are Means, 
I make clear the difference 
Between the Means and Insight.

--- PAGE 24 [DIRECT] ---

10 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
45 The Victors have explained that the Means. 
Are all the Equipments of virtue, 
Starting with the Perfection of Giving, 
Up to, but excluding, that of Insight. 
46 
One who combines mastery of the Means 
With a true cultivation of Insight 
Will swiftly attain Enlightenment, but 
Not by cultivating merely Non-self. 
47 "Insight" is fully explained as knowing 
The Emptiness of intrinsic nature, 
In comprehending that Aggregates and 
Sense-bases and Elements do not arise. 
48 An existent's aJjsing is impossible; 
A non-existent's is like flowers in the sky; 
For a thing to be both is absurd fallacy; 
So neither do they originate together. 
49 Since an entity does not arise from itself, 
And is not from another, or even from both, 
Nor is it yet without cause; therefore it has 
No intrinsic nature by way of own-existence. 
50 Furthermore, if one analyses all things 
As identities or multiplicities, 
Own-existence is not perceived; hence one is 
Certain that intrinsic natures do not exist. 
51 
The reasoning of the Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness, 
And of texts like the Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way, 
Explains the proof that all entities 
Are empty of intrinsic nature. 
52 Wherefore, lest my text become too long, 
I do not elaborat<:< it here, 
But will explain only proven tenets 
In order to further contemplation. 
53 Thus, not to perceive intrinsic nature [277a] 
In any phenomenon whatever 
Is to contemplate it~ Non-Self; which 
Is the same as contemplating with Insight.

--- PAGE 25 [DIRECT] ---

A LAMP FOR THE ENLIGHTENMENT PATH 
11 
54 And this Insight which does not see 
Intrinsic nature in any phenomena 
Is that same Insight explained as Wisdom. 
Cultivate it without conceptual thought. 
55 The world of change springs from conceptual 
Thought, which is its very nature; 
The complete removal of such 
Thought is the Highest NirvaQa. 
56 Moreover, the Blessed One declared: 
"Conceptual thinking is the great ignorance, 
And casts one into sal!lsara's ocean; but 
Clear as the sky is his contemplation who 
Remains in Concentration without concepts." 
57 And he also says in the Non-Conceptual Progress Formula: 
"When a son of the Victor meditates on 
This holy Doctrine without conceptual thought, 
He gradually attains the non-conceptual. " 3 
58 When through scripture and reason one has 
Penetrated the non-intrinsic 
Nature of all non-arising phenomena, 
Then contemplate without conceptual thought. 
59 And when he has thus contemplated Thatness, 
And by stages has attained "Warmth" and the rest, 
Then he will gain the "Joyous" [Level] and on up: 
Buddha-Enlightenment is not far off. 
60 Through the rites of "Appeasement" and "Prosperity" 
And the rest, effected by the force of Mantra, 
And also by the strength of the Eight Great Powers, 
Starting with that of "Good Flask", and others, 
61 It is maintained that the Equipment for 
Enlightenment is perfected with ease; 
And if one wants to practise Mantra as prescribed 
In the Tantras: Action, Practice, and on,

--- PAGE 26 [DIRECT] ---

12 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
62 Then, to gain the Preceptor-Initiation, 
One must first win a holy Guru 
By giving him attendance and precious things 
And by obedience to his word. 
63 
And when the Preceptor-Initiation has been 
Conferred by the Guru who was won over, 
Then one is purified of all sin, and [277b] 
Becomes fit to exercise the Powers. 
64 The Secret and Insight Initiations 
Should not be taken by religious celibates, 
Because it is emphatically forbidden 
In the Great Tantra of Primal Buddha. 
65 If those Initiations were taken by one who stays 
In the austerity of a religious celibate, 
It would violate his vow of austerity 
Since he would be practising what is forbidden. 
66 Transgressions would occur which defeat 
The man of religious observance; 
And by his certain fall to bad destinies, 
He could not even succeed [in Mantra practice]. 
67 
Having acquired the Preceptor-Initiation, 
He may listen to all Tantras and explain them; 
Perform Fire-offering, Gift-worship, and the like: 
There is no wrong in wisdom about reality. 
68 I, the Elder, Dipamkarasri, 
Have seen this explanati<?n in texts 
Such as the siitras; and at Byang-chub-'od's request 
Have explained concisely the Path to Enlightenment. 
[Colophon] 
This completes the Lamp for the Enlightenment Path 
composed by the great Acarya, glorious Di:pamkarajniina. 
Translated and edited by the great Upiidhyiiya of India 
himself, and by the revisor-translator Dge-ba'i blo-gros. 
This text was composed at the Tho-ling temple of 
Zhang-zhung.

--- PAGE 27 [DIRECT] ---

A LAMP FOR THE ENLIGHTENMENT PATH 
13 
Notes to the Root Text 
Notes on the contents of the basic poem are given in the text of the Commentary 
where the stanzas are repeated, except for the following source identifications: 
1 Ot. 760 (28), Vol. 25:86.2. 
2 Ot. 760 (15), Vol. 23:129.2. 
3 Ot. 810, Vol. 32:232.5.

--- PAGE 28 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 29 [DIRECT] ---

The Commentary on a Lamp 
for the Enlightenment Path 
Dedication and Theme 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
DEDICATORY VERSE 
1a 
16 
II 
THE TEXT 
Reasons for Writing 
1b 
17 
III 
THEME: THREE PERSONS 
2 
18 
Inferior 
3 
Mediocre 
4 
Superior 
5 
IV 
THE RIGHT MEANS FOR THE SUPERIOR 
PERSON 
6 
20 
A 
Triple Refuge 
B Twofold Enlightenment Thought 
c Superknowledges 
D Means and Insight 
E 
Tantra

--- PAGE 30 [DIRECT] ---

Commentary on the Difficult 
Points of the Lamp for 
Enlightenment Path 
In the Sanskrit language: 
Bodhi-miirga-pradfparrz-paiijikii-niima. 
In the Tibetan language: 
Byang-chub lam-gyi sgron-ma'i dka' 'grel. 
Dedicatory Verse 
I pay homage to the noble and blessed Tara. 
I pay homage to Mafijusri, prince of old. 
To Cakrasa111vara the Triple-pledge King, 
To Lokesvara and Tara in respect I bow. 
Bowing down in sincerity to the Gurus: 
Maitreya; Asanga ang Guru SuvaTQadvipa, 
And to Mafijugho~a: Santideva and Bodhibhadra, 
I will write this Commentary to give sunlight. 
Since the Lamp for the Path is only a moonbeam [278a] 
On the good path to Enlightenment's heart; 
Whatever details may be unclear in it, 
This sun-like Commentary will light the way. 
Though I have no talent for treatise composing, 
I am writing this clearer explanation, 
At my devout and ardent disciple's request, 
So that the Buddha's teaching may increase, and 
Disputes over scripture may be put to rest. 
For wise men to produce wonders, and 
Average men to understand with ease, 
And so lesser men will put aside their passions, 
I write this Commentary on Difficult Points. 
With so much meaning in so short a text, 
This treatise may be hard to comprehend; 
And without holy men [for guidance] 
One will altogether go astray.

--- PAGE 31 [DIRECT] ---

COMMENTARY ON THE DIFFICULT POINTS 
17 
Therefore, an intelligent person 
Wins the favour of a Guru, and 
Asks for the right personal guidance which 
Is in accord with the Guru-tradition. 
The Text 
The instruction I give here came like drops of honey and 
nectar to me from the holy Gurus SuvaTQ.advlpa and the 
glorious and venerable Bodhibhadra. And faced with 
the repeated requests of Byang-chub-'od, my disciple of 
princely rank, and of the Monk Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba, my 
disciple of long-standing, I am going to gather up those 
drops of personal guidance I received, and follow both 
what my Gurus gave me, and what the siitras and treatises 
have to say. 
Because Byang-chub-'od is ever asking me 
For the sevenfold explanation, saying: 
"The meaning is not clear in your root text", 
I will write for the sake of his request. 
He was referring to what the great scholar Acarya 
Vasubandhu said: 
"Those who preach a siitra's meaning 
Should give short instructions which include: 
[1] its usefulness, [2] a summary, [3] the word definitions, 
[4] its relevance, [5] objections, [6] responses, and 
[7] explanation." 1 
If men of insight rely on a Guru and are taught according to 
this method, they quickly comprehend the good Path of 
Mahayana- the Path of the great Wagons and the way of 
the Superior Person. [278b] 
And thus I will explain the 
Path of the Bodhisattvas, 
According to the siitras, 
Texts, and my Gurus' teaching.

--- PAGE 32 [DIRECT] ---

18 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Where does my explanation begin? It begins right there in 
the basic text, starting with the first stanza: 
I BOW IN GREAT REVERENCE TO ALL PAST, PRESENT, AND 
FUTURE VICTORS, TO THEIR DOCTRINE AND COMMUNmES. 
I SHALL LIGHT A LAMP FOR THE PATH TO ENLIGHTENMENT, 
AT THE REQUEST OF MY GOOD DISCIPLE, BYANG-CHUB-'OD. (Stanza 1] 
The first half of the stanza is easy to understand. In the 
second half, by "GOOD DISCIPLE" I mean a fit vessel for the 
doctrine of Mahayana. And who is this good disciple? He is 
the man we call Byang-chub-'od. "AT THE REQUEST oF" 
refers to his saying to me: 
"In this area of Tibet there are persons who misinterpret 
the Mahayana Path of the Buddha's teaching. Gurus and 
Spiritual Friends are arguing back and forth about things 
they themselves do not comprehend. They all have their 
own logic to analyse their suppositions about the 
Profou.nd View and Broad Practice. With so much 
disagreement on all sides, I beg you to clear up these 
doubts for us." 
And so, because of his repeated entreaty and for his sake, I 
do light this lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, following 
the teaching of the siitras and tradition. 
If you ask where that Lamp for the Path to Enlighten-
ment is to be found, it is the main part of my basic text from 
the stanza on the Superior Person [6] through to the last 
stanza [67] on Tantra. 
Theme: Three Persons 
In the opening stanzas about the Three Persons I show who 
is and who is not a fit vessel for Mahayana. The definitions 
of the Inferior and Mediocre Persons are easy to under-
stand. It is this stanza which shows who is the fit vessel for 
Mahayana: [279a 1 
ONE WHO WHOLLY SEEKS A COMPLETE END 
TO THE ENTIRE SUFFERING OF OTHERS BECAUSE 
THEIR SUFFERING BELONGS TO HIS OWN (CONSCIOUS] STREAM, 
THAT PERSON IS A SUPERIOR. (5]

--- PAGE 33 [DIRECT] ---

COMMENTARY ON THE DIFFICULT POINTS 
19 
This is what the commentaries have to say about the subject: 
Or again: 
"The Bodhisattva loves all creatures 
From the bottom of his heart; 
As one loves an only child, 
Ever desiring to seek its good. " 2 
"As the dove loves her own chicks best, 
Sitting to brood them beneath her breast; 
So like her, with aversion overcome, 
Treat every creature with affection. " 3 
And the great scholar, Acarya Vasubandhu: 
"A lesser man uses his resources to provide for the 
happiness of his own [conscious] stream. The mediocre 
man is not happy and so turns aside only [his own] 
suffering, but thereby remains in suffering. The holy 
man, because sufferings exist in his own stream, has the 
sole care to tum aside the very basis for others' suffering 
and give them happiness; for he suffers on account of 
their suffering. " 4 
And he adds: 
"Those who suffer because others are suffering, and who 
rejoice and are happy at the happiness of others belong 
to that class of men for whom there is no 'My'. They do 
not look to their own happiness, but rather make great 
effort, thinking 'I am able to save others from the great 
river of suffering.' By its very nature their compassion 
rejoices both in their own suffering and at the happiness 
of others because of the strength they have cultivated in 
compassion. " 5 [279b] 
Consequently, the person who by nature cannot bear to see 
his neighbour afflicted with calamity, who proposes to 
barter his own [happiness] for others' [suffering], who looks

--- PAGE 34 [DIRECT] ---

20 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
upon every creature as his only child - as a father cannot 
bear to see an only son trapped in a blazing fire, or falling 
into an abyss or being swept away by a flood- I praise that 
kind of man here as being the fit vessel for Mahayana. 
The Right Means for the Superior Person 
It was with that kinq of Great Being in mind, that I wrote: 
I SHALL EXPLAIN THE RIGHT MEANS 
WHICH WERE TAUGHT ME BY MY GURUS. (6) 
By "GuRus" I mean the venerable and glorious 
Bodhibhadra and the venerable Suvafl).advlpa. As to "THE 
RIGHT MEANS", I will explain them fully in the following 
order: [A] Taking Refuge in the Three [Jewels], [B] the 
two aspects of Enlightenment Thought, [C] begetting the 
Superknowledges in order to work for the special good of 
others, [D] accumulating the Two Equipments through the 
union of Means and Insight, and [E] accumulating the Two 
Equipments through the extra-ordinary method of Mantra, 
that great [system] of Mahayana which swiftly perfects the 
good of self and others. 
Notes to Dedication 
1 Science of Preaching, Ot. 5562, Vol. 113:245.4. 
2 OrnamentofSutras, Ot. 5521. Vol. 108:10.3. 
3 ibid. 
4 Explanation of" Treasure of Phenomenology", Ot. 5591, Vol. 115:189.1. The 
quotation is of paramount importance because it is evidently Atlsa's doctrinal 
and literary source for the "Three Persons" distinction of spiritual qualities he 
introduces to all the later Tibetan lam-rim ("Steps on the Path") writings. 
The teaching device of triads in presenting qualitative degrees - low-
medium-high - is common enough in all literature (aller guten Ding sind 
drei), and eminently so in Buddhism. But the three types of person presented 
here by Vasubandhu (and Atisa following him) are not to be taken as the same 
triple division of Paths (Hearer, Solitary Buddha, Bodhisattva) that the 
Perfection of Wisdom literature uses, since the inferior person is not even 
concerned about liberation- as the Hearer would be. Rather, the distinction 
is between the utter worldling (inferior), the Hearer or Solitary Buddha 
(mediocre), and the Bodhisattva (superior) who seeks Enlightenment out of 
compassion, and not just for his own liberation. 
5 ibid.

--- PAGE 35 [DIRECT] ---

Vehicle of the Perfections 
PART ONE 
Higher Conduct

--- PAGE 36 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 37 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 1 
The Triple Refuge 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
7 
24 
II 
SEVENFOLD WORSHIP: 
THE GOOD PRACTICE 
Sa 
25 
A 
First Interpretation 
27 
B 
Second Interpretation 
27 
c Third Interpretation 
27 
III 
KINDS OF WORSHIP 
28 
A 
With Pleasing Objects 
28 
1 Actually present 
28 
2 Created by mind 
28 
B 
Meditative Worship 
29 
1 Sevenfold Worship 
29 
2 Supreme Worship 
29 
a With objective-basis 
31 
b Without objective-basis 
32 
IV 
THE HEART OF ENLIGHTENMENT 
8b 
34 
v 
NOT TURNING BACK 
8b 
34 
VI 
REFUGE-TAKING 
9 
35 
A Mahayana Candidate 
35 
B 
Preparation of Place 
36 
c Ceremony of Petition 
37 
D The Training Involved 
38

--- PAGE 38 [DIRECT] ---

1 
The Triple Refuge 
The Triple Refuge 
Going for refuge to the Three Jewels is the entrance portal, 
so to speak, to the great city of Liberation, and the 
foundation of the Thought of Enlightenment. I teach about 
this in the three stanzas [7, 8, 9] that begin: 
FACING A PAINTED IMAGE OF THE PERFECT BUDDHA, 
OR IN FRONT OF HOLY RELIQUARIES AND THE LIKE. 
By "FACING" I mean the kind of thing one sees in such 
Mahayana siitras as the Admonitions for the King, taken 
from the old Glorious Acts: 
"The Enlightenment Thought is produced [just] by 
facing and seeing the body of a Tathagata. " 1 
And all the Spiritual Friends say that this is true. [280a] 
A fuller ritual for taki:r:tg the Refuges can be shown later 
[but here let me state it briefly]. First of all, beg that each 
likeness of the Three Jewels painted in the Twenty-seven 
Ma~qalas 2 be present before you, and then invite also 
the [actually] purified Three Jewels from their respective 
abodes, wherever they may be in all the regions of the 
ten-directional world. Or again, you may prefer to place 
yourself in those very paradises, taking a worshipful 
posture, and reflecting that you are seated in the presence 
of each and every Buddha and Bodhisattva. Then, with 
your palms flat together or cupped, join the hands at the 
crown of the head, completing the acts of worship, and 
perform the Three Heaps [of Confession, Rejoicing, and 
Entreaty]. Then afterwards, when you have presented the 
Guru with a gift, the Refuges can be taken. Of course, this

--- PAGE 39 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
25 
should be prefaced with an understanding of [the difference 
between] the Three Jewels as Ultimate Reality and the 
Three Jewels as present before us. 
Sevenfold Worship: The Good Practice 
"GIVE WORSHIP WITH FLOWERS AND INCENSE" (Stanza 7b] 
illustrates Worship with Pleasing Objects. "AND wrrH THE 
SEVENFOLD WORSHIP" (Stanza 8] illustrates Meditative 
Worship. A bodhisattva on the Equipment Path, who is 
going to be an instructor himself, should be skilled in these 
matters of Worship because they afford great growth in the 
Equipment of Merit. 
AND WITH THE SEVENFOLD WORSHIP EXPRESSED 
IN THE DEEDS OF SAMANTABHADRA (Stanza 8a] 
refers to that scripture known as the Deeds of 
Samantabhadra, [280b] the Royal Resolves, which is a part 
of the Stalks in Array Sutra. The great scholars and holy 
Gurus have described this siitra as a lamp for the scriptures 
of the Bodhisattvas' vehicle of the Perfections. It is the 
completely good [samanta-bhadra] practice of a Bodhisattva 
who had attained the Great Level. It is the completely good 
[ samanta-bhadra] practice of those who have discovered 
the treasure found in endless oceans of Resolve. And it 
is the Resolve of "One Who Is Completely Good" 
[Samantabhadra]. 
[The Royal ResolvesP 
(1 To all those Lions of Men who 
In every corner of this world have 
Passed beyond the dimensions of time, 
I pay homage with body, speech, mind. 
2 With the power of Resolve in good practice, 
I use bodies more numerous than atoms 
To pay reverence to all 
Victors my mind can perceive.

--- PAGE 40 [DIRECT] ---

26 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
3 I place full faith in these Victors, 
And their virtues of Excellence-
In these countless Buddhas, seated 'midst 
Their Sons, more than atoms upon atoms. 
4 
I praise all those gone to Bliss, 
With oceans of endless laud; 
I sing the virtues of all Victors 
With the whole range of ocean's voice. 
5 With fine flowers and fine garlands, 
Cymbals' sound, unguents and parasols, 
With finest lamps and pure incense, 
I do worship all those Victors. 
6 With finest cloth and excellent fragrances, 
With vessels of powder piled high as Meru, 
With special arrays of anything rare, 
Again to those Victors I do give worship. 
7 I also devote to all Victors 
All magnificent and supreme worship; 
In the strength of my faith in good practice, 
I pay worship in homage to all Victors. 
8 Whatever sins I may have committed 
Out of lust or hatred or illusion, 
Whether in body, speech, or mind as well, 
I confess them, each and every one. 
9 I rejoice in all the merits of the 
Buddha's Sons, of Solitary Victors, 
Of those still learning and those beyond, 
In the entire world's merit I rejoice. 
10 I entreat the Supreme Wheel's Turning 
From those who are Lamps throughout this world, 
Who through their steps to Enlightenment 
Have reached unencumbered Buddhahood. 
11 
With folded hands, I petition all those 
Who long to teach NirvaQa, to remain 
For all creatures' welfare and happiness, 
Throughout ages that cannot be counted.

--- PAGE 41 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
27 
12 Whatever least Merit I have gained 
In Homage, Worship, or Confession, 
In Rejoicing or Entreaty or my Petition, 
I bestow it on all for Enlightenment's sake. 
13 
I shall worship the Buddhas of the past 
Wherever they dwelt throughout the worlds; 
And may those yet to come, find their goal swiftly 
Through the steps to the Buddha's Enlightenment.) 
First Interpretation 
Now some Gurus interpret the Good Practice Resolves as 
sevenfold Worship in the following manner: [1] The first 
verse teaches Worship of Homage with body, speech and 
mind; [2] the second verse teaches the Worship of Body-
Offerings; [3] the third verse teaches the Worship of Faith, 
with the Buddhas as its object; [4] the fourth verse shows 
the Worship of Praise; [5] the fifth and sixth verses teach 
the Worship with Ordinary Things; [6] the seventh verse 
teaches Supreme Worship; [7] the eighth, ninth and tenth 
verses teach the Worship of the Three Heaps [Confession, 
Rejoicing, Entreaty]. Then they say the rest of the verses 
show the bestowal of the merit of this Worship. 
Second Interpretation 
Again, some Gurus find sevenfold Worship in the Royal 
Resolves [just from the fifth verse]: [1] finest flowers, 
[2] finest garlands, [3] finest music, [4] finest unguents, 
[5] finest lamps, [6] finest incense, and [7] finest cloth. They 
say that the "fr~grances" and "vessels of powder" [in the 
sixth verse] are included under unguents and incense; and 
that the "special arrays" [ofthe sixth verse] are to be made 
out of each of the above items as well as things not 
[explicitly] stated there. 
Third Interpretation 
And other learned Gurus interpret the Worship as seven-
fold by summarising them as Seven Limbs which comprise 
Meditative [281a] Worship. They say it clearly means this

--- PAGE 42 [DIRECT] ---

28 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
kind of Worship because of the words following the seven-
fold summation [in the twelfth verse] itself: 
"I shall worship the Buddhas of the past and present 
Wherever they dwell throughout the worlds." 
These [three interpretations] are in no way contradictory, 
and one can take whichever one prefers. 
Kinds of Worship 
Now then, the kinds of Worship are twofold: [A] Worship 
with Pleasing Objects, and [B] Meditative Worship. 
With Pleasing Objects 
Worship of Pleasing Objects can be [1] either of things 
actually at hand, or [2] of things created by the mind. 
Things ac~ually at hand can be kinds of flowers, incense, 
music, a kingdom or one's precious gems. Or they can be 
one's own mind and its basis, or a son, daughter, wife, or 
servants and the like. Things created by the mind are all 
those most excellent things of the universe which have no 
earthly owners and cannot be appropriated by anyone- the 
kinds of things mentioned in the Cloud of Jewels Siitra, the 
Garland of Thought Tantra, the Seal, Worship, and Centre 
of Concentration Siitra, the Flaming Jewel; and the 
Progress in Practice. Other things created by the mind are 
the arrays of offerings found, for instance, in the Heavenly 
Treasure: the Seven Precious Things of a Universal 
Monarch's Kingdom, and jewels, gold, silver, conch, 
crystal, moonstone and sapphire, emerald, pearl and red-
pearl, ruby and diamond, cat's-eye, topaz, lapis [281b] 
lazuli, veined turquoise, beryl and shell-crystal, coral and 
quartz- whole showers of such gems, and countless palaces 
bedecked with jewelled banners, pennants and parasols. 
Moreover, one can take indescribable quantities of these 
things and offer them in the way the Flaming Jewel Formula 
mentions:

--- PAGE 43 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 29 
"Emitting a brilliance streaming with flowers, 
With canopies of flowers and great mounds of flowers, 
Scattering flowery profusion everywhere, 
The Great Beings gave worship to the Victor. " 4 
Using this verse, one can also offer arrays [as the Formula 
itself does] of incense, perfume, garlands and powders, 
cloth and gems, lotuses, victory garlands and royal banners 
- all in their panoplies of colour. 
In the same sort of way, [imagine] a well-made parasol 
with its handle, colourfully fashioned of precious things, 
and providing an indescribable shelter for all the para-
dises of the Buddhas. Then do the same with a royal 
banner, treating it as you did the parasol. Or use a 
pennant or victory flag, [seeing] their size and material and 
number. 
Or again, [imagine] showers of colourful flowers, perfect 
in shape and fragrance; then showers of garlands and of 
parasols, of victory banners, pennants and flags, and all the 
ineffable accoutrements of fabulous castles. The same 
method of worship can be applied to lamps and showers of 
incense, as well as to the eating and drinking of refresh-
ments whose colour, aroma, and taste is excellent, or the 
wearing of soft and fragrant cloth. 
Other mind-created things for offering are the pleasant 
and captivating sounds and melodies of music: of the lute 
and flute, of drums-snare-, kettle-, and bass-oftabor and 
conch, of cymbal and tinkling bell, the riot-drum- and the 
rapturous song of gods and men. [282a] Or just the hearing 
of melodious praise of the Three Jewels and contemplation 
of only one of its benefits - benefits more numerous than 
particles in a hundred ten-million Mount Sumerus of 
sandalwood powder! Even that description of worship is 
found in the Cloud of Jewels Sutra! 
Meditative Worship 
The second kind of Worship, Meditative, is twofold: [1] the 
Meditative Worship itself, and [2] the Supreme Worship. 
The former has the Seven Limbs of Worship of:

--- PAGE 44 [DIRECT] ---

30 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
[a] 
Homage, 
[b] Pleasing Objects, 
[c] 
Confession of Sins, 
[d] Rejoicing [at Virtue], 
[e] Entreaty [for the Doctrine], 
[f] 
Petition [for the Buddha's blessing], and 
[g] 
Bestowal [of one's Merit on others]. 
[a] The Worship of Homage includes worship with the body 
as well as in speech. Bodily Worship is described in the first 
three verses of the Good Practice Resolves, where it tells 
what the object of one's attention is, what bodily offering 
means, and how homage is paid. The same topic is treated 
in the Three Heaps Sutra in the words: 
"In touching right knee to the ground ... in touching left 
knee to the ground . . . in touching right hand to the 
ground ... beget the Thought: 'May all creatures in this 
direction remain on the Path'. " 5 
The same is to be understood for touching the left hand and 
head to the ground. [282b] It also speaks about the 
bestowal of the merit of that Homage: 
"By this Homage of my five limbs, may the Five 
Obscurations of all creatures be cleansed away! May 
their Five Eyes be purified, and their Five Senses be 
perfect! May they remain in the Five Paths, and attain 
the Five Superknowledges unimpaired! May creatures 
born in the Five Destinies rise superior from those 
destinies, and attain to pre-eminent Conduct, Con-
centration, Insight, Liberation, and to superior vision 
and wisdom of Liberation! May they get to see the 
Buddha, hear the Doctrine, and join the Community!"6 
Worship with speech is performed at the same time as the 
bodily Homage, making the obeisance and reciting hymns 
like the Three Jewels Praise or with whatever one is inspired. 
[b] Worship with Pleasing Objects has already been 
described.

--- PAGE 45 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
31 
[c] For the Worship of the Confession of Sins, one 
may consult texts like the Golden Splendour, or [my] 
Confession of Failings, the Three Heaps Sutra, or the 
Removal of Action's Obscuration. The Siltra Set Forth by 
Ak~ayamati shows that the very Confession of Sin does 
constitute Worship, in the words: "Even the confession of 
my own and others' sin turns into merit." 
[d] That Rejoicing [at Virtue] is also Worship is verified in 
passages of the Moon-Lamp Sutra, where one can see also 
that [e] Entreaty, [f] Petition, and [g) Bestowal, are all 
considered as Worship. 
The Supreme Worship has two divisions: [a]withobjective-
basis, and [b] without objective-basis. [283a] In regard 
to Worship with objective-basis, the [Questions of] 
Siigaramati Sutra says: 
"0 Sagaramati, there are three things that are supreme 
for attendance upon, and worshipping of the Tathagatas. 
What are the three? They are producing the Thought of 
Enlightenment, and comprehending the holy Doctrine, 
and begetting the Great Compassion for creatures. " 7 
And the Gradual Rising Sutra: 
"Good Sir, the bodhisattva who worships the Tathagata 
is one who looks for four certain qualities. What are the 
four? Faith in that excellent object of his veneration; and 
that other creatures, noticing him, will perform Worship 
also; and that from worshipping the Tathagata, his 
Enlightenment Thought will become steady; and that by 
seeing the Thirty-two marks of the Great Person, he will 
acquire the roots of virtue. These are the four qualities."8 
And in the River of Brine Sutra, the Blessed One declares: 
"Giving delight to creatures is also a form of supreme 
Worship."9

--- PAGE 46 [DIRECT] ---

32 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
A.dirya Santideva has this: 
"If others are happy, the great Sages rejoice; 
If others are sad, the Sages are sad; 
When others are content, all the Sages rejoice; 
Harm done others is harm done to the Sage." 10 
Then he adds: 
"Henceforth I go as a slave to the world 
In order to please the Tathagatas; 
It is right that the mass of men put feet on my head, 
Or even slay me-:- if only it please the Lord of the World." 
The Compassionate Ones are making the entire 
World their own- there is no doubt about that! 
Is it not the Lords who appear in all [283b] 
These creature-forms? How then not respect them? 
It is the same as pleasing the Tathagatas. " 11 
And in the Compendium of Training he says: 
"Worshipping with loving intent 
Constitutes a creature's greatness; 
Merit from faith in the Buddha 
Constitutes the Buddha's greatness. " 12 
Or again from the Progress in Practice: 
"There is no other means of pleasing the Victors 
Except by showing deference to creatures." 13 
This whole subject is explained at length in that text, and it 
should be consulted. 
As for [b] the Worship without objective-basis: 
It is contemplation with the Perfection of Insight. In this 
case, there is no object of Worship, or Worshipper, or 
substances for Worship. Hence the Perfection of Insight 
Sutrasays:

--- PAGE 47 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
33 
Whoever sees me as a Body, or knows me as a voice, that 
person sees me falsely. He does not see me. The Buddhas 
are the Body of Truth, and those who are guided have 
studied that Truth; yet its true nature is not to be seen, 
and no one can be conscious of it as an object. 14 
The Chapter of Ever-Weeping should be studied, where this 
theme is clearly preached. And in the Lion's Roar Sutra 
there is this passage: 
"If one does not see the Buddha when one has the 
concept of 'Buddha', then what need to say how 
impossible it would be when one worships the 'Buddha'. 
What then does worshipping the Buddha mean? It 
means worshipping without producing the marks of a 
concept. The worship of the Tathagata is that which is 
without mind, without products of the mind, without 
concepts of 'Buddha', without concepts of 'Community', 
and without concepts of 'Person' or 'Self or 
'Other'." 15 [284a] 
One should consult the sutra itself for the full meaning. 
One could also appropriately quote the noble Asanga 
here: 
"The Blessed Buddha is not as pleased by the Worship of 
Pleasing Objects as he is by Meditative Worship. " 16 
And as to the Buddha being the Body of Truth, a chapter of 
the Garlands ofthe Buddha says: 
"The Buddhas are the Body of Truth; 
The Tathagata does not originate; 
He is !Jurified, just like Space." 17 
And the Heavenly Treasure Sutra: 
"If there is no objective-basis [to be found ]for the Blessed 
Buddha in his essential reality, where will be the 
objective-basis for viewing him as a form with charac-
teristics?"18

--- PAGE 48 [DIRECT] ---

34 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
As the superior Acarya Nagarjuna has said: 
"All things being empty of inherent existence, 
What is there to praise and who to praise it? 
Rejecting origination and destruction, 
For which there is no middle or extremes, 
And subject and object have no place-
In this lies your whole power to praise!" 19 
Such then are the different kinds of Worship, and the 
bodhisattva of dull or keen faculties should learn those 
which are suitable for him. 
The Heart of Enlightenment 
'Now let us return to the root text itself, and my words: 
AND A MIND THAT DOES NOT TURN BACK .UNTIL 
THE·HEART OF ENLIGHTENMENT IS REACHED. [Stanza 8) 
ln the ordinary sense, this Heart of Enlightenment refers to 
the site of the Great Enlightenment, the glorious Diamond 
Seat; or to the place called Akani~tha, the paradise of the 
glorious Heavily Adorned Sutra. Both these places are 
called the "Heart" because there [the Blessed One] 
attained the Diamond-like Concentration. But in the truest 
sense, the place where he acquired that Concentration 
should not be called the "Heart", because ultimately the 
Heart of Enlightenment is the very essence of Truth itself. 
As the Heavenly Treasure Sutra says: [284b] 
"The Heart of Enlightenment is Space; 
Enlightenment has the characteristic of Space. " 20 
Not Turning Back 
The WOrds" AND A MIND THAT DOES NOT TURN BACK" refer to 
a bodhisattva's [perseverance in] not turning back from the 
goal. There are three interpretations of this: [1] he does not

--- PAGE 49 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
35 
tum back after the Path of Practice; [2] he does not turn 
back after seeing the [Four] Truths; [3] he does not turn 
back after the Eighth [Bodhisattva] Level. One can study 
the full significance of these in the Ornament for the 
Realisations: Treatise on the Perfection of Insight. 
Or again, it can mean he does not turn back after the 
Mundane Paths; or after seeing the Truths; or after the 
Seventh_ [Bodhisattva] Level. For this interpretation, 
consult Acarya Jftanakirti's Cause of Splendour: A Major 
Treatise on Progress in Thatness. 
There is still another fourfold division of not turning back: 
[1] not turning back after begetting the Thought of 
Enlightenment; [2] not turning back in secret;21 [3] not 
turning back after acquiring Patience [in seeing that 
phenomena do not arise]; [4] [lacking in text]. 22 
Refuge-Taking 
The words "FIRST TAKE THE THREE REFUGES THRICE" [Stanza 
9] mean that one should take them three times for each of 
the Three Jewels. Here let me give a summary of topics for 
treating the Refuge-taking: [1] Content, [2] Candidate, 
[3] Intention, [4] Time, [5] Training, [6] Disposition, 
[7] Criteria, [8] Method, [9] Acts, [10] Classification, 
[11] Interpretation, [12] Examples, 
[13] Penalties, 
[14] Necessities, [15] and Benefits.23 Now let me talk about 
the subject of taking the Refuges. 
Mahayana Candidate 
Some persons live faultlessly in the Conduct proper to one 
of the seven Pratimok~a ranks. They are persons whose 
conversion comes out of the suffering of sa~sara. They are 
ever mindful of death. And they are by nature of greater 
Compassion and Insight. If they are Householders, then 
they have the Training of the Lay Devotee [upasaka] with 
its Five Precepts and forty-five practices pertinent to them. 
[285a] If they are Religious, they have their own method of 
Training; for instance, the items explained in the Hearers

--- PAGE 50 [DIRECT] ---

36 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Level: the Ornaments of Virtuous Practice, and Qualities 
of Purification, the Four Resources and Four Modes of 
Life, and so on. They also have the best of rituals, paths of 
practice, livelihoods, conduct, and views. Furthermore, 
their [way oflife includes] zeal in the yoga of wakefulness in 
the early and latter parts of the night, propriety in food and 
restraint of the senses, and a fearful attitude toward even 
the slightest infraction [of their rules]. 
Now suppose such a person, after much reflection, says 
to himself: "If by all this Pratimok~a discipline, I am still 
not finding my own and others' good, how then shall I really 
do it? This so-called 'Great Vehicle' [Mahayana] is famed 
for its achieving one's own and others' good- I will seek it 
out from a holy Spiritual Friend." And then he strives for a 
long time to please a holy man who will be suitable as his 
Guru. And when the Guru is won, with guileless heart he 
touches his feet with his head and says: 
"Holy Man, have a kindly heart toward me. I beseech 
you to speak to me about the Path of Mahayana - that 
Means to fully achieve my own and others' good." 
Preparation of Place 
Then the Spiritual Friend examines the disciple's 
disposition in three ways: according to his habits, his 
dreams, and his inspirations from both the mundane and 
supra-mundane gods. [285b] If he discerns that the disciple 
is a fit vessel, the Guru smiles and rejoices. And with no 
thought for esteem or gain or fine gifts, but with affectionate 
regard for that disciple, he goes about preparing a place [for 
the ceremony]. It should be pleasant and sturdy, and some 
isolated area apart from [the eyes of] sinful men. For 
cleanliness he paves and polishes it with the five bovine 
articles. Then he should anoint it with sandalwood [paste] 
or the like, and scatter fragrant flower petals around lightly. 
He should have images of the Three Jewels in the place, 
and his small books and things on a shelf or Bodhisattva-
throne, arranging a canopy over it, and using whatever 
articles of worship he has- flowers, foods, decorations, and 
different kinds of music.

--- PAGE 51 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 37 
Ceremony of Petition 
When this is done, the disciple, bathed and dressed in clean 
clothes, begs the Spiritual Friend to be seated on the high 
throne decorated with flowers. Then he visualises his Guru 
as [Buddha] the Teacher, thinking to himself, "This man is 
the Defender and Refuge of all creatures." With good 
intention he then says: 
"0 Son of Noble Family, please heed me! In this state of 
sa:q1sara from beginningless time, I have been wounded 
by much suffering and have become very exhausted. I 
have no Master. I have no Defender. I have no Refuge." 
He repeats this three times, and then the Guru declares: 
"0 man, you are depressed and weary from sa:q1sara, 
and your desire to enter upon the Path of the Great 
Vehicle is very right. Now you shallleam it! Since what 
we call the 'Three Jewels' can be the Master and 
Defender and Refuge of those who are without master 
and defender and refuge, [286a] go for Refuge to them 
with pure mind and cheerful heart. Make the good of all 
creatures your goal. Gather up whatever things for 
Worship you have so that reverence and respect may be 
shown them [the Three Jewels] befittingly." 
Then the disciple kneels with both knees on the ground and 
folds his hands, and offering a flower he repeats the 
following three times: 
"0 Chief of Men, please heed me! 
From beginningless time till now, 
I have spun round in sarpsara, 
Greatly wearied by suffering. 
I beg you teach me the Path 
Which puts an end to suffering." 
Thereupon the Guru visualises the Three Jewels in the 
realms throughout the entire universe, and reverences them 
with an ineffable array of bodies. With an inconceivable

--- PAGE 52 [DIRECT] ---

38 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
[number] of heads for each body, he reverences them with 
the tongues of those heads. And when he has performed 
the aforementioned Sevenfold Worship, then the Refuges 
should be given. 
The Training Involved 
One who has taken the Refuges should then observe the 
proper Training: he should not pay homage to other gods; 
he renounces harm and injury to others; he does not 
associate with heretics or show them religious reverence. 
Mindful of the eminent qualities of the Three Jewels, he 
takes the Refuges over and over. Mindful of their great 
kindness, he is ever zealous in worship, making first-
offerings even before eating and drinking. Mindful of 
Compassion, he spreads these practices among other 
creatures also. [286b] 
Whenever he has any need in whatever he is doing, he 
makes Petition, worshipping the Three Jewels, and rejects 
other worldly means. 
The benefits that come from the Three Jewels are: [1] at 
the time of Cause; "[2] at the time of Path; and [3] at the time 
of the Result. The first are the benefits in the present 
lifetime; the other two should be learned from a Guru. 24 
And so one who knows the advantages of taking the 
Refuges will repeat them three times a day and three times 
a night. He will preserve and not abandon the Three Jewels 
either out of human respect or jest or threat of his life. 
Notes to Chapter 1 
1 Ot. 887, Vol. 35:79.1. 
2 This set of twenty-seven ma~qalas is unknown to today's lamas. It may have 
referred to a series of temple-paintings (thang-ka) popular at Tho-ling in 
Atisa's time, or possibly ;it should be read as "twenty-seven-fold", as the 
mai]qala of Sitatapatra, the Diamond Crown (~~J4a) of the Tathagata 
Family in Action Tantra. See Mandala No. 8, Gdugs-dkar lha nyer-bdun-
ma'i dkyil-thang, in Lokesh Chandra's Ma'!'falas of the Tantra-samuccaya. 
3 Ot. 716, Vol. 11: 285.3ff. The stitra is not actually quoted in Atisa's text since 
his readers would know it by heart, but is supplied here for convenience in 
studying his analysis of it. 
4 Ot. 472 (SS: p. 291). 
5 Ot. 950, Vol. 37:114.5.

--- PAGE 53 [DIRECT] ---

THE TRIPLE REFUGE 
39 
6 op. cit., 115.1. 
7 
Ot. 819 (SS: p. 279). 
8 
SS: p. '279. The siitra is not found under this title in the Tibetan catalogues. 
9 Unidentified. 
10 
Progress in Practice, Ot. 5272, Vol. 99:252.5. 
11 
ibid. 
12 SS: p. 155. 
13 Ch. VI: 119. 
14 
Ot. 739, Vol. 21:255.5. 
15 
Ot. 760 (23), Voi. 24:41.4. 
16 Unidentified. 
17 
Unidentified. 
18 Ot. 815. Vol. 33:28.3. 
19 
Praise of Ultimate Truths, Ot. 2014, Vol. 46:34.4. 
20 SS: p. 249. 
21 
gsang-ste phyir-mi-ldog-pa. The phrase is interpreted in the lama tradition as 
referring to the First Bodhisattva Level, but the significance of the "in 
secret" or "privately" has been lost. 
22 The omission of the fourth division here either is an oversight of the copyist, 
or the seventh or eighth Bodhisattva Level (the most commonly interpreted 
as the point of assured perseverance) is to be understood. 
23 The summary is taken verbatim from Atiisa's Instruction on Refuge-Taking 
(Ot. 5391. Vol. 103: 195.4). In that short text each of the topics is defined and 
explained; however. here it is used only loosely as an outline of what follows. 
24 The times at which benefit comes from taking the Refuges is amplified in the 
above text (note 23, page 196: 3): 
[1] "At time of cause means in this life and in other re-rebirths: [a] In this 
life: it effects freedom from the Eight Great Fears, and makes friends 
with the 1,000 gods who rejoice in the Teaching and are without mis-
chief. And at the hour of death it is a mental joy, and so on. [b] In other 
rebirths: it guides one from the suffering of samsara, and the suffering 
of evil destinies, and gives zest for the joys of higher rebirths and 
Nirvana. 
[2] At time of Path: It affords the practice ofthe Noble Eightfold Path, and 
of the Seven Limbs of Enlightenment and so on. 
(3] At the time of the Result: One attains the two Nirvanas and the Three 
Bodies." 
·

--- PAGE 54 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 55 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 2 
The Enlightenment Thought 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
BEGETIING THE THOUGHT OF 
ENLIGHTENMENT 
10-11 
42 
A Love 
42 
B Ritual for Begetting the Thought 
43 
C Interpretations on the Thought 
44 
1 Nature 
2 Ritual 
3 Growth 
4 Training 
D Preludes to Begetting the Thought 
46 
1 Purification of Mind 
2 Presentation of Gifts 
E Praises of the Thought 
46 
II RESOLUTION-THOUGHT OF 
ENLIGHTENMENT 
12 
49 
A Qualities 
49 
B Studying the Siitras 
13 
50 
C Reliance on the Guru 
51 
D Repetition of the Thought 
13 
55 
E Benefits 
55 
F Expanding the Thought 
18 
57 
III 
PROGRESS-THOUGHT OF 
ENLIGHTENMENT 
19 
58 
A Origin in Siitras 
58 
B Differ~nce between Resolve 
and Progress 
60

--- PAGE 56 [DIRECT] ---

2 
The Enlightenment Thought 
Begetting the Thought of Enlightenment 
Having shown the special kind of Refuge-taking [for 
Mahayana], I address the topic of Begetting the Enlighten-
ment Thought in the following twenty-three stanzas, 
starting with: 
THEN, BECAUSE THE THOUGHT OF LOVE FOR 
ALL CREATURES IS THE PREREQUISITE, (Stanza 10]. 
The word "THEN" means after one has taken the Refuges. 
By "ALL CREATURES", I point out the object in one's 
begetting the Thought, and that one cannot put a limit on 
creatures, thinking they end with just so many. As the 
siitras say: 
"If a:ll realms throughout the world were to become one 
huge enclosure of water, and one man worked at dipping 
the water from it with the tip of a single hair for hundreds 
of thousands of years - that water might diminish some-
what; but there is no such lessening of the realm of 
creatures." 
And the Deeds of Samantabhadra: The Royal Resolves also 
says: 
"The extent of all creatures is as vast as the limits of 
space." 1 
When one has made creatures his object to that extent, 
then he can beget the Thought. 
Love 
"BECAUSE THE THOUGHT OF LOVE IS THE PREREQUISITE" refers 
to perceiving [all creatures] as one's mother2 - from which

--- PAGE 57 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
43 
arises the thought of repaying their kindness: that is Love. 
Then out of the thought of Love comes the thought of 
Compassion, And from the thought of Compassion, the 
Enlightenment Thought emerges. That is why I said the 
Thought of Love is prerequisite. [287a]. The next seven 
lines follow this same theme. 
Ritual for Begetting the Thought 
"MUST BEGET THIS THOUGHT OF ENLIGHTENMENT" means that 
after taking the Triple Refuge, and carefully offering 
whatever he can in Worship to the Three Jewels and Guru 
Spiritual Friend, one then makes the maQ.qala in the 
presence of the Guru. Then with good and sincere inten-
tion, he reflects within himself: "This Guru is the same as 
the Buddha seated before me. I too shall accomplish all the 
great deeds of all the Buddhas of the past, present and 
future." Then kneeling on both knees and offering a flower 
in his folded hands, he declares three times: 
"0 Omniscient One, epitome of wisdom, 
Purifier of the Wheel of Life, 
I have no refuge in any Lord, 
Except at your lotus feet. 
0 Hero of creatures, may the Great Sage 
Bestow his kindness upon me! 
May that Holy One grant to me the 
Supreme and highest Enlightenment Thought!" 
Then the Guru Spiritual Friend invites to witness all the 
Blessed Buddhas of all the realms throughout the universe, 
and all the Bodhisattvas who dwell on the Great Level, and 
all the Guru Spiritual Friends of past and present. In their 
presence he cleanses his [conscious] stream with the ritual 
of the Good Practice and the Progress in Bodhisattva 
Practice. When the disciple has likewise thoroughly purified 
[his stream], he again makes his petition to the Guru with 
flower in hand. [287b] The Guru then reflects - without 
thought of profit, esteem or fame, or of [the disciple's] tone 
or verses or gifts-" Ah, this is wonderful! That in this age of 
great dread there should come forth a holy creature like

--- PAGE 58 [DIRECT] ---

44 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
this! It is marvellous!" Such is the way to perform a 
ceremony [for begetting the Thought] with true Higher 
Intention. 
Interpretations on the Thought 
There have been different interpretations about Enlighten-
ment Thought among the Acaryas of old in my country: 
King 
Indrabhiiti, 
Nagarjuna,, 
Sant}deva, 
Asanga, 
Daf!l~trasena, Candragomin, Siira, 
Santirak~ita and 
others. The opinions of these great scholars may differ on 
various points: [1] on the very Thought of Enlightenment 
itself; [2] on the ritual for the Thought of Enlightenment; 
[3] on methods for growth in the Thought; [4] in the method 
of Training [to be observed] with the Thought. 
[1] On the first point, some Acaryas say that the 
Enlightenment Thought is the Resolve nurtured in the 
Mundane Paths when one is practising out of devotion. 
Others hold that Resolution is the Thought in so far as it 
depends upon an object [creatures], and is a species of 
Relative Truth. Others that Resolution is the Thought 
when it produces the basic virtues equivalent to the Equip-
ment Path's "Aids to Liberation". And others that Resolu-
tion, which has yet to actualise its merit, is the Thought. 
Still others, that simply the Resolve to take Perfect 
Enlightenment as one's objective is the Thought, as in [the 
difference between] "Desiring to go, and [actually] going." 
There are other opinions besides these, but to include them 
would make my text too big. [288a] 
[2] For the different rituals [for begetting the Thought], 
one should consult the texts of the above-mentioned 
scholars. 
[3] On methods of growth in the Thought, some hold that 
it grows through begetting it in front of a person; but some 
say it should not be produced except in the presence of a 
Buddha; others hold that it grows through the practice of 
the Four Modes [of Compassion: seeing creatures as 
mothers: repayment of their kindness: compassion: 
Enlightenment Thought]. 
[4] There have been differences about the method of

--- PAGE 59 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 45 
Training [involved], depending on five 
[kinds of] 
bodhisattvas: 
[a] 
those who have first produced the Thought; 
[b] those who are entering the Practice Path; 
[ c] 
those who will not turn back; 
[d] those who have attained Patience [in seeing that] 
phenomena do not arise; 
[e] 
those who have but one rebirth left. 
Some hold that a Training pertains only to what is [pre-
scribed] for the first two. Som~ hold that everything 
preached in the siitras must be observed. Some that only 
the Training of the Equipment Path need be observed. 
Others that neither these Trainings nor any like them [need 
be observed]. Still others hold that the principal Trainings 
for those who have taken the Refuges are the ones [to 
observe] - instructions found in such siitras as the Stalks in 
Array, the Embracing the Roots of Virtue, and the 
Producing the Power of Faith Sutra - but still the Eight 
Teachings on Forgetting and Not Forgetting the Enlighten-
ment Thought [fou,nd] in the Questions of Kasyapa Sutra 
are also to be kept. 
These are only a few examples [of the differences]. Ifl set 
down all the systems of the great scholars of the past, my 
text would be far too large. These great Acaryas were 
Mahayana Path's great men of philosophy, transformed by 
great love and compassion, their minds steady in both [the 
resolve and progress] aspects of Enlightenment Thought. 
Some of them had attained the power of the Great Seal. 3 
Some saw the Truth [directly]. [288b] And the ones who 
achieved the "Highest Mundane Virtue"4 received instruc-
tion from Buddhas in Apparition Bodies. We must keep in 
mind that these m~n represerlt the Great Path itself, since 
their interpretations of the siitras are [at the same time] 
things declared by the Blessed One himself. However, my 
Gurus taught me that one should hold the system presented 
him by his own Gurus. 
At least there are no differences of opinion about the 
method of Ritual for begetting the resolution thought for

--- PAGE 60 [DIRECT] ---

46 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Enlightenment., The excellent 
Acaryas Nagarjuna, 
Asanga, and Santideva are all in accord. And my 
own Gurus, venerable and glorious Bodhibhadra and 
SuvarQadvipa, scholars of our own day, follow their system. 
I in turn followed my Gurus in that small ritual5 I composed 
for a group of my disciples; and mY, presentation is simply 
that of Nagarjuna, Asanga, and Santideva, and can be 
summarised as follows: 
Preludes to Begetting the Thought 
Two things are prerequisite, like watering, so to speak, for 
growth of the wish-granting tree of Enlightenment 
Thought: 
[1] 
purification of mind, and 
[2] 
presentation of gifts to the Guru. 
The presentation of gifts should be made as described in 
passages of the Good Age Sutra and the Great Compassion. 
[289a] The purification of mind is what I have already 
pointed out in the Resolves of Samanta-bhadra, and can be 
performed with the method of the Progress in Bodhisattva 
J?ractice. Then, using the ritual either of Asanga or 
Santideva, and cultivating the Four Infinitudes as the pre-
requisites, beget the Thought of Supreme Enlightenment. 
This is the path of the Great Wagons, and the religious 
tradition of the Superior Person, handed down from Guru 
to Guru. 
Praises of the Thought 
What is unique about the Thought of Enlightenment when 
it rises in the [conscious] stream of the disciple who con-
ceives it? The Blessed One gave the answer to that in this 
passage from the Sutra Set Forth By Alqayamati 
[Imperishable Mind]: 
"[Then] Ak~ayamatisaid: 'VenerableSariputra, the very 
first Thought of Enlightenment that bodhisattvas con-
ceive is imperishable. And why is that so? Because it is 
pure. It rises without any influence of the passions. It

--- PAGE 61 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
47 
rises with tolerance because it has no desire for other 
vehicles. It rises with firmness because it is not anxious to 
argue with opponents. It is unassailable by any of the Evil 
Ones. 
"It is solid because it masters perfectly all roots of 
virtue. It is permanent because it knows well that all 
composite things are impermanent. It rises without 
hesitation because it embraces correctly all teachings of 
the Buddha. It is without distress because it uses no false 
powers. It rises continually because it is unshakeable. 
"This Thought is peerless because it has no kin.lt is like 
a diamond cutting through all appearances. [289b] It is 
infinite, storing up immeasurable merit. It rises with 
equal [love] toward all creatures. It is perfectly pure 
because it is completely without corruption. It is im-
maculate because of its clear light of insight. It rises with 
great conviction because it does not forsake its Higher 
Intention. It stretches far beyond because it is like and 
equal to space. It rises in great breadth because it makes 
all creatures its scope. 
"This Thought rises without obscuration because it is 
given over to dispassionate knowledge. It is a servant to 
all because of its constant great compassion. Because it 
knows [the value of] the ritual for Bestowal [of merit], it 
rises continually. Because it is the Thought taught by the 
Omniscient One, it is the prerequisite. It is worthy of 
study because it is not found in other vehicles, and any 
creatures studying them will not see it. 
"This Thought rises adorned with the Equipment of 
Merit. It rises with realisation because of its Equipment 
of Knowledge. It is the seed of all Buddha virtues. It is 
not shattered by any phenomena. It is the home of all 
happy things, 
"It rises [already] accumulating its equipment of 
Giving. It rises exalted in its resolve because of its 
equipment of Conduct. It rises in reverence because of 
its equipment of Patience. It rises invincible because of 
its equipment in Zeal. It rises with the marks of serenity 
because of its equipment in Meditation. It rises without 
hindrance because of its equipment of Insight. [290a]

--- PAGE 62 [DIRECT] ---

48 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"Because it has amassed great Love, it rises without 
ill-will. Because it has amassed great Compassion, it rises 
with firm roots. Because it has amassed great Joy, it 
abides in delight and gladness and supreme joy. In its 
grea:t Equanimity, it is undisturbed by either happiness 
or suffering. 
"It is blessed with the benediction of the Buddha. Its 
method is constant because of the unbroken ranks [of 
believers] in the Three Jewels. It rises as so well pro-
claimed in the assemblies of all the Buddha-realms 
throughout the uniyerse. 
"0 Venerable Sariputra, can such a thought of the 
Omniscient On~ ever perish?' 
"To which [Sariputra answered]: '0 Noble Youth, it 
cannot. Anyone who holds that such a Thought of the 
Omniscient One perishes, holds that space perishes!' 
"Then Ak~ayamati said: 'Venerable Sariputra, that is 
right. The Thought of the Omniscient One is imperish-
able. And since [a bodhisattva's] Enlightenment Thought 
is the root of the Omniscient One's Thought, it too is 
imperishable.' " 6 
Further on the Siitra continues: 
"This [resolute] intention [of Enlightenment Thought] is 
genuine because it is not artificially made. It is not 
artificially made because it cannot be swayed. It is un-
wavering because it comprehends completely. It fully 
comprehends because it has no deceit. It has no deceit 
because it is sincere. Sincere because pure, pure because 
clear, clear because without dissimulation. " 7 
The siitra continues at length in this fashion, and deserves 
to be studied. 
Such then is the Enlightenment Thought unique to 
Mahayana, the Thought which is superior by far to the 
whole world, the Thought which rejects no creature. This is 
the Thought that Bodhisattvas on the Great Level purified 
and made pure. [290b] They protected it and kept it un-
diminished, increasing it from Level to Level. And because

--- PAGE 63 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 49 
it is the Thought of all Buddhas, the bodhisattva who 
begets it, is ever after protected by the gods who rejoice in 
the Teaching. At the hour of death, he dies rejoicing, and 
the gods protect him through the Intermediate State and in 
his mother's womb and throughout childhood. All his basic 
virtues continue through [into his next rebirth] and his 
mind retains its stream of merit. 
As Acarya Santideva says in his Progress in Practice: 
"All other virtue is like the plaintain tree: 
When its fruit ripens, itself begins to decay; 
But the Tree of Enlightenment Thought grows 
Ever greater, and its fruit never decays. " 8 
Therefore, since the Thought of Enlightenment is imperish-
able, all its virtues [of growth] in the Mundane and 
Supramundane Paths and their fruition at the Buddha Level 
are imperishable. 
Resolution-Thought of Enlightenment 
Qualities 
At this point, having described the kind of Thought that 
arises, I wanted to speak about its beneficial qualities, and 
so I wrote: 
EVERY QUALITY THAT BELONGS TO 
BEGETTING THOUGHTS OF SUCH RESOLUTION. [Stanza 12] 
I referred to the qualities that Maitreya spoke about to 
Sudhana "IN HIS SUTRA, THE STALKS IN ARRAY" [Stanza 
12]: 
"0 Noble Youth, this Enlightenment Thought is like the 
seed of all the Buddha's teachings. It is like a field because 
it makes the good deeds of all creatures grow. Like earth 
because the whole world rests on it. Like Vaisravaq.a [the 
god of riches], because it destroys all poverty. Like a 
father because it protects all bodhisattvas. It is like a

--- PAGE 64 [DIRECT] ---

50 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
royal wish-fulfilling jewel because it grants all boons. 
Like a good flask filling all aspirations. It is like a lance 
because it vanquishes all corruptions, its enemies. Like 
armour because it wards off all careless activity of mind. 
Like a sword because it beheads corruption. Like an axe 
because it chops down the tree of corruption. Like a 
weapon because it defends from rebirth. 
"It is like a hook because it snatches one out of the 
river of saf!1sara. Like a cyclone because it scatters all the 
veils of obscuration. It is like a motto because it sum-
marises all the· resolves and practices of a bodhisattva. 
Like a shrine for all the worlds of gods and men and 
demigods. These are the qualiti'es of the Enlightenment 
Thought, 0 Noble Youth, and it has infinite variety of 
other attributes too. " 9 
In accord with this passage are the words I quoted [in 
Stanzas 14-17] from the Questions of the Householder 
Vlradatta, and they shc:mld be considered here also. 
Studying the Sutras 
There are many siitras and great discourses on these 
attributes by men like Nagarjuna and Santideva, but I do 
not present them here for fear of enlarging my text. But to 
acknowledge those sources, I wrote: 
READ THAT SUTRA OR HEAR IT FROM A GURU, AND WHEN 
THE INFINITE BENEFITS OF PERFECT ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
ARE SEEN, THEN FOR THAT VERY REASON YOU Will 
BEGET THE THOUGHT AGAIN AND AGAIN. [Stanza 13] 
On the words "READ THAT SUTRA", I quote from Santideva's 
Compendium of Training: 
"The precepts of Bodhisattva training appear most 
abundantly in the siitra collections. [291b] They state 
both what a Bodhisattva practises and what the precepts 
of his training are. Therefore always respect siitra study, 
lest through ignorance of them, transgressions occur and 
one go on to forfeit [the training altogether]." 10

--- PAGE 65 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
51 
He also says in his root text [ofthe Compendium]: 
"By never leaving the Spiritual Friend 
And by ever studying the siitras ... " 11 
[The Thought is preserved.] 
And in the Progre~s in Practice he says: 
"One must study the siitras, and the 
Sutra of Akii.Sagarbha is one that 
Should be studied from the very start. 
After that, the Compendium of the Sutras 
Composed by Nagarjuna is the one 
That should be studied next." 12 
Reliance on the Guru 
By my words, "HEAR IT FROM A GURU" (Stanza 13], J mean 
the kind of Guru who causes one to beget the Thought. 
And if he is that, then he is also a Guru in the lineage of 
Asanga as well as of Santideva. 
, 
Now in the Stalks in Array Siitra, when Srisambhava sees 
that [Sudhana] is wondering why he must rely on a Guru, 
he says: 
"Noble Youth, a bodhisattva rightly guided by a Spiritual 
Friend does not fall into bad destinies. A bodhisattva 
protected by a Spiritual Friend makes no mistakes in his 
training. Motivated by a Spiritual Friend, he transcends 
this world. Showing reverence to a Spiritual Friend, he 
perseveres in not forgetting any practices. Adopted by a 
Spiritual Friend, he is unassailable by any deed or 
corruption. 
"It is the Spiritual Friend who impresses on him the 
things that need to be done. [292a] He turns his indiffer-
ence aside and drives him forth from the city of sa~sara. 
Therefore, Noble Youth, since that is so, you must walk 
continually in the presence of Spiritual Friends. 
"With mind like the earth, not sinking under the 
burden of all things. With mind like a diamond, not 
changing. With mind like a pup, not easily provoked. 
With mind like the Cakravala Range, unshakeable by

--- PAGE 66 [DIRECT] ---

52 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
any suffering. With mind like a servant, uncomplaining 
in any work. Like a sweeper, dismissing overweening 
pride. Like a wagon, carrying heavy burdens. Like a 
ship, unwearied in its comings and goings. With mind 
like a wise son, ever studying the face of the Spiritual 
Friend - with such a mind give reverent service to the 
Spiritual Friend. 
"Noble Youth, you must see yourself as a sick man, 
and the Spiritual Friend as the doctor. His instructions 
are your medicine, and the cure of your sickness is taking 
to heart his prescriptions. " 13 
There is a similar passage [in the Stalks in Array J in the 
chapter about the monk Sagaramegha. And in the 
Questions of Ugra, there is this: 
"0 Householder, if a bodhisattva [has learned] to read 
and recite any four-line stanzas about Giving, Conduct, 
or Patience, Zeal, Meditation or Insight, or about 
accumulating the equipment for the Bodhisattva Path, 
[!hen] he must give reverence for that doctrine to the 
Acarya from whom he [first] heard, or learned to read 
and recite them. [292b] But even if he reverenced and 
attended and supported that Acarya for as many aeons as 
[those stanzas] have names and words and letters, the 
reverence due that Acarya, 0 Householder, would still 
not be enough- much less the reverence due the doctrine 
itself. " 14 
There are other pertinent accounts of relying on a Guru 
that should be studied in the Vajrapii1Ji Initiation Tantra, 
and the chapter on Sadaprarudita in the Perfection of 
Insight, as well as [the example of] AnathapiJ].qada. 
Noble Asanga speaks about Reliance on the Guru in his 
Bodhisattva Levels in this way: 
"There are certain questions one must ask about this 
matter: [1] What qualities make a bodhisattva a Spiritual 
Friend? [2] What qualities make him effective as a

--- PAGE 67 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
53 
Spiritual Friend? [3] What qualities make him stand out 
as an inspiration for faith? [4] What functions does he 
perform in acting as a Spiritual Friend? [5] What are the 
qualities of Reliance on a Guru? [6] What ideas should 
one have in mind for listening to the Doctrine from a 
Spiritual Friend? [7] What things should one avoid think-
ing about when listening to the Doctrine from a Spiritual 
Friend? 
"[1] A bodhisattva can be recognised as a Spiritual 
Friend, perfect in every respect, if he has eight qualities: 
[a] He keeps the discipline of the Bodhisattva Vow with-
out fault or failing. [b] He is very learned because his 
mind is pure. [ c] He has a comprehending mind and has 
acquired all possible virtue arising from contemplation. 
[d] His loving heart is endowed with compassion. [293a] 
He puts aside his own happiness in this life and works for 
the good of others. [e] He is aware of the terrible fear 
others may have when the Doctrine is being taught, and 
[displays] unfailing confidence and fearlessness himself. 
[f] He is patient in the face of contempt, censure or 
flattery, the unpleasantness of malicious gossip, and all 
the devious ways creatures have. [g] His mind does not 
tire in his strong and incessant teaching ofthe Doctrine 
to the four assemblies [of the Community]. [h] He has 
the gift of clarity and does not obscure the reality behind 
words. 
"[2] A bodhisattva will be effective in acting as a 
Spiritual Friend if he has five qualities: [a] He desires the 
happiness and benefit of others right from the start. 
[b] He knows what that happiness and benefit consists of. 
[c] He has unerring judgement. [d] Using every method 
and means of teaching the Doctrine, he has the power and 
ability to convert any creature capable of it, and his mind 
does not tire. [e] Impartial in compassion, he does not 
take sid~s with any persons, whether inferior, mediocre 
orsupenor. 
"[3] The Spiritual Friend presents himself as an in-
spiration for faith if he has five qualities: [a] If hearing 
him discourse inspires sincerity, then actually gazing 
upon him should also: his manner is truly serene and

--- PAGE 68 [DIRECT] ---

54 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
gracious, and his excellent disposition shows in his who~e 
external appearance. [b] He is steadfast and const~nt m 
his activities, in deed, word, and thought. [c] He 1s not 
hypocritical, and does not feign constancy to deceive 
others. [d] He does not envy others their discourses on 
the Doctrine or their esteem and gain, but rather rejoices 
for them. He looks upon his own honour and gain as 
strengths for [helping] others. [293b] [ e] He is simple and 
frugal in his needs, and whatever he saves beyond 
sufficiency, he gives to all. 
"[4] The bodhisattva performs five functions in acting 
as a Spiritual Friend: [a] He converses. [b] He reminds. 
[c] He encourages. [d] He instructs. [e] He teaches the 
Doctrine. The classification of those terms can be learned 
from [my] Hearers Level, and the topics on Instruction 
and Teaching can be found in the Powers chapter [of my 
Bodhisattva Levels]. 
"[5] There are four qualities to [the disciple's] perfect 
reliance on a Spiritual Friend: [a] Acting as his common 
servant and nurse as occasion demands. [b] Speaking 
respectfully and at the proper time; rising in his presence 
and greeting him cheerfully; bowing with folded hands. 
[c] Worshipping him [as a Buddha], and providing him 
with articles of worship, suitable religious robes, food, 
sleeping-quarters, a mat, and healing medicine, and the 
necessities of life. [d] Making him one's refuge, and 
walking in his presence, confessing one's sins to him and 
questioning and listening. 
"[6] One who wants to hear the Doctrine from a 
Spiritual Friend should have five ideas [in mind] while he 
listens: [a] It is precious because it is so rare. [b] It is an 
eye, because it is the means to gaining deep Insight. [c] It 
is brilliant because it teaches all truths correctly. [d] It is 
of the greatest benefit because it is the means of gaining 
Supreme Enlightenment. [e] It is irreproachable because 
it is the source of pure joy in Calmness and Insight, 
leading to Nirvana and Perfect Enlightenment. [294a] 
"[7] There are five things one should not think while 
listening to the Doctrine from a Spiritual Friend: [a] One 
should not think: 'This man breaks the Rule and does not

--- PAGE 69 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
55 
keep his Vow; I should not listen to the Doctrine from 
him.' [b] Or: 'This man comes from a lower class [family 
than I], so I should not listen to the Doctrine from him.' 
[ c] One should not have reliance on the person but on the 
Doctrine. [d] One should not think about the pleasant 
articulation of words, but rather rely on their meaning. 
[ e] One should not think about his uncomely face or 
body, or his poor articulation, but rather listen to the 
Doctrine reverently. The Doctrine is untouched by 
personal defects, and can [never] become defective in 
itself. It is a bodhisattva of dull faculties who gets angry at 
the defects people have and does not want to hear the 
Doctrine from them. He should know he harms only 
himself; it is his own Insight that is hurt." 15 
Thus, when one relies upon a Guru, one can become wise 
about the beneficial qualities of Enlightenment Thought. 
Repetition of the Thought 
Now I return to the root text itself and the words: 
.•. THEN DAY AND NIGHT YOU 
WILL BEGET THE THOUGHT AGAIN AND AGAIN. (Stanza 13)* 
After learning its beneficial qualities, you should beget the 
Enlightenment Thought continually- thrice a day, thrice a 
night, over and over- and thus expand it. Even if you do 
not use the full ritual for it, expand the Thought with words 
like these: 
"I take refuge in the excellent Buddhas, Doctrines, and 
Communities until I be enlightened. May all my deeds of 
Giving and the rest accomplish Buddhahood for the 
good of all creatures." [294b] 
Benefits 
In explaining other advantages of the Thought, the Scrip-
tures also teach that bodhisattvas of dull faculty may 
achieve Perfect Enlightenment even in the midst of house-
* Atisa's words are not identical with the root text. Seep. 6.

--- PAGE 70 [DIRECT] ---

56 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
hold life simply as a result of their resolve for Enlighten-
ment. The Blessed One says in the Admonitions for the 
KingSutra: 
"0 great King, you are very busy indeed, carrying out 
your many duties. You cannot practise in every way all 
the details of the Perfection of Giving up through the rest 
of the Perfections, to Insight. Therefore, 0 great King, 
be ever mindful and keep constantly in your heart the 
longing for supreme and perfect Enlightenment. Culti-
vate [that longing] with faith, care and resolution -
whether walking or sitting, sleeping or waking, even 
drinking and eating. Then gather up and weigh all the 
virtuous deeds you have done or will do - and those of 
the Buddhas and ordinary men too - and rejoice in it! 
Rejoice because [this mass of virtue] is the highest of 
joys; it is like Space [in its infinity]. It is similar to NirviiQ.a 
itself. 
"After rejoicing, offer [those merits] in worship to all 
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, noble Hearers and 
Solitary Buddhas. Then do it in union with all creatures. 
"Then day after day, thrice a day, bestow [these 
merits] on all creatures until they achieve Omniscience, 
that they may perfect every virtue of Buddhahood and 
gain complete Enlightenment. [295a] 0 great King, if 
you live like that even while you act as king, you will not 
neglect your royal duties and will perfect the equipment 
for Enlightenment." 16 
Acarya Santideva speaks that way too in his Compendium 
of Training: 
"Do not look down on the [mere] Thought of Enlighten-
ment, even without the practice. It produces boundless 
happiness even in S<lf!lSiira." 17 
The potency of the Thought is also described in the 
Maitreya chapter on liberation in the Stalks in Array: 
"0 Noble Youth [Sudhana], just as a precious diamond, 
for example, even when divided, has brilliance that

--- PAGE 71 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
57 
overpowers any royal crown of gold, and can take away 
anyone's poverty without diminishing its repute as a 
precious gem; just so, 0 Noble Youth, the diamond of 
producing the Thought for Omniscience- even divorced 
from its practice-surpasses in brilliance the whole golden 
crown of achievements of the Hearer and Solitary 
Buddha. And even though it takes away all the poverty 
of sarp.sara, it does not lose its reputation as the Thought 
of Enlightenment." 18 
Again from the Admonitions for the King Sutra: 
"0 great King, you were reborn among the gods many 
times because your virtuous acts of [producing] the 
Enlightenment Thought matured. I need not tell you 
what the effect of producing it many more times will 
be!"i9 
Expanding the Thought 
WHEN YOU GET THE THOUGHTS OF ASPIRING TO ENLIGHTENMENT 
THEN WITH GREAT EFFORT STRIVE TO EXPAND THEM FULLY; 
AND TO RECALL YOUR RESOLVE IN YOUR OTHER BIRTHS, 
OBSERVE FULLY THE TRAINING I EXPLAINED TO YOU. (Stanza 18) 
I Wrote "WITH GREAT EFFORT STRIVE TO EXPAND THEM FULLY" 
so that when you have begotten the Thought and know its 
benefits, you will increase it. I treat this quite explicitly in 
the Ritual for Begetting the Thought I composed, when I 
say: [295b] 
"In order that a person who has now produced the 
Enlightenment Thought may increase it, he should beget 
the Thought with these words: 'At least three times a day 
and three times a night: I take refuge in the excellent 
Buddhas, Doctrines and Communities until I be en-
lightened. May all my deeds of Giving and the rest 
accomplish Buddhahood for the good ofall creatures.' " 20 
Whenlsay: 
AND TO RECALL YOUR RESOLVE IN YOUR OTHER BIRTHS, 
OBSERVE FULLY THE TRAINING I EXPLAINED TO YOU, (Stanza 18)

--- PAGE 72 [DIRECT] ---

58 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
I refer to what I took from the Questions of Kiisyapa Sutra 
and presented in that same Ritual of mine: 
"You must avoid four things which weaken the Thought 
of Enlightenment. What are the four? [1] Deceiving your 
instructor, teacher, guru, and persons worthy of respect. 
[2J Making others feel guilty when there is no reason for 
shame. [3J Belittling, defaming, or disparaging a person 
who has entered Mahayana. [4J Approaching the neigh-
bour in guile and deceit and with improper motives. 
"And you must practise four things which do not 
weaken the Thought of Enlightenment. What four? 
[1] Not speaking untrue words even to save your life, 
much less to provoke derision. [2] Living among 
creatures with high motivation, and without guile or 
deceit. [3] Seeing all bodhisattvas as The Teacher 
[Buddha], and proclaiming the praises of their perfect 
state everywhere. [4] Spurring on all creatures you have 
influenced to the Supreme and Perfect Enlightenment, 
lest they prefer the limited Vehicle. 
"One who wishes to attain the Superknowledges 
quickly should practise especially the Sevenfold Way 
Sutra: Questions of the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara. " 21 
[296a] 
This concludes what I mean by striving to expand fully. 
Progress-Thought of Enlightenment 
Origin in Sutras 
To point out the wider expansion of the Thought in the 
three degrees22 the Venerable Ones speak of, I wrote: 
A RIGHT RESOLVE WILL NOT BE FURTHERED 
WITHOUT VOWS THAT HAVE PROGRESS IN MIND; 
THEREFORE HE WHO SEEKS GROWTH IN THE RESOLVE FOR 
PERFECT ENLIGHTENMENT, EARNESTLY TAKES THEM. (19] 
The words "THAT HAVE PROGRESS IN MIND" refer to the

--- PAGE 73 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
59 
purified Higher Intention, as described in this passage from 
the Heavenly Treasure Sutra: 
"0 Noble Youth, what virtues comprise the Enlighten-
ment Thought so that one keeps it without regressing? 
And Gaganagaiija replied: 
" '0 Noble Youth, two virtues comprise the Enlight-
enment Thought so one keeps it without regressing: 
Intention and Higher Intention. Intention is comprised 
of sincerity and guilelessness. Higher Intention is com-
prised of detachment in its Intention and of superior 
behaviour. 
" 'In tum, these four virtues are comprised of eight 
others. Sincerity is comprised of openness and candour. 
Guilelessness is GOmprised of artlessness and pure 
motives. Detachment is comprised of a mind that is not 
timid and a zeal which is not faint-hearted. Superior 
behaviour is comprised of the equipment of knowledge 
and the equipment of merit ... ' " 23 
And so he continues combining virtues on up to one 
hundred and eight of them. You should study the siitra 
itself for the entire description. And again, in the 
Compendium of Doctrine Sutra: [296b] 
"Higher Intention is the desire for special qualities: 
Higher Intention is gentleness toward living things. It is 
love for all creatures. It is reverence for all the Exalted 
Ones. It is compassion for all worldlings. It is faithful 
service to the Guru. It is to be a refuge, protector, island, 
and last resort for all who are without refuge, protector, 
island or last resort. " 24 
And again in the same siitra: 
"For bodhisattvas with Pure Intention the Doctrine 
comes forth even from things like the sky, walls, trees, 
rivers and forests; counsel and instruction comes forth 
right from their own practice." 25 
And in the A~ayamati Sutra:

--- PAGE 74 [DIRECT] ---

60 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"Venerable Sariputra, moreover, the bodhisattvas' 
Higher Intention is imperishable. Why? Because it is 
more highly supported by all the basic virtues. Nay more, 
every single thought a bodhisattva has is supported by his 
Higher Intention [arising] from his virtuous motivation. 
The transmigrations which lift him from Level to Level 
are because of his Higher Intention .... Again I say, 
Venerable Sariputra, this Higher Intention of· the 
bodhisattva is imperishable. " 26 
From these passages it may be seen that just as the best 
forests and harvests grow from good ground, so you should 
understand that all virtues of the Buddha will grow and 
increase from the good ground of Conduct. That is my 
analysis of the matter. 
Difference between Resolve and Progress 
In regard to the meaning of the Resolve-Thought of 
Enlightenment and the Progress-Thought of Enlighten-
ment, great scholars of both past and present have given 
many different explanations. I do indeed understand their 
interpretations, but. I omit expounding them here lest I be 
too wordy. But the meaning of the two kinds of Thought is 
clear in the siitras themselves. For instance, the Stalks in 
Array says: [297a] 
"0 Noble Youth, rare are the beings who beget the 
resolution for Supreme Perfect Enlightenment; but 
rarer still are those who have set out towards it. " 27 
And Acarya Santideva in his Compendium of Training: 
"The Enlightenment Thought is of two kinds: the 
Thought which resolves upon Enlightenment, and the 
Thought which progresses towards it. " 28 
Again in his Progress in Practice: 
"Just as one knows the difference 
Between desiring to go and going;

--- PAGE 75 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 61 
So the wise man should know the difference 
Of those two stages in the Thought. " 29 
And in the Compendium of Training again: 
"In this matter, the Resolve-Thought arises from the 
resolution: 'I must become a Buddha.' "30 
Consequently, Resolve-Thought is the focusing and fixing 
on Perfect Enlightenment as the goal, as Maitreyanatha 
says in his Ornament of Realisations: "This begetting of 
the Thought is the desire for ·complete and perfect 
Enlightenment for the sake of others."31 And Progress-
Thought is the focusing and fixing on the virtues of Path, as 
he says in the Ornament of the Sutras: 
"[1] First is begetting the Thought, [2] then: one's own 
and others' good, [3] Thatness, [4] Power, [5] one's own 
Buddha-field, [6] the maturing of others, [7] and seventh: 
the highest Enlightenment. •m 
Therefore, the Thought of Enlightenment itself, both at 
the time of its cause and at the time of its result, is altogether 
one and the same reality. [29Th] The distinguishing of it 
into stages shows that this is true. Maitreyanatha explains 
them in detail in these words: 
"Hence, it is like: [1] the Earth, [2] Gold, [3] the Moon, 
[4] Fire, [5] Treasure, [6] a Jewel Mine, [7] the Ocean, 
[8] a Diamond, [9] a Mountain, [10] Medicine, [11] a 
Spiritual Friend, [12] a Wish-granting Gem, [13] the Sun, 
[14] a Song, [15] a King, [16] a Storehouse, [17] a High-
way, [18] a Carriage, [19] a Fountain, [20] a pleasant 
Sound, [21] a River, and [22] a Cloud. With these, the 
Thought is of twenty-two kinds. " 33 
The [first] two are the Enlightenment Thought as cause. 
The [next] seventeen are the Thought during the Path. The 
[last] three are the Thought as fruition. 
[Or again] the first two are Resolve-Thought; the

--- PAGE 76 [DIRECT] ---

62 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
remaining twenty are Progress-Thought. In still another 
enumeration, the first three are the Thought while it is a 
cause· the next sixteen during the Path; the last three as the 
time ~f fruition. For the complete meaning of these [similes 
for stages], you must study the Ornament of Realisations 
itself.34 
Notes to Chapter 2 
1 Ot. 716, Vol. 11:286.3. 
2 mar 'du-shes. The phrase has the twofold meaning of treating others as a 
mother treats her child, and also the [Buddhist] recognition that in the cycle 
of rebirths and the countless destinies one has experienced as a sentient 
being, every other creature has at some time and place functioned as one's 
mother in that particular body. The method of developing compassion that 
Atisa presents here became a very popular Dge-lugs-pa "mind-purification" 
(blo-sbyong) exercise. known as the "Seven Cause and Effect Instruction'' 
(rgyu 'bras man-ngag bdun). From Ati5a's four steps, Tsong-kha-pa and 
later writers created seven: 
I) mar shes: Perceiving as a Mother causes 
2) dr.in dran: Mindfulness of Kindness causes 
3) drin gzo: Repayment of Kindness causes 
4) byams-pa: Affectionate Love causes 
5) snying-rje chen-po: Great Compassion causes 
6) lhag-bsam rnam-dag: Pure Higher Motive causes 
7) 
byang-sems: the Thought of Enlightenment. 
See Theory and Practice of Tibetan Buddhism by Geshe Lhundup Sopa, pp. 
28-32, for a translation of the Fourth Panchen Lama's presentation of the 
practice. 
3 phyag-rgya chen-po: lit., "Great Seal". This is part of the initiation practice 
in Union and Supreme Union (yoga, anuttara yoga) Tantra. The powers 
(dngos-grub/siddhi) are described in Atlsa's final chapter of the Commen-
tary. 
4 See Chart 1: The Five Paths. Achievement of the "Highest Mundane 
Virtue" indicates that a bodhisattva is ready to pass on to his personal direct 
experience of the Four Truths in the Vision Path. 
5 Atisa refers to his Ritual for Begetting the Thought (Ot. 5364). 
6 Ot. 842, Vol. 34:39.5ff. 
7 Joe. cit. 
8 BCA: I:12. 
9 InSS: p. 5. 
10 In SS: p. 43. 
11 
Ot.' 5536, Vol. 102:196.3. 
12 
BCA: V:104. 
13 In SS: pp. 37-8. 
14 In SS: p. 39. 
15 Ot. 5538, Vol. U0:189.3ff. 
16 In SS: p. 10. 
17 SS: p. 10.

--- PAGE 77 [DIRECT] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT THOUGHT 
63 
18 
In SS: p. 9. 
19 
InSS: pp. 10-11. 
20 Ot. 5403, Vol. 110:204.4. 
21 
Ot. 760(43), Vol. 24:188.5. 
22 spel-ba rnam-pa gsum. The three degrees of expanding the Enlightenment 
Thought are the customary three degrees of any attainment as applied here: 
1) 
Weak/Inferior ( chung): Resolution-Thought; 
2) Medium/Mediocre ('bring): Progress-Thought; 
3) Strong/Superior (che): Vowed-Thought. 
23 
Ot. 815, Vol. 33:28.3. 
24 In SS: p. 260. The quote is actually from the Surra Set Forth by Ak~ayamati 
(Ot. 842: Vol. 34:42.1). 
25 
In SS: p. 259. 
26 Ot. 842, Vol. 34:41.5. 
27 
In SS: p. 9. 
28 SS: p. 9. 
29 
BCA: 1:16. 
30 SS: p. 9. 
31 
Ot. 5184, Vol. 88:3.3. 
32 Ot. 5521, Vol. 108:7.5. 
33 
Ornament of Realisations, Ot. 5184, Vol. 88:3.3 
34 The divisions of the twenty-two similes and their corresponding virtues or 
qualities into stages of Cause-Path-Result are not found explicitly in the 
Ornament of Realisations, but rather in the many commentaries on them; 
e.g., Maitreyanatha's Ornament of Sutras (Ot. 5521) and Asanga's com-
mentary (bhci~ya) on Maitreyanatha's work (Ot. 5527), and a small text by 
Sri-jiianakirti, the Instruction in the Steps of Contemplation in the Perfection 
Vehicle (Ot. 5456).

--- PAGE 78 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 79 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 3 
The Monastic Life 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
PRA TIMOK~A REQUISI1E FOR 
BODHISA TIV A VOW 
20 
66 
A 
Fit receptacles for Mahayana 
67 
B 
Objections concerning Family 
67 
c Middle Way and Mind-Only views 
67 
II 
RANKS OF THE COMMUNITY 
21a 
69 
A 
Seven Only 
69 
B 
Lay Devotee and Novice 
70 
c Monk and Nun 
71 
III 
THE EIGHTEEN SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM 
71 
IV 
THE GLORIOUS PURE LIFE: THE MONK 
21b 
72 
v 
ACTS OF THE COMMUNITY 
74 
A Persons 
75 
B Non-Person 
75 
c Ten Ways of Ordination 
75 
VI 
CONCERNING VOWS 
76 
A-D Preparation and Taking 
76 
E 
Giving up Vows 
76 
F 
Nature of Vows 
77 
G Transgression 
78 
H 
Preventing Transgression 
78 
I 
Rising from Transgression 
78 
VII 
SUMMATION OF THE DISCIPLINE 
2lb 
79

--- PAGE 80 [DIRECT] ---

3 
The Monastic Life 
Pratimo~a Requisite for Bodhisattva Vow 
Fit receptacles for Mahayana 
I have described how the precious Thought of Enlighten-
ment should be expanded in its special way, and that one 
must actually take vows of Conduct in order to increase it. I 
want to show now what persons constitute the special 
receptacles for the [Bodhisattva] Vow of Conduct by my 
verse: 
ONLY HE WHO HAS LASTING VOWS IN 
ONE OF PRATIMOK~A'S SEVEN RANKS 
IS FIT FOR THE VOW OF THE BODHISATTVA; 
THERE IS NO OTHER WAY FOR IT TO BE. (Stanza 20] 
But here you may object: "Did you not state at the 
beginning 'THAT PERSON IS A SUPERIOR' (Stanza 5) and 'FOR 
THOSE PURJ; BEINGS WHOSE DESIRE IS THE HIGHEST OF 
ENLIGHTENMENTS' [Stanza 6]? Then how can what you say 
now [in this stanza] be true? Here you hold that this 
[Pratimok~a person] is the pure receptacle, and make the 
earlier [Superior Person] less pure." 
My meaning here has been stated by niy venerable Guru, 
the glorious Bodhibhadra, in his Commentary on "Twenty 
Verses on the Vow": 
"The vows of the Pratimok~a have become ancillary to 
the Bodhisattva vow, and they should be understood as 
part of the whole. Therefore, the meaning of [Asanga's] 
'This pledge of [Pratimok~a] training should also be 
taken' is that the person who has the vows of Pratimok~a 
is a fit vessel for taking the Bodhisattva vow correctly.

--- PAGE 81 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 
67 
[298a] For there is simply no other [Buddhist] rule [that 
binds one] to refrain from killing, stealing, unchastity 
and so on. Even the fit vessel for taking the Bodhisattva 
Vow adds no [new rules] of refraining from these 
[ unvirtuous deeds]." 1 
Objections concerning Family 
Well now, it is true there are those of "No-Family"/ as 
yet undisposed toward Mahayana, who have [physical or 
external] impediments to the PriHimok~a system, 3 [and 
thus are unjustly prevented from taking the Bodhisattva 
Vow even if they developed the desire]. [And I know] there 
are those who already have the Bodhisattva Vow but have 
never taken the Pratimok~a vow, or [have taken it and] 
were expelled for offences, 4 or [just] gave up the training, 
or rejected the life of virtue [altogether]. But if it is not the 
Pratimok~a vow [that binds one to refrain from basic sins], 
then where you can you possibly look for another? 
Hence I say here: Could there be a bodhisattva who does 
not refrain from killing, stealing, unchastity and so forth? 
The answer is no. Because the siitras say these are basic 
failures in a bodhisattva as well. That being so, the 
Pratimok~a vow is necessary first of all, and is the very 
prerequisite for the Bodhisattva Vow. Of course, if 
someone has practised Mahayana in other births and 
remains in the Mahayana Family, there is nothing wrong 
with having taken the Bodhisattva Vow first because his 
natural state is not to commit sin. 
Middle Way and Mind-Only Views 
Then again, if you interpret the Mahayana Middle Way 
system strictly, a vessel for Mahayana does not exist 
anywhere at all [in the first place]. All creatures are one and 
the same Family and are "endowed with the essence of a 
Tathagata". 5 As it is said: 
"There is no fitness or unfitness 
For higher Levels. All become Buddha. 
Therefore, to achieve the perfect 
Awakening, act to [your] capacity." [298b]

--- PAGE 82 [DIRECT] ---

68 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
And in the Compendium ofThatness: A Major Tantra: 
"Yea, I do not try to examine who is and who is not a 
vessel for entering the great mal).<;lala. And why is that, 
you ask? ... " 6 
And the Acarya Aryadeva says: 
"As beginners one gives to creatures 
Whatever it is they wish, because 
There is no vessel for Holy Doctrine; 
It has no existence anywhere at all. "7 
And so, because all creatures are of one and the same 
Family, Ajitanatha says: 
"Because the Ultimate Element8 is undifferentiated, 
distinct Families are impossible." 
And noble Nagarjuna: 
"If there is no distinguishing a chief Vehicle 
Becau·se the Ultimate Element is undifferentiated, 
Then your teaching that there are Three Vehicles 
Is simply to help creatures progress [on the Path]." 
However, even the siitras do speak of the three groups of 
creatures [Hearers, Solitary Buddhas, and Buddhas], and 
use the species of precious gems to exemplify the five types 
of Families among creatures: [No-Family, Uncertain 
Family, Hearer, Solitary Buddha, BuddhaJ. But the Com-
mentaries say these refer only to temporary stages. To 
quote the venerable Suvafl).advipa: 
"When scripture says there are two types of Family, 9 the 
True Nature [dharmata] Family and the Striving Family, 
it means that one remains in the Striving Family only as a 
temporary stage, but when it treats of the True Nature 
Family there are no distinctions whatever. Hence 
scholars say that Pratimok~a vows are certainly and

--- PAGE 83 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 
69 
chiefly necessary [while in the Striving Family]; but [the 
True Nature Family] is othezwise: [1] the Truth Body 
pervades all time and all reality; [2] the perfect Enjoy-
ment Body remains in its [heavenly] courts, the property 
of only the Great Lords [Bodhisattvas] of the Ten Levels 
as they preach the profound and extensive Doctrine of 
Mahayana exclusively; and [3] the Apparition Body 
appears only now and then, like the uqumbara fruit; as 
the siitras say, 'After this age, there will be sixty ages 
when a Buddha does not appear.' " 10 [299a] 
Hence, the Pratimok~a vow he mentions is also a rare thing 
because it exists only in our time and is the chief cause that 
leads to happy destinies. It is the Buddha's teaching that we 
refrain from sins of killing, stealing, unchastity and the 
rest, and since his Teaching endures only as long as the 
Pratimok~a vows remain- and depends on them-we teach 
that the vows of the Pratimoksa alone come first. 
So, if you are talking about.stages of progress [along the 
Path], then those previously undisposed toward Mahayana 
have as their preparation the vows of whichever of the 
seven Pratimok~a ranks they find suitable. Hence I say 
correctly in the root text, "ONLY HE .•. IS FIT FOR THE VOW OF 
THE BODHISATIVA; THERE IS NO OTHER WAY FOR IT TO BE." 
Ranks of the Community 
I continue now on the same theme: 
THE TATHAGATA HAS SAID THAT OF 
THE SEVEN RANKS OF PRATIMOK~A, 
THE GLORIOUS PURE LIFE IS HIGHEST; 
BY WHICH HE MEANT THE VOWS OF A MONK. (Stanza 21) 
What I mean to say here is that the vows of a Monk are 
unique among the seven ranks. 
Seven Only 
There may be an objection at the outset that there are eight

--- PAGE 84 [DIRECT] ---

70 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Pratimok~a ranks set down in all the basic Discipline texts, 
and in such Hinayana works as the Progress in Knowledge, 
the Treasure of Phenomenology and its useful summaries, 
and the Major Exposition of the "Treasure", therefore how 
can my saying seven be correct? Well, it is true those 
texts do propose the number as eight, but noble Asanga 
establishes it as seven in every section of his Levels of Yoga 
Practice and [in particular] in the Chapter on Conduct. 
[299b] And if we doubt the brilliance of that great man's 
mind, we are finished. Asanga is a Bodhisattva of the Third 
Level, who attained a concentration called the "Stream of 
Truth", and who was prophesied in the Basic Tantra of 
Maiiju§rf as "that holy man, Asariga, wise in the true 
meaning of the texts". 11 Does anyone doubt that he heard 
the entire (siitra] collection directly from Ajitanatha? 
In his Commentary on "Twenty Verses on the Vow", the 
venerable Bodhibhadra says: 
"In regard to the vowing of Conduct, vows are taken in 
the seven ranks of Pratimoksa. That is, the five kinds in 
the religious life: the Monk and Nun, the Nun-candidate, 
the male and female Novices; and the two kinds in the 
Lay state: the male and female Devotees. The practice of 
One-Day [vows] is not a true ascetical practice, and has 
not been taught as worthy ofPratimok~a rank since there 
is no restraint of desires for [any] great length of time." 12 
The Guru who declared this was a great master of the 
Discipline of the Bodhisattva scriptures. I follow his inter-
pretation because he received his instruction in the 
[Buddhist] trad!tion i~ the unbroken line from noble 
Nagarjuna and Acarya Santideva. 
Lay Devotee and Novice 
A few things can be observed here about the sevenfold 
ranks of Pratimok~a: The [Lay] Devotees are of two types: 
those who abstain from unlawful sexual activity, and those 
who abstain even from their own partners. But the training 
common to both [types] is: renunciation of the four basic 
transgressions [killing, stealing, lying, unchastity] and of

--- PAGE 85 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 71 
liquor. Some say renunciation of false views [in place of 
liquor]. 
In regard to liquor, some Discipline masters interpret it 
as objectionable by its very nature [300a] but the 
Phenomenology followers say it is objectionable [only] 
because its renunciation has been promised. However, I 
must omit their full presentations here. 
For the Devotee, then, there are the five precepts and 
forty-five rules which [specifically] apply to them. 13 The 
Novice vows include these fifty practices of the faultless 
[and celibate] Devotee, [divided] according to whether 
[their subject matter] must be confessed [when violated] or 
[whose renunciation) must be vowed [as part of religious 
life) or are [simply) sinless. 14 
Monk and Nun 
The training of the Monk is such that of two hundred and 
fifty-three [rules], twenty-seven must be confessed [when 
violated], two hundred and thirteen must be vowed, and 
thirteen pertain to sinless matters [of community 
governance]. 15 
The Nun-candidate correctly observes two hundred and 
forty rules - that is, all the above, except for the thirteen 
[rules pertaining to community governance], and including 
the pure and irreproachable life of the Novice, as well as 
her Six Basic Rules and Six Rules for Harmony [in the 
community]. 16 
The Nun is pure in her five hundred rules, 17 which include 
those of the pure Nun-candidate as well as the Monk, 
together with the training the holy Doctrine and Discipline 
texts present for the perfecting of the pure Monk. 
The Eighteen Schools of Buddhism 
There have been a variety of sects [in the Buddhist Com-
munity]: [A] the MahasaJ!lghika, [B] the Sarvastivada, 
[C] the Sthavira, and [D] the Sammatiya sects. These 
existed [formerly] in eighteen schools: 
[A] The five schools of MahasaiJlghika: the Purvasaila,

--- PAGE 86 [DIRECT] ---

72 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
the Aparasaila, the Haimavata, the Lokottara-vada, and 
the Prajfiaptivada. [B] The [seven Sarvastivada]: the Miila, 
the Kasyapiya, the Dharmagupta, the Mahisasaka, the 
Vibhajya-vada, [300b] the Bahusrutiya, and TamrasiiFyii. 
[C] Three sects of Sthavira: the Mahavihiira-vasina, the 
Jetavaniya, and the Abhayagiri-vasina. [D] Three sects of 
Sammatiya: Kaurukullaka, the Avantaka, and the Viitsi-
putriya.18 
Some texts differ on this listing, saying that the 
Vijiiaptiviida belong to Sarvastiviida, but keeping the rest 
the same. And another text has it: 
"[A] Kasyapiya, Dharmagupta, 
Mahisasaka and Miila-sarvastivada; 
[B] Purva, A para, Haimavata, 
Prajiiapti, Vibhajya and Lokottaravada; 
[C] TamrasaFya, Bahusrutiya, Avantaka, 
Kaurukullaka and Vatsi-putriya; 
[D.] Jetavaniya, Abhaya and Mahavihara. 
"In four, six, five and three, 
They wanted their variety, and 
Hence the Eighteen Schools. 
"The Lion of Sakya's teaching endures 
Because of the Gurus who went forth of old 
With the power of his message. 
"Though the schools were many, 
And great the variety of views, 
Due to difference in region and teachers, 
Never did they argue about the [Great] Teacher. " 19 
For their respective differences in the matter of the Rule 
and views, you must study the great texts on those topics. 
The Glorious Pure Life: The Monk 
Returning to my root text, the words "THE PURE LIFE" 
[Stanza 21] refer to renunciation in the matter ofliquor and 
of women. For the dangers of liquor you can study that 
subject in the [Discipline] scriptures and the pertinent

--- PAGE 87 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 73 
places in the siitra collection. For the danger of women, 
consult the [Discipline] scriptures also, and the siitras of 
both Mahayana and Hinayana. For instance, the Hi:nayana 
siitra The Teaching in Sevens: Sexuality: 
[301a] "For example, 0 Brahmin, take a man who 
promises to live the Pure Life, and never even has an 
intimate encounter with a woman. But when his eyes 
behold women's bodies, he is attracted by their shape; he 
dallies with women and is captivated by their chatter; he 
becomes absorbed in paying them attentions. Even when 
he is separated from them by walls and curtains, women's 
adornments and their singing and dancing and sound of 
music go right to his heart. And when he sees his neigh-
bour indulging his senses with desire, he takes that into 
his heart. Yet he still'inakes Bestowal [ofthe merit] of his 
Pure Life [to gain] a place among the gods! The Pure Life 
of such a man is altogether impure. " 20 
And again from the Mahayana siitra, The Seven-fold Way: 
"If we ought not cling to Desire even in imagination, 
Why mention indulging the senses of sight and touch?" 21 
The dangers of Desire in general can be learned from the 
Questions of King Udayana-vatsa and the Admonitions on 
Desire Sutra. 
So then, a man who gives a show of living the Pure Life 
while not [truly] living it, who is proud of the signs and 
marks of the religious profession, yet treats it con-
temptuously thinking "The religious life [simply] means we 
are bodhisattvas who have the same prerogatives a layman 
does", that man is a hypocrite, and like a thief and robber. 
The sutras say things like "A thief is eating [alms]; a thief is 
drinking [alms]". Such a sinful Monk or Novice should 
never have taken up the saffron robe - that shrine to gods 
and men. It has been said that "the religious robe burns [the 
hypocrite]; the begging bowl burns". And the Arrest of 
Misconduct Sutra:

--- PAGE 88 [DIRECT] ---

74 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"The Monk who violates his Rule without so much as a 
snap of the fingers for the royal mark of the Teacher's 
saffron robes should not be kept [in the Community]. " 22 
[30lb] 
The misfortune of this [hypocrisy] can be studied in the 
pertinent parts of such siitras as the Questions of KiiSyapa. 
The teaching of Mahayana- and my thought also- on that 
kind of sinful religious profession is that [such persons] 
should not enter upon this Great Path. The Pure Life, 
properly so called, is untouched by such evils and com-
pletely pure. 
Because it is more perfect than the Lay Devotee or 
Novice or Nun-candidate, I said: 
THE GLORIOUS PURE LIFE IS HIGHEST; 
BY WHICH HE MEANT THE VOWS OF THE MONK. (Stanza 21} 
And it is the Blessed One himself who held that the pure 
vow of the Monk is "the perfect foundation for the Great 
Vehicle, and superior by far". 
Acts of the Community 
As for wh~t we call "Monk", it is he who has been 
ordained23 by the Fourfold Motion-with-Acts [of the 
Community]. 
Now Acts of the Community are of four kinds: 24 
[1] 
a Motion with [single] Act; 
[2] 
a Motion with Two Acts; 
[3] 
a Fourfold: Motion-with-[Three Acts]; and 
[4] 
the Act of Triple Declaration of an Act. 
These four kinds of Act are used for two types of matters: 
[A] personal, and [B] non-personal.

--- PAGE 89 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 
75 
Persons 
Acts that deal with persons are: 25 [1] Admission, 
[2] Ordination, [3] Unity of mind among persons, 
[4] Release from [penances for] transgressions, [5] Agree-
ment on: Dismissal, Banishment, and those in Summer 
Retreat, [6] Blessing [and permission to leave retreat] for 
seven, twenty, or forty days, [7] Assistance to persons, and 
[8] Acts imposing penances. 
Non-Person 
Acts that do not deal with persons are: 26 [1] Consecration 
of the Robes and Bowl, [2] Consecration of the Cloth, 
[3] Forfeiture of robes not freely given, [4] Decisions on 
[monastery] boundaries, [302a] [5] Unity of mind with the 
laity, and any other acts of business like these. 
The Community Acts are also [grouped as]: those to be 
passed by an assembly of two, four, five, ten, twenty, forty, 
or by the unanimous Community. 27 For example, an Act 
performable by an assembly of two: when a Monk confesses 
a transgression or sin he has committed, with the Act of 
Triple Declaration in presence of Community. An Act 
performable by four: confession in each other's presence of 
the Four Gross Sins [Intercourse, Theft, Homicide, Lying 
to praise self]. An Act performable by ten: Ordination in 
populated areas. An Act performable by an assembly of 
five: Ordination in remote areas. By an assembly of twenty 
monks: Act of removing Suspension. By forty: Act of 
ordaining a Nun. By the unanimous Community: Acts for 
[monastic] boundaries, [establishing the date 1 of Po~adha, 
and for the Retreat Examination. 
Ten Ways of Ordination 
The Discipline masters of the Sarvastivada sect - the 
Reverends Dharmatrata, Dbyangs-sgrogs, Vasumitra, 
Buddhadeva, Bsam-rJzogs, the great scholar Vasubandhu, 
the Elder GuQ.aprabha, and the Reverend Sakyaprabha -
all say that Ordination has been performed in ten ways: 28 
[1] 
By self-ordination: Buddhas and Solitary Buddhas. 
[2] 
By conviction: the [First] Five Converts.

--- PAGE 90 [DIRECT] ---

76 
A LAMP FOR THE PA:rH AND COMMENTARY 
[3] By the "Come aside, 0 Monk!": Yasas and others. 
[4] 
By accepting the Teacher: Mahakasyapa and others. 
[5] By pleasing [the Buddha] with their questions: 
Sudatta and others. 
[6] By accepting the Eight Serious Virtues: Maha-
prajapati. [302b] 
[7] By messenger: Dhannadinna. 
[8] 
By five Monks, without a Discipline-master: persons 
in remote areas. 
[9] By an assembiy often: persons in populated areas. 
[10] By triple repetition of taking the Refuges: the 
Ordination of the Sixty Bhadravargas. 
Four types of Monk have been [traditionally] described: 29 
[1] one who is a Monk in name only; [2] one who [merely] 
professes [but does not live as a Monk]; [3] one who is 
called "Monk" because he begs; [4] one who is called 
"Monk" because he conquers the passions. It is rare in our 
t,imes to firid a Monk of pure observance; for as the Acarya 
Santideva said: "The Teaching is rooted in monasticism, 
although monasticism survives with difficulty. " 30 And 
therefore the Gurus have said repeatedly that the pure Lay 
Devotee is to be praised as a Mahayana vessel [far] more 
than the Monk who is weak in his observance and is 
diminished, stained, tom, destroyed and impure. 
Concerning Vows 
I continue now with an explanation of the word "vow" [in 
Stanza 21]. "To vow" means to block and bind the stream 
of misconduct. This can be treated under several headings: 
[A] What is gained [by vowing]. [B] How it is gained. 
[C] Time for taking the vow. [D] How the vow is taken. 
[E] How it is given up. [F] Its nature. [G] Reasons that 
transgressions are committed. [H] Conditions that prevent 
transgression. [I] Rising from failures. 
For the interpretation of the first four topics [A-D] one 
should consult his own Discipline-master and study the 
basic texts. [Topic E]: How is the vow given up? The ways

--- PAGE 91 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 
77 
of giving up Pratimok~a vows are several: one gives back his 
precepts, after sincere reflection, in the presence of anyone 
[capable of] understanding, 31 or deserts the suitable 
environment [for living the religious life], 32 or commits an 
Expulsion offence, 33 or becomes hermaphrodite,34 or 
rejects the life of virtue altogether. How can these be [true] 
reasons for giving up the vow? [303a] Because the thought 
of honestly giving it up does occur, or one does forsake the 
supports [of religious life], or some cause or other of trans-
gression does happen, or the [bodily] basis of the vow 
changes, or the foundation of it [in virtue] is wrecked. 
Now Some Discipline-masters say that by committing 
[just] one transgression, the whole [discipline] is forsaken. 
Others also say that vows are given up at times when the 
Holy Doctrine wanes. But the Sarvastivadin Discipline-
masters have this to say: 
"By committing one transgression [against the vowed 
rules] the rest are not forsaken, for a man can be both 
restrained and unrestrained [at the same time]; just as a 
man can be rich and [yet have] debts. So if a man with 
[vowed] conduct confesses his transgression, then it is 
[simply] not true that he is [still] unrestrained."35 
In the case of hermaphrodite change, one would not 
[precisely] be giving up the vow that had been taken [for a 
particular male/female sex status] since one does not for-
sake a vow that never existed [and there are no Pratimok~a 
vows for this ambiguous state]. The same is true at times 
when the Holy Doctrine declines [for then the Pratirnok~a 
simply does not exist]. The vow also ceases in death and 
transmigration because a different body is involved and one 
has not promised to practise [Pratimok~a] in that body, and 
the vows are not recalled [in the new body]. These ex-
planations follow 
(the 
interpretations of] 
Acarya 
Vasubandhu, but I omit here the many adversary opinions 
[he argues] in his [Treasure of Phenomenology] text. 
[F] For the nature of the vow one should study the basic

--- PAGE 92 [DIRECT] ---

78 
(G] 
(H] 
[I] 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMEN.TARY 
Discipline texts and question the masters of his 
particular school. 
There are two ways of committing transgressions: by 
not doing what should be done, and by doing what 
should not be done. And [the reasons are] fourfold: 
ignorance, irreverence, negligence, and strong 
passions. 
Conditions that prevent transgression are fivefold: [1] 
the restraint of the doors of the senses; moderation in 
food; perseverance in yoga in the early and latter parts 
of the night, without falling asleep; deliberate be-
haviour, mindfulness, vigilance, and thorough aware-
ness; a fear of even the slightest infraction. [2] the 
second condition is to look earnestly to one's [303b] 
religious practice, and reflect that the Teacher himself, 
and those who live the Pure Life, and the gods who 
rejoice in the Teaching, learned men as well as world-
lings would condemn [transgression]; and through 
self.•examination [to develop] a sense of shame and 
embarrassment. [3] The third condition is to have 
modest goals, modest activity, and modest [concern 
for the] outcome. [4] The fourth condition is not to 
live as half-layman, half-religious; and to be well in-
structed in what is and is not transgression; and 
zealous in the pursuit of virtue. [5] The fifth condition 
[reduces culpability in transgression]: being a begin-
ner, insane, sleepy, of distraught mind or tormented 
by emotions. 
Rising from failings involves three things: begetting 
five despairs, a five-limbed vigilance, and removing 
despair in five ways. The five-limbed vigilance can be 
studied in the Hearers Level [of Asatiga).l6 
The five despairs arise when a person commits some trans-
gression or other and thinks: [1] "With this kind of start, my 
observance will [always] be faulty", or [2] "The Teacher 
[Buddha] and learned men of the Pure Life [surely] con-
demn me", or [3] "The gods condemn me [for this]", or [ 4] 
"Sinful men from here to the border know about me, and 
talk about me indecently", or [5] "With this unvirtuous

--- PAGE 93 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 
79 
beginning of mine, I will be reborn in the bad destinies after 
[leaving] this body, and then it will be no use!" 
These despairs are removed by five [contrary] ways of 
thjnking: [1] "The Blessed One taught a Doctrine which 
has both a foundation and way of deliverance; therefore 
there [surely] is a means of rising from transgression", or 
[2] "Because I have not [yet] learned that transgressions are 
committed through ignorance, irreverence, negligence 
[304a] and strong passions, they [continue to] increase", or 
[3] "I now beget the Enlightenment Thought with sincere 
superior intention so that I will not go on failing", or [4] "I 
have now properly confessed [my failing] in the presence of 
learned men of the Pure Life", or [5] "I have entered the 
religious life of the well-spoken Doctrine-Discipline, and 
my despair when I go against its training is not right or 
proper. The Blessed One condemned the stream of despair 
with whole lists of the obstructions [it creates]. Now since 
despair is the thing making the obstacles, then to put up 
with it and not cleanse it away from the start [can only] 
mean that I am the one who is not virtuous and right in not 
removing it!" 
Summation of the Discipline 
Confession should be made according to the methods found 
in the proper Discipline of each one's own school. You can 
also confess [privately] with the more general method I 
composed in my Ritual for Confession of Failings. But be 
earnest about the fortnightly recitation of the Pratimok~a­
sfitra and about the Po~adha [observance]. The monk who is 
earnest about his Discipline training knows what the trans-
gressions are and is wise about the [means] of deliverance 
[from them]. He does not despair because his nature is to be 
pure, clean, unsullied, and sinless. Having left the house-
holder's state to become homeless and enter religion, his 
Conduct in the well-spoken Doctrine-Discipline is not dim-
inished, stained, tom, destroyed or impure. He guards it 
well. He stands adorned with the Twelve Qualities of Purifi-
cationand the Seventeen Ornaments of Religious Practice. 37

--- PAGE 94 [DIRECT] ---

80 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
It was as I reflected on how the pure Monk is this kind of 
man that I wrote: 
THE. GLORIOUS PURE LIFE IS HIGHEST; 
BY WHICH HE MEANT THE VOWS OF A MONK [304b] 
Finally, Ajitanatha says in his Ornament ofthe Sutras: 
"The Doctrine of the Discipline is [expressed] in terms of 
[1] Transgression, [2] its Source, [3] Rising from it, [4] 
Deliverance, [5] Persons, [6] Promulgation, [7] Distinc-
tion, and [8] Determination. " 38 
This completes the section on the Hearer's Vehicle. 
Notes to Chapter 3 
1 Ot. 5584, Vol. 114:262.2. 
2 rigs-med-pa/agotraka. In some systems of Mahayana, notably the Yogacara 
school, classification of persons into "Families" according to their dis-
positions in a particular rebirth became popular. The reference here is to a 
fivefold division: 
l) rigs-med/agotra: No-Family (= no inclination to liberation in one's 
present rebirth); 
2) ma-nges-pa/aniyata: Uncertain Family ( = those who will enter which-
ever Family circumstances suggest to them); 
3) nyan-thos/Sriivaka: Hearer Family ( = Hinayana ideal of the Arhat 
saint); 
4) 
rang-sangs-rgyas/pratyeka-buddha: Solitary Buddha Family (=the self-
made Buddha ideal ofHinayana); 
5) de-bzhin-gshegs-pa/tathiigata: Tathagata Family ( = the Mahayana ideal 
of compassionate Enlightenment). 
3 bar-chad/antaraya: impediment. The Vinaya (Discipline) specifies many 
physical and circumstantial impediments which the candidate must be free 
from for acceptance as a Novice or Monk. The Ordination ceremony itself 
contains a double inquiry into freedom from these impediments; e.g., free-
dom from deformities, from a variety of specific diseases, from debt, lack of 
parental consent, and so on. See Matters of Discipline, Ot. 1030, Vol. 
41:24.3ff. 
4 pham-pa byung-ba/piiriijika: expulsion offence. The first of the eight classes 
of offence against the monastic rule (which constitute the divisions of the 
Priitimolqa-sutra itself (Ot. 1031, Vol. 41:141-9): 
1) Expulsion (see below); 
2) Suspension (dge-'dun lhag-ma/sarrrghiivaie~a); 
3) Indeterminate (ma-nges-pa/aniyata);

--- PAGE 95 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 81 
4) Forfeiture (spang-ba/nai!Jsargika); 
5) Transgression (/tung-byed-pa/ptitayantika); 
6) 
Confessable (so-sor-bshag-pa/pratideianiya); 
7) Etiquette (bslab-pa'i chos/iaik~a); 
8) Dispute-settling (rtsod-pa'i zhi/adhikararJa-iamatha). 
The four Expulsion Offences are the most serious and involve dismissal 
from the community: 
1) Sexual intercourse (mi-tshangs-pa spyod-pa/a-brahma-caryam: lit., 
impure life); 
2) Theft (ma-byin-par len-pa/adatttidiinam); 
3) Homicide (gsod-pa/badha); 
4) Lying to praise self (mi'i chos bla-mar smra-ba/uttara-manu~ya-dharma­
praltipa: lit., speaking of self as higher in things of man). 
5 de-bzhin-gshegs-pa'i snying-po-can = Tathtigata-garbha. A term of the 
YogiicaraNijfliinaviida school of Mahiiyiina referring to ultimate reality 
under the aspect of the potential for Buddhahood within every "vessel" 
Such a reality would be rejected by strict Miidhya111ika as holding to a 
position of reality, and therefore false both by reason of holding to a position 
and by establishing a reality. See Atisa's Chapter VI of the Commentary; 
also A. K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, pp. 404-S. 
6 Ot. 112. 
7 Unidentified. 
8 chos-kyi dbyings!dharma-dhiitu. The term for ultimate reality when con-
sidered under the aspect of its own proper nature, indescribable, incon-
ceivable. 
9 The two types of Family [rigs/gotra 1 presented here differ from the fivefold 
distinction mentioned earlier [see note 21. The True Nature [chos-nyid kyi 
rigs] Family means those who have already achieved Buddhahood in the 
various bodies of fruition that Suvarl)advipa describes; the Striving Family 
[sgrub-pa'i rigs 1 refers to those still progressing on the Paths. 
10 Illumination on the Unfathomable, Ot. 5192, Vol. 91. 
11 
Ot. 162, Vol. 6. 
12 Ot. 5584, Vol. 114:262.2. 
13 The five precepts of the lay Devotee, according to the Miilasarviistiviida 
tradition which the Tibetan Communities follow, are found in the vow 
formula itself: 
"0 Aciirya, please heed me! From this day forward, as long as I live, I, 
(name), renounce [11 the killing of living beings; I tum away, as was done 
by the saintly Arhats as long as they lived, from the killing of life. With this 
first precept I shall train, obey, and imitate the training of the saintly 
Arhats. Moreover, as was done by the saintly Arhats as long as they lived, 
I too from this day forward, as long as I live, renounce [21 the taking of 
what is not given, and [3] unlawful sexual conduct, and [4] speaking 
untruly, and [5] intoxicating liquor and places of vulgar amusement. These 
five precepts I shall study, obey, and follow as the saintly Arhats before 
me 
"[Matters of Discipline, Ot. 1030, Vol. 41:22ff]. 
The forty-five rules connected with the five precepts. are not mentioned in the 
Discipline itself, but are later interj>retations and refinements of the applica-
tion of the precepts; e.g., the basic precept of Not Killing would have several 
types of killing expressed as "rules" connected with it: parricide, matricide, 
infanticide, the killing of an Arhat, and so on.

--- PAGE 96 [DIRECT] ---

82 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
14 
Atrsa's triple division of the monastic rules is a more ge?eric cla~sification 
than the eight classes of transgressions [see note 4] foun~ m the Pratlmokfas 
of any of the schools. The eight classes of the Prattmok~a are spectfic 
descriptions of the type of transgression. ranked from the most senous to the 
least offensive. Atisa's analysis is rather of the nature of the transgressions 
themselves - whether they are actions evil in themselves (and therefore 
requiring confession). or actions that would n~t be w~ong ~f one had not 
promised to observe them, or actions that are stmply dtscrettonary matters 
pertaining to good order. 
15 
The number of rules pertaining to each of the three classes totals 253, but 
that. total is at variance with the total number of rules in the known 
Pratimoksas (Sarvastivada: 262; Miilasarviistiviida: 258; Pali: 227]. This in 
itself is not unusual. since there is considerable latitude in the enumeration 
of the Etiquette rules. some combining two prohibitions into one. However, 
the Commentary's statement that twenty-three rules pertain to the 
"Confessable" does not agree with any of the schools. which all enumerate 
four: not receiving food from the hands of nuns, admonishing nuns to let the 
monks eat first when in a layman's house. receiving food from families which 
have been interdicted by the Samgha, and taking food in the Community for 
use outside. without permission of the Community. [See W. Pachow, 
Comparative Studv of the Priitimok~a. p. II.] 
The discrepancies about the monastic rule here in the Commentary simply 
point to Atlsa's having been ordained in the Mahiisamghika lineage, whose 
Pratimok~a has since been lost. Atisa did discourse on the Discipline during 
summer retreats in Central Tibet. but it is perhaps significant that no men-
tion is made of his participating in any ordination ceremonies either as 
Aciirya or Upiidhyaya. The statement has been made by Nyii~amoli Thera 
in his Pii(imokkha [p. 101] that AtiSa was asked not to ordain in Tibet 
because his o;vn lineage [Mahasamghika] was different from t,hat begun at 
Bsam-yas by Santirak~ita with the first seven Tibetan monks. Santirak~ita's 
lineage is attested as the Tibetan preference by the Kanjur's containing only 
the Miilasarvastivada version of the Discipline and Priitimok~a Sutra. 
16 
The Six Basic Rules and Six Rules for Harmony are not identified in the 
known traditions. From the context they seem similar to the Nuns' "Eight 
Serious Virtues" mentioned in the Nuns Ordination Ritual; e.g. receiving 
ordination only from monks; awaiting announcement of the proper date for 
the fortnightly Po~adha from the monks' community; not making the 
summer retreat without the monks nearby for Instruction; not admonishing 
the monks; rising in reverence to even y0ung monks although the nun be a 
hundred years old, and so on. See Ridding and La Vallee Poussin, "A 
Fragment of the Sanskrit Vinaya: Bhi~unl-karma-vacana", Bulletin of the 
School of Oriental Studies (London), Vol. I, pt III, pp. 141-2. 
17 '!fie number 500 for the rules of Nuns is mentioned in a siitra quote in 
Santideva's SS (p. 170), but the Nuns Priitimo~a Sutra (Ot. 1033) itself has 
a total of only 371 rules in the Miila-sarviistiviida tradition. The Pali version 
has 311 rules. See A. C. Banerjee, Sarviistiviida Literature, p. 88; and E. J. 
Thomas, The Life of the Buddha, pp. 107-12, for further information. 
18 The history of the early divisions of Buddhism was knowledge that every 
monk was expected to have, and the enumeration here is in Tibetan verse in 
the Commentary,. a mnemonic borrowed from Bhavya's Nikaya-bheda-
vibhanga-vyiikhyiina (Ot. 5640), and translated by Atisa himself. The 
proper names refer to certain doctrines held, or to founding teachers, or to 
places where moth~r monasteries were built. See Sukumar Dutt's Buddhist

--- PAGE 97 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 83 
Monks and Monasteries of India; A. K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, Chapter 
9. 
19 
Questions forthe Monks' Retreat, Ot. 5649, Vol. 127:309.1. 
20 In SS: p. 81. 
21 
Ot. 817, Vol. 33:36.5. 
22 
Ot. 886. Vol. 35:55.2. 
23 
bsnyen-par rdzogs-pa/upasan:zpadii: the ordination ceremony as distinct 
from the ceremony for admission to the religious life as a novice (rab-tll-
byung-ba/pravrajyii). The essence of ordination is the unanimous and 
formally acknowledged consent of the Community to accept the novice who 
has the intention to be bound (vowed) by the rules of the Monk. The 
ceremony itself was conducted as a formal business meeting of the Com-
munity, requiring a minimum of five monks (four of whom have specific 
functions in the ceremony), and consent of the Community given in its most 
solemn and binding form. The four officers required for the ceremony are: 
1) 
Preceptor (mkhan-po/upiidhyiiya): to sponsor and receive the novice in 
the name of the Community; 
2) Teacher (slob-dpon/iiciirya): to instruct the novice and receive his 
promises at the end of the ceremony; 
3) President (las-byed-pa/karma-karaka): to act as master of ceremonies 
or chairman, seeing to the proper conduct of the ritual, and to present 
the formal motion to the Community for granting the ordination; 
4) Admonitor (gsang-ste ston-pa/raho'nuJiisaka): to inquire privately 
during the ceremony about the novice's freedom from the physical 
impediments. 
The ceremony in all its details of rubrics and formulas and proper conduct of 
the meeting is described in the first chapter of the Matters of Discipline itself, 
and is considered to be among the oldest of Buddhist scriptures. See A. C. 
Banerjee, op. cit. pp. 101-42. 
24 The four basic types of acts of the Community (dge-'dun gyi las/samgha-
karma) are described in great detail in the Matters of Discipline, chapter 10: 
Acts. It is believed that this true democratic parliamentary procedure was 
adapted by the Buddha from contemporary tribal council systems such as the 
Vajji of northern India. (See S. Dutt. op. cit .. pp. 85-7.) An Act of the 
Community is always expressed by silence in response to the presiding 
monk's proposal of the Motion. As Atisa states, the third type of Act is 
required for ordination: a triple repetition of the Motion before the fourth 
and final assent of the Community. SeeS. Dutt, Early Buddhist Monachism, 
pp. 144ff; A. C. Banerjee, op. cit., pp. 222-4; for the Pali Vinaya: 
Mahiivagga IX(S.B.E .• Vol. XVIII). 
25 
Numerous rules throughout the Priitimo!qa are concerned with harmony in 
the religious community, and appropriate penances imposed for infractions, 
and formal lifting of the penance when atonement has been made. Banish-
ment (bskrad-pa/praviisaniyam) could be carried out against a group of 
monks who had created scandal in a given place. Penances in general are 
treated· in Chapter XIII of the Discipline. Regulations and conduct for the 
annual monsoon retreat are covered in Chapter IV. 
26 The first two items pertain to the Ordination Ritual; the third pertains to 
poverty in the matter of the monks' robes. their care and distribution. 
(Chapter VII of the Discipline). Forfeiture, the fourth class of Priitimok~a 
rules, describes offences for which the monk must give up the cloth (and 
other material gain) he has received through suggesting that generosity to 
laypersons.

--- PAGE 98 [DIRECT] ---

84 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
27 
The· prescriptions mentioned here show the minimal number (two) of monks 
required (and obligated) to conduct the fortnightly recitation of the 
Priitimoksa. as well as how confession may be made even when a larger 
assembly ·is gathered: i.e. by turning to the monk at one's elbow to admit the 
guilt. 
- Ordination hy five monks in remote areas had application in the history of 
Tibet when the native Tibetan lineage of ordina.tions begun at Bsam-yas by 
Santirak~ita was nearly broken by the persecution of Glang-dar-ma in the 
ninth centurv. In the later rekindling of the Doctrine. three monks who had 
fled the persecution and had found ; Tibetan worthy and desirous of ordina-
tion in A-mdo. one Dgongs-pa rab-gsal. performed the ceremony according 
to the prescribed ritual by inviting two Chinese monks to participate in order 
to make up the minimal assembly of five. Bu-ston records the incident: 
chos-'bvun~ (Obermiller). Pt II. pp. 201-2. 
The · R~treat Examination (Discipline. Chap. Ill) is the special 
recitation of Priitimoksa at the end of the summer retreat, with examina-
tion and confession of faults committed, seen. or apprehended by others 
during the time of retreat. 
· 
2R 
Considering that Atisa was ordained in the Mahasamghika lineage and 
described a different analysis of Priitimok~a rules from that of the 
Sarvastivada, it is interesting to note here his listing of their great Discipline 
masters as authorities - perhaps in deference to his Tho-ling patrons. The 
title."Reverend" (btsun-pa!bhadanta) is especially reserved for outstanding 
Discipline commentators. and all those listed here are found in the Tanjur, 
~xcept for two (Dbyangs-sgrogs and Bsam-rdzogs). Gul)aprabha and 
Sakyaprabha are especially revered in Tibet as the "Two Excellents" 
(mchog gnyis). 
The Ten Ways of Ordination are a traditional listing, found in AK(LVP). 
IV, 60, and in the Blue Annals (Roerich), p. 33. The first Five Converts 
refers to the Buddha's companions in his initial austerities, who later listened 
to .his first sermon on the Four Holy Truths and followed him. (See 
Mahiivagga, I, 6.) Yasas' ordination by the "Come aside, 0 Monk!" (dge-
slong tshur shog!ehi bhik!u) is described in the Ordination Ceremony itself 
as the Buddha's first way of receiving monks into the Community. (See 
Matters of Discipline: Ot. 1030, Vol. 41:22). Mahakasyapa, the ascetic of 
Uruvela, came to the Buddha with his five hundred disciples, and all were 
ordained by their very assent to the Buddha's teaching. (See E. J. Thomas, 
Life of the Buddha, p. 91.) Sudatta (or Aniithapil)c;lada) is not recorded as 
ever being other than a lay devotee; so this reference remains unidentified. 
Mahaprajapati, the Buddha's aunt, who prevailed upon him to permit 
women to join the Community as nuns. (See Cullavagga, X. 1.) 
Dharmadinnii, a woman locked up in a harem, sent a messenger to the 
Buddha for admission to the Community. (See Majjhima Nikaya. I, 299.) 
The Sixty Bhadravargas ("the good groups") are not accounted for in the 
various Disciplines known to date. The appellation bhadravarga is usually 
given to the first five converts. 
29 
InAK(LVP).IV,97. 
30 BCA, IX. 45. 
31 
mi brda phrad-pa. 
32 ris mthun-pa/nikiiya-sabhiiga. Vasubandhu, whom Atisa is following in 
these topics, defines this as meaning death; i.e., one must be in the human 
body to be able to observe the precepts of the Pratimok~a. At death, the

--- PAGE 99 [DIRECT] ---

THE MONASTIC LIFE 85 
vows of the monastic life do not carry over into other rebirths. even human. 
See AK(LVP). IV. 94. 
33 
See note 4. 
34 mtshan gnyis dus gcig-tu byung-ba: lit., "both [sex] marks appearing at the 
same time", which is hermaphroditism. But actually sex-change is meant 
here- a physiological possibility accepted in the history of Indian medicine. 
SeeAK(LVP), IV, 94. 
35 
A K(L VP). IV. 94. 
36 The five-limbed vigilance is not found in the Hearer's Level. but rather in 
Asariga's Bodhisattva Levels (Ot. 5538. Vol. 110. 167.3]: 
I) sngon-f{yi mtha' dang-ldan-pa: one who has put an end to past trans-
gressions: 
2) 
phyi-ma'i mtha' dang-ldan-pa: one who has put an end to future trans-
gressions: 
3) dbus-kyi mtha' dang-ldan-pa: one who has put an end to present trans-
gressions: 
4) snga-nas bya-ba: learning what should be done from previous mistakes: 
5) lhan-cig rjes-su spyod-pa: one who has put all the above together and 
acts accordingly ever after. 
37 The Twelve Qualities of Purification (sbyangs-pa'i yon-tan/dhilta-guf!a) are 
one item in the Seventeen Ornaments ofthe Religious Practice (dge-sbyong-
gi rgyan/sriimatJii-alamkiira). both of which are listed in Asariga's Hearer's 
Level [Ot. 5537. Vol. 110:65.5f]. The Twelve Qualities all have to do with 
living frugally in the religious life; the Seventeen Ornaments are more 
generic: having greater faith, greater patience, few necessities, and so on. 
See Glossary. 
38 
Ot. 5521, Vol. 108:8.1. The summary inserted here is a mnemonic verse 
covering the contents of the Discipline itself. Atisa has treated only the first 
four topics in this chapter. Persons [5] refers to the subject matter of chapter 
XII of the Matters of Discipline: the disposition of disciplinary actions 
against persons. Promulgation [6] refers to the Buddha's assembling the 
monks to announce new changes in the rule as each new case arose. 
Distinction [7] covers the many exceptions allowed by the Pratimok~a rules: 
e.g. absence from Po~adha by reason of illness. Determination [8] refers to 
the settling of dissension in the Community and to the decision about 
undetermined infractions of the rule.

--- PAGE 100 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 101 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 4 
The Bodhisattva Vow 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
THE BODHISATfVA VOW 
22 
88 
A 
Conduct Chapter of Asanga 
88 
B 
The Good Guru 
89 
II 
EXPLANATION OF THE VOW 
90 
A 
Ritual 
91 
1 With Guru 
24-31 
91 
2 Without Guru 
91 
B 
Extent of Conduct 
91 
c Forsaking the Vow 
93 
D 
Preventing Transgression 
93 
E 
Rising from Transgression 
93 
F 
Benefits of Conduct 
94 
III 
PURIFICATION OF BODY, SPEECH AND 
MIND 
32 
95 
A 
Conduct of the Vow 
96 
B 
Conduct for Garnering Virtue 
97 
c 
Conduct for the Good of Others 
97 
IV 
PERFECTING THE EQUIPMENT 
33 
98 
A 
Striving in Both Vows 
98 
B 
Five Effects 
99 
c Marks of Unfailing Thought 
100 
v 
BEGINNER BODHISATfVAS 
101 
A 
Skilled in Means 
102 
B 
Unremitting Practice 
102 
c 
Siitra Study 
104 
VI 
KINDS OF BEGINNERS 
105

--- PAGE 102 [DIRECT] ---

4 
The Bodhisattva Vow 
The Bodhisattva Vow 
But you must not think it enough simply to have the 
P.nHimok~a vow and beget a resolve [for Perfect Enlighten-
ment]; for the Cloud of Jewels says: 
"0 Noble Youth, a bodhisattva bound by the vow of 
bodhisattva training is one who says: 'I cannot be directly 
awakened to the supreme and perfect Enlightenment 
just by Pnltimok~a vows. Rather I must train myself in 
everything the Tathagatas have enjoined as bodhisattva 
practice and training in the sutras and by their 
example.' " 1 
And so at this point I will imitate my Gurus in following the 
Mahayana sutras to explain what must be practised in the 
comprehensive training of a bodhisattva. 
Conduct Chapter of Asahga 
I have already indicated [in the preceding stanzas] who the 
unique vessel for Mahayana. is, so now I point out the Path 
ofthe Great Wagons for him by saying: 
ACCORDING TO THE RITUAL GIVEN IN THE 
CONDUCT CHAPTER OF THE BODHISATIVA LEVELS, 
[ONE TAKES THE VOW ..• ] [Stanza 22] 
This Bodhisattva Levels is the treatise composed by noble 
Asariga to present the Six Perfections. In that text there is 
the Chapter on the Perfection of Conducf comprised of 
nine titles: [1] The Nature of Conduct, [2] All-inClusive, 
[3]TheDifficulties, [4]TheApproaches, [5]TheHolyMan, 
[6] All Kinds, [7] The Wish in Misfortune, [8] Happiness

--- PAGE 103 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
89 
Here and Hereafter, (305a] and [9] Purified Conduct. My 
reference here is to what is stated under the heading "All-
inclusive Conduct". 
The Good Guru 
I show how this ritual proceeds by saying 
ONE TAKES THE VOW FROM ANY GOOD GURU 
WHO HAS THE PROPER CHARACTERISTICS. (Stanza 22) 
And who is the good Guru and what are his· proper 
characteristics? 
ONE WHO IS LEARNED IN THE RITUAL OF THE VOW, 
AND HIMSELF LIVES THE VOW HE HAS TAKEN, 
AND HAS THE COMPASSIONATE FORBEARANCE 
TO IMPART IT- KNOW HIM TO BE THE GOOD GURU. 3 (23] 
"LEARNED IN THE RITUAL OF THE VOW" means that he is 
well-informed and knowledgeable about it. "uvEs THE vow 
HE HAS TAKEN" means that the Guru's own Conduct is not 
diminished or destroyed and that it is pure. "FORBEARANCE" 
means he is willing to do it, and proceeds freely in imparting 
the vow. "coMPASSIONATE" means he sees a disciple as a 
son, and that he cannot bear to see others suffer. When I 
say he must be a "GuRu" ["higher"] I mean that a vow can 
only [truly] be taken from someone whose attainment is 
higher than others. And a Guru is considered to be higher 
when his disciples possess virtues like his and when great 
reverence has been paid to his teaching. 
Furthermore, a Guru possesses four excellences: [1] 
excellent Conduct; [2] excellent attainments, [3] excellent 
intention, and [4] excellent practice. I specify his excellent 
Conduct by saying "HIMSELF LIVES TflE VOW HE HAS TAKEN", 
and his excellent attainments by "LEARNED IN THE RITUAL OF 
THE VOW ... [ANT)) ... FORBEARANCE TO IMPART IT". 
To explain this further: "LIVES THE vow" means that you 
cannot acquire a vow from a Guru who has forsaken his 
own vow or has violated his own Conduct or no longer 
agrees With the Doctrine. "LEARNED IN THE RITUAL" means

--- PAGE 104 [DIRECT] ---

90 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
a vow cannot be acquired from a Guru who does not know 
the ritual because then the ritual itself is defective. And 
"FORBEARANCE TO IMPART" means he is willing to grant the 
vow because he approaches it with a glad heart, saying, 
"Excellent! I must give this vow without hesitation!" 
His excellent intention and excellent practice are shown 
by the word "COMPASSIONATE": 
The Guru's excellent intention is his faith, his sincere 
motivation in action, his detachment and compassion, 
his reverence for his own Guru. He desires little and 
knows moderation, keeping trifles unimportant. He has 
no anxieties, he is patient with others' faults, he is free of 
anger and grudge-bearing. 
The Guru's excellent practice is his advancing in prac-
tice of virtue, ever esteeming and increasing it. He does 
not deceive himself about the rules of his training. He is 
neither overenthusiastic nor indolent, and he does not 
like noisy crowds or pleasure-seeking. His mind is 
undisturbed. 4 
If you take the vow from such a Guru your practice of 
Conduct will grow, and that kind of Guru is what I had in 
mind when I wrote: 
ONE TAKES THE VOW FROM ANY GOOD GURU 
WHO HAS THE PROPER CHARACTERISTICS. (Stanza 22] 
Explanation of the Vow 
My explanation continues now with these topics: [A] the 
ritual for taking the vow, [B] the full extent of it, [C] how 
the vow is forsaken, [D] how it will not be forsaken, 
(E] rising from failings in it, [F] the benefits of Conduct. 
There are of course many systems of interpretation from 
the great scholars of the P?St, but here I am going to ex-
glain only the thought of Arya Asanga and of Venerable 
Santideva because theirs is the spirituality of the Superior

--- PAGE 105 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
91 
Person - which is the Great Path of the Great Vehicle. 
[306a] 
The Ritual for Taking the Vow 
[1] "for the full ritual, you should study the one composed 
by Adirya Asari.ga in his Chapter on ConductS or the one 
that I myself composed. 6 There is also a ritual foF taking the 
vow without a Guru given in the same Chapter on Conduct. 
For_the ritual I made, I imitated Arya Asari.ga's. The ritual 
by Santideva is found of course in his Progress in Practice, 
but is presented more fully in the Compendium of Training. 7 
He has also given a ritual for the vow without a Guru in the 
latter text. 
[2] I presented my own ritual without a Guru in the 
stanzas from: 
"BUT IF, AFTER TRYING, ONE CANNOT 
FIND JUST SUCH A GURU AS THIS, 
I WILL EXPLAIN ANOTHER RITUAL 
FOR TAKING THE VOW IN A CORRECT WAY." (Stanza 24] 
down to the words: 
"NO UNVIRTUOUS DEED WILL EVER BE MINE." (Stanza 31b] 
I chose this ritual of Ambaraja8 here because my Gurus 
have said it is a formula for the ritual both with and without 
a Guru. It is true, the Compendium of Training gives it as a 
ritual for taking the vow from a Guru, but since I am 
presenting both methods, my ritual for taking with a Guru 
is based on the Chapter on Conduct [of Asari.ga] and the one 
'Jithout Guru is based on the Compendium of Training [of 
Santideva]. 
Extent of Conduct 
The full extent of Conduct. Arya Asari.ga has summarised 
what the entire Sutra collection teaches on Conduct in the 
nine sections of his Chapter on Conduct beginning with 
"Nature". He concludes by saying:

--- PAGE 106 [DIRECT] ---

92 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"The Conduct of the Bodhisattva is completely covered 
by these practices. What he must do in his Conduct is 
complete with just these. The benefit of his Conduct is 
complete in just these. [306b] There is nothing more; 
there is nothing beyond them. " 9 
And Acarya Santideva treats the whole Sutra teaching as a 
training by three types of person; hence in Mahayana there 
is a higher practice of Conduct, and an average, and a 
minimal. When speaking of the higher practice in his 
Compendium of Training he says, "The fullest practice of 
Mahayana comes from the Bodhisattva vow." 10 Then in the 
Progress in Practice he says: 
"There is no virtuous practice to be had anywhere 
Which the Sons of the Victor do not observe." 11 
And my Guru, the glorious Bodhibhadra, has said: 
"The chief precepts of Bodhisattva training are sum-
marised here [in Asanga's Chapter on Conduct]. But this 
training of a Bodhisattva is measureless and endless [in 
actual practice], and therefore when you return to what 
is taught here in these precepts, you will know what is or 
is noLa fault." 12 
On the St!bject of the average practice of Bodhisattva 
~onduct, Santideva says in the Compendium of Training: 
"This Bodhisattva will know the basic attitudes [ neces-
sary] for not transgressing. He gives away his person and 
enjoyments to all creatures, and all the merit he has ever 
gained as well. And he keeps on growing in these 
practices." 13 
Then on the subject of minimal practice, he says: 
"A Bodhisattva who wants to observe some certain pre-
cept of the. training makes a promise to do so in the 
presence of the Buddhas. If he has no [Guru] Spiritual

--- PAGE 107 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 93 
Friend, he acts on his own power to do so, and takes the 
vow in the presence of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 
Hence, even when acting on your own in observing a 
single precept, you should take the vow correctly." 14 
[307a] 
_ 
Forsaking the Vow 
According to Arya Asanga's explanation, the causes of 
forsaking the vow are the failure to renew the resolve for 
the great Enlightenment, and through great entanglement 
to commit the four basic sins. The former means to grow 
tired of seeking the good of all creatures, and feeling that 
Enlightenment is too far off, and to have the resolution of 
only a Hearer or Solitary Buddha or an outsider. The latter 
means to be without shame or regret, and to lose all concern 
for the consequences, or to give back the vow in the 
prese~ce of a!lyone capable of understanding. 15 
In Adirya Santideva's interpretation in the Compendium 
of Training, the vow is forsaken by failing to reject the Evil 
Works of Mara or the Fourteen Evil Things 16 that begin 
with the man who appropriates for himself what belongs to 
the holy religion, and so on; and by imperfect mindfulness, 
by laziness and indifference, by not learning what the trans-
gressions are, and by having no shame or regret. 
And in his Commentary on "Twenty Verses on the Vow", 
my Guru says, " ... not learning the precepts of the train-
ing, by unmindfulness, delusion, and irreverence." 17 
Preventing Transgression 
For Asanga transgression is prevented by deliberateness 
and mindfulness, zeal and carefulness, by knowing what is 
~nd is not a fault, and by a sense of shame and regret. 
Santideva mentions these also, along with rejecting and 
correcting the Fourteen Evil Things, as even the ordinary 
[Paths] do. 18 
Rising from Transgression 
Both Gurus say that one can be as free of regret for failure 
by being restored to virtue as by never having sinned in the 
first place. If one sees the wrong in his faults, and admits 
and confesses it even in little things, he will be pure. [307b]

--- PAGE 108 [DIRECT] ---

94 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
In the Chapter on Conduct, Arya Asanga speaks of rising 
from failings in the passage that begins "If there is no 
suitable person to act as one's teacher [to confess to] ... ", 19 
where he also sayS that when the basic sins have been 
committed because of complete entanglement, then the 
vow should be taken again after confessing in the presence 
of the community. But, for [lesser] faults committed, con-
fession to anyone of the Hearers' or the Great Vehjcle [is 
~ufficient]. In the Compendium of Training Adirya 
Santideva comments on his verse, "If we do not strive as the 
Perfect Buddha told us, to evil destinies we will go" ,2° by 
giving an explanation of the Four Virtues Sutra. 
Benefits of Conduct 
The Chapter on Conduct has this to say: 
"And so this great collection of rules for Bodhisattva 
Conduct results in the attainment of the great Enlighten-
ment. Through them you will reach the Perfection of 
Conduct and be directly awakened. And while striving 
toward Buddhahood you will gain five advantages: [1] you 
will think as a Buddha; [2] you will treat death as an 
occasion for rejoicing; [3] you will be reborn in your next 
life in a place where there is a Spiritual Friend who is wise 
in the Doctrine; [4] iri the present life you will have an 
endless store of merit that will help you achieve the 
Perfection of Conduct; [5] and when you are reborn in 
your next life you will retain the level of Conduct you 
have gained. m 1 
And in the Compendium of Training: 
"The benefits from observing the training are so very 
great, it is only fitting we should strive for them right 
from the present moment. " 22 
And, supporting that idea, [Santideva] quotes from the 
Exhortation to Higher Intention, the Miracle of Resolute 
Calm, the Moon-Lamp Sutra, and the Cloud of Jewels. 
[308a]

--- PAGE 109 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
95 
My own Guru [Bodhibhadra] says in his Commentary on 
"Twenty Verses on the Vow": 
"The man who conducts himself in this manner will 
thereby surely cut off any approach to the evil destinies, 
and will never be reborn in them again. " 23 
And further on: 
"He is not reborn in the evil destinies, and even though 
he be reborn a hundred times he does not experience 
severe suffering or [at least] is swiftly liberated from it, 
and in enduring it he works to mature others. " 24 
There are still other benefits in taking the vow correctly, as 
Arya Candragomin says: 
"Because of the virtue in him then, 
The Buddha with all his sons-
Their hearts set on virtue too -
Regard him as their comely child. " 25 
And Acarya Santideva: 
"Today I am born into the Buddha's family; 
I have become a son ofthe Buddha! 
As I take up this family's profession, 
Let me never act so as to spoil 
Its spotless and venerable name. " 26 
Purification of Body, Speech and Mind 
Because the Bodhisattva who has taken the vow needs to 
preserve and extend his Conduct, I said: 
IN ESSENCE, ONE'S PURITY OF BODY, SPEECH AND MIND 
MEANS KEEPING VOWS WITH A MIND FOR PROGRESS. (Stanza 32) 
Now as to the words "IN ESSENCE, ONE'S PURITY OF BODY, 
SPEECH AND MIND", I quote from the Tathiigata's Com-
passion Sutra:

--- PAGE 110 [DIRECT] ---

96 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"[The Bodhisattva] cleanses his body, he cleanses his 
speech, and he cleanses his mind. " 27 
Purifying the body and speech is done by [Asanga's] 
Conduct of the Vow, and purifying the mind by his 
Conduct for Garnering Virtue and Conduct for Others' 
Sake. Or again, each one of those Conducts purifies body, 
speech and mind. [308b] Or still again, body and speech are 
purified by avoiding the [first] seven Unvirtuous Deeds 
beginning with Killing and so on, and the mind is purified 
by avoiding the [last] three beginning with Covetousness. 
In the Questions of Celestial King Druma Sutra, this is the 
meaning [the Blessed One] gave: 
"The Conduct of a purified body is devoid of Lust, Anger, 
and Illusion, and the Conduct of purified speech is 
marked by no deceit toward my godly Three Jewels, and 
the Conduct of a purified mind holds no Covetousness, 
or Ill-will or False Views. " 28 
As I reflected on how, if that is true, I would study well the 
training in Conduct, and how the strength gained in culti-
vating it would increase my desire, joy and delight in 
Conduct and my application to it, I wrote: 
FOR BY PRACTISING WELL THE THREE CONDUCT TRAININGS, 
APPRECIATION OF THE THREE BECOMES GREATER. [Stanza 32] 
Now these three Trainings are: [A] the Conduct of the 
Vow, [B] Conduct for Garnering Virtue, and [C] Conduct 
for Others' Sake. 29 
Conduct of the Vow 
Conduct of the Vow includes the vows of Pratirnoksa's 
seven ran}<:s which prohibit acts that would be wrong 
because [one has] pledged [to renounce them], as well as 
the Ten Unvirtuous Deeds which prohibit [acts that are] 
wrong by nature.

--- PAGE 111 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
97 
Conduct for Garnering Virtue 
Conduct for Garnering Virtue means that after correctly 
taking the Vow you gather up every least bit of virtue you 
can in body, speech and mind, for the sake of Enlighten-
ment. In particular it is to apply yours~ If to study, reflection, 
and contemplation with unique delight. And likewise it is 
your behaviour toward your Gurus, always greeting them 
first, rising and saluting them with folded hands. [309a] It is 
showing reverence to and proclaiming the praises of gifted 
persons, and rejoicing in all merit. It is forbearance under 
the contempt of others. It is bestowing [the merit of] all 
your virtues [on others] for Enlightenment's sake. It is 
regularly making the various resolves for purity. It is offer-
ing worship to the Three Jewels in a wide variety of 
offerings. It is zeal in virtue. It is rejecting inattention, and 
fostering mindfulness and deliberateness and restraint of 
the doors of the senses. It is knowing moderation in food, 
and striving not to sleep in the early and latter parts of the 
night. It is reliance on the holy man. It is knowing what the 
faults are and, having seen them, avoiding them or confess-
ing them honestly. It is preserving and extending every 
good deed that is in harmony with these virtues. 30 
And thus, if you keep the Conduct of Garnering Virtue, 
your life of virtue will become well integrated. For, if you 
do not consent to looking for pleasures even in small things, 
then how much less in greater. This Conduct is the very 
heart of the Ten Perfections, of the Four Means of Attrac-
tion, of the Four Infinitudes, and of the Ten Thoughts of 
Enlightenment. 
Conduct for the Good of Others 
Conduct for Others' Sake means that you must work for the 
good of creatures. It is being a companion to those in 
suffering as a nurse is to the sick, and so on. 
It is being a guide for the blind, and teaching the deaf by 
signs, and carrying those who have no hands or feet, and 
cleansing those who hanker after desire, and purifying 
the suffering of anyone overcome or contemned by

--- PAGE 112 [DIRECT] ---

98 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
others, and [309b] giving food and drink to the weary 
traveller, and helping with clothes and lodging. It means 
being indefatigable in helping the sick with your healing 
abilities, and having no thought of reward. 31 
In short, it is cleansing away all the suffering that creatures 
have, and keeping the intention to remove it, and bestow-
ing all your virtues on others for their benefit. For the full 
significance of these practices, you must study the Chapter 
on Conduct. 
Perfecting the Equipment 
It was in my reflecting that these three kinds of Conduct for 
the [Bodhisattva's] vow are actually the Equipment of 
Merit, and should therefore quickly bring that Equipment 
to perfection, I wrote the verse: 
HENCE, WHEN ONE HAS STRIVEN IN THE VOWS WHICH MAKE UP 
THE PURE AND PERFECT BODHISATTVA VOW, 
HE WILL BRING TO COMPLETE PERFECTION 
THE VERY EQUIPMENT FOR PERFECT ENLIGHTENMENT. (Stanza 33) 
Consequently, you should understand that if you wish to 
reach the Perfect Enlightenment, and want to achieve the 
merit which is the condition for it, you will bring that 
Equipment of Merit to perfection by striving diligently in 
the Vow of the Bodhisattva. 
Striving in Both Vows 
By the words "VOWS WHICH MAKE UP THE ... VOW", I include 
both the Vow of a Bodhisattva who is following Arya 
~sanga's ,system, and the Vow of a Bodhisattva who follows 
Adirya Santideva's. If you have striven and laboured 
perseveringly in the paths of both these great Wagons, you 
will have fulfilled the Equipments of Merit and Knowledge 
alike, and the Gurus say that you will be directly and 
perfectly Enlightened. My Guru [Bodhibhadra, for 
instance] says in his Commentary on "Twenty Verses on the 
Vow":

--- PAGE 113 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
99 
"These Three Trainings of Conduct are virtuous because 
to take and observe them correctly works for one's own 
and others' good, benefit, and happiness. [310a] They 
are measureless because they comprise the measureless 
trainings of a Bodhisattva. They are useful because they 
accomplish the benefit and happiness of all creatures. 
And one can understand how much greater their effect is 
[than other trainings] by the fact that through them one 
lays hold of the supreme and perfect Enlightenment, the 
greatest result of all. " 32 
Five Effects 
Now then, to undertake such a training from a holy Guru 
and desire the basic virtues of the Equipment Path's Aids-
to-Liberation, as is proper for a Bodhisattva, means that 
one has had the right disposition for it from previous 
rebirths. For as Maitreyanatha says in the Classification of 
the Middle and Extremes: 
"Scriptures declare that the maturing [of karma] 
includes: [1] becoming a Vessel, and [2] Strength 
because ofthat capacity, and [3] Desire, and [4] Growth, 
and [5] Purification. These are the successive stages of 
the effects [of karma]. " 33 
And the great and learned Guru Santipa [explains this as] :34 
"The bodhisattvas' becoming Vessels [for Mahayana] in 
this life is because of their having trained to cultivate 
virtue in their previous lives. This is the Maturation 
Effect. [1] Their becoming strong is because of what 
they have done in this life. This is the Dominant Effect. 
[2] For the same reason, but later, is their desire [for more 
training]. This is the Causally-Similar Effect. [3] Their 
great growth in training in this life is the Human-Activity 
Effect. [4] Their being dissociated from the impurities of 
the Obscurations is the Dissociation Effect. [5] Four of 
these effects, excepting the Dominant, are listed as 
effects of the same [causal] category, but the list would 
not be complete if that were true."

--- PAGE 114 [DIRECT] ---

100 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
And the great and learned Acarya Vasubandhu says: [310b] 
"The Bodhisattva who has the Thought for Enlighten-
ment, from then on in rebirth after rebirth, 
'Has happy destinies, noble birth, all his faculties, is 
born a male, remembers rebirths, and does not turn 
back.' 
He does not regret suffering in the cause of helping 
creatures. A servant not bought with worldly goods is this 
bodhisattva. And, even with his special eminence in the 
good fortune of a Great Being, he will not be proud and 
arrogant. Out of compassion, he is controlled by others, 
and lives at their feet like a dog, a servant or a low-caste. 
And although others hold him in contempt and hurt him, 
he is forbearing, and takes unto himself all weariness and 
anxiety." 35 
This is the kind of person we know as a Mahayanist. 
Marks of Unfailing Thought 
The Sutras also speak of the signs of Enlightenment 
Thought, unimpaired through rebirth after rebirth: 
"[Because of the Thought] one is spared the evil 
destinies. He avoids birth in remote areas, and is reborn 
In a place where there is a holy man. His birth is of noble 
family, and he is handsome in body, and has great 
insight, and is free of sickness. He is endowed with 
compassion." 
Hence, you avoid the Eight Unfavourable Conditions and 
possess the qualities of the Ten Favourable ones. Or again, 
the signs [of Enlightenment Thought] are to be naturally 
endowed with the Six Perfections; for the Sutras say, "One 
is endowed with [the Perfection of] Giving without being 
taught it", on through each of the Perfections to "He is 
endowed with Insight without being taught it."

--- PAGE 115 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
101 
And Acarya Candrakirti says this: 
"If while [on the Paths of] the Ordinary Person/6 
One hears of Emptiness and inner joy comes again and again, 
And from that joy the eyes fill with teai:s, 
And even the body hairs begin to rise; [311a] 
Then to that one, whoever he be who has this 
Seed of Enlightenment, let Ultimate Truth be taught. 
For from that seed springs the quality of realising it. " 37 
Acarya Vasubandhu puts it this way: 
"Regarding the Aids to Liberation: when anyone hears a 
sermon on Non-Self, or on the defects of the cycle of 
rebirth, or on the qualities of Nirval).a, and the tears flow 
and his scalp tingles, then we recognise a man who has 
the basic virtues of the Aids to Liberation- just as surely 
as we know that seed has been sown in the furrows of the 
field when we see the summer's sprouting." 38 
And the holy Descent into Lanka Sutra: 
"As from seeing smoke, one knows there is fire; 
And from the presence of herons, that water's nearby; 
SoJ the Family of intelligent Bodhisattvas 
Is recognised by their characteristics. " 39 
Beginner Bodhisattvas 
And so, the Beginner Bodhisattva should be constantly 
aware that his whole body and life and enjoyments, and all 
the phenomena of Samsara and Nirval).a alike are as but a 
dream. Dreamlike are the Three Jewels to which he pays 
dreamlike reverence. Dreamlike the cycle of rebirth in 
which he must sorrow; dreamlike the creatures for whom 
his compas~ion labours with dreamlike mind; and dream-
like the creatures whom he must respect. 
He must bear in mind that all creatures are his lord; he 
must bear in mind the Non-arising [of all phenomena]; he 
must bear in mind the Thought of Enlightenment. He must 
bear Death in mind. He must bear Conduct in mind. He 
must bear in mind detachment from all material things. He

--- PAGE 116 [DIRECT] ---

102 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
must bear in mind his mindfulness, deliberateness, 
attention, and careful reflection. [311b] 
Skilled in Means 
Moreover, this Beginner should at all times be skilled in the 
Means, [reflecting in this way:] 
"Taking my own sins to be others' sins, I confess them; 
and taking others' sins to be my own, I confess them. 
Making my own roots of virtue to be others' root~ of 
virtue, and others' to be my own - making my own 
happiness to be others' happiness, and making their 
suffering to be mine - I cleanse away the suffering of 
others through my own suffering. When I see or hear of 
the happiness of others, my heart is glad. And when I see 
or hear of their suffering, my heart is cast down like a 
mother's, thinking 'Ah alas, when will I free them from 
their suffering?' 
"I put aside all thought of worldly things. I must not be 
jealous of others' gain, honour, and fame. Here am I, 
with 
this 
family, 
good 
health, 
attendants 
and 
wherewithal; I have the five branches of knowledge; I 
have my own goods, honour, and reputation; so, without 
pride or arrogance, I will not hold lesser people in 
contempt. In sharing my virtue with others, I completely 
bestow [its merits on them] for the Great Enlightenment; 
and the virtues that others have shared with me, I also 
completely bestow for the Great Enlightenment. And in 
sharing my own sins with others' sins, I confess each one; 
and the sins they have shared with me, I confess them 
all." 
Unremitting Practice 
The [Beginner Bodhisattva's] daily practice is to be 
unremitting;40for as the Cloud of Jewels says: 
"In eating ... in drinking ... in going forth ... in lying 
down ... in lying on the right side ... [he is mindful]. "41 
[312a] 
You must study the rest of the Sutra for the description.

--- PAGE 117 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 103 
And then again his pledge is unremitting too, as these 
words of King Akasa of old say:42 
"From this day forward, even if the 
Thought of attachment arise in me, 
I will never betray all the Buddhas 
Who dwell in the ten directions. 
Beginning from this moment and henceforth, 
[Until I obtain the Highest Enlightenment,] 
I shall not permit ill-will or anger, 
Avarice or envy, to occupy my mind. [Stanza 27] 
I shall practise the Pure Life, 
And renounce sin and base desire; 
I shall imitate the Buddha 
By rejoicing in the vow of Conduct." [Stanza 28] 
And the Exhortation to Higher Intention Sutra: 
"0 Blessed One, from this day forward, we make this 
solemn promise in the presence of the Tathagata. 0 
Blessed One, from this day forward, if we talk about the 
failings of a person in the Bodhisattva Vehicle, be it true 
or not, we will be betraying the Tathagata, the Arhat, the 
completely perfect Buddha ... " 43 
And you must study the siitra for the rest [of that idea]. 
The Beginner's Bestowal [of merit] is likewise un-
remitting: study the Bestowal prayer in the Golden 
Splendour, the Ten Great Bestowals of the Bodhisattva 
yajradhvaja, and the Twenty Verses on Gathering Merit by 
Arya Nagarjuna, and others such as the Bestowal Chapter 
of the Progress in Practice. 
His Resolve is also unremitting: read the holy Good 
Practice, the Ten Great Resolves of the Siltra on the Ten 
Stages, the Twelve Great Resolves of the king in the 
Glory_ of the Blessed One, Vaidurya, Teacher of Healing, 
and Acarya Asvagho~a's Seventy Resolves, and so on. 
[312b] 
From time to time, recall the fifty [simile] teachings that 
my Guru collected from quotes out of the entire body of 
Siitras: "Mother and Father-like" and "Son and Daughter-
like" [is the BodhisattvaV4

--- PAGE 118 [DIRECT] ---

104 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Sutra Study 
A Beginner should also read the whole Siitra collection 
through at least once. And why is that? Because the 
beginner has only studied a small part of the remedy and its 
superficial conditions; and so he needs to study the Siitras 
diligently [for basic understanding]. He should also read, 
listen to, and ask questions about the books that summarise 
the complete Siitra meaning: the Compendium of Sutras, 
the Progress in Bodhisattva Practice, the Chapter on 
Conduct, and the Twenty Verses on the Vow. Since the 
great A cary as of the past- and the great' and learned Gurus 
of our own day- gave much reflection to the meaning of the 
Mahayana Siitras, their treatises too ought to be studied, 
listened to, and copied. 
He should also recite the Three Heaps three times a day 
and night, as the Questions of Ugra says: 
"Washing himself three times a day and three times a 
night, and· donning clean robes, he should recite the 
Three Heaps." 45 
And the Instruction on the Non-Production of All 
Phenomena: 
"Three times a day as well as night, pay homage to the 
Bodhisattvas with head [to the ground]." 46 
And the Cloud of Jewels: 
"To all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, he performs 
worship three times a day and three times a night." 47 
And in the Questions of Upali, it says: "He confesses day 
and night. " 48 (313a] And Arya Asariga: 
"The bodhisattva who wants to be enlightened swiftly, 
directly, and perfectly, must three times a day and times 
a night: pay Homage, perfom1 Worship, Confess his sins, 
Rejoice, make Entreaty, offer Petition, and make the 
Bestowal. " 49

--- PAGE 119 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
105 
For the beneficial qualities of these practices, study the 
Avalokitesvara Sutrq, the ,Hundred Explanations of 
the Doctrine, and Acarya Sura's Precious Garland of 
Discourses. They should all be performed as given in the 
text of the Good Practice, and the Three Heaps Sutra 
should then be recited again. 
Kinds of Beginners 
The keen and intelligent Bodhisattva, adorned with 
learning, will enlarge upon these ritual practices with the 
instruction he receives from his Guru - but only after he 
gas grounded himself in the holy Good Practice. Hence, 
Santideva says in the Progress in Practice: 
"Three times in the day and in the night 
Recite the Three Heaps Sutra, and then 
Relying on the Victor and Enlightenment Thought, 
The rest of your failings will be calmed. "50 
So, following such methods, he makes the Three Refuges 
and confesses the wrong of his failings, and then creates 
the twofold Enlightenment Thought [of resolving and 
progressing]. He tells himself that he must practise the 
complete and entire Training of a Bodhisattva preached in 
the Mahayana Sutras. A full ritual for doing all of this c'an 
be sought from his Guru. [313b] 
A yogin who is not found lacking in these daily practices 
can be said to be endowed with Three Excellences. As my 
own Guru [Bodhibhadra] put it: 
"I will be in touch with happiness by means of Three 
Excellences: Excellence of Practice, of Intention, and of 
Prior Cause. By Excellence of Practice I am not con-
tinually committing sins of body, speech and mind; and I 
confess my wrongs. By Excellence of Intention I am 
motivated by the Teaching, and not its contrary, like 
Wrong Livelihood, etc. And, caring about the goal of 
Great Enlightenment, I have no use for the goal of

--- PAGE 120 [DIRECT] ---

106 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
worldly happiness. By Excellence of Prior Cause I have 
acted out of virtue and merit in previous lives, and 
therefore I am not now impoverished in food, clothing 
and the necessities. I am naturally diposed to share my 
lot with others. " 51 
A beginning disciple of less keen intelligence should not 
embark on this path [of vowed Conduct] right at the start. 
The Gurus say that he should first have all the siitras and 
commentary explained to him which show him the wide 
scope of Bodhisattva Training. And, when he has mastered 
these, then let the [vow] ritual for entering the path of a 
beginning individual be applied. 
Here I suggest [an examination by] Watches to determine 
the extent of his reverence for the Three Jewels, or 
renunciation of a~tachment, or mindfulness of death, 
keeping the Conduct uppermost, or his honesty and 
trusting reverence towards his Guru: 
The eighteen hours [of a day] are divided into Six 
Watches [of three hours each]. If there is a failure in the first 
or second hour of the Morning Watch, and in the third the 
Enlightenment Thought is forgotten, that individual 
[should be judged] weak. Let the [examen] be repeated in 
the next five Watches again. [314a] 
The Superior Individual corrects his failures from hour to 
hour; the Mediocre in two hours; and the Inferior corrects 
his only in the last [hour of any Watch]. 
The superior-Superior corrects himself within a minute 
[of any failing], the mediocre-Superior corrects himself in 
two minutes, and the inferior-Superior in the last minute 
[of any given hour in which the fault is committed]. In this 
fashion the examination can be applied to all the rest of the 
nine [degrees]: superior-Mediocre, and so onY 
There are, however, some famous learned Gurus who 
say that a Superior Person is one who corrects his fault 
immediately after it is committed, the Mediocre Person 
corrects his after two or more minutes, and the Inferior 
[only] corrects his by the end ofthe six Watches. 
THIS COMPLETES THE TEACHING ON THE TRAINING FOR 
HIGHER CONDUCT

--- PAGE 121 [DIRECT] ---

THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
107 
Notes to Chapter 4 
I 
Ot.897,Vol.35:178.1. 
2 Ot. 5538, Vol. 110:166-77. The nine topics of the Conduct Chapter are 
Asanga's own verses, but by themselves do not give complete compre-
hension of their content. All but topic [2], the All-inclusive, represent 
succinct meditational or ascetical practices. The ''all-inclusive" Conduct is a 
detailed description and enumeration of the entire Bodhisattva course, 
beginning with the development of the Enlightenment Thought, the con-
ditions of a bodhisattva in both the lay and religious states, the prerequisite 
of Pratimok~a vows (the opinion Atisa follows), and a complete ritual with 
formulae and rubrics for taking the Bodhisattva Vow, along with a long list 
of Priitimok~a-like offences to be avoided by a bodhisattva. 
3 The inspiration for this stanza is taken almost verbatim from Candragomin's 
Twenty Verses on the Bodhisattva Vow [Ot. 5582, Vol. 114:253.1]. 
4 The entire paragraph here, although not indicated as a quotation in the text, 
is taken from Candragomin, op. cit., pp. 266.5f. 
5 Ot. 5538. Vol. 110:169.3 to 170.2. 
6 
Ritual for Begetting the Thought and for the Vow, Ot. 5364. 
7 Ot. 5336, Vol. 102:187.2f. 
8 One of Mafijusrl's rebirths as a king, recounted in the Ornament of 
Mafzjusri's Buddhafield [Ot. 760(15). Vol. 23:129.2f]. and also quoted by 
Santideva in SS, p. IS. 
9 op. cit., pp. 177.2. 
10 
SS: p. 19. 
II BCA:V:lOO. 
12 
Commentary on "Twenty Verses on the Vow", Ot. 5584, Vol. ll4:276.2f. 
13 
SS: p. 19. 
14 
SS: pp. 12-13. 
15 
mi brda phrad-pa. The term is borrowed from the conditions surrounding 
the giving up of the Pratimok~a vows. See Chapter 3, note 31. The phrase 
"to give back the vow" (sdom-pa phul) has the technical sense of being 
legitimately released from it by appropriate authority for honest reasons. 
16 The Hooks of Mara (his "Evil Works") are found in SS: pp. 46f; the 
Fourteen Evil Things are described in SS: pp. 70-71. 
17 
Ot. 5584, Vol. 114:269.1. 
18 
See note 16. 
19 
op.cit .. pp. 175.4f. 
20 
SS: p. 158. 
21 
op.cit., p. 177.1ff. 
22 
SS: pp. 17-18. 
23 
op.cit., p. 266.1. 
24 
ibid. 
25 
Candragomin, op.cit .. pp. 253.1. 
26 
BCA: III:25-26. 
27 
Ot. 814. Vol. 32:278.2. 
28 
Ot. 824, Vol. 33:159.4. 
29 
The Three Conduct Trainings used for explanation here are taken from 
Asaitga's "All-inclusive Conduct" topic of the Conduct Chapter (see note 
2), and form the broad outline for his treatment of Bodhisattva practices. 
These three Conduct Trainings should not be confused with the Three 
Higher Trainings (lhag-pa'i bslab-pa gsum): Higher Conduct, Higher Con-

--- PAGE 122 [DIRECT] ---

108 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
centration. Higher Vision, which are also a common division of the elements 
of Bodhisattva life. 
30 The practices mentioned here are again from Asanga's list in the Hearer's 
Level [Ot. 5537, Vol. 110:37.4f]. 
31 
All of the graphic. examples listed here are taken from Bodhibhadra's 
explanation of this Conduct Training [op.cit .. p. 263.3f.]. 
32 op.cit.. p. 262.2f. 
33 
Ot. 5522. Vol. 108:21.1. 
34 
Santipa is also known as Ratnakarasanti (Rin-chen 'byung-gnas zhi-ba), but 
the quotation here. although obviously a commentary on Maitreyanatha's 
work. remains unidentified as no such commentary is ascribed to Santipa in 
the catalogues. The five types of effect. however. are classical Buddhist 
divisions in any discussion of the good and bad effects of actions (las/ karma). 
See A K(L VP): II:287ff. 
I) Maturation (rnam-par smin-pa/vipiika): the effects of one's actions in 
terms of level of rebirth: whether in higher or lower destiny. 
2) Dominant (bdag-po/adhipati): external circumstances viewed as the 
result of good or bad actions: natural calamity. fire. flood, etc. from bad 
actions; friends. material sufficiency. pleasant surroundings. etc. from good 
actions. 
3) Human-Activity (skyes-bu'i byed-pa/puru~a-kilra): the immediate 
effects in today's life of good or bad actions, as distinguished from the more 
remote effect in Maturation Effect. 
4) Dissociation ('bral-ba/visaiflyoga): the necessary effect of knowledge 
gained; that is, the dispelling of ignorance. 
5) Causa1ly-Similar (rgyu-mthun-pa/n~yanda): one's character retaining 
the good or bad tendencies toward which it was habituated by good or bad 
actions: a murderer toward more killing, a saint toward more virtue. 
35 
Explanation of the "Treasure of Phenomenology", Ot. 5591, Vol. 115:218.5. 
36 Paths of the Ordinary Person refers to the Equipment and Practice Paths, 
also called Mundane or Worldly. A person at this level has just begun to 
desire the goal of Enlightenment, but has not yet reached the immediate 
direct experience of the Four Truths' significance of the higher levels. See 
Chart I. 
37 
Supplement to the "Treatise on the Middle Way", Ot. 5261, chap. 6, vv. 
4-5. 
38 AK(LVP): IV: p. 252. 
39 Ot. 775, Vol. 29. 
40 
phyin-ci-ma-log-pa/aviparyiisa. 
41 
Ot. 897. In SS: p. 134. 
42 The quotation is from the Ornament of Manjufri's Buddhafield [Ot. 760(15), 
Vol. 23:129.2f], the same siitra and verses Atlsa used in the root poem 
[Stanzas 26-31] for the formula of a Bodhisattva Vow without a Guru. The 
discrepancy here is that the king's name is given as Akasa (nam-mkha'), 
whereas in the root text he is ca1led Ambaraja (am-ba-ra-dza). 
43 
In SS: p. 100. 
44 The reference is to the Instruction on the Concise Meaning of the Sutra [Ot. 
5395], translated by Atlsa and Tshul-khrims, but without mention of the 
author- either in the catalogues or in AtiSa's text here. The first metaphor 
given here reads "The doctrine is Mother and Father-like, as Emptiness and 
Compassion. There can be no bodhisattva who is not born of these two." 
45 
In SS: p. 263. 
46 
In SS: p. 101.

--- PAGE 123 [DIRECT] ---

47 
In SS: p. 264. 
48 
In SS: p. 165. 
THE BODHISATTVA VOW 
109 
49 The same unidentified quotation is used again in Chapter 5, merely ascribing 
the familiar Sevenfold Worship to Asanga. The repetition possibly indicates 
insertion by later editors. 
50 BCA: V: 98. 
51 
Bodhibhadra, op.cit., pp. 276.2. 
52 The nine degrees means the three qualitative degrees that are applied to the 
three qualities of persons, totalling nine: superior-Superior, mediocre-
Superior, 
inferior-Superior; 
superior-Mediocre, 
mediocre-Mediocre, 
inferior-Mediocre, and so on.

--- PAGE 124 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 125 [DIRECT] ---

PART TWO 
Higher Meditation

--- PAGE 126 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 127 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 5 
The Superknowledges 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
RELATION OF CONDUCT TO 
CONCENTRATION 
114 
II 
THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 
114 
A Perfecting of the Equipment 
34 
115 
B 
For the Good of Others 
35 
115 
1 Dangers of Preaching 
115 
2 Need of the Superknowledges 
117 
3 Need of a Guru 
118 
4 Relation to Calmness 
36-37 
118 
III 
CALMNESS 
38 
119 
A 
The Nine Limbs 
39 
119 
B 
Defects and Remedies in 
Meditation 
120 
c Topics for Calmness 
40 
121 
1 With Signs 
121 
2 Without Signs 
121 
D 
Practice of the Yogin 
122 
1 Of Keen Ability 
123 
2 Of Slower Ability 
123

--- PAGE 128 [DIRECT] ---

5 
The Superknowledges 
Relation of Conduct to Concentration 
The Path to Enlightenment is not a matter of just Conduct 
by itself. You must develop Concentration and Insight too. 
However, from your foundation in Conduct, Concentration 
arises. As the holy Moon-Lamp says: 
"The Concentration-free from afflictions is swiftly 
Attained: that is the advantage of purified Conduct." 1 
And Acarya Santideva: 
"In Conduct, Concentration is achieved .... Hence we 
must understand that any activity concerned with Con-
cent.ration is· [really] a part of Conduct. In striving for 
Concentration, we must have dispositions of mindfulness 
and deliberateness .... And in striving for Conduct also 
we must work on Concentration .... The interaction of 
both is what makes Conduct grow, and by means of both, 
purification of mind [Concentration] is achieved. " 2 
[314b] 
So, if you cannot have Concentration without having 
Conduct, then you must strive for Conduct for the sake of 
having Concentration. 
The Superknowledges 
Through the Concentration born of excellent Conduct, one 
develops the Superknowledges. And the Superknowledges 
are the means both for working for the good of others, and 
for acquiring the Two Equipments. This I showed when I 
wrote:

--- PAGE 129 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 
115 
"ALL THE BUDDHAS HAVE HELD THAT 
PERFECTING THIS EQUIPMENT, 
THE NATURE OF WHICH IS MERIT AND KNOWLEDGE, 
LIES ESSENTIALLY IN THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES." (Stanza 34] 
Perfecting of the Equipment 
Let me show briefly what I mean by this: 
If a man wants to build up the Two Equipments, 
And has the constant desire to work for others' good, 
But has not developed the Superknowledges, 
Then he is acting like a blind man, 
And behaving as though insane-
A veritable brute beast, as it were. 
If he cannot achieve even his own good, 
How will he (ever] achieve others'? 
For the Good of Others 
Dangers of Preaching 
"JUST AS A BIRD WITH UNFLEDGED WINGS 
CANNOT FLY UP INTO THE SKY, 
SO WITHOUT THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES' POWER, 
ONE CANNOT WORK FOR THE GOOD OF OTHERS." (Stanza 35] 
It is absurd to explain the (Buddha's] Teaching and to 
gather disciples, having only your own Insight from study-
when you have not even yet acquired the Superknowledges 
or developed the Insight born of contemplation. 3 Hence 
the saying "How can it not be madness, to preach before 
even learning one's own measure?" Or to quote from the 
Exhortation to Higher Intention on this subject of liking to 
talk [about religion] and observing the evils that result from 
it: 
"Proud of his learning, he has no respect; 
He loves conversations with dispute and debate; (315a] 
He becomes unmindful and loses deliberateness-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
His inner thought is quite far away; 
Neither his body nor mind become very pure;

--- PAGE 130 [DIRECT] ---

116 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
His arrogance is turned into great humiliation-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
He is a child too frail to reflect on the Doctrine; 
His thoughts turn unfriendly and become very harsh; 
He is a long way off from Calmness and Insight-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
He is ever disrespectful of his Gurus, 
And finds his delight in obscene conversation; 
Pointlessly he lives and lacking in Insight-
These are the evils of liking to talk .... 
At the hour of death, this child makes moan: 
'Alas! my meditation's so weak! what shall I do?' 
So with the depths unfathomed, his suffering is great-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
Like grass in the wind, he is blown to and fro; 
His only conviction is that he's in doubt; 
Firmness of mind will never be his-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
He is like an actor before a crowd watching 
His play: he declaims the hero's virtues 
While his own character grows weaker-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
He is a hypocrite and in despair; 
He is remorse-stricken ever afterwards; 
·He is far off from the noble and holy Teaching-
These are the evils of liking to talk. 
Of little ability, he is delighted by attention, 
And his ignorance makes him impulsive; 
His mind is restless as a monkey's: 
These are the evils of liking to talk. " 4 
Further on, the Sutra continues: 
"The man.who likes to talk at great length, [315b] 
And then still says that he's not had enough, 
Would be far better off to reflect on a word, 
And that one word would give him infinite delight. 
The sugar-cane bark has no juice at all; 
The taste-giving delight is all found inside; 
The man who chews on only the bark 
Cannot find the sugar's sweet taste. 
Talking is like the husk of the cane; 
But thought and meaning, these are the taste.

--- PAGE 131 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 
117 
So renounce this delight in talking, 
And be ever attentive and think on meaning. " 5 
This same Sutra also has this passage: 
"The Great Bodhisattva Maitreya questioned the 
Blessed One in these words: 
'The bodhisattva who has rejected the highest 
Doctrine and is occupied with evil deeds will have very 
little Insight and his Insight will be impaired, will it not?' 
And the Blessed One answered the Great Bodhisattva 
Maitreya: 
'Maitreya, that is exactly how it is. The words you have 
spoken are true. Bodhisattvas who reject the highest 
Teaching and are occupied with evil deeds have very 
little Insight. Maitreya, let me show you, and bear this in 
mind: bodhisattvas who lack zeal and meditation and 
renunciation, who do not do their recitation nor seek 
greater learning, such bodhisattvas have not entered the 
religious life under the Teaching of the Tathagata. [316a] 
Maitreya, this teaching of the Tathagata unfolds only 
through meditation and renunciation. It is composed of 
wisdom and held together by wisdom, and only by great 
diligence can it be truly unfolded. But there can be no 
such unfolding in the householder's way of life with its 
preoccupations and concern for worldly matters. A 
householder's diligence is misplaced; managing business 
and struggling for worldly success are the things that 
delight him in this cycle of rebirths. Bodhisattvas should 
have no desires for such things. " 6 
Need of the Superknowledges 
My Guru has spoken on this in his Chapter on Concentra-
tion Equipment: 
"The bodhisattva who has only studied the Doctrine 
should refrain from preaching it [yet). The Scriptures do 
not tell us that we can be helpful to others just from 
having studied the Teaching, and without first acquiring 
the superknowledges .... Therefore, there should be no 
preaching of the Doctrine just because we are very

--- PAGE 132 [DIRECT] ---

118 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
learned. When we have the superknowledges, then at 
the very earliest we are ready to seek the good of others . 
. . . A man who is incapable of maturing disciples because 
he lacks the_ superkpowledges is sinking toward death 
himself. As Acarya Santideva said: 
'People all have their_preferences, 
And if even the Victor did not please them, 
Then how much less a bad. one like me? 
So give up the idea of [pleasing] the world.' " 7 
So also the great Acarya Nagarjuna commented on this 
subject: 
"When you have acquired the five Superknowledges-
Powers that will follow you in all rebirths -
Then strive constantly for the complete 
Benefit and happiness of all creatures." 8 
Need of a Guru· 
But to attempt Contemplation without instruction from a 
Guru and relying exclusively on one's own study of texts is 
prohibited [by the authorities I give] here in the following: 
even though you strive diligently in such yoga, the Super-
knowledges still will not come about, for the same reason 
that you have not yet reached the great and perfect 
Enlightenment. In the commentaries that treat this 
subject, the Brahmin Saraha the Great says this in his Kinds 
of Ultimate Truth: 
"What we call 'instruction of the Guru' is the essence 
of ambrosia. Anyone who does not drink to satisfaction, 
as it were, "will certainly die of thirst- like a man in the 
middle of a desert full of treatises. " 9 
And Arya Nagarjuna again: 
"A man may study a great many Tantras, and even purify 
himse~f correctly according to Scripture, but having little 
regard for a Guru he will not master that Scripture. He 
only defeats himself, and is mouthing treatises without

--- PAGE 133 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 119 
authority. For him the texts are only reasons for 
argument." 10 
Relation to Calmness 
The two stanzas that begin with the words "THE MERITS 
WHICH A MAN WITH THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES GAINS IN A 
SINGLE DAY" [Stanzas 36 and 37] continue the same theme 
as the preceding ones. Hence, this great and perfect 
Enlightenment depends upon the Two Equipments [of 
merit and knowledge]; and the two kinds of Equipment 
depend upon [effecting] the good of others; and that 
depends upon the Superknowledges. But the Super-
knowledges depend upon Calm'ness; 11 and Calmness 
depends on Conduct; and that is why I taught about 
Conduct first of all. And so, since Calmness arises from 
Conduct, and the Superknowledges arise from Calmness, I 
wrote: 
AS LONG AS CALMNESS IS NOT A TrAINED, 
THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES WILL NOT OCCUR; 
THEREFORE, IN ORDER TO ACHIEVE CALMNESS, 
ONE MUST KEEP STRMNG OVER AND OVER. (Stanza 38] 
Calmness 
The Superknowledges which arise from Calmness, and for 
which you must [first] gain Calmness, are these: [1] Super-
knowledge of godlike sight, [2] Superknowledge of godlike 
hearing, [3] Superknowledge of others' thoughts, [4] [317a] 
Superknowledge of previous liwes, [5] Superknowledge of 
miraculous powers, [6] Superknowledge that all impurities 
have been destroyed. 12 
The Nine Limbs 
ONE WHO NEGLECTS THE LIMBS OF CALMNESS, 
EVEN THOUGH HE STRIVE TO MEDITATE 
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS, NEVER 
WILL ACHIEVE CONCENTRATION. [Stanza 39]

--- PAGE 134 [DIRECT] ---

120 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
The "Limbs of Calmness" are ninefold, beginning with 
Renunciation, as presented by my own Guru. The stanza is 
otherwise easily understood. By "NEGLECTS THE LIMBS" I 
meant that the nine Limbs given by the venerable 
Bodhibhadra in his Chapter on Concentration Equipment 
are appropriate for the person who has not as yet achieved 
Calmness. Here is what he said: 
"[1] Renunciation, [2] Preparation, [3] Avoidance, 
[4] Suppression of anxiety, [5] Dissatisfaction (with the 
world), [6] Mindfulness of benefits, [7] Diligence, 
[8] Integrating, and [9] Means of Staying. Besides just 
learning such Limbs, one must remain in them 
correctly." 13 
You should study the Chapter itself for the meaning [of 
each Limb]. 
D.efects and Remedies in Meditation 
But here I will-write a little on what the last Limb means, 
giving what my Guru said in his Chapter: 
"When a man has acquired the [first] eight Limbs, and 
has provided himself with suitable location and food, and 
has the appropriate life-style and clothing, and conducive 
companions, then he should compose his mind. . . . 14 
[317b] If he cannot compose it, let him strive again for his 
Equipment of Merit in things like reading the Perfection 
of Insight, making offerings, and circumambulations .... 
When he does set himself to composing his mind, he 
must cultivate eight [good] habits which avoid the evils 
that are opposed to them. [Now the Classification of the 
Middle and Extremes says that]: 15 
'The defects in concentrating are held to be fivefold: 
[1] laziness, [2] forgetfulness of instruction, [3] apathy 
and anxiety, [4] failure to achieve a level, [5] a false 
achievement. The remedies against these defects are 
the eight habits which avoid them; namely: 
[1] [desiring] this state, [2] [the effort to] remain in it,

--- PAGE 135 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 
121 
[3] [faith, which is] the cause, [4] [and its] result [in 
self-confidence], [5] mindfulness, [6] awareness of 
one's apathy or anxiety, [7] habitually avoiding [these 
defects], and [8] when calm, [actually] entering into 
the state [of composure].' " 16 
The Ornament of Sutras says: 
"The first thing is to make the effort; 
The second is to bolster it; 
The third is to focus [the attention]; 
The fourth is the actual remedy [of calmness]." 17 
Some prefer another explanation [of the five evils]: [1] 
craving, [2] ill-will, [3] sloth and drowsiness, [4] anxiety and 
guilt, and [5] doubt. The retinue of sloth and drowsiness 
includes things like weariness, lack of zest, restlessness, not 
taking the proper amount of food, and slackness of mind. 
These things make the mind depressed. Their remedy is 
clear thinking. The retinue of anxiety and guilt includes 
interest in relatives, memories of past distractions, thrills, 
and frivolities. These do not calm the mind; and their 
remedy is Calmness. 
Topics for Calmness 
ONE CAN THEN SET THE MIND IN VIRTUE 
FIXED ON ANY TOPIC HE CHOOSES. (Stanza 40] 
Here the word "TOPIC" refers to the object of the mind, as in 
this quote from the Blaze of Reasoning [on the "Essence] of 
the Middle Way": 
"The mind is a rampaging elephant: 
Tie it fast with the rope of mindfulness 
To the steady post of Topic; [318a] 
Then settle the mind in Calm." 18 
My words "ON ANY TOPIC HE CHOOSES" refer to Calmness-
with-Signs as well as Calmness-without-Signs. 19 As my 
Guru says in the Chapter on Concentration Equipment:

--- PAGE 136 [DIRECT] ---

122 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"Calmness is twofold: [1] with-Signs, and [2] without-
Signs. Calmness-with-Signs is twofold: [a] signs that are 
internal, and [b] signs that are external. [a] The kind that 
are internal are twofold: topics on the body, and topics 
on what supports the body. The three topics on body are: 
the aspect of the god being the body itself;20 the 
disgusting aspects of it, 21 such as skeletons, etc.; or a 
distinctive sign such as a trident. 22 
"There are five topics on the supports of the body: 23 
the Breath, the Subtle Signs, the Drop, the Limbs of 
Light Rays, and Joy and Bliss. [b] Signs that are external 
are of two kinds: the special, and the ordinary. 24 The 
special topics are either [a Buddha's] body or [a 
Buddha's] words .... 
"[2] Calmness-without-Signs is the same as Investiga-
tive Insight/5 whence arises signless Higher Vision, the 
knowledge which is without discursive reasoning .... It is 
recommended that, rather than resting in Calmness-
with-Signs, one proceed toward developing Higher 
Vision by· [first] focusing on Calmness-without-Signs. 
[318b] For it is only by being firmly established in Higher 
Vision joined with Calmness that the afflictions are 
cleansed away and thoroughly subdued - it is the only 
basis for such a result .... 
"I do not describe here how to contemplate, for fear of 
enlarging my text, but also because guidance in con-
templation is the kind that requires personal instruction 
from an experienced Guru. And that is because the 
details of the teaching on Calmness and Higher Vision 
must be explained, and because of the difficulty of 
learning contemplation just from reading books." 26 
Practice of the Yogin 
The Gurus all say that such a yogin who has achieved 
Calmness will without doubt gain the five Superknowledges 
I mentioned before. And, as means of getting them, you 
should also take to heart the training precepts of the 
Sevenfold Way Sutra: Questions of Avalokitesvara, and 
recite the sutra itself now and then. Arya Asaitga says:

--- PAGE 137 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 123 
"A bodhisattva who wants to acquire the Superknow-
ledges quickly should diligently, three times a day and 
three times a night: pay Homage, perform Worship, 
make Confession of sin, feel Rejoicing, and make the 
Petition, Entreaty, and Bestowal. " 27 
And he should also have, for all the equipment of 
Calmness, such things as few desires, frugality, content-
ment, and true solitude. That a yogin abiding in Calmness 
correctly does have few desires and is frugal [is clear from] 
the holy One Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of 
Insight: 
"Monks who catch even a little taste for meditation, [319a] 
think little about clothes and little about food-
and [yet] their complexions are healthy." 28 
The Yoga of these bodhisattvas is to strive for the Seven 
Noble Riches when they have renounced attraction to 
worldly riches. They take the Six Mindfulnesses to heart, 
and of the six even practise the short Mindfulness of 
Buddha, Doctrine, and Community. 29 
And since bodhisattvas are divided into those of keen 
ability and those of slower ability, the Mindfulness for 
those of keen faculty should be studied in texts such as the 
Perfection of Insight siitras, the Mindfulness of the Buddha 
Sutra, the Heavenly Treasure Sutra, and the Sutra Set Forth 
by Ak~ayamati. Mindfulness for those of slower ability 
should be studied in the Producing the Power of Faith 
Sutra, the Rehearsal of the Buddha, Doctrine, and the 
Community Sutra, and the above Mindfulness of the 
Buddha Sutra as well as its smaller form, and others in the 
Mahayana Siitra collection. 
The chapter on Mindfulness of the Three Jewels in the 
Compendium of Training should also be studied because it 
explains the thought behind these siitras. 
Higher Vision also comes to a yogin [who practises 
Calmness], and that is the subject I will explain next. The 
practice of the yoga of Calmness and Higher Vision is what 
is called "Remaining on the Path"; and hence1one gradually 
grows in: 30

--- PAGE 138 [DIRECT] ---

124 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
the Four Applications of Mindfulness, 
the Four Right Efforts, 
the Four Bases of Miraculous Power, [319b] 
the [Five] Dominants and [Five] Powers, 
the [Seven] Limbs of Enlightenment, and 
the Noble Eightfold Path. 
THIS COMPLETES THE TEACHING ON THE TRAINING FOR 
HIGHER MEDITATION 
In SS: p. 120. 
2 SS: p. 120. 
Notes to Chapter 5 
3 Three kinds of Insight are generally given to describe the degree of depth of 
the knowledge gained; Atisa mentions two of them here: 
'!) Insight from Study (thos-pa'i shes-rab/irutamayi-praiiii); 2) Insight from 
Reflection (bsam-pa las shes-rab/cintiimayi-prajiiii; 3) Insight from Con-
templation (bsgom-pa'i shes-rab/bhiivaniimayi-prajiiii). For Kamalasila's 
explanation of this, see G. Tucci, Minor Buddhist Texts, Pt. II, p. 160. 
4 
In SS: p. 109. 
5 
In SS: p. 109. 
6 In SS: p. 112. 
7 Ot. 5444, Vol. 103:251.4f. 
8 Ot. 5658, Precious Garland of Advice for the King, stanza 48i. 
9 The text is not found in the catalogues by this title as one of Saraha's 
compositions. Atisa takes the title and quote from Bodhibhadra's Chapter 
on Concentration Equipment [Ot. 5444, Vol. 103:252.1], but supplies 
Saraha's name as author, which Bodhibhadra's text does not do. 
10 
Unidentified. 
II 
zhi-gnas/samatha: Calmness. The terms Calmness and Higher Vision (lhag-
mthong/viiJasyanii) are found in most of the Mahayana siitras, always paired 
together. Calmness designates the meditative techniques of yogic concen-
tration, which Atisa unfolds in this chapter; Higher Vision is the investigative 
analysis for Emptiness in the Perfection of Insight, which is the subject of the 
next chapter. 
12 
mngon-par shes-pa/abhijiiii: superknowledge. The five (or sometimes six) 
superknowledges have a long historical development in the siitras. See H. 
Dayal, Bodhisattva Doctrine in Sanskrit Literature, pp. 106-34. 
13 op. cit., p. 250.5f. The nine limbs are Bodhibhadra's opening outline for his 
entire treatise, eas:h limb being explained in tum. Briefly summarised, the 
meaning of each of the Limbs is this: 
1) Renunciation (of the worldly life); 
2) Preparation (through study with a Guru); 
3) Avoidance (of premature effort to seek others' good before having 
attained realisation oneself); 
4) Suppression (of worldly cares and anxieties); 
5) Dissatisfaction with the world; 
6) Mindfulness ofthe benefits (of Concentration); 
7) Diligence (in the efforts of Concentration);

--- PAGE 139 [DIRECT] ---

THE SUPERKNOWLEDGES 125 
8) Integrating (Calmness with Higher Vision); 
9) Means of Staying (in all the above virtues). 
It is. remarkable that Atisa does not mention here the Nine States of Mind 
(sems-gnas/citta-sthiti) in Calmness proposed by Asailga in his Hearer's 
Level [Ot. 5537, Vol. 110:100.3ff.) which have become so well known to 
Tibetan monks through Tsong-kha-pa's Lam-rim chen-mo. where they are 
described at length. Perhaps Atisa felt that teaching was too advanced for his 
audience. 
14 sems mnyam-par bzhag-pa/citta-samiihita: lit., the balanced mind. or the 
mind in concentration. Here it is used as the equivalent of Concentration 
(ting-nge-'dzin/samiidhi). 
15 Ot. 5522. Vol. 108:20-5. Atisa omits Bodhibhadra's acknowledgement of 
the source. I have supplied the meaning of the partially cryptic statement of 
the eight habits which remedy the five defects, following Sthiramati's 
Commentary on the "Classification of the Middle and Extremes" [Ot. 5534, 
Vol. 109:176.1ff.]. 
16 Bodhibhadra, Chapter on Concentration Equipment [Ot. 5459, Vol. 
103:266.4]. 
17 Ot. 5521, Vol. 108:15.5. 
18 Ot. 5256, Vol. 96:26.4. 
19 
mtshan-ma dang-bcas-pa/sa-nimitta (with-Signs) and mtshan-ma med-pa/a-
nimitta (without-Signs) is a common distinction in yogic meditational 
practice, meaning simply the concentration of the mind on images, or 
concentrating the mind without the need for that kind of assistance- as the 
Commentary goes on to explain. 
20 The contemplation of oneself as a god is ·a common form of Tantric 
meditation. See A. Wayman, Fundamentals of Buddhist Tantra, p. 167. 
21 
mi-sdug-pa/a-subha: disgusting. The traditional Buddhist meditation on the 
impermanence and foulness of the body, viewing it as a corpse under nine 
aspects: blue; full of pus, insect-ridden, etc. Atisa is the author of a short 
meditation on the subject, Asubha-bhiivanii-krama [Ot. 5454). 
22 kha-tvam/khatvii: a staff with triple prongs and a skull at the top, carried by 
ascetics and yogins. It can be a symbol of Siva for Brahmanists, and also of 
Padmasambhava and other yogins for Tibetan Buddhists. For a long list and 
illustration of such insignia, see L. A. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, pp. 
340-1. 
23 The five topics presented here by Bodhibhadra are of a Tantric nature and as 
such would be incomprehensible to the uninitiated. They are based on 
fundamental yogic concepts of breath (dbugs!priif}a), subtle signs (mtshan-
ma phra-mo/sulq-ma-nimitta), and the drop (thig-le/bindu), but with 
additional liturgical and mystical significances. 
24 Ordinary external Signs would be any external concentration object what-
soever. Bodhibhadra does not bother with examples. 
25 so-sor-rtog-pa'i shes-rab/pratyavelqanii-jniina. 
26 Bodhibhadra, op. cit., pp. 255.2ff. 
27 See Chapter 4, note 49. 
28 In SS: pp. 196-7. 
29 The Six Mindfulnesses are 1) the Buddha, 2) the Doctrine, 3) the 
Community, 4) Conduct, 5) Renunciation, and 6) the gods. The "short" 
Mindfulness practice drops the final three. 
30 The virtues listed here comprise what is known as the "Thirty-seven 
Enlightenment Wings" (byang-chub kyi phyogs/bodhipalqa). They can be 
found individually in the Glossary.

--- PAGE 140 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 141 [DIRECT] ---

PART THREE 
Higher Insight

--- PAGE 142 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 143 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 6 
Insight and Means 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
PERFECTION OF INSIGHT 
41 
130 
II 
UNION OF INSIGHT AND MEANS 
42 
130 
A 
Necessity of the Union 
43 
131 
B 
Difference between the Two 
44-46 
133 
III 
FOUR GREAT PROOFS OF EMPTINESS 
47 
135 
A 
Four Extremes 
48 
136 
B 
Diamond-Particle 
49 
137 
c Identity and Plurality 
50 
137 
D 
Dependent Origination 
51 
138 
IV 
SCHOOLS 
139 
A 
Middle Way 
139 
B 
Bibliography of Sastra 
139 
v 
CONTEMPLATION 
52 
141 
A 
Emptiness 
.53 
141 
B 
Wisdom 
54 
142 
c Non-discursive Reasoning 
55 
143 
VI 
VERSES ON THE MIDDLE WAY 
143 
VII 
PROOF FROM SCRIPTURE 
56 
147 
A 
Quotations 
57 
147 
B 
Bibliography of Siitras 
149 
VIII 
BIOGRAPHY OF THE MASTERS 
150 
IX 
CULTIVATION OF HIGHER VISION 
58 
151 
X 
STAGES OF THE PATH 
59 
152

--- PAGE 144 [DIRECT] ---

6 
Insight and Means 
Perfection of Insight 
By means of the Insight that knows how to join Means with 
Insight, both the equipment of merit and the equipment of 
knowledge are integrated and perfected. As I was reflecting 
on this, I wrote [the stanzas] beginning: 
BUT OBSCURATION IS NOT DESTROYED 
WITHOUT THE PERFECTION OF INSIGHT. (Stanza 41 b] 
Calmness [by itself] cannot remove Karma and [its 
a~ompanying] Affliction 
and Maturation, or the 
Obscuration [resulting from ignorance] of phenomena. 1 It 
is only when they are [discovered and] removed by Higher 
Vision that they are destroyed. Hence you must base 
yourself in Higher Vision; and that is the meaning of the 
next stanza: 
HENCE, TO REMOVE ALL OBSCURATION 
OF HIS AFFLICTION AND HIS KNOWLEDGE, 
THE YOGIN MUST CONTINUALLY CULTIVATE THE 
PERFECTION OF INSIGHT TOGETHER WITH MEANS. (Stanza 42] 
Union of Insight and Means 
Let me explain Means and Insight more fully. When I say 
[in Stanza 43) "SCRIPTURE SAYS THAT BONDAGE IS ..• ",I refer 
to what both the Mount Gayii Sutra and the Sutra Set Forth 
by Vimalakzrti declare: 
"Insight divorced from Means is bondage. 
Means divorced from Insight is also bondage. " 2

--- PAGE 145 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
131 
And tO SUpport my saying "THEREFORE, NEGLECT NOT THIS 
UNION" [in Stanza 43], I quote from glorious Jfianak1rti: 3 
"One [then] truly progresses in the essence of Perfection 
of Insight, and in the Means which are Giving and the 
rest [of the Perfections]." The Mount Gayii Sutra sum-
marises the Bodhisattva Path, citing this very union: "It 
is Means and Insight." And then it classifies the Means as 
the Perfections of Giving and the rest, the [Four] 
Infinitudes, the [Four] Means of Attraction, and so on. 
The [Satra Set Forth by] Ak~ayamati and the Cloud of 
Jewels and other sutras say the same thing. [320a] But 
Insight is the factor that effectively and accurately 
delineates these Means. When it analyses them correctly, 
then they are effective; and therefore, when one adopts 
them for one's own and others' good, absolutely no 
affliction results - it is as though one had a [protecting] 
mantra against poison. Furthermore, that same Sutra 
says: "Means is known as the collecting; Insight is known 
as accurately defining." And the Producing the Power of 
Faith Satra: 
"What is skill in Means? It is known as the gathering up of 
all virtue. And what is Insight? It is skill in knowing that 
all phenomena are undifferentiated.''4 
Necessity of the Union 
Even [a bodhisattva already] established in the Levels must 
be grounded in both [Means and Insight]; therefore, it is 
not simply a matter of what inust be known. That is why 
sutras like the Ten Levels say: "It is wrong not to practise 
the rest of the Perfections as well .... On all ten of the 
Bodhisattva Levels all of the Perfections must still be 
practised." 5 And when there was a Bodhisattva who had a 
particular delight in [practising] the Perfection of Insight, 
the ./::,xtensive Satra: Compendium of All Phenomena said 
this on the subject: 
"0 Maitreya, the six Perfections of Enlightenment are to 
be understood correctly by the bodhisattvas. Some

--- PAGE 146 [DIRECT] ---

132 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
foolish men say that a bodhisattva need train only in the 
Perfection of Insight, and thereby have no need of the 
other Perfections. By so thinking, they are holding the 
rest of the Perfections in contempt ... " 6 [320b] 
And the holy Perfect EnlightenmentofVairocana: 
"The wisdom of an Omniscient Being, rooted in the 
Great Compassion, and with the Enlightenment Thought 
as its cause, has attained the perfection of the Means."' 
Since this is the case, one must rely on both [Means and 
Insight] at all times. And that was the way the Blessed One 
achieved. his Deferred Nirvat:ta. 8 Through [perfecting] the 
Means, Giving and the rest, He laid hold of that excellent 
result. the greatest enjoyment: the Form-Body9 and its field 
of activity and its retinue - and hence does not remain in 
Nirvat:ta. Through his Perfection of Insight, rejecting what 
is false, he d<:>es not [truly] abide in Samsara- because it is 
of the very nature of falseness. 
When [the above Siit:t:a] says, "If everyone who knows 
lists of phenomena 10 by the dozen, as it were, is supposed to 
reject those phenomena; then how much more what are not 
phenomena!" - what it is saying is that one should reject 
any attachment to what is false in them; and not that one 
should not continue to exist for the sake of [others'] needs 
and fulfilment. One should embrace the Truth; that is what 
-it means by saying "Do not grasp at what is false!" And so: 
"At all times be based in the Means 
Together with the Perfection of Insight; 
For because of it and from it, 
One passes to the Deferred NirvaQa." 
That is what he [Jiianakirti] and his sources say. And my 
Guru [Bodhibhadra] also adds: 
"If that is true, then one should have both Means and 
Insight at all times, and should accumulate and integrate 
the equipments of merit and ofknowledge." 11 [321a]

--- PAGE 147 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
133 
Difference between the Two 
Having shown the importance of combining Means with 
Insight, and that both must be had together, I now explain 
exactly what they are: 
TO REMOVE ANY DOUBTS ABOUT 
WHAT INSIGHT IS, AND WHAT ARE MEANS, 
I WILL MAKE CLEAR THE DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN THE MEANS AND INSIGHT. (Stanza 44] 
I said "TO REMOVE ANY DOUBTS" because great Acaryas of 
old have spoken variously about the two; for instance some 
texts are quoted as saying: 
"The Means is the Bodhisattva's 
Great Compassion for creatures; 
And its components differ according to 
The three aspects [that are involved]." 12 
Other sources say "the Means is the Thought of Enlighten-
ment in its relative aspect." 13 
But in the root text I presented what my Guru, glorious 
Bodhibhadra, said about this: 
THE VICTORS HAVE EXPLAINED THAT THE MEANS 
ARE ALL THE EQUIPMENTS OF VIRTUE, 
STARTING WITH THE PERFECTION OF GIVING, 
UP TO, BUT EXCLUDING, THAT OF INSIGHT. (Stanza 45) 
Taking the words "STARTING WITH THE PERFECTION OF 
GIVING", Giving can here be distinguished according to the 
[above-mentioned] three aspects: [a] the Donor, [b] the 
Substance given, and [c] the Object (of one's giving). One 
can be a Donor for the sake of gain, honour, fame, and 
glory; or because one is besought by others; or out of 
compassion, or to show respect, and so on. The Substance 
given can be things like the Teaching or material goods or 
fearlessness or love. The Object of one's giving can be the 
Three Jewels, or a Guru's sustenance, or any creature of 
the five destinies. [321 b] 
The Four Diamond Seats Tantra speaks at length [on

--- PAGE 148 [DIRECT] ---

134 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Giving] with phrases like "Sixty thousand Sudras took care 
of one pure Brahmin"; and the Siitras too, and the 
Hundred Explanations of the Doctrine, when talking about 
"not relying on another [non-Buddhist] teacher as the 
spiritual friend", and so on. In the Yoga Tantra called 
Conquest of the Triple World, the Blessed One says: 
"There is a Giving of initiation, a Giving of the Teaching, 
a Giving of wealth, and a Giving of food, a Giving of 
fearlessness and a Giving of love. And these [gifts are 
given) respectively to: a disciple, a mind not [yet] alerted, 
a religious mendicant, and to Brahmins, the poor, 
animals, the faint-hearted, and to every creature." 14 
My words "sTARTING WITH [GrviNG]" indicate that [the 
Victors] have also explained the rest of the Perfections. In 
the Perfection of Conduct, for instance, [they teach that) 
there is the Conduct of a bodhisattva when he gets the first 
Thought of Enlightenment, and of one who has entered the 
Practice [Path], of one who will not turn back, of one who 
has attained Patience in non-arising phenomena, -'of one 
who is held back by but one rebirth, and of a bodhisattva in 
his final life. 15 
"THAT THE MEANS ARE ALL THE EQUIPMENTS OF VIRTUE" 
points out that the Siitra passages [always] explain the rest 
of the Perfections in turn. You must consult the Siitras 
themselves for the full significance of these Perfections, and 
the other texts composed to clarify the Sfltras: the 
Compendium of Siitra, the Bodhisattva Levels, the 
f!.rogress, in Practice, the Compendium of Training, and 
Acarya Sura's Conversations on the Perfections. 
The theme of this stanza is exactly what it says: 
ONE WHO COMBINES MASTERY OF THE MEANS 
WITH A TRUE CULTIVATION OF INSIGHT, 
WILL SWIFTLY ATTAIN ENLIGHTENMENT, BUT 
NOT BY CULTIVATING MERELY NON-SELF. [Stanza 46) 
What is Insight? [322a] It is either innate, or comes from

--- PAGE 149 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
135 
study, or from reflection, or from contemplation - or as 
scripture says: 
"He who penetrates to what is changeless 
In the words and states of all activity, 
Let his be proclaimed as 
'Insight of the Diamond Mind'." 
That is what it is. And so I go on to say in the root text: 
"INSIGHT" IS FULLY EXPLAINED AS KNOWING 
THE EMPTINESS OF INTRINSIC NATURE 
IN COMPREHENDING THAT AGGREGATES AND 
SENSE-BASES AND ELEMENTS DO NOT ARISE. (Stanza 47) 
All external and internal phenomena are included in the 
Aggregates, Elements, and Sense-bases; as the Blessed 
One has said, "0 Brahmin, the Aggregates, Elements, arid 
Sense-bases are everything meant by the word 'Every-
thing'." I will explain the words "Do NOT ARISE" later; but 
the "FULLY EXPLAINED" means that the Buddhas and Gurus 
have said so. And I add here: 
The Perfections and Means of Conversion, 
The Four Infinitudes and Seven Limbs, 
The Ten Religious Practices and other acts of virtue, 
The Seven Noble Riches and the Six Mindfulnesses; 
The mary.qala and offerings and circumambulation-
Are the Means which are the reason for 
the Enjoyment and Apparition Bodies. 
But it is the Perfection of Insight alone 
That has the Insight which is the cause of 
the Body ofTruth. 16 
Four Great Proofs of Emptiness 
0 Noble Youth, what sort of method will lead to a direct 
experience of such "Insight" as this? I say that it is learned 
by [using] the Four Great Proofs. 17 And what are those 
Four? They are:

--- PAGE 150 [DIRECT] ---

136 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
[A] The Proof that refutes Arising in the Four Extremes; 
[B] The Diamond-Particle Proof; 
[C] 
The Lack of identity or Plurality Proof; and 
[D] The Dependent Origination Proof. [322b] 
I answer your question about what these Proofs are in the 
next four stanzas [48-51]. 
Four Extremes 
AN EXISTENT'S ARISING IS IMPOSSIBLE; 
A NON-EXISTENT'S IS LIKE FLOWERS IN THE SKY; 18 
FOR A THING TO BE BOTH IS ABSURD FALLACY; 
SO NEITHER DO THEY ORIGINATE TOGETHER. (Stanza 48] 
This is the Proof that refutes Arising in the Four Extremes, 
in which I show that whatever phenomena already exist 
will not arise, because they have already arisen. And 
phenomena that do not exist will also not arise, because it 
could not be accomplisned by themselves [being non-
existent], nor is there any cause for their arising. The third 
supposition, "FOR A THING TO BE BOTH [EXISTENT AND NON-
~XISTENT ]", has no reality to it whatsoever! A cary a 
Santideva also speaks on this subject: 
"Why make up causes for 
An entity that [already] exists? 
Or again, if it does not exist, 
What need to find causes for it? 
Not a hundred million causes 
Could change it from non-entity; 
For how could that situation be real? 
And what is there other than what is? 
If there is not entity when no existence, 
Then when does an entity originate? 
Non-entity cannot be separated 
By means of a non-arising entity! 
If there is no separation from non-entity, 
Then there is no chance of an entity existing; 
For that would be the absurdity of a double 
Intrinsic nature: there cannot be a non-entity entity! 
Destruction likewise does not exist;

--- PAGE 151 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
137 
Nor is there a basi's for permanence either. 
Hence all these living creatures 
Are without an arising and without a cessation." 19 
And he continues at some length on this theme. 
Diamond-Particle 
In this stanza I show the Diamond-Particle Proof: 
SINCE AN ENTITY DOES NOT ARISE FROM ITSELF, 
AND IS NOT FROM ANOTHER, OR EVEN FROM BOTH, 
NOR IS IT YET WITHOUT CAUSE; THEREFORE IT HAS 
NO INTRINSIC NATURE BY WAY OF OWN-EXISTENCE. (Stanza 49} 
And so, those who hold an external or internal Creator, 
such as an Atman or Fate or lsvara, [323a] or the Puru~a or 
Karma or Prak:rti or the GuQ.as or Brahman or Vi~Q.u20 - or 
even those of our own sects who admit that entities arise 
through the Six Causes and Four Conditions21 - are in error 
in their understanding. To refute them, Nagarjuna says in 
his Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way: "Insight": 
"There are never any entities 
In which arising exists, 
From themselves, from another, 
From both, nor without cause;" 22 
But you must study that text itself for the full meaning of 
this, as well as its six great commentaries and two sub-
commentaries,Z3 along with the Middle Way Treatise: 
"Finely Woven", the Clear Words, the Blaze of Reasoning, 
and Supplement to the "Middle Way". 
Identity and Plurality 
I show the Lack of Identity or Plurality Proof in this stanza: 
FURTHERMORE, IF·ONE ANALYSES ALL THINGS 
AS IDENTITIES OR. MULTIPLICITIES, 
OWN-EXISTENCE IS NOT PERCEIVED; HENCE ONE IS 
CERTAIN THAT INTRINSIC NATURES DO NOT EXIST. (Stanza 50]

--- PAGE 152 [DIRECT] ---

138 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
By "FURTHERMORE" I mean that I am still teaching you 
about the Proofs. The significance of" ANALYSES ALL THINGS 
~S IDEN:_riTIES OR MULTIPLICITIES" can be explained by 
Acarya Santaraksita: 
"The entities spoken of as 'self' and 'other', 
In the correct sense are without intrinsic nature; 
And because they lack identity and plurality, 
Being without intrinsic nature, they are like reflections. " 24 
Acarya Srlgupta says it too: 
"This entire internal and external state, 
In the correct sense is without intrinsic nature; 
And since it lacks identity or multiplicity, 
It is therefore like a reflection." 25 
But again you must study the texts themselves for the full 
meaning. 
Dependent Origination 
The Dependent Origination Proof is shown in the words: 26 
THE REASONING OF THE SEVENTY STANZAS ON EMPTINESS, 
AND OF TEXTS LIKE THE BASIC STANZAS ON THE MIDDLE WAY, 
EXPLAINS THE PROOF THAT ALL ENTITIES [323b] 
ARE EMPTY OF INTRINSIC NATURE. [Stanza 51] 
To understand the meaning of this Proof, you must study 
those texts themselves. The words "EXPLAINS THE PROOF" 
signifies that all the great Acaryas of old taught the proof 
that all entities are non-arising. And so, with Four Great 
Proofs such as these, the scholars have well established that 
absolutely every entity is non-arising, is not permanently 
fixed, passes beyond the suffering [caused] by intrinsic 
nature, is pure from its origin, is without root and without 
foundation, and that every phenomenon whatsoever is 
without substantiation.

--- PAGE 153 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
139 
Schools 
Middle Way 
There is this to note about those scholars of India: Arya 
Asanga's orderly presentation of the Teaching enunciates 
the Mind-Only understanding of the Perfection of Insight, 
and the present day Gur_us Suvafl}.advipa and Santipa 
follow that interpretation. Acarya Nagarjuna explained the 
essence of the Teaching with his personal realisation of the 
great Middle Way which transcends the existence and non-
existence of meaning in the Perfection of Insight. This he 
enunciated to a long line of other scholars, and the Guru 
Bodhibhadra and venerable Kusulupa follow his inter-
pretation today. 
The nectar of Arya Nagarjuna's words 
Filled Aryadeva, Candrakirti, Bhavya 
And Santideva down to Bodhibhadra too; 
Even on me a little has been sprinkled. 
And thus with their Four Great Proofs, 
I establish the non-arising of all phenomena; 
And following the steps of those Acaryas of old, (324a] 
I will hold to the tenets of the great Middle Way. 
Or again, let me describe it this way: 
There is nowadays a worsening, 
Of people, of the times, of vice and views, 
And even of life itself. Listening to texts profits not; 
So cultivate yoga on their essential meaning. 
Were there time to listen to great long texts, 
They might be our (rescue] ships in these our days; 
But [for now] avoid all disturbance of mind, 
And cultivate only the counsel of the holy. 
There's so much to be learned in so little while, 
And we know not the length of this life's span; 
So be like the goose straining milk from water, 27 
Taking only the pure desires from those you have. 
Bibliography of Siistra 
Returning to the words "BASIC STANZAS ON THE MIDDLE

--- PAGE 154 [DIRECT] ---

140 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
WAY" in my root text [Stanza 51], my reference is to 
[Nagarjuna's] Insight: Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way. 
And when I said "TEXTS LIKE", I had in mind such works as 
his No Fear from Anywhere, the Refutation of Objections, 
the Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning, the Seventy Stanzas on 
Emptiness, the Precious Garland, the Twenty Stanzas on 
Mahiiyiina, the Hundred Syllables, and [KamalasTia's] Rice 
Seedling Sutra Commentary. 
By "TEXTS LIKE ... " I also refer to the treatises composed 
by men such as venerable Aryadeva, the holy Acarya's 
gersonal disciple, and Candrakirti, Bhavaviveka, and 
Santideva. 
Aryadeva is the author of the following: the Great 
"Finely Woven": a Middle Way Treatise, the Length of a 
Forearm, the Finger-Length Instruction, and the Heart of 
Wisdom Compendium. 
The works of Acarya Candraklrti are: the Supplement to 
[Niigiirjuna's] "Treatise on the Middle Way", the Com-
mentary on "The Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning", the Five 
Chapters on the Middle Way, and the Clear Words, and so 
on._[324b] 
Acarya Bhavaviveka's treatises are the Blaze of 
Reasoning: [Commentary] On "Essence of the Middle 
Way", the Lamp for "The Insight" [of Niigiirjuna], and 
others. 
There 
are 
altogether 
eight 
commentaries 
on 
[Nagarjuna's] Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way: "Insight"-
the No Fear from Anywhere by the Acarya himself, the 
Clear Words by Candraklrti, the Lamp for "Insight" of 
Bhavaviveka, Buddhapalita's commentary, and those 
composed by the Elder Sthiramati, and the Acaryas 
Gul)amati, Gul)asx:l, and Gul)adatta. 
In addition, [Bhavaviveka's] Lamp for "The Insight" has 
two great sub-commentaries: one composed by Acarya 
A valokitavrata, and Devasarma's White-Shining: On the 
Middle Way. 
Besides these there are in India today men who have 
given serious reflection to this near ocean of presentations 
that the great interpreters ofNagarjuna's mind have made. 
And the reasoning in the texts they [in tum] wrote, also

--- PAGE 155 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
141 
EXPLAINS THE PROOF THAT ALL ENTITIES 
ARE EMPTY OF INTRINSIC NATURE. ~Stanza 51] 
In each and every one [of all these texts] the Emptiness of 
all phenomena is conclusively proven. If I were to try [here] 
to clear up the wrong understanding others have, by using 
my Four Great Proofs, my own text would become 
altogether too big. Hence, I have said only a little bit about 
the subject, and have not elaborated. Here we are simply 
saying that the tenets of the great Middle Way are thus and 
so, but have not written about them extensively. 
Contemplation 
But for yogins who do desire to take these tenets to heart I 
give a brief synthesis, saying: [325a] 
BUT WILL EXPLAIN ONLY PROVEN TENETS 
IN ORDER TO FURTHER CONTEMPLATION. (Stanza 52] 
I have not written here about cultivation of the Enlighten-
ment Thought of Ultimate Truth28 as a means of 
assimilating the tenets. One must petition a Guru for that 
[instruction], after he has been won over. 
Emptiness 
THUS, NOT TO PERCEIVE INTRINSIC NATURE 
IN ANY PHENOMENON WHATEVER 
IS TO CONTEMPLATE ITS NON-SELF- WHICH 
IS THE SAME AS CONTEMPLATING WITH INSIGHT. (Stanza 53] 
I wrote this stanza in accordance with the gist of those 
tenets. 
AND THIS INSIGHT WHICH DOES NOT SEE 
INTRINSfC NATURE IN ANY PHENOMENA 
IS THAT SAME INSIGHT EXPLAINED AS WISDOM. 
CULTIVATE IT WITHOUT CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT. (Stanza 54] 
My WOrds "DOES NOT SEE INTRINSIC NATURE IN ANY •• " 
mean that in whatever phenomenon you see, you see the

--- PAGE 156 [DIRECT] ---

142 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
highest Thatness29 of its very non-existence. That is the 
expression used in many sutras. And for the meaning of it 
you should study Acarya [Arya-]deva's Destruction of 
Errors about the Middle Way, the Blaze of Reasoning, 
Supplement to "The Middle Way", and Avalokitavrata also. 
Wisdom 
If this view of all other phenomena itself does not exist 
absolutely, you may ask, then does one's own mind [which 
sees) exist itself? To this I answer, "[IT] IS THAT SAME INSIGHT 
EXPLAINED AS WISDOM". That very investigative Insight by 
which the view exists, does not exist. And how is it non-
existent, yoti ask? I say "[IT IS] EXPLAINED AS WISDOM". 
Insight itself is also explained by the Four Great Proofs, 
and if examined carefully it cannot be established. The 
Blessed One clearly teaches this meaning in the Sutra 
Setting Forth the Two Truths: 
(" 
"In the ultimate sense, when one analyses the Insight of 
all phenomena, even the examination does not truly exist 
and is without basis. Even that Insight, in the ultimate 
sense, does not truly exist and is without basis. Therefore, 
it is called 'Insight' [only] conventionally; but in the 
ultimate sense, that Insight has not truly arisen and is 
non-existent. " 30 
Arya Nagarjuna reflects on this [in his Essay on Enlighten-
ment Thought]: 
"The mind, which all the Buddhas 
Have not seen is not a thing to be seen. [325b] 
For how could they see an entity 
Which has no intrinsic;: nature?" 31 
And Acarya Aryadeva in his Heart of Wisdom 
Compendium: 
"The scholars do not hold a consciousness either 
That [exists] in the ultimate sense; 
It would be a very sky-lotus, because of 
Its lack of identity or multiplicity. " 32

--- PAGE 157 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
143 
And Nagarjuna again [in his Essay]: 
"To refute the grasping at a Self, 
The Buddha taught the Aggregates, Elements, and so on. 
And the worthy ones destroyed even them 
As being a species of the mind alone. 
To put down the fear of childish men, 
The Sage did preach the words that say 
'All these things are only Mind'; 
But in truth, Mind itself is not! ... 
Although the Mahayanists' delights 
Lie in [seeing] this Non-self of phenomena; 
Their own mind is non-arisen from the start, 
And in short, it is not!" 33 
Non-discursive Reasoning 
And so now, if you have a clear understanding about the 
Self which outsiders impute [to be real], and about the 
Aggregates and so on, that [some of] our own sects impute 
[to be real], and about the [unreality of] mind and illusion-
and if you are fixed in these meanings continually- then 
you must abandon discursive reasoning. As Arya 
Nagarjuna said: 
"We hold that the Buddhas' Enlightenment Thought 
Has the pure characteristic of Emptiness, 
Unobscured by reasonings on the Self, 
On the Aggregates and the rest, and even consciousness." 34 
It is the elimination of this discursive reasoning I refer to 
when I said: [326a] 
THE WORLD OF CHANGE SPRINGS FROM CONCEPTUAL 
THOUGHT, WHICH IS ITS VERY NATURE; 
THE COMPLETE REMOVAL OF SUCH 
THOUGHT IS THE HIGHEST NIRVAJ':!A. (Stanza 55) 
Verses on the Middle Way 
In giving the meaning of the texts I have quoted above, I 
want to follow in the steps of a Guru who reached spiritual

--- PAGE 158 [DIRECT] ---

144 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
perfection through the counsel of Arya Nagarjuna, 
Nagarjuna having the gift from Arya 
Mafijugho~a 
(himself]. This Guru acquired the superknowledges, and 
understands the intent of all the Tantras and Siitras and the 
entire Discipline teachings. He sees [all] truth shining 
simultaneously in his mind, and is, moreover, a Guru 
of the unbroken lineage [from Mafijugho~a]. The glorious 
Bodhibhadra is that Guru, [and I follow him here]:35 
[1] If one analyses reality correctly, 
Then the entire examination of all apparent 
Phenomena made by various schools 
Is in error, and we hold them false. 
[2] For example, a diseased eye, because defective, 
Sees sewing-needles or comb-hairs [in its vision], 
Or sees a double moon, or [as through] honeycomb: 
In this there is a knowledge that grasps something. 
[3] For example, when asleep, under the power of sleep 
And of one's dispositions, one experiences 
Pleasure and pain, forms and the like: 
In this there is a knowledge that grasps something. 
[4] Just so, from the very beginning, 
The diseased eye of Ignorance with its defects 
Experiences internal and external entities: 
In this there is a knowledge that grasps something. 
[5] And also from the very beginning, 
In the great deep sleep of Ignorance, 
Comes that dream of the Four Dispositions:36 
In this there is an experience of the mind grasping. 
[6] But if one analyses in the actual ultimate sense 
What the real nature of these phenomena is, 
Those false comprehensions are unable 
To prove whether they exist or not. 
[7] For example, when the diseased eye is unfit, 
One cannot say the comb-hair does not exist; 
And when the diseased eye becomes fit, 
One cannot say the comb-hair [riow] exists. 
[8] For example, when one wakes from the sleep 
Of Ignorance, one cannot say he sees the dream; 
And as long as he is not awakened from the sleep, 
He cannot say the dream does not exist. 
[9] When one recovers from the blinding disease, 
And when one awakens from his sleep, [326b]

--- PAGE 159 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
145 
The dream, the comb-hair and the rest, and 
Even the knowledge that grasps them do not exist. 
[10] Just so, if one recovers from the eye-disease 
Of Ignorance, and from the deep sleep of Ignorance, 
Everything that appears and is examined, and 
Even the knowledge of experiencing them do not exist. 
[11] The [very] man who is declaiming "Destruction 
And non-destruction" [views] is destructible! 
In his real nature he does not [even] exist; 
So swiftly does this fool's analysis perish! 
[12] "Then," says he, "[your] Acarya Santideva 
Cannot assert this Destructionist [view either]; 
For his instruction does not [even] exist, 
And his texts are destructible [then too]!" 
(13] For this man nothing can be made clearer; 
Not [even] the least [principle] can be put down. 
Study correctly what truly exists, and 
By really seeing that you will be saved. 
[14] There are some of our own and others' schools 
Who have established that phenomena do exist, 
And still others who say that they do not: 
[15] But if one analyses reality correctly, 
"Existence" and "Non-existence" as true extremes 
Themselves do not exist; and therefore 
In no way can they ever be established. 
[16] Although men outside the Guru-tradition 
Have established things like Existence, Non-existence, 
Permanence and Destruction, with their inferring37 
Insights, they will not touch their tiring goal. 
[17] How many texts have been written 
By Dharmakirti and Dharmottara and the rest-
Texts of our own scholarly men to refute 
These challenges of the heretics! 
[18] Therefore I say, "There is no use in 
Logic for cultivating the ultimate truth." 
If I put it any other way, then straightway 
[My very] declaration on it is useless [too]! 
[19] So throw out your texts on argumentation 
Which make inference supreme; 
And cultivate the [Guru-] tradition's counsel, 
With the textual authority of Arya Nagarjuna. 
[20] The Middle Way follower knows the Thatness 
Which is freed from the Four Extremes: [327a]

--- PAGE 160 [DIRECT] ---

146 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
No Existence, no Non-existence, 
No both together, nor negated either. 38 
[21] The Middle Way realises the Thatness 
Which is freed from the Four Extremes: 
No Permanence, no Destruction, 
No both together, nor negated either. 
[22] Transcending views of Existence and Non~existence, 
And rejecting Permanence and Destruction, 
Be freed from knowing and knowledge: 
This is the basic text ofthe great Middle Way. 
[23] Those who have made inference supreme, 
Talk of Existence and Non-existence, of Permanence 
And Destruction, but in not pursuing the real nature, 
Their affirmations and negations perish! 
[24] For example, although [assertions that] intrinsic 
Natures do exist for gold, sky, water and the rest, 
Are accompanied apparently by a fallacy, 
They do not follow up the fallacy in them. 
[25] Abandon [these] affirmations and negations, 
And cultivate only the Thatness that frees 
With certainty from [false] affirmations; 
And do not rest in [any] set oftenets. 
[26] Cultivate only the instruction of the lineage 
Of Arya Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, 
Of Candraki:rti, Bhavya, and Santideva. 
[27] And if there is no one of that tradition, 
Then study the texts composed by them 
Over and over again. 
[28] For they are the door to the "A"39 of all 
Phenomena, which from the start do not arise nor cease; 
Their real nature is Nirvai}a; 
Of intrinsic nature they are pure. 
[29] Even if seen, they are not seen: 
What is called the "Seer" and "Thing Seen" 
And the "Seeing" do not exist at all! 
The Sage is ever in equipoise. 40 
[30] If one abandons all discursive reasoning 
And remains in the realm of True Reality, 
He does not want such starts and advances41 
Toward the knowledge of the great Yoga. 
[31] Hence, those who have attained equipoise 
Themselves do not desire Buddhahood-

--- PAGE 161 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
147 
As explained in the Non-Conceptual Formula - 42 
While remaining on the [Bodhisattva] Levels. 
[32] I have not enlarged on this subject here; [327b] 
[So] one must beg [its explanation] again and again 
From a Guru who understands my text- after one 
Has [first] made offerings and given him attendance. 
[33] Following in the steps ofBodhibhadra, 
Who belongs to the lineage of that Arya N agarjuna 
Prophesied by the Omniscient One,43 
I shall not hold any tenets whatever! 
Proof from Scripture 
And now, having proven from reason that all phenomena 
are non-arising, I [now] show from scripture that this is the 
case in these stanzas: 
MOREOVER, THE BLESSED ONE DECLARED: 
"CONCEPTUAL THINKING IS THE GREAT IGNORANCE, 
AND CASTS ONE INTO SAMSARA'S OCEAN; BUT 
CLEAR AS THE SKY IS HIS CONTEMPLATION WHO 
REMAINS IN CONCENTRATION WITHOUT CONCEPTS." (Stanza 56) 
AND HE ALSO SAYS IN THE NON-CONCEPTUAL PROGRESS FORMULA: 
"WHEN A SON OF THE VICTOR MEDITATES ON 
THIS HOLY DOCTRINE WITHOUT CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT, 
AND TRANSCENDS THE ARDUOUS TRAILS OF SUCH THOUGHT, 
HE GRADUALLY ATIAINS THE NON-CONCEPTUAL."44 (Stanza 57)* 
WHEN THROUGH SCRIPTURE AND REASON ONE HAS 
PENETRATED THE NON-INTRINSIC 
NATURE OF ALL NON-ARISING PHENOMENA, 
THEN COI\'TEMPLATE WITHOUT CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT. (Stanza 58) 
Quotations 
My root stanzas should be examined [carefully] at this 
point. The Blessed One spoke on this subject not only in 
the above but in other siitras too. He is clearly talking about 
it in the Exposition of the Undifferentiated Nature of All 
Phenomena when he says: 
• Atisa has apparently abbreviated the root text. Seep. 11.

--- PAGE 162 [DIRECT] ---

148 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"If you are talking about the realm of True Reality in 
terms of valid reasonings, then there is neither ultimate 
nor conventional meaning to it. " 45 
And in the Bodhisattva Section Sutra he says, "There is one 
Truth, and that is cessation . . . ", 46 continuing at great 
length in that sermon. In the Ornament of the Wisdom 
Engaging the Sphere of All Buddhas; he says: 
"The Tathagata [himself] is ever a non-arising phenomenon; 
And all phenomena are like the Tathagata; 
So purify the phenomena that do not exist in the worlds; 
They are the false delusions of foolish minds. " 47 
And the holy Moon-Lamp: 
"This ultimate truth that everything is empty of an 
intrinsic nature means that a phenomenon is without 
basis and its very nature does not exist. You have not 
understood my explanation of [causal] conditions- that 
was to prevent attachment [to phenomena] - but [in 
reality] there are no words, no statements to be made 
about the character of a phenomenon." 48 
In the Ocean of Discipline: [328a] 
"The extreme of [something being] prior is empty [of 
reality); the extreme of [something being] posterior is 
empty likewise: all Becoming [on the wheel of life] is 
empty at all points, and empty are the points [of change 
posited) by the heretics too. " 49 
And the Descent into Lanka: 
"Conventionally, everything exists; but the ultimate 
Truth is: intrinsic nature does not exist. 
What we explain as correct conventional truth 
(In reality] is in error about the non-existence of intrinsic 
nature. " 50 
In the [Questions of] Suvikriintavikriimf Perfection of 
Insight:

--- PAGE 163 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
149 
"The Tathagata's wisdom does not see anything at all. 
And why is that? Because no object exists for his wisdom 
[to see] !" 51 
And the Deeds of the Conqueror as Mother Siitra: 
"Because the Blessed One had described the unique 
paradise of the Tathagata Ak~obhya to them, the 
assembled [bodhisattvas] begged him. '0 Blessed One, 
please show us that paradise!' And when he made that 
[eastern] realm of the world appear for them, and then 
disappear again, he said, 'Just as this paradise of the 
Tathagata Ak~obhya disappears from the range of sight; 
so also Body disappears from the range of sight; so also 
Feeling ... " 52 
And he continues at length to speak [of the rest of 
the Aggregates and phenomena]. The Chapter of 
Sadaprarudita and the Removal of Ajata§atru's Regrets 
both treat this subject clearly. 
Bibliography of Siltras 
Of course, the entire Siitra Collection ought to be studied, 
but the following deserve special attention for their clarity 
in these matters: 
the Meeting of Father and Son Siltra, 
the Finger-Garland Siltra, 
the Seal of Wisdom Sutra, 
the Secret Tathagata Sutra, [328b] 
the Tathagata Set Forth by Vimalakirti Siltra, 
the Mindfulness of the Buddha Siltra, 
the Subduing by Akii.Savar1Ja Siltra, 
the Tathagata Essence Siltra, 
the Sutra of the Thirty-three, 
the Questions of Kii.Syapa Sutra, 
thelnstructiononNon-ProductionofAllPhenomenaSiltra, 
the Tathagata's Compassion Siltra,

--- PAGE 164 [DIRECT] ---

150 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
the King of Meditations Sutra, 
the Seated before the Present Buddha Sutra, 
the Sutra Setting Forth the Three Bodies, 
the Questions ofVimaladatta Sutra, 
the Questions of the Girl Sumati Sutra, 
the Questions of the Girl Viriwlasuddha Sutra, 
the Unwavering Light Sutra on Reality's Own Emptiness of 
Intrinsic Nature, 
the Descent into Lanka, 
the Sutra Setting Forth the Two Truths, 
the Sutra of Akasagarbha, 
the Questions of the Serpent King Anavatapta Sutra, 
the Questions of the Serpent King Siigara Sutra, 
the Sutra Showing the Unthinkable Secrets, 
and the entire set of the Perfection of Insight Sutras. 
If I set down all the [pertinent] quotes from these Siitras 
here, my text would be altogether too long; so you must be 
very diligent in your study of all the Mahayana Siitras 
without exception. 
Biography of the Masters 
Besides the Siitra Collection, there are the treatises 
composed by men who dedicated themselves to the precise 
and infallible meaning of the essence of the Perfection of 
Insight; men such as the Aryan Acaryas Nagarjuna, 
Aryadeva, [329a] Candrak1rti, Santideva, Bhavaviveka, 
Asvagho~a and Candramitra. 53 Study their texts diligently 
as well because they unlock in a clear way the sense of the 
Siitras. If I were to quote them all here, my text would be 
too_ big. 
Arya Nagarjuna, although widely known and proclaimed 
to be a Bodhisattva of the First Level by the longer Siitras 
and wise men of India, I myself have seen [mentioned] 
as a Bodhisattva of the Eighth Level in [some] Siitras. 
Aryadeva likewise I have seen [referred to] as a 
Bodhisattva who gained the Eighth Level, because of his

--- PAGE 165 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
151 
instruction by Nagarjuna. Candrakirti had his con-
secration54 to the Truth through the counsel of Nagarjuna, 
and attained the realisation of all phenomena as illusory. 
He lived for four hun?red years in India, working solely for 
t~e good of others. Santideva too received Maiijugho~a's 
gift through Nagarjuna's instruction, and saw the Truth. 
Bhavya, through Nagarjuna's teaching, [became] a master 
of reasoning and passed on [to Nirvana] in his same 
lifetime. Asvagho~a, through Aryadeva's.instruction, saw 
the Truth, [329b] and Candramitra also. 
Cultivation of Higher Vision 
When you have learned these extensive teachings from 
scripture and reason, and ascertained their purpose, then 
with all doubts aside cultivate that non-conceptual thinking 
called "Higher Vision". And how do you do this? First of 
all, [by remembering] that entities are twofold: those that 
have form, and those that do not. And when you have 
cleared them away with the [Four] Great Proofs, you can 
contemplate [with Higher Vision]. Hence my Guru says in 
his Chapter on Concentration Equipment: 
"All phenomena are contained in the mind, and the 
mind is contained in the body; so you must put the body 
to work for the realm of Reality also. That is my 
counsel." 55 
If you know how to do that, there will be no conceptualising 
anywhere, and no grasping [at objects]; and leaving 
memory and all reflecting behind, remain in that [s!ate] 
until that enemy, the [mental] Sign, rises [again]. As Arya 
Nagarjuna said: 
"I pay homage to the mind that does not examine 
With imaginings, and takes no stand [on anything]; 
To the mind devoid of memory and reflecting 
And of topics, I pay homage."

--- PAGE 166 [DIRECT] ---

152 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
And again he says: 
"The wise man will not view 
Even Emptiness as Emptiness .. 
The mind devoid of topics, 
Rests in the characteristic of space; 
To contemplate space 
Is to contemplate Emptiness." 56 
Acarya Santideva says: 
"When neither Existence nor Non-Existence 
Stand present before the mind, 
Then, since it has no other way [to go], 
And is objectless, it is truly calmed. " 57 [330a] 
And cultivating this becomes one's strength, as he goes on 
to say: 
"Through the cultivation of Emptiness 
One abandons the tendency toward things [as real]." 
Acarya Srigupta also: 
"By the power of whatever contemplation 
One cultivates, one takes on the nature 
Of the non-real essence of ali phenomena, 
In the same way that he sees [those] entities." 58 
THIS COMPLETES THE TEACHING ON THE TRAINING IN 
HIGHER INSIGHT 
Stages of the Path 
AND WHEN HE HAS THUS CONTEMPLATED THATNESS, 
AND BY STAGES HAS ATTAINED "WARMTH" AND THE REST, 
THEN HE WILL GAIN THE "JOYOUS" [LEVEL] AND ON UP: 
BUDDHA-ENLIGHTENMENT IS NOT FAR OFF. [Stanza 59] 
So, when you have established yourself in the Practice Path

--- PAGE 167 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
153 
with the yoga of equipoise, you will be well set in the Path of 
the Perfections in the sense of the ·Mahayana Sutras I 
explained earlier. These steps [towards Enlightenment] are 
given in the eight chapters of the Ornament for the 
Realisations, 59 the text Maitreyanatha preached, and which 
Asailga spread widely in India. Vimuktisena60 and the 
glorious Haribhadra61 explained and commented on it, and 
it is their explanation you should learn. Unless you study 
them, the Path and its Results may become confused. 
Hence, the yogin who has been in the Equipment Path 
and set in [its] Emptiness then advances to the Practice Path 
and develops the basic virtues [called] the Aids to 
Liberation. The words "BY STAGES HAS ATTAINED 'WARMTH' 
AND THE REST" refer to those [four] aids to one's con-
viction: that is, persevering through (1] the three degrees of 
Warmth, [21 the three degrees of Summits, (3] the three 
degrees of Patience, and [4] the three degrees of the 
Highest [Mundane] Phenomena. 62 [330b] 
"THEN HE WILL GAIN THE 'JOYOUS' (LEVEL] AND ON UP" 
refers to the advance to the Path of Vision and its four 
Concentrations and so on. 63 "BUDDHA-ENLIGHTENMENT IS 
NOT FAR OFF" means that while perfecting the Ten Levels, 
the Supreme and Perfect Enlightenment is coming about 
from Moment to Moment [of the Vision Path], 64 and in no 
time at all, and swiftly, you will gain the Three Bodies and 
Five Wisdoms and so on. 
I have not written here the details 
Of the Practice Path and its start at "Warmth", 
Nor of the Ten Levels that begin in Vision Path, 
Nor of the Three Bodies and the rest, because I 
Fear too long a text. Study them in Siitra and 
Commentary; there they are well woven. 
Another reason I said "BUDDHA-ENLIGHTENMENT IS NOT FAR 
OFF" w::s to give [some] encouragement to slothful 
bodhisattvas. The "three countless aeons"65 that scripture 
speaks of [for attaining Enlightenment] is not very long for 
Bodhisattvas who stay [in sam sara] for the sake of all living 
beings. As Ambaraja's words have it:

--- PAGE 168 [DIRECT] ---

154 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
"As for me, I have no preference or wish 
To be a Buddha in [some] distant Enlightenment; 
But I shall carry on to the very end of time, 
For the sake of one single creature. " 66 
And the Glorious Original [Aeon]: 
"The wisest man remains in samsara 
As long as he can; for then, by choosing 
Not to pass into Nirvaq.a, he can seek 
The unequalled good of creatures. " 67 
And from the Resolves of Nagarjuna: 
"As long as there are any creatures here at all, 
And one of them is still not saved, 
I will carry on my investigations for them, 
Even though I have reached the Highest Enlightenment. " 68 
If you ask why [the saving of others takes so long], I answer 
from the Siitras: 
"If all the realms of the world were changed into [331a] a 
single tank of water, and if for a thousand years one man 
worked at dipping the water from it with the tip of a 
single hair - that tank of water might lower somewhat. 
But with the realm of creatures there is no such 
lessening." 
And from the Good Practice: 
"The extent of all creatures is as vast as the limits of 
space." 69 
For instance, a bodhisattva is called slothful when he 
thinks, "After I have demolished [by analysis for 
Emptiness] all the atoms of Mount Meru, king of 
mountains, I will reach Enlightenment." And that is why 
Ambaraja says:

--- PAGE 169 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
155 
"Until the very last rebirth 
In this beginningless samsara, 
I will perform endless deeds 
For the benefit and good of creatures. " 70 
Hence, even I must not desire to be swiftly Enlightened, 
except to lessen those suffering in the realm of creatures, 
whether it is diminishing or increasing or not. 
It necessarily follows that a bodhisattva of keen ability, 
endowed with a hero's great zeal and a mind controlled by 
compassion for all creatures, will- although he had not 
desired it- swiftly be directly and perfectly Enlightened. 
In his Lamp of the Three Methods, Acarya Tripi~akamala 
says: 
"In the depth and in the breadth 
Of its aspiration and execution, 
The Great Vehicle is far superior, 
For it achieves the changeless result .. 
The Vehicle of the Perfections is far more exalted than the 
Vehicle of the Hearers- iinpress that on your mind. " 71 
THIS COMPLETES [THE TEACHING ON) THE VEHICLE OF THE 
PERFECTIONS 
Notes to Chapter 6 
See Glossary for technical Buddhist terms here. Calmness pertains merely to 
yogic method· for concentrating one's mind; the actual removal of the 
hindrances to liberation is a matter of overcoming ignorance through the 
investigations of Higher Vision. 
2 Ot. 84:3, Vol. 38:85.3. 
3 Instruction in the Steps of Contemplation of the Perfection Vehicle, Ot. 5456, 
Vol. 103:264.2. 
4 dbyer med-pa/asan;rbhinna: undifferentiated. All phenomena lose any basis 
for real dist~nction in their ultimate and true reality of Emptiness. 
5 Ot. 761 (31). 
6 This siitra title is not fou!Jd in the catalogues, but the title and the quotation 
here are excerpted from Santideva's SS: pp. 96-99. 
7 Ot. 126, Vol. 5:241.1. 
8 mi-gnas-pa'i mya-ngan-las-'das/aprat~thita-nirvii~a: The "Deferred Nir-
vli~a" is a third addition of Mahayana to the two earlier types of Nirval}a 
understood by the Hinayana schools; viz.,

--- PAGE 170 [DIRECT] ---

156 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
1) Nirvana-with-remainder 
(phung-bo 
/hag-rna 
dang 
bcas-pa'i0 / 
sa-upadhise~a-0 ); and 
2) 
Nirvana-without-remainder 
(phung-bo 
/hag-rna 
med-pa'i0 / 
nirupddhise$a-0 ). 
For the Hinayanist, the first type means the cessation of all obscuration 
caused by any afflicting activity (e.g., any imperfection), b~t with the body 
and mind continuing to function - as with the Buddha Sakyamuni after 
his Enlightenment, continuing his non-afflicting activity of preaching the 
Doctrine and founding the Community. The second type means the total 
cessation not only of the obscuration caused by afflicting activity, but of all 
mental and physical activity as well, as exemplified by the Buddha's final 
departure into Nirvarya. the "Parinirvarya", at the age of eighty. 
The Mahayanists add the third type, the Deferred Nirvarya, to describe 
the Bodhisattva who has earned Nirvarya by his having overcome not only 
the obscuration caused by afflicting activity but also that caused by ignorance 
of the true nature of Non-self; i.e. the all-embracing Emptiness of all 
apparent reality. This Bodhisattva then, by choice and out of compassion, 
remains in sam sara to devote himself to the salvation of all beings. It is this 
type which Ji\anakirti proceeds to describe in this passage. 
The Mahayanist view of a third type of Nirvana necessarily gives a slightly 
different interpretation to the Nirvaryas of the Buddha Sakyamuni, who for 
the Mahayanist is simply one of many Tathagatas or Bodhisattvas who have 
appeared in Form or Apparition Bodies to serve living beings. Consequently 
the first and second types of Nirvarya become but different kinds of final 
release won by those of the Hinayana paths: the Hearer with his goal of 
Arhatship (Nirvarya-with-remainder), meaning his afflicting activity has 
ceased, but a "remainder" of obscuration persists because of his partial 
ignorance of the true extent of Non-self; i.e. that all phenomena are empty of 
inherent existence. And the Solitary Buddha wins the goal of Buddhahood 
(Nirvarya-without-remainder), completely released from all obscuration, 
whether caused by afflicting activity or by ignorance of the true extent of 
non-substantiality, yet less perfect in his Nirvarya because of his declining to 
return to the world of rebirth- as the Bodhisattva- for the sake of others. 
See T. R. V. Murti, Central Philosophy of Buddhism, pp. 271ff. 
9 See Glossary. 
10 The reference is to the long analytical lists of component phenomena 
found in the Abhidharma texts of the Hinayana. By comprehending the 
component elements of any given thing, it was believed that the false view of 
that thing's real Self (or substantiality) could be eliminated; e.g. compre-
hending that the apparent Self is composed of the five aggregates, and each 
of the five aggregates in tum composed of further phenomena. For the 
Mahayanist this type of analysis would not be adequate for liberating the 
mind from ignorance, since the very emptiness of substantiality of the 
component phenomena themselves is what must be seen and experienced. 
11 
Bodhibhadra, op. cit .• pp. 253.4ff. 
12 The three aspects (rnam-pa gsum) of a thing are the Subject-Action-Object 
involved. 
13 
kun-rdzob/sarrzvrtti: relative, as opposed to the ultimate absolute sense or 
aspect. These are the two aspects or levels of truth familiar in Buddhist 
terminology. The ordinary or conventional truths (relative) are valid at the 
mundane level in the conduct of everyday affairs; the ultimate truths are 
realities as they truly are in themselves, empty of any inherent existence. In 
terms of the Enlightenment Thought, Compassion is considered to be the

--- PAGE 171 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
157 
Thought on the relative level because it deals with creatures in ordinary 
everyday activity by means of the Perfections. The absolute Thought of 
Enlightenment is Emptiness itself. 
14 
Ot. 115, Vol. 5:73.3ff and 76.4ff. 
15 
The same list of five bodhisattvas at various stages of the Path is found in 
Chapter 2, p. 45. 
16 The import here is that the Means are basically an exercise of Compassion 
whereby Enlightened Ones choose to continue their work of liberating all 
beings. Hence, the Means are the cause of the Apparition Body (which is 
necessary for working for others in the Desire and Form realms) and of the 
Enjoyment Body (which is necessary for preaching in the paradises of the 
Formless realms). 
17 
gtan-tshigs/upapatti: proof, demonstration. The Four Great Proofs, given 
with their popular names here, are summarised in the opening stanza of 
Nagarjuna's Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way [Ot. 5224, Vol. 95:1.1 ]: 
(A) /'gag pa med pa skye ba med pal 
[B) 
I chad med pa rtag med pal 
[ C] /' ong med pa 'gro med pal 
(D] /tha dad don min dol'! gcig min/. 
The Tibetan translation reverses the sequence of the last two lines of the 
Sanskrit: 
[A] 
anirodham-anutpadam-
[B) anucchedam-llSiiSvatam/ 
(C) 
anekartham-ananartham-
[D] 
anagamam-anirgamam/. 
Actually all four proofs will employ Nagarjuna's famed tetralemma (mu-
bzhi/catus-kotika: four-homed, of four extremes) dialectic in reducing to 
absurdity that entities exist, or do not exist, or both exist and not exist, or 
neither exist nor not exist. Hence, aside from the Diamond Particle (rdo-rje 
gzegs-ma/vajra-ka~Ja) Proof, Atisa's popular names for the proofs coincide 
with the above stanza: 
[A) Non-cessation and Non-arising; 
[B] 
Non-destruction and Non-permanence (called Diamond Particle 
because this proof is the most basic enunciation of the tetralemma in 
terms of existence, and represents the very heart of the gem); 
[C) 
Non-identity and Non-multiplicity; 
[D J Non-going and Non-coming (another way of expressing the Buddhist 
Dependent Origination causality). 
18 nam-mkha'i me-tog/kha-pWjpam: sky-flower; a common example in Indian 
logic for a contradiction in terms; as also a hare's hom, son of a barren 
woman, etc. 
19 
BCA: IX:146-50. 
20 The list covers the ultimate principles of all India's major philosophical 
traditions: · 
a) Atman (bdag): the Supreme Self of the Vedanta schools; 
b) Fate (phya): both the scepticism of the Carvaka school and fatalism of 
the Aji:vakas; 
c) 
isvara (dbang-phyug): the Lord, or God, of later Nyaya-Vaise~ika; 
d) 
Puru~a (skyes-bu): the free and independent self, Person, co-principle 
with Prakrti in the Saf!lkhya system;

--- PAGE 172 [DIRECT] ---

158 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
e) Karma (/as): retributive action; held by all schools, including Buddhist; 
but as an ultimate principle stressed by the Mimarpsa and Jaina 
traditions; 
f) 
Prakrti (rang-bzhin): ultimate unconscious Nature, co-principle with 
Puru~a in Sarpkhya; 
g) 
Gu~as (yon-tan): the three Attributes of Prakrti in the Sarpkhya 
system (clarity, activity, darkness), whose disturbance starts the process 
of evolution of the world. 
h) Brahman (tshangs-pa): the Supreme Spirit of the Vedanta schools; first 
of the triad with 
i) 
Vi~I}U (khyab-'jug), and Siva (whom Atisa does not mention). 
21 
The reference is to the Hinayana schools which held the real production of 
phenomena (dharma) as ultimate constituents, while denying composite 
substances and a Self as real. Vasubandhu treats the six kinds of causes and 
the four kinds of conditions in A K(L VP): II: pp. 245ff. 
22 Ot. 5224, Vol. 95:3.1. 
23 {i-ka/{ikii: sub-commentary. 'grel-pa/vrtti: primary commentary, often by 
the author himself. 
24 The quotation is from the great patron of Buddhism in Tibet, co-founder of 
Bsam-yas, and upadhyaya of the first ordained Tibetan monks. The passage 
here is not identified any further than the author's name, but is probably 
from his Ornament of the Middle Way and its auto-commentary JOt. 5284.5]. 
It is curious that this quotation and the following one from Sri-gupta are 
given here for explanation of the Lack of Identity and Plurality Proof, yet 
neither the names of the authors nor names of their works are mentioned in 
the final bibliography in this chapter. 
25 
Unidentified. 
26 Nagarjuna's investigation of the Twelvefold Chain of Dependent 
Origination is Chapter 26 of his Basic Stanzas [ Ot. 5224]: 
27 In the ~veda the goose is said to be able to separate Soma from water when 
the two are mixed. In later literature, as here, the ability is to strain milk 
from water. The final stanza here is also used in Atisa's Introduction to the 
Two Truths [Ot. 5380, Vol. 103:187.3.]. 
28 don dam-pa/paramiirtha: ultimate truth. See note 13 of this chapter. 
Training in the meditational practices on Emptiness requires the guidance of 
a Guru. 
29 de-kho-na-myid/tattva: thatness=Emptiness (stong-pa-nyid/sunyatii). 
30 Ot. 846, Vol. 34:110.5. 
31 
Ot. 5470, Vol. 103:273.3. 
32 Ot. 5251, Vol. 95:144.3. 
33 ibid. With these three stanzas excerpted from Nagarjuna, the Three 
Turnings of the Wheel are exemplified: 1) the Four Truths [Hinayana]; 2) 
Mind-Only [Yogacarii/Cittamatra]; and 3) Total Emptiness [Miidhyamika]. 
34 ibid. 
35 Atisa's long "Hymn to the Middle Way" begins here, and is his own 
composition, thirty-two stanzas in length, and of equal quality with the root 
stanzas of the Lamp itself. As he states in the introduction to it, he is 
imitating Bodhibhadra -
specifically his Composition [Ot. 5252] on 
Aryadeva's Heart of Wisdom Compendium [Ot. 5251]. Bodhibhadra's 
treatise is of much greater length; so there is no slavish imitation here, but a 
quite clear and original work which surprisingly is not found in the Tanjur 
elsewhere as a separate treatise. 
36 bag-chags/viisanii: disposition, propensity. The four dispositions alluded to

--- PAGE 173 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
159 
here are not identified, but are related to the afflictions [see Glossary] and 
are of an obscuring nature. 
37 
~je-su dpag_/anumiina: infere_nce, one of the two main sources of knowledge 
m the Indi~n systems of epistemology; direct perception (mngon-sum-du/ 
pratyak!ja) IS the second. The Nyaya-Vaisesika schools of Brahmanism, as 
well as Buddhist schools, developed logic to·a high degree. Atisa decries the 
science both in this and the following stanzas; although he himself assisted in 
the Tibetan translation of an immense treatise on logic of Acarya Jaya (or 
Jina) [Ot. 5720]. 
38 yod min med min yod med min/ 
gyni ga min pa' ang ma yin pal. 
39 
a-yi sgo-can: "the door of A". The letter and sound "A" is the seed syllable 
for mantric meditation c:in the Perfection of Insight, the "Great Mother 
of all bodhisattvas". It is also the smallest of all the variations on the great 
Perfection of Wisdom siitras, from the 100,000 line version down to the short 
Single-Syllable Perfection of Insight Sutra: 
"At that time, the Blessed One spoke these words to the Venerable 
Ananda, '0 Ananda, take hold of this Perfection of Insight called the 
One-Syllable, because it is of benefit and happiness for all beings. It is like 
this: A.' Thus the Blessed One spoke, arid Venerable Ananda and all 
those monks and great Bodhisattvas realised that Perfection and rejoiced, 
and praised what had been been said by the Blessed One." [Ot. 741, Vol. 
21:741.4]. 
40 mnyam-par bzhag-pa/samiihita: equipoise, or the composure of concentra-
tion (ting-nge-' dzin/ samiidhi), the culmination of Calmness when distraction 
has been eliminated. 
41 
'byung-ba dang 'jug-pa: starts and advances. The reference is to a yogin who 
has transcended distraction and discursive thinking, and in his direct 
intuitional experience does not wish to be going in and out of his state of 
concentration. 
42 This is the same siitra quoted in the root stanza 57. The pertinent section 
referred to here is: 
"If that bodhisattva abandons those [earlier analyses of phenomena], then 
the analysis for gaining the other Levels - as when the signs of discursive 
thinking are clearly perceived- happens and becomes direct experience. 
It is like. this: From the signs of discursive thinking in the analysis for 
gaining the First Level up to the signs of discursive thinking in the analysis 
for gaining the Tenth Level, and for gaining Patience in the Non-arising 
Phenomena ... even these signs of discursive thinking in his analysis for 
gaining [the Levels], he completely abandons by not directing his mind to 
them." [Ot. 810, Vol. 32:231.3). 
43 The prophecy occurs in the Manjrdri Basic Tantra [Ot. 162]. See Bu-ston's 
mention of it in his short life of Nagarjuna in his Chos-'byung (Obermiller): 
11:111 and 122. 
44 The quotation in Stanza 56 is unidentified. The quote in Stanza 57 from the 
Non-Con:eptual Progress Fonnula is Ot. 810, Vol. 32:232.5. 
45 
Ot. 760(8), Vol. 22:192.2. 
46 Ot. 760{12), Vol. 23:78.2. 
47 
Ot. 768, Vol. 28. 
48 
Ot. 795, Vol. 31. 
49 Unidentified. 
50 Ot. 775, Vol. 29:73.4.

--- PAGE 174 [DIRECT] ---

160 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
51 
Ot. 736, Vol. 21:195.5. 
52 Ot. 5029, Vol. 87. 
53 Tit is passage listing the names of the great Madhyamika scholars appears to 
be by a different hand, or at least a later addition made by Atisl! without 
cons~lting his previous spelling of the names. Here the names of Aryadeva 
and Santideva are transliterated from Sanskrit, rather than translated into 
Tibetan as elsewhere in the Commentary. Further, the passage itself seems 
to be out of place, as these wr;iters have all been mentioned earlier in 
p. 140 of this chapter, along with the principal writings of each- although the 
author states here that he does not set down their texts lest it expand his 
treatise too much. Also to be noted is the fact that Buddhapalita's name is 
absent from the present list, but Bhavya/Bhavaviveka is included; that is, the 
founder of the Madhyamika-Svatantrika school is included, but Bhavya, the 
founder of the Madhyamika-Prasangika, is not. 
54 byin-gyis brlabs/adhi~!hana: blessing, consecration. The word connotes the 
special' empowerment through personal contact and initiation by one's 
Guru. The same word is used for the "consecration" of the bowl and robes in 
the Ordination ceremony of monks. In the Bka'-gdams-pa tradition, the 
"Blessed Lineage" is a separate category from the teaching lineages of the 
Madhyamika theory, and the Compassion practice. 
55 
Ot. 5444, Vol. 103:255.4. 
56 Essay on the Enlightenment Thought (Ot. 5470, Vol. 103:273.4]. 
57 
BCA: IX: 34-5. 
58 Unidentified. 
59 Ot. SUM. The eight chapters are titled: (Vol. 88:1.1] 
1) Knowledge of All Modes (rnam-pa thams-cad mkhyen-pa); 
2) Knowledge of All Paths (lam thams-cad mkhyen-pa); 
3) All-Knowledge/Omniscience (kun mkhyen-pa); 
4) Comprehension of All Modes (rnam-pa thams-cad rtog-pa); 
5) Practice at the Summit (rtse-mor phyin-pa'i sbyor-ba); 
6) The Gradual Process (mthar-gyis bya-ba); 
7) The Instantaneous Realisation of the Sage (thub-pa'i skad-gcig gcig-pa-
yis rtogs-pa); 
8) The Nature of the Sage (thub-pa'i ngo-bo-nyid). 
60 There are two men by this name in the Bka'-gdams-pa lineage of the Broad 
Practice, distinguished only by their titles: Arya Vimuktisena is the teacher 
of Bhadanta Vimuktisena, and the author of a treatise which places the 
topics of the Ornament for the Realisations in correspondence with the topics 
of the 25,000 Line Perfection of Insight Satra, called Atoka [Ot. 5185]. 
61 
Author of the Light on the Ornament of Realisations' Exposition of the 8,000 
Line Perfection of Insight (Ot. 5189], whose work became the most popular 
in the Tibetan monasteries for study of the Perfection of Insight literature. 
The text was revised by Atisa together with Rin-chen bzang-po. 
62 See Glossary. 
63 The four Concentrations mentioned here are usually referred to as four 
"clear realisations" (mngon-nogs/abhisamaya); i.e. one for each of the Four 
Noble Truths as they are seen in the Vision Path. 
64 
skad-gcig-ma/~ana: moment. Each of the "clear realisations" of the Four 
Truths in the Vision Path (see above note) is divided into four "Moments" or 
degrees of growth in the awareness of the Truth involved (Suffering, 
Origination, Cessation, Path), from a stage of eliminating one's ignorance 
about the Truth on up to full liberating knowledge of it. 
·

--- PAGE 175 [DIRECT] ---

INSIGHT AND MEANS 
161 
65 
Explanation of "Treasure of Phenomenology" [Ot. 5591, Vol. 115:189. 
lff.]. 
66 The quotation is the same as that used in root Stanza 29; however, a different 
Tibetan translation of the siitra is used here. 
67 
Ot. 120, Vol. 5:133.4. 
68 
Ot. 5428, Vol. 103:244.3. 
69 See Chapter 2, note 1, for the same quotation. 
70 This stanza immediately precedes those used for stanzas 26-31 in the root 
poem: Ornament of Maiijuirf's Buddhafield, [Ot. 760(15), Vol. 23:129.2]. 
71 
Ot. 4530, Vol. 81:113.4.

--- PAGE 176 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 177 [DIRECT] ---

Vehicle of Mysticism 
CHAPTER 7 
Tantra

--- PAGE 178 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 179 [DIRECT] ---

CHAPTER 7 
Tantra 
Stanza 
Page 
I 
VEHICLE OF MANTRA 
166 
A 
Rites 
60 
166 
B Powers 
167 
II 
TANTRA SCRIPTURE 
61 
167 
A Seven Classes of Tantra 
167 
B Bibliography ofTantras 
168 
III 
INITIATIONS 
62 
169 
A Permission 
169 
B Winning a Guru 
63 
172 
IV 
MISUNDERSTANDING OF TANTRA 
64 
172 
A 
Exaggeration 
173 
B Defamation 
174 
v 
PROHIBITED INITIATIONS 
65 
176 
A Laymen and Religious 
176 
B Religious Celibate 
66 
177 
1 Permitted Initiations 
67 
177 
2 Wisdom of Thatness 
177 
VI 
CONCLUDING VERSES 
179 
VII 
COLOPHONS 
181

--- PAGE 180 [DIRECT] ---

7 
Tantra 
Vehicle of Mantra 
Now I must speak about the Vehicle of Mantra. It too is a 
great vehicle and belongs to the highest Mahiiy~na. [33lb] 
When I say that the Mantra Vehicle is eminently superior to 
the Vehicle of the Perfection oflnsight, the textual authority 
I use is again from the great Acarya, venerable 
Tripitakamiila: 
"The teachings on Mantra are eminently superior 
When mastered by one of keen abilities, 
Because of the many Means [they offer] without 
austerity-
Provided the one and only Goal is kept, unobscured." 1 
Hence, the bodhisattva who engages in the practice of 
Mantra must first produce that unmistakable reality, the 
Thought of Enlightenment in its ultimate sense. 2 However, 
I am not going to talk here about the texts that explain the 
meaning of this. Here and in my root text I [simply] set 
down some of the means for accumulating the Two Equip-
ments [of merit and knowledge], for a bodhisattva who is in 
the Generation Stage, 3 and confine myself to that. 
Rites 
The Two Equipments can be swiftly and perfectly achieved 
in an extraordinary [way] by the system of Mantra. And 
with this in mind I wrote the stanza: 
THROUGH THE RITES OF "APPEASEMENT" AND "PROSPERITY" 
AND THE REST, EFFECTED BY THE FORCE OF MANTRA, 
AND ALSO BY THE STRENGTH OF THE EIGHT GREAT POWERS, 
STARTING WITH THAT OF "GOOD FLASK", AND OTHERS, [60]

--- PAGE 181 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 167 
When I say "EFFECTED BY THE FORCE OF MANTRA", I mean all 
dhiira1Ji4 rituals in general, but also include the Powers 
effected on the strength of muttering5 Mantras taken from 
any of the Tantras - such as the dhiiralJfs of the Action 
Tantra. What are these rites? The rituals for "Domination" 
and "Destruction", for" APPEASEMENT AND PROSPERITY" and 
the rest of the eight kinds of ritual. 6 
Powers 
"THE EIGHT GREAT POWERS; STARTING WITH THAT OF 'GOOD 
FLASK', AND OTHERS" refers to [1] the Good Flask Power, [2] 
Fleetness of Foot, [3] the (Invincible] Sword, [4] the 
Commander, (5] the Underworld [Power], (6] Invisibility, 
[7] the Wishing-Tree, and [8] Supremacy.7 By "AND 
OTHERS" I mean all the many Powers that are associated 
with the rites that put an end to anything, and follow upon 
the [principal] Eight Powers; for example, eye-medicine, 
pills, flying in the sky, showers of grain, producing various 
shapes out of a conjured mustard-seed, superknowledge by 
augury, and the [Four] Miraculous Powers. 8 When, 
through Muttering and Concentration, one has accom-
plished these Eight Great Mundane Powers and the [rites 
of] Appeasement-Prosperity-Dominion-Destruction, one 
thereby perfects the Two Equipments of Merit and 
Knowledge, swiftly and effortlessly. [332a) 
Tantra Scripture 
Seven Classes ofTantra 
What is this "Vehicle of Mantra" from which such Powers 
come so swiftly and effortlessly? I say: 
IT IS MAINTAINED THAT THE EQUIPMENT FOR 
ENLIGHTENMENT IS PERFECTED WITH EASE; 
AND IF.ONE WANTS TO PRACTISE MANTRA AS PRESCRIBED 
IN THE TANTRAS: ACTION, PRACTICE, AND ON ••• [Stanza 61] 
And these are: [1] Action Tantra, [2] Practice Tantra, 
[3] Skill Tantra, (4) Combined Tantra, [5] Union Tantra, 
[6] Great Union Tantra, and [7] Supreme Union Tantra. 9 
The extent of each of these Tantras is immeasurable, as the

--- PAGE 182 [DIRECT] ---

168 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Blessed One says about their number in the Glorious 
Compendium of Diamond Knowledge: A Great Tantra: 
"There are four thousand Action Tantras. There are 
eight thousand Practice Tantras. Their are four thousand 
Skill Tantras. There are six thousand Combined Tantras. 
There are twelve thousand Great Union Tantras. But if 
these are taken in their complete entirety, they are 
numberless." 10 
Bibliography ofTantras 
[1] The four thousand Action Tantras include such texts 
as: 
the All Dhiira~Jfs [Ot. 141], 
the Highest Wisdom [Ot. 402], 
the Excellent Dancer [Ot. 424], 
the True Power Maker [Ot. 431], 
the [Questions of] Subiihu [Ot. 428], 
the Great: Basic Tantra of Manjuiri [Ot. 162], 
the Secret Tantras of Maiijuirf[Toh. 544-52], 
the Diamond Crowners [Toh. 590-603], 
the Tantra of AmoghapiiSa [Ot. 365], 
and the Great Victory Tantras [Toh. 604-13]. [332b] 
[2] The Practice Tantra with its eight thousand texts has: 
the Perfect Enlightenment of Vairocana Tantra [Ot. 
126], 
and the Initiation ofVajrapii~Ji Tantra [Ot. 130]. 
[3] The four thousand texts in the Skill Tantra collection 
contain the Tantra of Tiirii's Arising [Ot. 390], the 
Royal Tantra Setting Forth the Triple Pledge [Ot. 134], 
and the Compen,dium of Skills. 
[4] 
Among the Combined Tantra in its six thousand text 
collection are the Illusion-like [Ot. 102] and the Lord 
of Lotus Dancers. 
[5] The Union Tantra contains innumerable texts such as: 
the Compendium ofThatness [Ot. 112], 
the Glorious Original [Aeon] [Ot. 119], 
the Conquest of the Triple World [Ot. 115], 
the Higher Union Conquest, 
and the Diamond Summit [Ot. 113].

--- PAGE 183 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 169 
[6] 
The Great Union Tantra in its twelve thousand 
collection contains such texts as the Glorious Union of 
the Secret [Ot. 81] and its Explanatory Tantras [Toh. 
443-53], and 
the Beauty Mark of the Secret Moon [Ot. 111], 
the Black DestroyerofYama [Ot. 103], 
the Gloriolis Original [Aeon] [Ot. 119], 
the Assembly of All Gods, 
the Secret of All [Ot. 114], 
the Unfailing Discipline, 
the Compendium of Diamond Knowledge [Ot. 84], 
the Marvels ofVairocana [Ot. 126], 
the short Space-like [Buddha] [Ot. 31], 
the Tantra of Unique [Buddha's] Conquest [Ot. 87], 
and the Diamond-Crowners Tantras. 
In their entirety these texts are numberless. 
[7] The Supreme Union Tantra has fourteen thousand 
texts in its collection and includes the Glorious 
Cakrasainvara: the Hundred Thousand Verses of the 
Space-like Buddha [Ot. 30; 59], and the Diamond Imp 
[Ot. 18], 
the Four Diamond Seats [Ot. 68], 
the Great Illusion [Ot. 64], 
the Buddha-like Practice [Ot. 8], 
the Buddha Death's Head [Ot. 63], 
and the Five Hundred Thousand Verses on Hevajra 
[Ot. 10]. 
Taken in their entirety the texts would be endless. It is the 
vastness of each of these Tantra collections that makes the 
Vehicle of Mantra so extremely broad and unlimited. 
[333a] The Gurus say that all dharalJis without exception, 
such as the DharalJis Blazing From the Mouths of Ghosts 
and the Great Peacock-like DharalJis, are Tantras of the 
Action class. 
Initiations 
Permission 
In the line "IF ONE WANTS TO PRACTISE MANTRA AS

--- PAGE 184 [DIRECT] ---

170 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
PRESCRIBED", [Stanza 61], you may ask what is meant by the 
words "AS PRESCRIBED", and SO I say: 
THEN, TO GAIN THE PRECEPTOR-INITIATION, 
ONE MUST FIRST WIN A HOLY GURU 
BY GIVING HIM ATTENDANCE AND PRECIOUS THINGS 
AND BY OBEDIENCE TO HIS WORD. (Stanza 62] 
That is, if you desire to practise the Mantra Vehicle in the 
Action Tantras and the rest, I indicate by my mention of 
"PRECEPTOR-INITIATION" that you !I1USt look not merely to 
your resolution and actually making progress [toward 
Enlightenment], but you must also receive the Flask 
Initiation [that is essential to the Preceptor-Initiation 
ritual], 11 because otherwise you would be taking Mantra by 
yourself. That is why the Tantras say: 
And again: 
"Without [first] winning a Preceptor and 
Without [first] acquiring the Initiations, 
Even to begin the study [ofTantra] 
Would be ineffectiveness itself." 
"Without even the Permission' 2 for Initiation 
Is to take Mantra by oneself." 
Taking Mantra by oneself means to perform the dhiiralJf 
rituals while still relying on methods of the Perfection Path 
in the Mahayana siitra sense- without even [so much as] 
the Permission of a Guru for entering the Mal)qala 13 and for 
Initiation. It is taking Mantra by oneself when one listens to 
and cultivates visualisations 14 such as venerable Tara's, or 
practises Muttering [of mantras] or Fire-offering or Food-
offering's or the Mal)qala and the like- [without a Guru's 
Permission]. [333b] The Permission to enter the Mal)qala 
and to receive Initiation is granted [explicitly] by the 
Preceptor's saying, "Your god is this one. This is the 
muttering you must do." 16 Hence the Tantras say:

--- PAGE 185 [DIRECT] ---

"This taking Mantra by oneself 
Leads only to destiny in Hell; 
Even the Mantra is not effective, 
And the body is only wasted in afflictions." 
TANTRA 
171 
These are the things I meant by my words" AS PRESCRIBED", 
and all the Tantras, all the Acaryas of old, and every single 
Guru today say that the prescription is explicit. If someone 
says that certain persons, because of the dreams and omens 
of mundane and supramundane deities they have, are 
persons who practised Mantra in previous lives [and 
therefore need no Permission], then let a method [for 
determining] their achievement be applied - [presuming) 
they had pleased a Guru and were given his blessing and re-
ceived his Permission to "practise in this certain manner". 
The method to be used can be that of the Setting Forth the 
Triple Pledge and Palace of the Great J ewe! and Glory of the 
Blessed One, Vaiqurya, Teacher ofHealing: if by these 
methods they have cleansed themselves of sin and built up 
their equipment [of merit and knowledge], and then 
auspicious signs occur, these persons [indeed] had 
permission to enter Mantrayana; but they are not thereby 
[necessarily] persons who [actually] practised it in previous 
lives. Moreover, their Permission to teach Mantra, or to 
hear, study and practise it, was not given merely because 
they had taken the Three Refuges and had the resolution 
for Enlightenment and made progress toward it. The Paths 
on which one progresses are each different, and the 
[methods of] liberation of the particular Vehicles should 
not be mixed up. [334a] The Blessed One preached the 
various paths of the Vehicles because He knew the 
capability of persons, their potential and disposition. And 
that is why I wrote the way I did in the root text: 
IF ONE WANTS TO PRACTISE MANTRA ... 
THEN TO GAIN THE PRECEPTOR-INITIATION .. 
That is, if you wish to enter and practise in the Vehicle of 
the Perfections, then you must school yourself in the Three 
Kinds of Trai,ning I explained earlier. 17 But if you wish to

--- PAGE 186 [DIRECT] ---

172 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
practise Mantra and perform visualisations like venerable 
Tara's, then you must request the Flask Initiation [that is 
essential to) the "PRECEPTOR-INITIATION". That is the 
meaning of my stanza. 
Winning a Guru 
Now then, if you ask whether this can be done when you 
have no worldly goods or lofty presents for the initiating 
Guru, the words "BY GIVING ATTENDANCE AND PRECIOUS 
THINGS" indicate it cannot. But then, what should those who 
are poor and bereft of worldly goods do? They should give 
"OBEDIENCE TO HIS WORD". For even men of means must 
[still] offer their own bodies over and above the Seven 
Precious Things of Royalty. For example, King Devapala, 
after 
offering 
his 
entire 
kingdom 
to 
Acarya 
Buddhajnanapada, offered his queen and himself also. 18 
And later he enticed him, as it were, with gold equal [in 
weight] to b<;>th himself and the queen. The poor must 
make do with repeated offerings of obedience and bodily 
attendance, of mandalas and flowers, and in this manner 
they "MUST FIRST wiN A HOLY GURU". 
When the Guru has been pleased and won, and Initiation 
has been acquired, and you are freed from all sin of body 
[speech, and mind], you will be worthy of achieving all 
mundane and supramundane Powers, by reason of being 
cleansed of sin (Stanza 63]. 
Misunderstanding of Tantra 
Having taught that in keeping the Vehicle of Mantra one is 
effortlessly and swiftly, directly and perfectly Enlightened, 
and having shown that it is a means that perfects the good of 
others, I now give [a stanza] to refute two misconceptions 
about the Mantra Vehicle: [334b] 
THE SECRET AND INSIGHT INITIATIONS 
SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN BY RELIGIOUS CELIBATES, 
BECAUSE IT IS EMPHATICALLY FORBIDDEN 
IN THE GREATTANTRA OF PRIMAL BUDDHA. 19 (Stanza 64]

--- PAGE 187 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 173 
The misunderstandings of Mantra here are of two 
[extremes]: either making exaggerations about it, or 
defaming it. The former we should put an end to; in the 
latter case, we should defend it. 
Exaggeration 
Now in this matter there are some who still do not under-
stand the intent of the endless great Tantras of Mantra, and 
because they trust in even holy Gurus who have not grasped 
it [either] or in sinful Spiritual Friends, they rely on their 
interpretations without really having learned the true 
nature of Mantra. "We are Mantrists!" they claim. "We are 
doing all the practices with great exactness, and we will all 
swiftly achieve even the Powers of the Great Seal!" 20 But 
those who continue in this bragging are heading for evil 
destinies. They heap contempt on the word of the 
Tathagata, and, by their defiling religious celibacy, they 
cause the Teaching of the Buddha to decline. They exercise 
their Harsh Destruction [Powers to harm others], and, by 
their keeping women, Expulsion offences are committed. 21 
Here is what glorious Jiianakirti said about them: 
"They proclaim ever more loudly, 'We have permission 
for this yoga from the Blessed One!', and further, they 
even perform all the practices with exactness, but [alas], 
they are heading for evil destinies." 22 
And my Guru, the monk Pai:q.cJ.apatika Avadhutipa: 
"If th.ose two Initiations [the "Secret", and "Insight"] 
are taken, the Preceptor together with the disciple are 
both going to evil destinies. " 23 [335a] 
The Blessed One says in the Great Tantra Elucidating 
Meaning: 
"Those who are in Yoga without guidance, 
Are practising [elephant-taming] without the goad; 
They say, 'I am a Yogin!' [but] 
They are treating the Teaching with deceit.

--- PAGE 188 [DIRECT] ---

174 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
They perform [rituals] even for livelihood 
With their practice of mantras and the Seal; 
And [to avenge] even only tiny offences, 
They use the Harsh Destruction [Powers]. 
From their knowledge of one certain visualisation 
They will explain the whole great Tantra; 
And whenever some profit may be got, 
They will teach the Holy Doctrine."24 
And He speaks on at length in that vein. The glorious 
Padmavajra likewise has much to say about the penalties 
for that k1nd of behaviour: 
"Their practices, and they themselves 
Are all full of sinful activity; 
They keep to a Path that is unholy, 
And are hurrying to their hells. " 25 
There are indeed many more sources, but my text would 
1Jecome too long. [In short], we must put an end to such 
[exaggerations] in a compassionate way. 
Defamation 
Then, in this matter [of defaming Mantra], there are some 
who say, "Why bother with the Mantra Vehicle when no 
one knows how the great method of Mantra works? Why 
not simply make progress in the clear Vehicles of the 
Perfections, and of the Hearers and Solitary Buddhas? If 
Expulsion offences against religious celibacy and against 
the taking of life come from [the Mantrist's] use of women 
and the Harsh Destruction [Powers], then that [Vehicle] 
should not be entered." 
But in so saying these persons are defaming [Mantra] 
without knowing its [true] intent. It is wide and deep, a 
sphere of action for those of keen powers, and the [very] 
heart of the Buddha's teaching. And he who condemns it as 
a field of activity for those who have the capacity, dis-
position, and development for it is going to hell- have no 
doubt about it - because he is belittling the word of the 
Tathagata and rejecting His profound Doctrine. Here is 
what the holy Finely Woven Sutra says about the [karmic] 
maturation of an act of rejecting the Doctrine: [335b]

--- PAGE 189 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 175 
"If anyone says, 'Some of the Doctrine is good; some of 
it is bad', he is rejecting the Doctrine." 26 
And that is because he does not see the Doctrine [rightly]. 
As the Guru-Monk Pai~qapatika says: 
"Therefore, do not scorn the Mantra Vehicle 
By saying it is the talk of the Evil One. 
As well reject all Vehicles [then] too! 
Indeed, in keeping this one, the Great Seal is got!" 27 
And so, against such [defamers], we must uphold [Mantra] 
in a compassionate way. 
Defaming is twofold: defaming the Doctrine and 
defaming persons. The Doctrine should not .be defamed, as 
these words from the Questions of Kiisyapa say: 
"When one enters into the doctrine taught by the 
Tathagatas, and his mind does not understand all the 
profundities of it concerning the limitlessness of Buddha-
enlightenment and the variety of preferences among 
creatures, and he says, 'Although I do not understand 
this, the Tathagata himself does; He perceives it 
directly', [then he does not reject or defame the 
Doctrine]. " 28 
Study that Siitra itself, for it is a point I have seen made in 
all the Siitras and Tantras. And as to not defaming persons 
either, [the Blessed One says] in both the Exhortation to 
Higher Intention and the Instruction on Non-production of 
All Phenomena: [336a] 
"For one person- except myself or someone [enlight-
ened] like me- to judge the measure of [another] person 
is harmful. " 29 
And the evil of [such judgement] is frequently seen in the 
Siitras.

--- PAGE 190 [DIRECT] ---

176 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Prohibited Initiations 
(THE SECRET AND INSIGHT INITIATIONS 
SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN BY RELIGIOUS CELIBATES, 
BECAUSE IT IS EMPHATICALLY FORBIDDEN] 
IN THE GREATTANTRA OF PRIMAL BUDDHA. (Stanza 64] 
(IF THOSE INITIATIONS WERE TAKEN BY ONE WHO STAYS 
IN THE AUSTERITY OF A RELIGIOUS CELIBATE, 
IT WOULD VIOLATE HIS VOW OF AUSTERITY 
SINCE HE WOULD BE PRACTISING WHAT IS FORBIDDEN. (65] 
TRANSGRESSIONS WOULD OCCUR WHICH DEFEAT 
THE MAN OF RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE; 
AND BY HIS CERTAIN FALL TO BAD DESTINIES, 
HE COULD NOT EVEN SUCCEED (IN MANTRA PRACTICE]] (66] 
The meaning in these twelve lines I have based on the 
instruction of Suvarr:tadvipa and the monk who was my 
[Mantra] Guru, Pair:tqapatika. 
Laymen and Religious 
In his Initiation Set Forth, this Guru says: 
"In this matter, there are two kinds of Initiations: those 
based on the lay state, and those based on the celibate 
religious state. Which are based on the lay state? All the 
Initiations spoken of in all the many Tantras. And which 
are based on the celibate religious state? All of the same 
Initiations, except for the Secret and Insight-Knowledge 
ones. And why are these two excluded? In this way: all 
the many virtues that have come about in consequence of 
the Buddha's Doctrine have happened because His 
teaching has continued. But the continuation of His 
teaching depends solely on the celibate religious life; 
and these two Initiations [are excluded] because they 
envision states which are not in harmony with religious 
celibacy. Consequently, these two Initiations cause 
religious celibacy to perish, and when religious celibacy 
perishes the teaching of the Buddha will decline. Because 
of its decline, there would be an end to the gaining of 
merit. And hence, because of the immeasurable loss of 
virtue that would come from such a state of affairs, these 
two [Initiations] are excluded for the religious celibate." 30

--- PAGE 191 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 
177 
Religious Celibate 
Permitted Initiations 
If that is the case, you may say, it is not right for religious 
celibates to engage in Mantra. But to that I say: 
HAVING ACQUIRED THE PRECEPTOR-INITIATION, 
HE MAY LISTEN TO ALL TANTRAS AND EXPLAIN THEM; (336b) 
PERFORM FIRE-OFFERING, GIFT-WORSHIP AND THE LIKE: 31 
(THERE IS NO WRONG IN WISDOM ABOUT REALITY.) (Stanza 67) 
If a celibate Mantrist wants to listen to the Tantras, to study 
and explain them to others, to perform Fire-offering and 
Gift-offering and [mantra-] muttering, then every Tantra 
and every ritual for the Mal).qalas clearly says that it is all 
right, [provided he has] the Flask initiation of the 
"Preceptor-Initiation". The Guru-Monk Pail).qapatika 
A vadhutipa says this also: 
"If that is so, you may say, then religious celibates 
[who practise Mantra], although Mahayanists, are being 
untrue to Mahayana. [But I say,] that would assuredly be 
treating this matter mistakenly. Whoever has obtained 
an Acarya and his Permission and the Flask - because of 
his [very] Initiation to practise those Tantras, to hear, 
study, and explain them- is [entirely] true to Mahayana. 
But then, you may say, if that is so, there is no need of the 
Secret and Insight Initiations even for laymen. [And I 
say, yes,] it is unnecessary and they are dissuaded from 
it. "32 
And then he continues at length on that subject. 
Wisdom of Thatness 
THERE IS NO WRONG IN WISDOM ABOUT REALITY. 33 (Stanza 67) 
My Gurus have given much specific instruction to me in 
this matter, and this is what some of these holy men say: 
[a] "If a bodhisattva in his compassion knows the good of 
creatures and is governed by compassion in all that he 
does, then wrong does not exist in his Tantra, and in

--- PAGE 192 [DIRECT] ---

178 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
consequence of it, his merit will even greatly 
increase." 
This. interpretation means he has reached the weak 
[degree] ofPatience.34 
[b] 
According to other holy men, there could never be 
wrong [coming] from a yogin who knows all 
phenomena to be illusion and is wise in the reality [of 
Emptiness]: 
"Any yogin who knows [that all phenomena] [337a] 
Are like unto the water-reflected moon, 
Will never be clothed in such things 
As sin and merit. 
All his inner and outer states 
Are [of the] mind and illusion-like to him: 
He conceptualises no longer [the Proofs of] 
Non-permanence and Non-destruction 
And of them both taken together; 
Untouched by the poison of entity-grasping, 
Who has seen his like? Wrong does not exist 
In his wisdom [of all] as illusion." 
[This interpretation] means that wrong does not exist 
for one who has reached the weak [degree of] Highest 
Mundane Phenomena. 35 
[c] 
As to there being no wrong [according to] the Guru-
Monk, Paii).qapatika, you must study that same 
[previously quoted] text which was made from his 
lectures. In his interpretation, wrong does not exist 
even for one who is at the very start of the Beginner's 
Level. 36 
[ d] 
Still other holy men say: 
"There will be no wrong [in practising Mantra] 
according to methods in such texts as the Questions 
of KiiSyapa Sutra, the Injunctions on Dealing with 
Women Sutra, the Glorious Original [Aeon] 
Tantra, the Unfailing Discipline and other Tantras 
in that section, and in [the works of ]Arya Nagarjuna 
and Acarya Aryadeva. This means there is no 
wrong for one who knows the Thatness [of 
Emptiness], if he has reached the weak [degree of] 
Summits. " 37

--- PAGE 193 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 
179 
[ e] 
Others again: 
"Wrong does not exist for him who has the 
Enlightenment Thought in the ultimate sense [of] 
the non-arising of all phenomena, and it is growing 
in his [conscious] stream; for there can be no wrong 
when one knows the Thatness of phenomena." 
This [interpretation] means there will be no wrong for 
those [who are on the Path of] Vision of the Truths. 38 
Consequently, the yogin who is following the Paths 
must learn both what is and what is not wrong (for 
him]. 39 
Concluding Verses 
[1) That wish-granting jewel, the Apparition Body. 
Has passed away, and no longer are there 
Great scholars like Arya Nagarjuna and the rest; 
And in these times of the approaching decline 
Of the Sage's holy Doctrine, many persons come forth [337b] 
With the erroneous conceptions of madmen. 
[2) They see the libraries of sutra and sastra, 
But are lost to the guidance of Guru-tradition; 
Like blind men, they embark 
On scripture's vast ocean of meaning. 
They do not know Mahayana's superior Path, and 
Their misunderstanding of it ought not be followed. 
[3) Without a Guru for their eyes, 
They have not seen and will not see 
The true arrangement of the Mahayana Path. 
[4) Like the ocean, Mahayana is deep, 
And, like the sky, it is very vast; 
Yet they preach as they please, without Guru, 
Satisfied they've seen the books of 
Siitra and sastra, but no reliance on Guru for them. 
[ 5) If they do not know even so much 
As the steps of the Mahayana plan, 
How do they view its deep and vast meaning? 
[6) 
A person whom a holy Guru has chosen 
Because of his right disposition for Mahayana-
Follow that wise one, whoever he be. 
[7) This is a time of great trepidation,

--- PAGE 194 [DIRECT] ---

180 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Now is the hour of the Teaching's decline, 
So ask in what country and which direction 
Lives that man of the good Gurus' tradition, 
Awed by his wise [teachers'] true comprehension-
And, when you find him, serve him for months or years, 
And in careful attendance you will win him. 
[8] 
Even if this person behaves very badly, 
In the manners he has of body and speech, 
Pay no attention [but instead] accept the holy Doctrine. 
As the bee, for example, in selecting a flower, 
Carries off the honey, leaving the flower behind; 
So a wise man too conducts himself like that, 
Listening to instruction, not looking at manners. 
[9] 
When the mind becomes skilled through his counsel, 
Then for the Enlightenment to be gained in this very life, 
Beg instruction in the Guru tradition [338a] 
On the mantra of Cakrasamvara40 and the like. 
If you do not learn the method of the Mantra texts, 
Excluding the two Initiations [of Secret and Insight], 
You are chained by much discursive thought, 
And Buddhahood will not be swiftly won. 
Again I say: 
[1] The lustre of the Sage's teaching now fades, 
And the Teacher's holy Doctrine is perishing. 
If outsiders and inferior men, and even 
The Buddha's own disciples are destroying it, 
Then who cannot destroy the Sage's teaching? 
[2] 
The destruction comes especially from religious: 
Some, in following the Mantra of the Tantras, 
Practise it falsely and teach others to stray; 
And others, not knowing the true meaning of 
The Perfection of Insight as it really is, 
Preach, "Eliminate the relative truths, 
Like cause and effect, and intrinsic nature is pure"!41 
[3] 
And some have given up everything in 
The training that Priitimolqa and Vinaya teach, 
Mingling with laymen in field and trade, 
Conducting business even in assembly hall. 
In the Descent into Lanka Sutra:

--- PAGE 195 [DIRECT] ---

"It will come about in the future (that] 
The wearing of the saffron robe and the 
Preaching that it does not matter, 
Will be the disgrace of my Teaching ... 
At the end of this Age of Strife, 
TANTRA 
181 
The world will not cultivate the HolyDoctrine. " 42 
And in the words of the great scholar Vasubandhu: 
[1] 
"The Teacher, the Eye of the world, is closed; 
And men of mastery are all but gone. [338b] 
His Teaching is confused in the misunderstanding 
Of men who practise as they please, not having seen 
Thatness. [2] The Self-arisen One has passed 
Excellently to Calm; they that held the Self-arisen 
Teaching dear are deprived of their Lord. Unleashed is 
Corruption, destroying virtue, sporting at will today. 
[3] 
And so this fair teaching of the Sage 
Emits, as it were, its dying gasp; and knowing 
It is the hour when impurities are in power, 
Those desiring liberation act with care."43 
Colophons 
[BENEDICTION] 
May the instruction on the Superior Person, set forth 
More fully here, endure as long as the Buddha's teaching; 
And possessed of the compassionate Enlightenment Thought, 
May you practise it with zeal by day and by night. 
(TRANSLATOR'S COLOPHON] 
This Commentary on "The Lamp for the Enlightenment 
Path" which ends here, was composed by Diparilkara-
srijfiana qf the royal family of Bengal, a great and learned 
monk of Sakya, who lives the Bodhisattva's life. 
[1] 
There lives a Bodhisattva who is like a holy Tree: 
Its seed of Conduct was sown in the soil of Faith; 
Its sprout of Love dewed by the water of Concentration; 
Its root is Compassion; Enlightenment Thought itstrunk; 
Its boughs are the Perfections, leaves the Attractions;

--- PAGE 196 [DIRECT] ---

182 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
It flowers with the Seven Riches, 
Bears the fruit of the Six Mindfulnesses, 
And is filled with the Ten Virtues' fragrance; 
Birds of distiples are its [friendly] flock. 
[2] 
Dipamkarasrfpada is he, born of Bengal, 
Envoy of the Buddha's race in our present day, 
Born like a Sun in the midst of men, 
In fame renowned, wise in true religion, 
By his vows well bound, and a scholar of ability, 
Worthy to be Guru to those of rank. 
[3] 
Cherished like an only child by the Buddhas, 
With a mind and high intention like gold and crescent moon, 
He is a teacher attuned to the thoughts and ways [339a] 
Of those who stray from the explanation of Doctrine. 
He would never think to avoid these persons 
Who have no faith, as though they were poison; 
But simply rejecting their bad ways, his own unharmed, 
His friendly strength is instantly ready. 
[4] 
Born in cultured country because of good karma, 
Born of royal family, a good rebirth; 
Born of Mahayana Family, the good tradition; 
Born a Buddha's Son by his good resolve. 
[5] 
Such is this Guru Bodhisattva, 
Diparilkarasnjfiana, the Compassionate One; 
And th~ disciple who aspires [to be] his "Superior Person" 
Is this Sakya monk, Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba. 
[6] 
And he says, having given his own careful 
Service with reverence and faith, that [this text] 
Is the essence of [Attsa's] solemn oath: "This is the 
Heart of hearts of the Royal Union Tantra: Cakrasamvara; 
As well of the 84,000 collections of Doctrine; 
Cultivate in the mind all your days and nights." 
[7] 
There has never been another Tibetan disciple 
Besides myself alone, Nag-tsho, to whom he granted 
So unstintingly of his personal instruction. 
With faith and devotion, I will always pay homage 
To that Guru, with my body and speech and mind. 
Translated and corrected by the $feat Indian scholar and 
Bodhisattva Guru, the Bengali Sri-dipainkarajiianapada, 
and the monk-translator, Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba. 
[Sde-dge version ends here].

--- PAGE 197 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 
183 
(SECOND BENEDICTION) 
In fame renowned, versed in the best religious tradition, 
Like the Sun, labouring only for others' good; 
Such is this holy and Venerable One 
Who reformed Mnga'-ris' three regions in Holy Doctrine. 
When Byang-chub-'od and Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba 
With sincere mind and heart begged a Commentary [339b] 
On the Lamp for the Path, this is what he composed, 
With wisdom and love as the heart of the matter. 
"Do not show it to all," he said; "class it as secret. " 44 
Since he wrote this for virtue's sake, 
May I and all others understand the entire meaning 
Of this text exactly, and swiftly attain the rank 
Of the Omniscient King, and may the measureless 
Good of creatures be marvellously achieved! 
Notes to Chapter 7 
Ot. 4530, Vol. 81:115.2. Tripi~akamala was quoted at the end of the pre-
ceding chapter, concluding the explanation of the Perfection Vehicle; hence 
the statement "And again. 
".The "one and only Goal" which both the 
Perfection Vehicle and the Mantra Vehicle have in common is the resulting 
Enlightenment. The Goal must be kept "unobscured" (ma-rmongs/ 
asaf!1mllqha); that is, the Mantra Vehicle must be as carefully and correctly 
followed in its proper order and details as the Vehicle of the Perfections and 
its paths. 
2 The Enlightenment Thought in its ultimate sense (as opposed to its relative 
sense) refers again to the cultivation of Emptiness. Madhyamika teaching on 
Emptiness is the basis ofMantrayana. See Chapter 6, note 13. 
3 
bskyed-pa'i rim-pa/utpatti·krama: Generation Stage. Two stages are 
referred to in the practice of the highest class ofTantra, the Supreme Union: 
1) 
Generation Stage, 
2) 
Completion Stage (rdzogs-pa'i rim-pa/saf!lpanna·krama). 
The first refers to preparatory study, initiations, and practices in the lower 
classes ofTantra as well as of Supreme Union Tantra itself; the second is the 
ultimate initiation and experience in Supreme Union. See A. Wayman, 
FBT, Chapter 9; and TBT, pp. 47-8. 
4 gzungs/dhiirarJf: the actual syllables and sounds of a mantra, often with 
no meaning outside of their applied symbolism. The word mantra is 
more generic; dhiirarJfs are the specific mantras of particular deities 
and Vajrasattvas as found in their particular Tantras. 
5 
bzlas,-brjod/jiipa: muttering, or whispering. 
6 
Atisa mentions eight kinds of rites, but lists only the four more commonly 
known ones: 
1) Appeasement (zhi-ba/siintikam); 
2) 
Prosperity (rgyas-pa/pawftikam);

--- PAGE 198 [DIRECT] ---

184 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
3) Domination (dbang-dubyed-pa/vasf-kararJam); 
4) 
Destruction (mngon-spyod =drag-shu/ spyod-pa/iibhiciirikam). 
7 There are various listings of the Eight Great Powers (dngos-grub/siddhi) in 
both Brahmanic and Buddhist tantric practice. See Yogasutra, III:46ff., for 
an example of the former. Wayman (FBT, p. 220, n. 13) has equivalated the 
Tibetan and Sanskrit terms for most of the powers in Atisa's list: 
I) 
Good Flask (bum-pa bzang-po!gola-bhadra); 
2) Fleetness of Foot (rkang mgyogs/piidalepa); 
3) Sword (ral-gri!khaqga); 
4) Commander (mngag-gzhug/pre~aka); 
5) 
Underworld (sa-'og/piitiila-siddhi); 
6) 
Invisibility (mi-snang-ba/antardhiina); 
7) Wishing-Tree (dpag-bsam gyi shing = kalpa vrksa); 
8) Royalty (rgyal-srid/riijya). 
8 See Glossary for the Four Bases of Miraculous Powers. 
9 
A lisa's division ofTantras into seven classes differs from the division of four 
classes established by Bu-ston for the arrangement of the Tantra in Kanjur. 
Bu-ston's Rgyud-sde spyi'i rnam-par-bzhag rgyud-sde rin-po-che'i mdzes-
rgyan [Ot. I, Vol. 1] is the opening treatise of the entire Tibetan canon, 
listing the Tantras in order, beginning with the highest, and their individual 
sub-groupings according to Tantric "Family" (rigs/kula) with its Progenitor 
(gtso-bo/kulesa) and progeny (rigs-can). The four_ classes of Tantra of Bu-
ston have been described by Wayman [TBT, p. 33] in this way: 
1) 
Supreme Union (rnal-'byor b/a-na-med/anuttara): for those who delight 
in inner concentration completely; 
2) 
Union (rnal-'byor/yoga): for those who delight predominantly in inner 
concentration over external ritual; 
3) 
Practice (spyod/caryii): for those who delight equally in external ritual 
and inner concentration; 
4) 
Action (bya-ba/kriyii): for those who delight mainly in external ritual 
over inner concentration. 
As will be seen from Atisa's following quotation, still another division of five 
classes ofT antra exists. Judging from the titles which Atisa later presents for 
bibliography of his seven classes, it becomes apparent that his division is 
simply a more detailed listing and designation of the same groupings which 
Bu-ston has under only four classes. For example, Bu-ston's Supreme Union 
class contains two important divisions of Mother Tantras (stressi'ng Wisdom 
and Insight) and Father Tantras (stressing Means). Atisa's Supreme Union 
corresponds to Bu-ston's Mother Tantra; his Great Union, to the Father 
Tantra. 
10 
Ot. 84, Vol. 3:253.3. 
11 
slob-dpon dbang-bskur/iiciirya-abhiSeka. The full title of this Initiation in the 
Union and Supreme Union Tantra class is "Vajra-Preceptor" (rdo-rje slob-
dpon/vajra-iiciirya). In this section of the Commentary, I translate iiciirya 
with the English "Preceptor" to distinguish this office and Initiation from the 
connotations of Acarya seen in the Path of the Perfections and in the 
Pratimok~a sense. See Chart II, and Wayman, FBT, pp. 311-17. 
12 
rjes-gnang/anujnii. 
· 
13 
marJ4ala. A symbolic representation of a deity's realm of existence, 
generally a geometric design showing all aspects of the universe. "Entering 
the mal)<;lala" is the meditational construction of this representation within

--- PAGE 199 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 
185 
oneself, seeing and experiencing the Emptiness of the universe. Such 
meditation is both part of Sevenfold Worship (see Glossary) and of Tantric 
Initiation. 
14 sgrub-thabs/siidhana: the formal yogic meditation procedure of exercise of 
evoking a deity within oneself or in front of oneself. Hundreds of such 
siidhanas are found in the Tantra section of the Tanjur; for example, Atlsa's 
own Tiirii-bha(!iirikii-siidhana [Ot. 4508] for his own patroness, whom he 
mentions here. 
15 
sbyin-sreg/homa: fire-offering. 
gtor-ma/bali: food-offering. 
16 The devotee must be assigned a deity and the mantra appropriate to its 
service; for example, Tara (the "Saviouress") and her mantra: Om ta-re 
tuttiire tu-re svii-hii. 
17 
See root stanza 32 and its commentary. 
18 
For the account of this Acarya and the king. see the sources from Taranatha 
and 'Gos lo-tsa-va given by A. Chattopadhyaya. Atisa and Tibet, pp. 47ff. 
Substantially they are in agreement with Atfsa's statements here. 
19 
Adi-buddha-mahii-tantra = Kiilacakra-tantra [Ot. 4, Vol. 1]. This Tantra is 
classified by Bu-ston as "Neither Father nor Mother" tantra of the Supreme 
Union class. and strangely is omitted from Ansa's bibliography in this 
chapter of the Commentary. 
Stanza 64 states the two of the Initiations which are parts of the Preceptor-
Initiation (see Chart II) are forbidden to religious celibates - the "Secret 
Initiation" (gsang-ba!guhya) and the "Insight Initiation" (shes-rab/prajiia). 
These two Initiations involve contemplative yogic practices with a female 
partner called the "Wisdom" (rig/vidya) or sometimes the "Seal" (phyag-
rgya/mudrii); the basic symbolism being that of the union of Emptiness 
(female = mother) and Means (male = father), but, in the terminology of 
Tantra, the union of Emptiness and Bliss. The symbolism ofthe sexual union 
is very complex and profound in Tantra, and the interpretation of Tant(ic 
practice allows for both the contemplation of the sexual embrace with the 
mudrii/vidyii mentally, and contemplation of it with an actual or "concrete" 
partner. (See Chart II, under "Seal".) It is the latter type that is involved in 
the Secret and Insight Initiations of the Preceptor-Initiation, and which is 
forbidden to religious celibates by the Kalacakra itself, by the very nature of 
the Pratimok~ vows and the chastity it implies. Because of the abuse of 
Tantra in Tibet at the time, and its literal and unguided practice, Ansa's view 
(as he validates from his teachers) is that the two Initiations are dangerous, 
not to say forbidden, to laymen as well. 
Because the language ofTantric literature is correctly known only to those 
who have been initiated and carefully guided by a Guru, the Sde-gzhung 
Rin-po-che has kindly pointed out to me the passages in the Kiilacakra 
(Great Tantra of Primal Buddha) where the prohibitions mentioned by Atlsa 
are found. Both places occur in Chapter 5 (ye-shes/jiiiina) of the famous 
scripture [Ot. 4, Vol. 1), the first in indirect language which indicates that 
physical continence must be preserved [p. 166.4ff], and the second [p. 
168.4f] where it states that those yogins who are observing the vows [of 
religious celibacy] must at all times avoid the practices involved in the yogic 
union with a woman in the Insight-Wisdom Initiations. 
20 
phyag-rgya chen-po/mahii-mudra: Great Seal. The pledge (dam-tshig/ 
samaya) of the Great Seal is part of the Preceptor-Initiation. See Chart II, 
and Wayman, FBT, pp. 225-39. 
21 
For Expulsion offences, se~ Chapter 3, note 4.

--- PAGE 200 [DIRECT] ---

186 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
22 The quote is possibly from Jiliinaklrti's general commentary on Tantra 
classes and the Vehicles at the end of the Tanjur Tantra section: Tattva-
avatiira-sakala-vacas-vyiikhya-pra-kar!Ja [Ot. 4532]. 
23 
ya-ba-'di-pa. According to sources in A. Chattopadhyaya, op.cit., p. 74, 
Pai!)<;lapatika = Avadhiitipa = Advayavajra = Maitripa. For a brief history 
of this early Tantric teacher of Atisa, see Blue Annals (Roerich), II, p. 732. 
24 
Ot. 83, Vol. 3: 233.3f. 
25 
For identification of this author, see A. Warder, Indian Buddhism, pp. 485f. 
26 
Ot. 893, Vol. 35:121.5 
27 
Unidentified. 
28 
Ot. 760(43), Vol. 24:189.3 
29 Ot. 760(25) and Ot. 847. The same quotation occurs in SS: 102. 
30 Ot. 3097, Vol. 68. What is given as an actual quotation from this short text by 
Pairy<;Japatika ( = Maitripa) is Atisa's own synopsis of it, interpreting the 
meaning of his Guru. 
31 
Atisa's "Thirteen Mantras" are good examples. of the types of ritual 
suggested here: [Ot. 4856-68] 
I) 
Mantriirtha-avatiira (sngags-kyi don 'jug-pa), 
2) Seka-upadesa (dbang-gi man-ngag), 
3) 
Samaya-gupti (dam-tshig sbas-pa), 
4) Saudha-diina (gzhal-yas-khang sbyin-pa), 
5) 
Peyot~epa-vidhi (chu-gtor-gyi cho-ga), 
6) 
Homa-vidhi (sbyin-sreg-gi cho-ga), · 
7) 
Deva-pujii-krama (lha-mchod-pa'i rim-pa), 
8) Ayul].-siidhana (tshe bsgrub-pa'i thabs), 
9) 
Mrtyu-vancana ('chi-ba slu-ba), 
10) 
Mumursu-~'iistra ('chi-ka-ma'i bstan-bcos), 
11) 
Sma-homa (ro bsreg-pa), 
12) 
Sapta-parva-vidhi (bdun-tshigs-kyi cho-ga), 
13) 
Citii-vidhi (tsha-tsha'i cho-ga). 
32 
Ot. 3097, Vol. 68. See note 30 above. The quotation is again Atisa's para-
phrasing of his Guru's instruction. 
33 
{de nyid rig Ia nyes pa med/. The line is open to interpretation because of the 
word rig ( = vidyii), which can also refer to the female partner of the Secret 
and Insight Initiations, as well as the meaning I have translated here, viz. 
"wisdom". 
3.4 
See Chart I and Glossary: Aids to Conviction. 
35 
See Chart I and Glossary: Aids to Conviction. 
36 Sec Chart I. 
37 See Chart I and Glossary: Aids to Conviction. 
38 See Chart I. 
39 The importance of learning what is and what is not wrong in practice is 
stressed in all Paths and Vehicles, from the Hearer's knowledge of his 
Pratimoksa rules to the Bodhisattva's "Pratimoksa" for his Conduct, and 
now for the Mantrayana as well. See Wayman, FiT, pp. 328-9. 
40 This is the same Supreme Union Tantra mentioned in the bibliography given 
earlier in the chapter. The Vajrasattva to whom it is dedicated is also the 
being to whom Atisa paid obeisance at the opening of the Commentary. 
41 
The very concise statement means that it is a false understanding of the 
Perfection of Insight to think that mere analysis of entities (such as cause and 
effect) for their emptiness of intrinsic nature is complete on the level of 
relative or everyday knowledge. The Insight must penetrate to the level of 
Ultimate Truth as well, seeing the emptiness of Emptiness.

--- PAGE 201 [DIRECT] ---

TANTRA 187 
42 Ot. 775, Vol. 29:77.1 and 84.1. 
43 
Explanation of the ''Treasure of Phenomenology", Ot. 5591, Vol. 115:277.4. 
44 I kun lama bstan bar gsang bar rigs so gsungs/. The meaning of "secret" here 
must be taken in the sense that his text should be taught only to those who are 
fit and sincere.

--- PAGE 202 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 203 [DIRECT] ---

Appendices

--- PAGE 204 [DIRECT] ---

Chart I The Five Paths 
v 
ADEPT PATH 
BUDDHA LEVEL ti 
1 Truth-body 
[Time of] 
:::::> 
2 Enjoyment-body 
(/) 
u.l 
3 Apparition-body 
~ 
(/) 
~ IV CONTEMPLATION PATH 
BODHISA TTY A 
<( 
[Gradual elimination of 
LEVELS 
(:l.. 
w 
Obscurations; growth in the 
10 Dharma Cloud 
z 
Perfections in Desire Realm; 
9TrueMind 
<( 
Insight through Eight 
8 Unshakeable 
Cl z 
Contemplative States in 
7 Far-Reaching 
;:l 
Form and Formless Realms.] 
6 Face to Face 
::;; 
<( 
5 Invincible 
~ 
4 Flaming 
(/) 
(:l.. 
3Luminous 
~ 
;:l 
(/) 
2 Stainless 
(:l.. 
u.. 
0 
III VISION PATH 
1 Joyous 
u.l 
[Patience and Knowledge of Four 
::;; 
...... 
Truths in all Three Realms] 
E-< 
II . PRACTICE PATH: 
DEVOUTNESS 
4 Highest Mundane Dharmas 
LEVEL 
(/) 
3 Patience 
~ 
2Summits 
<( 
1 Warmth 
(:l.. 
w 
z 
<( 
I 
EQUIPMENT PATH: 
BEGINNER 
Cl z 
5 Insight 
LEVEL 
u.l 
;:l 
(/) 
::;; 
4 Concentration 
[Begetting the 
;:l 
3 Mindfulness 
Thought] 
<( 
2Zeal 
u 
1 Faith

--- PAGE 205 [DIRECT] ---

Chart II Initiations in the Four Tantras 
[Permission of the Guru and Entrance to Ma~<;Jala must precede.] 
ACTION 
[1] Garland 
[phreng] 
[2] Water 
[chu] 
[3] Diadem 
[cod-pan] 
FIVE [2-6] 
WISDOM 
INITIATIONS 
[rig-pa'i dbang] 
I 
PRACTICE 
[4] Vajra 
[rdo-rje] 
[5] Bell 
[dril-bu] 
[6] Name 
[ming] 
UNION 
SUPREME UNION 
[7] PRECEPTOR-INITIATION* 
[s/ob-dpon dbang-bskur] 
\... ----------- -----
[After Five Wisdom Initiations]: 
* Referred to in Stanzas 62-66. 
Three Pledges: 
(dam-tshig) 
1 Vajra 
2 Bell 
3 Seal 
.I\ 
Mental 
Concrete 
Insight 
Insight 
[a] FLASK 
[bum-pa] 
[b] SECRET* 
[gsang-ba] 
[c] INSIGHT* 
[shes-rab] 
[d] SYLLABLE 
[~higs]

--- PAGE 206 [DIRECT] ---

Glossary 
Acarya (slob-dpon). Sanskrit title forformal teachers and great authors. 
Affiictions (nyon-mongs/klesa). That aspect of human activity which 
induces and produces karmic consequences. One of the two sources of 
obscuration (q.v.) or obstacles to Enlightenment. Often taken as 
three fetters or poisons: attraction, revulsion, and illusion. Also listed 
as ten: 1) desire, 2) aversion, 3) pride, 4) ignorance, 5) doubt, 6) view 
that holds a real person, 7) view that holds extremes, 8) false views, 9) 
holding one's own views as best, 10) holding one's own conduct and 
vowed life as best. 
Aggregates (phung-bo/skandha). The five groups of phenomena that 
make up the apparent "self': I) body or form, 2) feelings, 3) 
perceptions, 4) habits, 5) consciousness. 
· 
Aids to Conviction (nges-par byed-pa'i cha dang mthun-pa/nirvedha-
. bhagiya). The four basic virtuous achievements of the Practice Path 
(see Chart I), each in its degrees of weak-medium-strong: 1) Warmth: 
so called from the great fire that has been kindled to burn up the 
afflictions. 2) Summits: so called because it is a higher achievement 
than just the basic virtues, and from it one ascends to higher states. 
3) Patience: devout perseverance in virtue as one approaches the Vision 
Path. 4) Highest Mundane Phenomena: so called because one 
experiences all phenomena of the world as essentially full of suffering, 
and on that account is ready for the Path of Vision and seeing the Four 
Truths in their entirety. 
Aids to Liberation (thar-pa'i cha dang mthun-pa/mok~a-bhagiya). The 
five basic virtues of the Equipment Path (see Chart I), necessary for 
the beginning of progress toward Enlightenment: 1) Faith, 2) Zeal, 
3) Mindfulness, 4) Concentration, 5) Insight. 
Apparition Body (sprul-sku/nirma~a-kaya). One of the Three Bodies of 
Buddha (q.v.). A miraculously created body which appears in the 
lower realms, like that of Gautama in the sixth century sc, and for 
Tibetans, like the Dalai Lama and other incarnate lamas who are 
reincarnations of Buddhas. 
Arhat (dgra-bcom-pa). One who has attained the highest level and goal 
of the Hinayana system, after passing through four stages of 
perfection: stream-entering, once-returning, never-returning, and 
arhatship. The Arhat has achieved nirva~a. but not Buddhahood, 
because he does not return out of compassion to teach others as the 
Mahayana bodhisattva does. 
Asailga (thogs-med). Third-century AD saint and author, reputed 
founder of the Mind-Only (cittamatra) school of Mahayana, inspired 
by Maitreya. ·Composer of the Levels of Yoga Practice, and numerous 
other important works which Atisa follows in his teaching on 
Calmness and the superknowledges.

--- PAGE 207 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 
193 
Bodhibhadra (byang-chug bzang-po). One of Atisa's early teachers at 
Nalanda university, whose Chapter on Concentration Equipment is 
used extensively in the Commentary. 
B~hisattva (byang-chub sems-dpa'). An "Enlightenment-being", used 
m the sense both of anyone pursuing the Mahayana paths to 
Enlightenment and of one who has already achieved Buddhahood but 
continues to return to teach others, referring as well to the eternal 
Buddhas who have always been so. 
Broad Practice (rgya-chen spyod/vistirna-carya). The common way of 
referring to the practice of the Perfections, motivated by compassion 
for others in the pursuit of one's own Enlightenment. 
Buddha-field ( sangs-rgyas kyi khams/buddha-k~tra ). Realm of existence 
of a Buddha. 
Byang-chub-'od (Bodhi-prabha). Royal prince of Mnga'-ris and 
ordained monk who invited Atisa to Tibet and became his disciple. 
Cakrasarilvara ('khor-lo sdom-pa/bde-mchog). N arne of an Enlightened 
Being around whom a group of Tantric texts and practices centre. 
Known as the Triple-Pledge King because of the special Tantric vows 
taken with initiation in his mandala. 
Calmness (zhi-gnas/samatha). Goal of yogic practice, always paired with 
Higher Vision, connoting perfect attainment of concentration. 
Celibate. See Pure Life. 
Cormilunity (dge-'dun/sangha). Originally denoting the monastic com-
munities; later embracing all who accept the Buddhist doctrine. 
Concentration ( ting-nge-'dzin/samadhi). The culmination of the steps of 
yogic exercises in achieving single-pointed focus of awareness beyond 
the senses and mental activity. 
Conceptual Thought (rnam-rtog/vikalpa). The ideation process of the 
mind, the forming of concepts and discursive thinking. 
Conduct (tshul-khrims/sila). Second of the Ten Perfections, involving 
the observance of vows, growth in virtuous actions, and seeking the 
good of others. 
Conscious Stream (rgyud/sariltana). Buddhist term for describing the 
individual so-called person, which ultimately is constituted in a 
flowing series of phenomena ( chos/dharma), and what in other systems 
would be called the soul or self (bdag/atman). 
Dependent 
Origination 
(rten-cing-'brel-bar 
'byung-ba/pratitya-
samutpada). The Buddha's twelvefold "chain of causality" explaining 
the factors involved in continued rebirth in sathsara, called 
"Dependent Origination" rather than "Causal Chain" because there 
can be no real or true cause-effect relation in a world in which there 
are no real substances (the doctrine of Non-Self). Hence, the twelve 
links of the chain are merely conditions under which the following link 
arises in dependence on the former endlessly. Only the cessation of 
the links of the ignorance-condition and thirst-condition can break the 
chain and make liberation possible. The twelve conditions or links are: 
1) ignorance, 2) impressions, 3) consciousness, 4) name-and-form, 
5) the six sense-organs, 6) contact of senses with objects, 7) feeling,

--- PAGE 208 [DIRECT] ---

194 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
8) thirst or desire, 9) grasping, 10) becoming, 11) birth, and 12) old age 
and death. 
In the tradition of the Middle Way school, Dependent Origination 
is used to show the relativity of all phenomena, and hence the proof of 
the emptiness of inherent existence in all things. 
Destinies ('gro-ba/gati). The six principal rebirths possible in sarhsara, 
depending on one's karma. Three good destinies: human, gods .• demi-
gods; three bad destinies: animals, hell-beings, hungry ghosts. 
Discipline ('dul-ba/vinaya). One of the Three Baskets of Buddhist 
scripture, containing the narratives of how the Buddha established the 
monastidife and rules. 
Discipline-Master ('dul-ba 'dzin-pa/vinaya-dhara). Scholar-monk who 
specialises in the study and interpretation of the monastic rule; also 
famous authors of commentaries on the Discipline. 
Doctrine (chos/dhanna). Second of the Three Jewels; the Buddhist 
teaching in general. 
Eightfold Path ('phags-pa'i lam yan-lag brgyad). Fourth of the Four 
Truths, the way to bring about the cessation of the origin of suffering: 
1) Right view, 2) Right thought, 3} Right speech, 4) Right conduct, 
5) Right livelihood, 6) Right effort, 7) Right mindfulness, and 8) Right 
concentration. 
Eight Great Powers (dngos-grub/siddhi). Magical and preternatural 
capabilities developed through Tantric yoga practice, to be used only 
for the good of others. See Commentary, Chapter 7. 
Eight Unfavourable Conditions (mi-khom-pa brgyad/a~av-ak~na). 
Aspects of sarhsara that render the pursuit of liberation especially 
difficult: rebirth 1} in a hell, 2) as an animal, 3} as a hungry ghost, 4) as 
one of the long-lived gods, or 5) in a barbarian country, and 6) having 
impaired faculties, or 7) false views, or 8) living when no Tathagata 
appears. 
Elements (kham/dhatu). The eighteen phenomena which compose the 
stream of consciousness (q.v.); that is, each of the six sense-bases 
(organ + object) with its activating consciousness ( rnam-shes/vi jiiana). 
Emptiness (stong-pa-nyid/siinyata). The absolute nature of all existence, 
void of own-nature in respect to both person and phenomena in the 
Mahayana system. 
Enjoyment Body (Iongs-spyod sku/sarhbhoga-kaya). The body of 
Buddha as it exists in the Buddha paradises (fields) and upper realms, 
teaching the Doctrine to bodhisattvas who are at that stage. This body 
is fully adorned with the unique physical characteristics of a Buddha. 
Enlightenment Thought (byang-chub-sems/bodhicitta). The basic 
attitude and motivation of attaining Buddhahood for the sake of all 
living beings; contains two stages: resolution (q.v.) and actual 
progress ( q. v.) in compassion and insight. 
Equipment. See Two Equipments. 
Equipoise (mnyam-par bzhag-pa/samahita). The culmination of yogic 
concentration, steadiness in holding the composure of Calmness when 
the lower levels of distraction have been eliminated.

--- PAGE 209 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 195 
Essential Reality (chos-nyid/dh~rmata). The true nature of a thing as it is 
in itself, not as perceived or apprehended. 
Five Aggregates. See Aggregates. 
Five Bovine Articles (ba'i mam lnga/panca-gavya). Products of the cow, 
commonly used in India as housing material: dung, urine, spittle, 
mucus, milk. 
Five Branches of Knowledge (rig-pa'i gnas lnga/panca-vidya-stha-nani). 
Five classical sciences of: grammar, logic, the Self, healing, and crafts. 
Five Dominants (dbang-po/indriyat;~i). Same virtues as the Aids to 
Liberation (q.v.). 
Five Eyes (mig/cak~u). The fleshly eye, the religious eye, the insight eye, 
the divine eye, the Buddha eye. 
Five Paths (lam/marga). The five major stages of growth through which 
one must pass to reach either nirvaQa or Buddhahood: 1) Equipment 
Path, 2) Practice Path, 3) Vision Path, 4) Contemplation Path, and 5) 
Adept Path. These stages will occur whether one is of the Hearer's or 
Solitary Buddha's Vehicle seeking the goal of Arhatship in nirvaQa, or 
of.the Mahayana Bodhisattva's Vehicle seeking Buddhahood for the 
sake of others. The first two Paths are considered Mundane in that the 
virtues being practised do not yet entail direct personal experience of 
the Four Truths. The remaining three Paths are called Supramundane 
because the seeker's experience is now a personal awareness and 
growth in the insights and wisdom which constitute the Enlightenment 
above and beyond even the ordinary good person's practice of virtue. 
See Chart I. 
Five Powers (stobs/balani). Same as Aids to Libera.tion (q.v.). 
Five Precepts (bslab-pa'i gzhi/sik~pada). Five rules of the Lay Devotee 
(q.v.). 
Five Wisdoms (ye-shes/jnanani). 1) Wisdom about the purified nature of 
the Ultimate Element, 2) Mirror-like Wisdom, 3) Wisdom of 
Equanimity, 4) Investigative Wisdom, 5) Wisdom about what needs to 
be done. 
Four Applications of Mindfulness (dran-pa nye-bar bzhag-pa/smrti-
upasthanani). Directing one's awareness to: 1) body, 2) feelings, 
3) thoughts, 4) phenomena. 
Four Bases of Miraculous Powers {rdzu-'phrul gyi rkang-pa/rddhi-
padal)). Elements necessary for an adept to work wonders for others: 
1) desire to do so, 2) diligence in practice, 3) thought, 4) examination. 
Four Basic Sins (pham-par byung-ba/parajika). The four most serious 
offences against the monastic rule; the transgressions comprising the 
Expulsion class in the Pratimok~a (q.v.): 1) sexual intercourse, 
2) theft, 3) homicide, 4) lying to praise self. 
Four Infinitudes (tshad-med/apramiil).a). 1) love, 2) compassion, 
3) gladness about others' happiness, 4) equanimity. 
Four Means of Attraction (bsdu-pa'i dngos-po/sal!lgraha-vastiini). Four 
ways of making the Doctrine appealing to others: 1) showing 
generosity, 2). speaking in a kind and loving manner, 3) working for 
the benefit of others, 4) practising what one preaches.

--- PAGE 210 [DIRECT] ---

196 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Four Modes of Life (tshul/karaka-dharma.l).). Four exhortations made in 
the monk's ordination ceremony: 1) not to revile if reviled, 2) not to be 
angry when provoked, 3) not cursing when cursed, 4) not striking back 
if struck. 
Four Resources (rten bzhi). Promises made in the ordination ceremony 
of novices and monks: 1) to live under trees, 2) to live by alms, 3) to 
live in rags, 4) to use simple medicines. 
Four Right Efforts (yang-dag-par spong-ba/saiilyak-prahaQani). 1) to 
prevent evil which has not yet occurred, 2) to forsake evil which 
already exists, 3) to bring about good which does not yet exist, 4) to 
develop goodness which already exists. 
Four Truths {bden-pa/satya). 1) All existence is suffering, 2) and this 
suffering has its origin in self-grasping, 3) and that origination of 
suffering can be stopped, 4) by means ofthe Eightfold Path (q.v.). 
Good Flask (bum-pa bzang-po/gola-bhadra). One of the Eight Great 
Powers (q.v.). 
Guru (bla-ma). Spiritual teacher. 
Hearer (nyan-thos/sravaka). Follower of the Theravadin teaching; one 
who is seeking his own liberation and striving to become an arhat 
(q.v.). 
Higher Intention (lhag-bsam/adhyasaya). See Three Higher Trainings. 
Higher Vision {lhag-mthong/vipasyana). See Three Higher Trainings. 
Initiation (dbang/abhi§eka). A series of spiritual empowerments con-
ferred ritually by a qualified Tantric master, necessary for effective 
practice of different levels in the Mantra vehicle. The Union and 
Supreme Union tantras have an initiation called the Preceptor-
Initiation which includes four parts: 1) Flask, 2) Secret, 3) Insight, 
4) Syllable. For explanation of these, see Commentary, Chapter 7, 
notes 11 and 19. 
Insight ( shes-rab/pra jna). The sixth of the Ten Perfections ( q. v.), always 
paired with Means as the two requisites for Enlightenment. 
Specifically, Insight is the experience of the total .emptiness of 
existence in all intrinsic natures, developed through study, reflection, 
and one's own growth in it. 
Insight-Initiation. See Initiation. 
Intermediate State (bar-ma-do'i srid-pa/antara-bhava). State between 
death and rebirth, lasting anywhere from a moment to forty-nine days, 
when the conscious stream ( q. v.) is passing to the new kind of body 
determined by its habits-aggregate of the previous existence. 
Intrinsic Nature (ngo-bo-nyid/svabhava). The apparently real self-
identity of things. 
Investigative Insight (so-sor rtog-pa'i shes-rab/pratyavek~ana-prajfia). 
Type of analysis necessary for realisation of the emptiness of inherent 
existence in all phenomena. 
Joyous Level (rab-tu dga'-ba/pramudita). See Ten Levels. 
Karma (las). Moral action and its consequences, or the totality of one's 
actions insofar as they have merited one's present rebirth and 
condition and will continue to have future consequence.

--- PAGE 211 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 
197 
Lay Devotee ( dge-bsnyen/upasaka). First and lowest of the Seven Ranks 
of Pratimok~a in the Buddhist community; lay persons who take five 
basic vows: 1) to renounce all taking of life, 2) to renounce all unlawful 
sexual activity, 3) to refrain from taking what is not given, 4) to avoid 
speaking untruths, and 5) to abstain from intoxicating drink and places 
of vulgar amusement. 
Levels. See Ten Levels. 
Limbs of Calmness (yan-lag/anga). See Commentary, Chapter 5, note 
13. 
Lord of the World ('jig-rten mgon/lokesvara). Epithet of the Buddha. 
Maitreya (byams-pa). The Bodhisattva of Love, whose Buddha-field is 
presently the Tu~ita heaven, and who will come into the world as the 
next Buddha after Gautama. He is the inspirer of Asanga ( q. v.) in the 
teaching of the extensive practice of compassion. 
Ma~"ala (dkyil-'khor). A geometric symbolic representation of the 
universe in all its directions, constructed either of actual graphic 
materials (paint, ink, sand) or mentally visualised according to 
prescribed rules of particular Tantras. The maq.Qala is used as a means 
of offering the universe to the Buddha, or in higher Tantras, of 
invoking one's assigned deity. 
Maiijugho~a ('jam-pa'i dbyangs). Another name ofManjusri. 
Maiiju:Sri ('jam-dpal). Bodhissatva of Wisdom, inspirer of Nagarjuna in 
the teaching of the profound view of Emptiness. 
Mantra (gsang-sngags). Specific words or syllables whose recitation in 
Tantric practice confers merit and power of the deity to whom they 
belong. 
Means (thabs/upaya). The frequent siitra term for the Perfections of the 
virtues, Giving, Conduct, Patience, and so on, but excluding the 
Perfection of Insight. Means and Insight are always mentioned as a 
pair, the former Perfections denoting those which produce increasing 
karmic merit for better rebirths and purifying one's stream of 
consciousness, while the Perfection of Insight is the virtue itself 
through which Enlightenment is accomplished. 
Meru (ri-rab ). Himalayan mountain sacred in both Buddhist and Hindu 
tradition as the centre of the universe. 
Middle Way (dbu-ma/madhyamika). The Mahayana school, also called 
the Emptiness system, which is based on the Perfection of Wisdom 
siitras and the writings of Nagarjuna and his lineage, inspired by 
MaftjusrL Called "Middle, Way" because of its insistence that 
Enlightenment is found somewhere between assertions of eternal 
realities and nothingness. Chapter 6 of the Commentary is AtiSa's 
endorsement of this school. 
Monk (dge-slong/bhik~u). Ordained member of the Community who 
has successfully passed through the training and observed the vows of 
the Lay Devotee and Novice, and who is formally committed to the 
rules of the Pratimok~a by his acceptance into the Community in the 
ordination ceremony. 
Mundane Paths ('jig-rten-pa'i lam/laukika-marga). See Five Paths.

--- PAGE 212 [DIRECT] ---

198 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Nagarjuna (klu-sgrub). Second-century AD saint and author, reputed 
founder of the Middle Way (madhyamika) school of Mahayana, 
inspired by Mafijusri. Composer of the Basic Stanzas on the Middle 
Way and numerous other important works which Atlsa follows in his 
teaching on Higher Insight. 
Nirv~a (mya-ngan-las-'das). Literally, "blown out" as with a candle's 
flame. The ultimate state of bliss and extinction of all possible cause of 
suffering. Three kinds of Nirval)a: 1) with-remainder, 2) without-
remainder, 3) deferred. From the Mahayana point of view, Nirval)a-
with-remainder is that of the Hlnayana Arhat whose afflicting 
obscurations ( q. v.) have ceased so that Nirval)a is achieved, but who 
retains some obscuration about what should have been known con-
cerning the true nature of reality, that is the total non-inherent 
existence of both person and things. Nirval)a-without-remainder is 
that of the Solitary Buddha, all of whose obscurations have ceased, 
but whose state is less complete because of his declining to return to 
the world of samsara for the sake of others. Deferred-Nirvana des-
cribes the state of the Mahayana bodhisattva who has earned Nirval)a 
by eliminating all his obscurations, but by choice remains in sarpsara to 
continue working for the liberation of others out of compassion. 
Non-self (bdag-med/anatman). Basic characteristic of Buddhist teach-
ing. In Hlnayana, taken to mean the non-existence of soul or person; 
in Mahayana, extended to mean the non-existence both of person and 
of any inherently existing thing whatsoever. 
Nun (dge-slong-ma/bhik~unr). Feminine counterpart of monk (q.v.) 
with an additional stage of probation, and commitment to her appro-
priate vows in formal ordination ceremony. 
Obscuration (sgrib/avaral)a). Frequent Mahayana term denoting the 
hindrances and obstacles that stand in the way of Enlightenment. Of 
two kinds: 1) afflictions (q.v.), those which have karmic consequences 
in terms of one's habitual tendencies, and 2) what still remains to be 
known (shes-bya/jfieya), that is the Insight yet to be gained concern-
ing the emptiness of inherently existing things. 
Ornaments 
of 
Virtuous 
Practice 
( dge-sbyong-gi 
rgyan/ 
sramal)a-alam-kara). Seventeen virtues pertaining to religious life; 
e.g., having faith, suffering little ill health, having few needs, having 
greater patience, and so on. 
Own-Existence (rang-bzhin/svabhava). An inherently existing thing 
having its own nature and substance. 
Perfection. See Ten Perfections. 
Phenomenon (chos/dharma). Technical term denoting in the Hmayana 
the ultimately real constitutive elements of the apparent world, con-
ceived of as constantly appearing and disappearing instants of energy; 
hence "phenomenon". In Mahayana, even phenomena have no real 
inherent existence. 
Po~dha (gso-sbyong). Buddhist "sabbath day", fortnightly religious 
observances at new and full moon of each month, marked especially 
for monks by community recitation of the Priitimo~a.

--- PAGE 213 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 199 
Powers. See Five Powers and Eight Great Powers. 
Pratimo~a (so-sor-thar-pa). Literally, "individual liberation". Used in 
two senses: 1) referring to the Pratimok:ja Sutra which contains the list 
of some two hundred rules to which monks are vowed, or 2) referring 
to the vowed Buddhist religious community and its seven ranks. See 
Commentary, Chapter 3. 
Preceptor-Initiation (slob-dpon dbang/acarya-abhiseka). See Initiation. 
Profound View (zab-mo lta-ba/gambhira-d~ti). Middle Way school 
term for its teaching on the emptiness of inherent existence of both 
person and phenomena. 
Progress Mind/Thought ('jug-sems/avatara-citta). Second of the two 
stages of development of the Enlightenment-Thought, the first being 
Resolution (q.v.). The distinction arises because of the question of 
whether the simple resolve to achieve Enlightenment for the sake of 
others is sufficient for achieving the goal, and at what point one's 
resolve continues into actual achievement. 
Pure Life/Celibacy ( tshangs-par spyod-pa/brahma-caryam). Originally 
the Indian term designating the student stage of life, which implied 
abstention from sexual activity. Later, the technical term for sexual 
purity and renunciation of marriage for religious pursuits; specifically, 
the monk's primary vow of religious celibacy for life in imitation of the 
Gautama Buddha. 
Qualities of Purification (sbyangs-pa'i yon-tan/dhiita-gu~a). Twelve 
items having to do with the frugal equipment of monastic life, often 
paired with the Ornaments of Virtuous Practice (q.v.); such as dust-
heap rags cleaned for making the monastic robes, alms, possessing a 
single mat for meditation, and so on. 
Realm 
of True 
Reality 
(chos-kyi-dbyings/dharma-dhatu). 
For 
Mahayanists, the ultimate reality underlying phenomena; that is, their 
non-existence as intrinsic natures, or Emptiness. 
Refuges. See Three Refuges. 
Relative Truth. See Two Truths. 
Religious Life (rab-tu byung-ba/pravrajya). Technical term for monastic 
community life according to vowed rules, as with novices and monks, 
and essentially implying celibacy; as opposed to lay-persons' life or the 
householder who is married, such as the Lay Devotee. 
Resolution/Resolve-Mind/Resolve-Thought 
(smon-sems/pra~idhana-
citta). The first determination of one who has the Enlightenment 
Thought (bodhicitta) to seek Enlightenment for the sake of 
others. The commitment that precedes the Progress-Mind/Thought 
(q.v.). 
S~sara ('khor-ba). The cycle of rebirth and transmigration. See 
Destinies. 
Santideva (zhi-ba-lha). Eighth-century AD saint and scholar, author of 
the Compendium of Training and Progress in Practice, frequently 
quoted in the Commentary of Atisa. Inspired by Maiijugho~a as the 
primary teacher of the lineage which combjnes the practice of the 
Perfections with Middle Way school's theory of Insight.

--- PAGE 214 [DIRECT] ---

200 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Sastra (bstan-bcos). Secondary texts, explanations and commentaries; 
as opposed to primary sources such as the sutras. 
Secret-Initiation. See Initiation. 
Sense-Bases (skye-mched/ayatana). Traditiomil Buddhist analysis of the 
appaxent Sel(, along with the aggregates and elements (q.v.), to 
describe the process of cognition. Called "sense-base" because it 
combines six sensing organs or faculties with their proper objects; that 
is, the usual five senses and objects, and the mind and its object (which 
is phenomena) as the sixth. 
Sevenfold Worship (mchod-pa'i yan-lag/pujana-anga). Practices pre-
paratory to meditation: 1) Homage to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, 
2) Offering of pleasing objects, 3) Confession of sins, 4) Rejoicing at 
virtue, 5) Entreaty for the doctrine, 6) Petition for the Buddha's 
blessing, 7) Bestowal of merit on others. See Commentary, Chapter 1. 
Seven Limbs of Enlighterunent (byang-chub kyi yan-lag/bodhi-anga). 
1) Mindfulness, 2) Investigation of phenomena, 3) Diligence, 4) Joy, 
5) Purity, 6) Concentration, 7) Equanimity. 
Seven Noble Riches ('phags-pa'i nor/arya-dhanani). 1) Faith, 2) Conduct, 
3) Sense of shame, 4) Dread of blame, 5) Learning, 6) Renunciation, 
7) Insight. 
Seven Precious Things (rin-po-che/ratnani). Traditional marks of 
royalty; 1) court, 2) elephants, 3} horses, 4) jewels, 5) harem, 
6) subjects, 7) ministers. 
SevenRaiiksofPratimo~. The two lay states: 1) Layman Devotee, and 
2} Laywoman Devotee; and the five states in monastic life: 3) male 
Novice, 4) female Novice, 5) Nun-probationer, 6) Nun, and 7) Monk. 
Each state has its own particular rules of vowed observance and formal 
commitment ceremony. 
Six Perfections. See Ten Perfections. 
Solitary Buddha (rang sangs-rgyas/pratyeka-buddha). A self-taught 
Buddha, one of the two Hinayana paths (see Five Paths}, whose 
nirvaQ.a (q.v.) is more complete than the Arhat's, and who does not 
return as a Bodhisattva to help teach others out of compassion. 
Spiritual Friend (dge-ba'i bshes-gnyen/kalyaQ.a-mitra). Respectful title 
for one's guru or lama. 
Stream of Consciousness. See Conscious Stream. 
Suffering (sdug-bsngal/du~kha). One of the primary marks of Buddhist 
teaching, that all is suffering; a reference to the first of the Four Holy 
Truths. 
Superknowledges (mngon-shes/abhijiia). The five (or six) preternatural 
gifts arising from the practice of yoga and calming: 1} godlike sight, 2) 
godlike hearing, 3) knowledge of others' thoughts, 4) recollection of 
previous lives, 5) miraculous powers, 6) knowledge of having over-
come obscurations. All are achievements to be used for the good of 
others. See-Commentary, Chapter 5. 
Suvan;tadvipa (gser-gling-pa)... One of Atisa's principal teachers, also 
called Dharmakirti, from whom he received both the Mind-Only and 
the Middle Way schoois' teachings.

--- PAGE 215 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 201 
Tantra (rgyud). Canonical texts of the Mantra Vehicle, divided into 
seven classes by Atisa, but later reduced to four: 1) Action (kriya), 
2) Practice (carya), 3) Union (yoga), and4) Supreme Union (anuttara-
yoga). Tantras contain the swift mysti~al path of Buddhism, and are 
treated in the Commentary, Chapter 7. 
Tara (sgrol-ma). "Saviouress", the compassionate goddess, partner of 
A valokitesvara, the Bodhisattva of Compassion. Atisa's patroness, 
and subsequently Tibet's favourite goddess because of Atisa's intro-
ducing her devotion. 
Tathagata ( de-bzhin-gshegs-pa). "One who has gone thus." Epithet of a 
Buddha, emphasising the unique and indescribable quality of 
Buddhahood. 
Ten Directions (phyogs bcu/da§a-dis). The four cardinal directions of 
north-south-east-west with their intermediate points, plus zenith and 
nadir. 
Ten Favourable Conditions ('byor bcu). I) human rebirth, 2) rebirth in 
a civilised country, 3) having sound sense faculties, 4) having karma 
that can be improved, 5) faith in the Buddha's doctrine, 6) appearance 
of a Buddha, 7) that the Buddha's teaching exists, 8) continuance of his 
teaching, 9) being a follower of his teaching, 10) living among virtuous 
Buddhists. 
Ten Levels (sa bcu/dasa-bhiimi). Also called Bodhisattva Levels. 
Mahayana designation of ten stages through which bodhisattvas 
progress, beginning in the Vision Path (see Five Paths) through 
Contemplation Path to Adept stage: 1) Joyous, 2) Stainless, 
3) Luminous, 4) Flaming, 5) Invincible, 6) Face-to-Face, 7) Far-reach-
ing, 8) Unshakeable, 9) True Mind, 10) Dharma-cloud. Each Level is 
traditionally paired with one of the Ten Perfections ( q. v.). 
Ten Perfections (pha-rol-tu-phyin-pa/paramita). Cardinal virtues of 
Bodhisattva practice, originally listed as six in Mahayana siitras, with 
four more added in latedastras: 1) Giving, 2) Conduct, 3} Patience, 4} 
Diligence, 5) Concentration, 6) Insight, and 7) Resolution, 8) Skill-in-
Means, 9) Power, 10) Knowledge. 
Ten ReHgious Practices (chos-spyod/dharma-carya). 1) Writing, 
2) worship, 3) giving, 4) listening, 5) reading, 6) understanding, 7) 
explaining, 8) reciting, 9) reflecting, 10) contemplating. 
Ten Thoughts of Enlightenment. An unclear reference in the 
Commentary, possibly referring the bodhisattva's practice of the Ten 
Perfections (q.v.) on the Ten Levels. 
Ten Unvirtuous Acts (mid-dge-ba'i chos/akusala-dharma). The Buddhist 
"Ten Commandments"; actions which merit bad karmic conse-
quences. 1) Killing, 2) stealing, 3) sexual misconduct, 4) lying, 5) harsh 
speech, 6) slander, 7) idle speech, 8) covetousness, 9) ill-will, 10) false 
views. 
Ten Virtuous Acts. The opposites of the Ten Unvirtuous Acts. 
Thatness (de-nyid/tattva). Reality; what is actually and truly real, as 
opposed to what is apparently true and real. Term for ultimate reality, 
emptiness of all misconception.

--- PAGE 216 [DIRECT] ---

202 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Thirty-two Marks. Extraordinary physical characteristics of a superman, 
traditional in Indian literature and applied to the Buddhas; e.g. 
golden-hued skin, long toes and fingers, hair-tuft between eyebrows, 
dark-blue eyes, and so on. 
Thirty-seven Enlightenment Wings (byang-chub kyi phyogs/bodhipak-
~a). Mahayana formula embracing essential principles and practices of 
the bodhisattva path: the Four Applications, the Four Right Efforts, 
the Four Bases of Miraculous Power, the Five Dominants, the Five 
Powers, the Seven Limbs of Enlightenment, the Eightfold Path. 
Three Bad Destinies (ngan-song gsum/tri-durgati). See Destinies. 
Three Bodies of a Buddha ( sku-gsum/trikaya). Three modes under which 
Buddhas exist: Truth Body, Enjoyment Body, and Apparition Body. 
See each individually. 
Three Heaps (phung-bo gsum/tri-skandha). Practices which store up and 
increase merit: confession of one's sins, rejoicing in virtue wherever 
found, entreaty for the preaching of the doctrine. 
Three Higher ·Trainings (lhag-pa'i bslab-pa/adhisila). Bodhisattva 
practices designated as "higher" than Hinayana arhats' training 
because motivated by greater compassion and pursuing the complete 
realisation of emptiness: 1) Higher Conduct, 2) Higher Concentration, 
3) Higher Insight. The latter two are the equivalent of Calmness ( q. v.) 
and Higher Vision. 
Three Jewels (dkoil-mchog gsum/tri-ratna). The Buddha, his Doctrine, 
and the Community. 
Three Refuges ( skyabs-' gro gsum/tri-saral}a-gamana). Formula declaring 
one's commitment to the Three Jewels. 
True Nature (chos-nyid/dharmata). The ultimate reality of things, their 
emptiness of inherent existence, a synonym of Thatness. 
Truth Body (chos-sku/dharma-kaya). Highest and most perfect mode of 
Buddhahood; the Buddha-nature as it is in itself, omniscience: 
ultimate reality. See Three Bodies. 
Tshul-Khrims Rgyal-ba. Tibetan monk, disciple and constant com-
panion of Atisa from India to Tibet; principal translator of most of 
Atisa's writings. 
Two Equipments (tshogs/sari:lbhara). Merit and Knowledge. Traditional 
designation of the necessary qualities with which one must "equip" 
oneself for the pursuit of Enlightenment. Merit increases through the 
practice of virtue; knowledge, through the Perfection of Insight. 
Two Truths (bden-pa gnyis/satya-dvaya). Mahayana distinction of the 
dual aspect of all objects of cognition: 1) relative truth (kun-rdzob 
bden-pa/samvrtti-satya); the ordinary worldly and conventional per-
ception and expression of the apparent reality of things; and 
2) ultimate truth (don-dam bden-pa/paramartha-satya), the emptiness 
of inherent existences, reality as it truly is. 
Ultimate Element (chos-kyi dbyings/dharma-dhatu). See Realm of True 
Reality. 
Ultimate Reality (de-kho-na-nyid/tattva). Same as Thatness (q.v.) 
Ultimate Truth. See Two Truths.

--- PAGE 217 [DIRECT] ---

GLOSSARY 203 
Vasubandhu (nor-gyi rtsa-lag/dbyig-gnyen). Third-century AD saint and 
scholar, brother of Asanga (q.v.), author of numerous Mahayana 
treatises, and source of Atisa's division of three types of persons in the 
Lamp and Commentary. 
Vehicle (theg-pa/yana). The most generic term for the three Buddhist 
ways of theory and practice which can carry one to E~lightenment: 
1) the Lesser Vehicle (Hinayana) or Hearers' Vehicle (Sravakayana); 
also called Theravada, 2) the Greater Vehicle (Mahayana), and 3) the 
Vehicle of Mantra or Tantra (Mantrayana), the swift way to 
Enlightenment. 
Wagons (shing-rta/ratha). Epithet in the same metaphor as Vehicle, 
used especially for the great writers and saints of Mahayana, 
Nagarjuna and Asailga. 
Warmth (drod/u~ma). See Aids to Conviction.

--- PAGE 218 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Primary Sources 
A 
Buddhist Scriptures 
[ Ot.] = The Tibetan Tripitaka- Peking Edition. Kept in the Library of 
Otani University. Editor: D. T. Suzuki. (Kyoto: 1957). 
[Toh.] = A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canon. 
Editors: Hakaju Ui et al. (Sendai: Tohoku Imperial University, 
1934). 
[Tibetan and Sanskrit titles are given as they appear in AtiSa's texts; 
although they are frequently not the full titles as listed in the Catalogues. 
Several scriptures cannot be identified, either because they were not 
included in the Tibetan Canon compiled three cerzturies later or because 
they were known by different titles by that time.] 
Admonitions for the King Sutra 
Rlija-avaviidak.a-sutra 
Rgyal po la gdams pa'i mdo (Ot. 887) 
Admonitions on Desire Sutra 
Kama-apavadaka-sutra 
'Dod pa Ia gdams pa'i mdo (To h. 4523?) 
All Dharanfs 
Sarva-dharani 
Gzungs tharm cad (Ot. 141) 
Arrest of Misconduct Sutra 
Du!J.Sila-nigraha-sutra 
Tshul khrims 'chal pa tshar gcod pa'i mdo (Ot. 886) 
Assembly of All Gods 
Lha thams cad 'dus pa (unidentified) 
Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way: "Insight" by Nagarjuna 
M ula-madhyamaka-klirikli-prajnli-niima 
Dbu rna rtsa ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa shes rab ces bya ba (Ot. 5224) 
Basic Tantra of Manju$ri 
Mmiju$ri-mula-tantra 
'Jam dpal gyi rtsa ba'i rgyud (Ot. 162) 
Beauty Mark of the Secret Moon 
Candra-guhya-tilaka 
Zla gsang thig le (Ot. 111) 
Black DestroyerofYama 
Kr~I'Ja-yamiiri 
Gshin rje'i gshed nag po (Ot. 103) 
Blaze of Reasoning: on "Essence of the Middle Way" by Bhavaviveka 
Madhyamaka-hrdaya-vrtfi-tarka-jviilii 
Dbu rna rtog ge 'bar ba (Ot. 5256)

--- PAGE 219 [DIRECT] ---

Bodhisattva Levels by Asanga 
Bodhisattva-bhumi 
Byang chub sems dpa'i sa (Ot. 5538) 
Bodhisattva Section 
Bodhisattva-piraka 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
205 
Byang chub sems dpa'i sde snod (Ot. 760: 12) 
Buddha Death's Head 
Buddha-kapiila 
Sangs rgyas thod pa (Ot. 63) 
Buddha-like Practice 
Buddha-sama-yoga 
Sangs rgyas mnyam sbyor (Ot. 8) 
Buddhapiilitii's Commentary on Basic Stanzas of Middle Way 
B uddhapiilitli-mrlla-madh yamaka-vrtti 
Dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa buddha pii li ta (Ot. 5242) 
Cause of Splendour: Major Treatise on Progress in Thatness 
Tattva-avatiira-mahii-siistra-prabhiisa-kararJa by J ii.anakirti 
De kho na nyid la 'jug pa'i bstan bcos chen por gsal bar mdzad pa (Ot. 
5432) 
Chapter on Concentration Equipment by Bodhibhadra 
Samiidhi-sambhiira-parivarta 
Ting nge 'dzin,gyi tshogs kyi le'u (Ot. 5444) 
Classification of the Middle and Extremes by Maitreyanatha 
Madhyiinta-vibhanga-kiirikii 
Dbus dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa (Ot. 5522) 
Clear Words: on Basic Middle Way by Candrakirti 
Prasanna-padii-mrlla-madhyamaka-vrtti 
Tshig don gsa/ ba (Ot. 5260) 
Cloud of Jewels Sutra 
Ratna-megha-srltra 
Dkon mchog sprin gi mdo (Ot. 897) 
Commentary on the Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning by Candrakirti 
Yukti-sastikii-vrtti 
Rigs p~ drug c~ pa'i 'grel pa (Ot. 5265) 
Commentary on the Twenty Verses on the Vow by Bodhibhadra 
Sarrz vara-virrzsika-pafzjika 
Sdom pa nyi shu pa'i 'grel pa (Ot. 5584) 
Compendium of Doctrine Sutra 
Dharma-sarrzgiti-srltra 
Chos yang dag par sdud pa'i mdo (Ot. 904) 
Compendium of Skills 
Kalpa-samuccaya 
Rtogpa kun las btus pa (Toh. 367) 
Compendium of Sutra by Nagarjuna 
Sutra-samuccaya 
Mdo kun las btus pa (Ot. 5330) 
Compendium ofThatness: A Major Tantra 
Tattva-sarrzgraha-mahii-tantra 
De kho na nyid bsdus pa'i rgyud chen po (Ot. 112)

--- PAGE 220 [DIRECT] ---

206 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
C01;npendium ofTraining by Santideva 
Silcyii-samuccaya 
Bslab pa kun las btus pa (Ot. 5336) 
Confession of Failings (See Ritual for Confession of Failings) 
Conquest of the Triple World 
Trailokya-vijaya 
'Jig rten gsum las rnam par rgyal ba (Ot. 115) 
Conquest of the Unique Buddha Tantra 
Advaya-samatii-vijaya-tantra 
Gnyis su med pa rnam par rgyal ba'i rgyud (Ot. 87) 
Conversations on the Perfections by Arya5ura 
Piiramitii-kathii 
Pha rol tu ph yin pa'i gtam dag (Ot. 5424) 
Deeds of Samiintabhadra ( = Good Practice_ Resolves) 
Deeds of the Conqueror as a Mother 
J ina-janani-caritra-nirdesa 
Rgyal ba skyed mar mdzad pa (Ot. 5029) 
Descent into Lanka Sutra 
Lankiivatiira-satra 
Lang kar gsegs pa'i mdo (Ot. 775) 
Destruction of Errors About the Middle Way by Aryadeva 
Madhyamaka-bftrama-ghiita 
Dbu ma 'khrul pa 'joms pa (Ot. 5250) 
DhiirarJ.fs Blal,ing From the Mouth of Ghosts 
Preta-mukha-agni-jviila-dhiira7Ji 
Yi dags kha nas me 'bar ba'i gzungs (Ot. 356) 
Diamond Crowners 
Vajra-~rJ.fsa 
Rdo rje gtsug tor (Toh. 590-603) 
Diamond Imp 
Vajra-4iika 
Rdo rje mkha' 'gro (Ot. 18) 
Diamond Summit 
Vajra-sekhara 
Rdo rje rtse mo (Ot. 113) 
Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Insight Sutra 
A~tasahasrikii-prajnii-piiramitii-sutra 
Shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa'i mdo (Ot. 734) 
Embracing the Roots of Virtue Sutra 
Kufalamula-sarrzparigraha-sutra 
Dge ba'i rtsa ba yongs su 'dzin pa'i mdo (Ot. 769) 
Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment by Nagarjuna 
Bodhicitta-vivarana 
Byang chub sems ~nam par bshad pa (Ot. 5470) 
Excellent Dancer Tantra 
Nartaka-para-tantra 
Gar mkhan mchog (Ot. 424)

--- PAGE 221 [DIRECT] ---

Exhortation to Higher Intention Sutra 
Adhyasaya-sa'!'lcodana-sutra 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 207 
Lhag pa'i bsam pa bskul ba'i mdo (Ot. 760:25) 
Explanation of the Treasure of Phenomenology by Vasubandhu 
Abhidharma-kosa-bh~ya 
Chos mngon pa'i mdzod pa'i bshad pa (Ot. 5590-1) 
Exposition of the Undifferentiated Nature of All Phenomena Sutra 
Sarva-dharma-prakrti-asa'!'lbheda-nirdesa-sutra 
Chos thams cad kyi rang bzhin dbyer med par bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 
760:8) 
Extensive Commentary on the Lamp for the Insight by Avalokitavrata 
Prajiia-pradfpa-[ika 
Shes rab sgron rna rgya cher 'grel pa (Ot. 5259) 
Extensive Siltra: Compendium of All Phenomena 
Sarva-dharma-vaipulya-sa'!'lgraha 
Yongs su rgyas pa'i mdo chos thams cad bsdus pa (?) 
Finely Woven Sutra 
V aidalya-siltra 
Rnam par'thag pa'i mdo (Ot. 893) 
Finger-Garland Sutra 
Ahguli-maliya-siltra 
Sor mo'i phreng can gyi mdo (Ot. 879) 
Finger-Length Instruction 
Sor mo lta bu'i bshad (?) 
Five Chapters on the Middle Way by Candrakirti 
Madhyamaka-paiica-skandha 
Dbu ma phung bo lnga (Ot. 5267) 
Five Hundred Thousand Verses of Hevajra Tantra 
H evajra-tantra-riija 
Dgyes pa'i rdo rje 'bum phrag lnga pa (Ot. 10) 
Flaming Jewel Formula Sutra 
Ratnolka-dharanf-siltra 
Dkon mchog ta ia la'i mdo (Ot. 472) 
Four Diamond Seats Tantra 
Catu/J,-pi[ha-tantra 
Rdo rje gdan bzhi pa (Ot. 68) 
Four Virtues Siltra 
Catur-dharmaka-sutra 
Chos bzhi pa'i mdo (Ot. 916) 
Garland of Thought Tantra 
Samdhi-mala-tantra 
Dgongs pa rgyud kyi phreng ba (Ot. 432) 
Garlands of Buddha Chapters 
Buddha-avata1f!saka-parivarta 
Sangs rgyas phal po che'i le'u (Ot. 761) 
Glorious Acts 
Avadana 
Rtogs par brjod pa (To h. 343)

--- PAGE 222 [DIRECT] ---

208 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Glorious Cakrasarrvara: Hundred Thousand Verses of the Space-like 
Buddha 
Srf-cakrasam vara-khasama-sata-siihasrika 
Dpal nam ritkha' dang mnyam pa 'bum pa chen po 'khor lo sdom pa 
(Ot. 30) 
Glorious Compendium of Diamond Knowledge 
Jniina-vajra-samuccaya 
Dpal ye shes rdo rje kun las btus pa (Ot. 84) 
Glqrious Original Aeon 
Srf-paramiidya-kalpa 
Dpal dang po rtog pa (Ot. 119) 
Glqrious Union of the Secret 
Srf-guhyasamiija 
Dpal gsang ba 'dus pa (Ot. 81) 
Glory of the Blessed One Vaiqurya, Teacher of Healing 
Bhagavato-bha4ajya-guru-vai4flrya-prabhiisya-riija 
Beam /dan 'das sman gyi bla ba'i bai qurya'i 'od kyi rgyal po (Ot. 
136) 
Golden Splendour Sutra 
Suvar!Ja-prabhiisottama-sutra 
Gser 'ad dam pa'i mdo (Ot. 175-6) 
Good Age Sutra 
Bhadra-kalpika~sutra 
Bskal pa bzang po'i mdo (Ot. 762) 
Good Practice Resolves 
Bhadracarya-pra!Jidhiina-riija 
Bzang po spyod pa'i smon lam gyi rgyal po (Ot. 761.45) 
Gradual Rising Sutra 
Anupurva-samudgata-sutra 
Mthar gyis yang dag 'phags pa'i mdo (?) 
Great Compassion Sutra (=Great White Lotus) 
Great Illusion Tantra 
Mahii-miiyii-tantra 
Ma hii mii yii (Ot. 64) 
Great Peacock-like Dhara!Jf 
M aha-mayurf-dhiiraryf 
Rma bya chen mo'i gzungs (Ot. 178) 
Great Tantra Elucidating Meaning 
Sandhi-vyiikara!Ja-maha-tantra 
Dgongs pa lung bstan pa'i rgyud chen po (Ot. 83) 
Great Tantra of Primal Buddha (=Wheel of Time) 
Great Victory Tantras 
Vijaya-mahii-tantra 
Rnam par rgyal ba'i rgyud chen po (Toh. 604-613) 
Great White Lotus of Compassion Sutra 
M ahiikaru!Jii-puryqarfka-sutra 
Snying rje chen po'i pad ma dkar pa'i mdo (Ot. 779)

--- PAGE 223 [DIRECT] ---

Hec;rers' Level by Asailga 
Sriivaka-bhumi 
Nyan thos kyisa (Ot. 5537) 
Heart of Wisdom Compendium 
J fziina-sara-samuccaya 
Ye shes snying po kun las btus pa (Ot. 5251) 
Heavenly Treasure Sutra 
Gaganagafzja-sutra 
Nam-mka' mdzod kyi mdo (Ot. 815} 
Heavily Adorned Sutra 
Ghana-vyuha-sutra 
Stug po bkod pa'i mdo (Ot. 778) 
Higher Union Conquest 
Yang yoga rnam rgyal (?) 
Highest Wisdom Tantra 
Vidyii-uttama-tantra 
Rig pa mchog gi rgyud (Ot. 402} 
Hundred Expositions of Doctrine 
Dharma-upadesa-sata 
Chos bshad pa brgya pa (?) 
Hundred Syllables 
Aksara-sataka 
Yi ge brgya pa (Ot. 5234) 
Illusion-/ike Tantra 
Miiyii-jala-tantra 
Sgyu 'phrul dra ba'i rgyud (Ot. 102) 
Initiation Set Forth by Maitripada 
Seka-nirdeia 
Dbang bskur nges par bstan pa (Ot. 3097) 
Injunctions on Dealing With Women Sutra 
Strf-vivarta-vyiikara1Ja-sutra 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 209 
Bud med 'gyur lung bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 857) 
Instruction on Non-production of All Phenomena Sutra 
Sarva-dharma-apravrtti-nirdeia-sutra 
Chos thams cad 'byung ba med par bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 847) 
Kinds of Ultimate Truth by Saraha 
Don dam pa'i rigs pa (?) 
King of Meditations Sutra 
Samiidhi-riija-sCttra 
Ting nge 'dzin gyi rgyal po'i mdo (Ot. 795) 
Lamp for the Insight by Bhavaviveka 
Prajfza-pradipa 
Shes rab sgron ma (Ot. 5253) 
Lamp of the Three Methods by Tripi!akamala 
Naya-traya-pradipa 
Tshul gsum pa'i sgron ma (Ot. 4530) 
Length of a Forearm by Aryadeva 
Hastaviila 
Lag pa'i tshad (Ot. 5248-9)

--- PAGE 224 [DIRECT] ---

210 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Levels of Yoga Practice by Asanga 
Y ogiicaryii-bhami 
Rnal'byorspyodpa'isa (Ot. 5547-8) 
Lion's Roar Sii.tra 
Simhaniida-sii.tra 
Se;,g ge'i sgra'i mdo (Ot. 760:23) 
Lord of Lotus Dancers 
Padma-narta-fSvara 
Padma gar gyi dbang phyug (?) 
Major Exposition on the Treasure by Parsva and Vasumitra II 
Mahii-vibh~ii (?) 
Marvels ofVairocana 
Vairocana-vikurvita 
Rnam par snang mdzad sgyu 'phrul (Ot. 126) 
Matters of Discipline 
Vinaya-vastu 
'Dul ba'i gzhi (Ot. 1030) 
Meeting of Father and Son Sii.tra 
Pitii-putra-samiigama-sii.tra 
Yab dang sras mjal ba'i mdo (Ot. 760:16) 
Middle Way Treatise: Finely Woven by Nagarjuna 
Madhyamaka-vaidalya 
Dbu ma rnam par thag pa (Ot. 5226) 
Mindfulness of the Buddha 
Buddha-anusmrti 
Songs rgyas rjes'su dran pa (Ot. 945) 
Miracle of Resolute Calm Sii.tra 
PraSiinta-viniicaya-pratihiirya-sii.tra 
Rab tu zhi ba cho 'phrul (Ot. 797) 
Moon Lamp Sii.tra ( = King of Meditations) 
Candra-pradipa 
. ~La ba sgron ma 
Mount Gayii Sii.tra 
Gayii-sfr~a-sii.tra 
Ga ya mgo'i ri'i mdo (Ot. 777) 
No Fear From Anywhere by Nagarjuna 
Akutobhayii 
Galas 'jigs med (Ot. 5229) 
Non-conceptual Progress Formula 
Avikalpa-pravesa-dhiira'}f 
Rnam parmi rtog par 'jug pa'i gzungs (Ot. 810) 
Ocean of Discipline 
'Dul ba rgya mtsho (?) 
Onf! Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of Insight Sii.tra 
Satasiihasrika-prajnii-piiramitii-sii.tra 
Stong phrag brgya pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa (Ot. 730)

--- PAGE 225 [DIRECT] ---

One Letter Perfection of Insight Satra 
Eka-a/cyarf-prajnii-piiramitii-sutra 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 211 
Yi ge gcig mashes rab kyi pha rot tu ph yin pa (Ot. 741) 
Ornament of Mmijusn's Buddha-field 
Manjusn-buddhalcyetra-gu'!a-vyaha 
'Jam dpal gyi sangs rgyas kyi zhing gi yon tan bkod pa (Ot. 760:15) 
Ornament of Sutras by Maitreyanatha 
Sutra-alamkiira 
Mdo sde ~gyan (Ot. 5521) 
Ornament for the Realisations by Maitreyanatha 
Abhisamaya-alan:zkiira 
Mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan (Ot. 5184) 
Ornament of the Wisdom Engaging the Sphere of All Buddhas 
Buddha-v~aya-avatiira-jniina-iiloka-alan:zkiira 
Sangs rgyas kyi yulla 'jug pa ye shes snang ba'i rgyan (Ot. 768) 
Palace of the Great Jewel 
Ma'!i-vipula-vimiina 
Nor bu rgyas pa'i zhal med khang (Ot. 138) 
Perfect Enlightenment ofVairocana 
V airocana-abhisam bodhi 
Rnam par snang mdzad mngon par byang chub pa (Ot. 126) 
Perfection of Insight Satras 
Prajnii-piiramitii-sutra 
Shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa 
Praise of Ultimate Truths by Nagarjuna 
Paramiirtha-stava 
Don dam par bstod pa (Ot. 2014) 
Priitimoksa Satra 
So so thar pa'i mdo (Ot. 1031) 
Precious Garland of Advice for the King by N agarjuna 
Riija-parikathii-ratniivali 
Rgyal po la gtam bya ba rin po che'i phreng ba (Ot. 5658) 
Precious Garland of Discourses by Sura 
Ratna-karandaka-kathii 
Rin po che phreng balta bu'i gtam (To h. 5424) 
PrC!ducing the Power of Faith Satra 
Sraddhii-balil-dhiina-satra 
Dad pa'i stabs bskyed pa'i mdo (Ot. 867) 
Progress in Knowledge by Katyayimiputra 
J ftiina-prasthiina 
Ye shes Ia 'jug pa 
Progress in [Bodhisattva] Practice by Santideva 
Bodhisattva-caryii-avatiira 
Byang chub sems dpa'i spyod pa la 'jug pa (Ot. 5272) 
Questions of Celestial King Druma Satra 
Druma-kinnara-riija-pariprcchii-sutra 
Mi 'am ci'i rgyal po ljon pas zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 824)

--- PAGE 226 [DIRECT] ---

212 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Questions of the Girl Sumati Sutra 
Sumati-diirikii-pariprcchii-sutra 
Bu mo blo gros bzang mos zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:30) 
Questions of the Girl Vima/aiuddha Siltra 
Diirikii-vimalaiuddha-siltra 
Bu mo rnam dag dad pas zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:40) 
Questions of KiiSyapa Sutra 
KiiSyapa-pariprcchii-sutra 
'Od srungs kyi zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:43) 
Questions of King Udayanavatsa Siltra 
Udayana-vatsa-riija-pariprcchii-siltra 
Rgyal po shar ba'i bus zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:29) 
Questions of Siigaramati Sutra 
Siigaramati-pariprcchii-siltra 
Blo gros rgya mtsho'i zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 819) 
Questions of the Serpent King Anavatapta Siltra 
Anavatapta-niiga-riija-pariprcchii-siltra 
Klu'i rgyal po rna dros pas zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 823) 
Questions of the Serpent King Siigara Siltra 
Siigara-niiga-riija-pariprcchii-sutra 
Klu'i rgyal po rgya mtshos zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 820) 
Questions of Subiihu Tantra 
Subiihu-pariprcchii-tantra 
Dpung-bzang gi rgyud (Ot. 428) 
Questions of Suvikriintivikrami Perfection of Insight Siltra 
Suvikriintivikrami-pariprcchii-prajflii-piiramitii-sutra 
Shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rab kyi rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pa'i 
zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 736) 
Questions of Ugra Sutra 
Ugra-pariprcchii-siltra 
Drag shul gyis zhuspa'i mdo (Ot. 760:19) 
Questions of Upiili Sutra 
Upiili-pariprcchii-sutra 
Nye bar' khor gyis zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:24) 
Questions ofVimaladatta Sutra 
Vimaladatta-pariprcchii-siltra 
Dri ma med pas zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:33) 
Questions of Vfradatta Siltra 
Vfradatta-pariprcchii-siltra 
Dpa' sbyin gyis zhus pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:28) 
Refutation of Objections by Nagarjuna 
Vigraha-vyiivartanf 
Rtsod pa bz/og pa (Ot. 5228) 
Rehearsal of the Buddha, Doctrine, and Community Sutra 
Buddha-dharma-sangha-sangiti-siltra 
Sangs rgyas bgro ba dang chos bgro ba dang dge 'dun bgro ba'i mdo 
(Toh. 228)

--- PAGE 227 [DIRECT] ---

Removal of Action's Obscuration 
Karma-aviiralJll-pratipra.Srabdhi 
Las kyi sgrib pa rgyun gcod pa (To h. 219) 
Removal of Ajiita.Satru's Regrets Sutra 
Ajata.Satru-kaukrtti-avinodana-sutra 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 213 
Ma skyes dgra'i gyod pa bsal ba'i mdo (Ot. 882) 
Resolutions of Niigiirjuna by Nagarjuna 
Niigiirjuna-pra!Jidhiina 
Klu sgrub kyi smon lam (Ot. 5932) 
Ric,e Seedling Sutra Commentary by Kamalasna 
Siilistambaka-sutra-tfkii 
Sii lu ljang pa'i 'gre(pa (Ot. 5502) 
Ritual for Begetting the Thought by Atisa 
Citta-utpiida-vidhi 
Sems bskyed pa'i cho ga (Ot. 5364) 
Ritual for Confession of Failings by Atlsa 
Apatti-desanii-vidhi 
Ltung ba bshags pa'i cho ga (Ot. 5369) 
River of Brine Sutra 
Ba tsha'i chu klung gi mdo (?) 
Royal Resolves of Samantabhadra ( = Good Practice Resolves) 
Royal Tantra Setting Forth the Triple Pledge 
Tri-samaya-vyuha-riija-tantra 
Dam tshig gsum bkod pa'i rgyal po (Ot. 134) 
Royal Union Tantra: Cakrasmrzvara (=Glorious Cakrasan;.vara) 
Science of Preaching by Vasubandhu 
Vyiikhyii-yukti 
Rnam par bshad pa'i rigs pa (Ot. 5562) 
Seal of Wisdom Sutra 
1 fziina-mudrii-sutra 
Ye shes kyi phyag rgya'i mdo (Ot. 799) 
Seal, Worship, and Center of Concentration Sutra 
Samiidhi-cakra-sutra 
Ting nge 'dzin gyi 'khor lo'i mchod pa'i phyag rgya'i mdo (Ot. 907) 
Seated Before the Present Buddha Sutra 
Pratyutpanna-buddha-san;.mukha-avasthita-sutra 
Da /tar gyi sangs rgyas mngon du bzhugs pa'i mdo (Ot. 801) 
Secret of All Tantra 
Sarva-rahasya-tantra 
Thams cad gsang ba'i rgyud (Ot. 114) 
Secret Tantras of Manjuirf 
ManjuSrf-guhya-tantra 
'Jam dpal gsang ba'i rgyud (Toh. 544-52) 
Secret Tathiigata Sutra 
Tathiigata-guhya-sutra 
De bzhin gshegs pa'i gsang ba'i mdo (?) 
Sevenfold Way Sutra: Questions of A valokitesvara 
A valo_kitesvara-pariprcchii-sapta-dharmaka-siltra 
. 
Spyan ras gzigs dband phyug gis zhus pa'i chos bdun pa (Ot. 817)

--- PAGE 228 [DIRECT] ---

214 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Seventy Resolves by Asvagho~a 
Pra1'}idhiina-saptati 
Smon lam bdun cu (Ot. 5430) 
Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness by Nagarjuna 
Silnyatii-saptati 
Stong piz nyid bdun cu pa (Ot. 5227) 
Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning by Nagarjuna 
Yukti-sastika 
Rigs pa d.rug cu (Ot. 5225) 
Space-like Buddha Tantra 
Khasama-tantra 
Nam mkha' dang mnyam pa (Ot. 31) 
Stalks in Array Siltra 
Ga1'}4a-vyilha-siltra 
. 
Sdong po bkod pa'i mdo (Ot. 761 :45) 
Subduing by Akii.Savar"f}a Siltra 
Nam mkha' mdog gis 'dul ba'i mdo (?) 
Supplement to the Middle Way by Candrakirti 
Madhyamaka-avatiira 
Dbu rna Ia 'jug pa (Ot. 5261) 
Siltra of Akii.Sagarbha 
Akii.Sagarbha-siltra 
Nam mkha' snying po'i mdo (Ot. 926) 
Siltra of the Thirty-three 
Trayatrimsat-parivarta-siltra 
Sum cu rtsa gsum gi le'u (Ot. 889) 
Sutra on the Ten Levels 
Da$abhilmika-siltra 
Sa bcu pa'i mdo (Ot. 761:31) 
Siltra Set Forth by Alqayamati 
Alqayamati-nirde§a-siltra 
Blo gros mi zad pas bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 842) 
Sutriz Set Forth by Vimalakirti 
Vimalakirti-nirdesa-siltra 
Dri rna med par grags pas bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 843) 
Siltra Setting Forth the Three Bodies 
Trikiiya-nir:desa-siltra 
Sku gsum bstan pa'i mdo (Toh. 283) 
Siltra Setting Forth the Two Truths 
Satya-dvaya-nirdesa-siltra 
Bden pa gnyis bstan pa'i mdo (Ot. 846) 
Siltra Showing the Unthinkable Secrets 
Acintya-guhya-siltra 
Gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyab pa'i mdo (Ot. 760:3) 
Tantra of Amoghapii.Sa 
Amoghapii.Sa-tantra 
A mo gha pii sha (Ot. 365)

--- PAGE 229 [DIRECT] ---

Tantra of Tara's Arising 
Tara-bhava-tantra 
Sgroi rna 'byung ba'i rgyud (Ot. 390) 
Tathiigata's Compassion Sutra 
Tathagata-karurJa-sutra 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 215 
De bzhin gshegs pa'i snying rje'i mdo (Ot. 814) 
Tathagata Essence Siltra 
Tathiigata-garbha-sutra 
De bzhin gshegs pa'i mdzod kyi mdo (Ot. 924) 
Teaching in Sevens: Sexuality (Hinayana Sutra) 
Sapta-maithuna-samyukta 
'Khrig pa bdun bstan pa theg pa chung ba'i mdo 
Three Heaps Satra 
Triskandhaka-siltra 
Phung bo gsum gi mdo (Ot. 950) 
Three Jewels Praise by Vasubandhu 
Triratna-stotra 
Dkon mchog gsum gyi bstod pa (Ot. 2037) 
True Power Maker Tantra 
Susiddhi-kara-tantra 
Rab tu grub par byed pa (Ot. 431) 
Twenty Stanzas on Mahayana by Nagarjuna 
M ahiiyiina-vin:zsaka 
Theg pa chen po nyi shu pa (Ot. 5233) 
Twenty Verses on the Bodhisattva Vow by Candragomin 
Bodhisattva-samvara-vimsaka 
Byang chub sems dpa'i sdom pa nyi shu pa ( Ot. 5582) 
Twenty Verses on Gathering Merit by Nagarjuna 
Bsod nams kyi tshogs nyi shu pa (?) 
Unfailing Discipline 
Amogha-vinaya 
'Dul ba don yod pa (?) 
Unwavering Light Siltra on Reality's Own Emptiness of Intrinsic Nature 
Dharmatii-svabhiivq-silnyatii-acala-pratisarvaloka-sutra 
Chos nyid rang gi ngo bo nyid las mig. yo bas tha dad par bstan pa'i 
mdo ( Ot. 7906) 
VajrapiifJi Initiation Tantra 
VajrapiirJi-abhiSeka-tantra 
Lag na rdo rje dbang skur ba'i rgyud (Ot. 130) 
Wheel of Time: Great Tantra of Primal Buddha 
Paramadi-buddha-mahii-tantra-kalacakra-nama 
Dang po sangs rgyas rgyud chen 'dus kyi 'khor lo (Ot. 5) 
White Shining: The Middle Way by Devasarma 
Dbu rna dkar po 'char ba (?) 
B 
Tibetan Works 
Bu-ston rin-chen-grub, Bde-bar gshegs-pa'i bstan-pa'i gsal-byed chos-kyi 
'byung-gnas gsung-rab rin-po-che'i mdzod (1322).

--- PAGE 230 [DIRECT] ---

216 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
, Bstan-'gyur-gyi dkar-chag yid-bzhin nor-bu dbang-gi rgyal-po'i 
phreng-ba (1335). 
--, The Collected Works of B.u-ston, edited by Lokesh Chandra (New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1971). 
'Chad-kha-pa Ye-shes rdo-rje, Blo-sbyong don-bdun-ma, in Gdams-
ngag mdzod, Vol. II. 
Dwags-po lha-rje Sgam-po-pa, Dam-chos yid-bzhin nor-bu thar-pa rin-
po-che'i rgyan (Univ. of Washington xylograph). 
'Gos lo-tsa-ba Gzhon-nu-dpal, Bod-kyi yul-du chos dang chos-smra-ba 
ji-ltar 'byung-ba'i rim-pa deb-ther sngon-po (1478). 
Khams-pa lung-pa Shakya yon-tan, Blo-sbyong thun brgyad-ma, in 
Gdams-ngag mdzod, Vol. III. 
Kong-sprul Blo-gros mtha'-yas, Byang-chub lam-gyisgron-ma'i 'grel-pa 
snying-por bsdus-pa byang-chub lam-gyi snang-ba rab-tu gsal-ba, in 
Gdams-ngagmdzod, Vol. II. 
--, Gdams-ngag mdzod. A Treasury of Instructions and Techniques 
for Spiritual Realisation, compiled by 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul Blo-gros 
mtha'-yas (reprint: New Delhi: N. Lungtok and N. Gyaltsan, 1971). 
Las-chen Kun-dga' rgyal-mthsan, Bka'-gdams chos-'byung gsal-ba'i 
sgron-me (1494) (reprint: New Delhi: B. Jamyang Norbu, 1972), 
--, Legs-par bshad-pa bka' -gdams rin-po-che'i gsung-gi gees-pas nor-
bu'i bang-mdzod (Univ. of Washington xylograph). 
Rngog Legs-pa'i shes-rab, Bka'-gdams g/egs-bam; reprint: Vol. I (Pha 
chos); VoL II (Bu chos) (Varanasi: Kalsang Lhundup, 1973, 1974). 
Thu'u-bkwan Blo-bzang chos-kyi nyi-ma, Grub-mtha' thams-cad-kyi 
khungs dang 'dod-tshul ston-pa legs bshad shel-gyi me-long (1802) 
(reprint: New Delhi: Gedan Sungrab Minyam Gyunphel Series, Vol. 
II, 1969). 
Tsong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, Skyes-bu gsum-gyi nyams-su blang-
ba'i rim-pa thams-cad tshang-bar ston-pa'i byang-chub lam-gyi rim-pa 
(1408) (Univ. of Washington xylograph). 
Yongs-'dzin Ye-shes rgyal-mtshan, Byang-chub lam-gyi rim-pa'i bla-ma 
brgyud-pa'i rnam-par thar-pa rgyal bstan mdzes-pa'i rgyan-mchog 
phul-byung nor-bu'i phreng-ba (reprint: New Delhi: Gedan Sungrab 
Minyam Gyunphel Series, Vol. XVIII, 1970). 
C Sanskrit Editions 
A~tgsiihasrikii Prajiiiipiiramitii, with Haribhadra's Commentary Called 
Aloka, edited by P. L. Vaidya (Darbhanga: BSTNo. 4, 1960). 
Bhiivanii-krama [First] ofKamalasna, edited by G. Tucci (MBT, Part II, 
Rome: lstituto Italiano Per II Media Ed Estremo Oriente, 1958). 
Bhiivanii-krama [Third] of Kamalasna, edited by G. Tucci (MBT, Part 
III, Rome: lstituto Italiano Per II Media Ed Estremo Oriente, 1971). 
Bodhicaryiivatiira of Santideva, edited by V. Bhattacharya (Bibliotheca 
Indica, No. 280. Calcutta: The Asiatic Society, 1960). 
Daiabhilmikasiltra, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BST No. 7, Darbhanga: 
1967).

--- PAGE 231 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 217 
GalJcf.avyilhasiltra, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BST No. 5, Darbhanga: 
1960). 
Lankiivatiirasiltra, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BST No. 3, Darbhanga: 
1963). 
Madhyamaka.Siistra of Nagarjuna, with the Commentary Prasannapadii 
by Candrakirti, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BST No. 10, Darbhanga: 
1960). 
Mahiiyiina-siltriilankiira of Asanga, edited by S. Bagchi (BST No. 13, 
Darbhanga: 1970). 
Mahiiyiina-siltra-sarhgraha, Part I, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BSTNo. 17, 
, Darbhanga: 1961). 
Sik~iisamuccaya of Santideva, edited by P. L. Vaidya (BST No. 11, 
Darbhanga: 1961). 
D 
Translations 
Bendall, C., and Rouse, W. H. D., Sikshii-samuccaya (London: 1922) 
Reprint: New Delhi: Banarsidass, 1971. 
Conze, E., Abhisamayiilankiira (Rome: lstituto Italiano Per 11 Medio Ed 
Estremo Oriente, 1954). 
--, Buddhist Wisdom Books. [Vajracchedika and Prajiiii-piiramitii-
hrdaya] (London: Allen & Unwin, 1958). 
--, The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines. 
[A~{asiihasrikii-prajiiiipiiramitii] (Bolinas: Four Seasons, 1973). 
Evans-Wentz, W. Y., The Tibetan Book of the Dead. [Bar-do thos-sgrol] 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1927). 
Guenther, H. V., The Jewel Ornament of Liberation by Sgam-po-pa. 
[Yid-bzhin nor-bu thar-pa'i rin-po-che'i rgyan] (Berkeley: Shambala, 
1971). 
Hopkins, 1., et al., The Precious Garland of Niigiirjuna. [Riijaparikathii-
ratna-miilii] (London: Allen & Unwin, 1975). 
Inada, K. K., Niigiirjuna: Millamadhyamakakiirikii (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 
1970). 
La Vallee Poussin, L., L'Abhidhannakosa de Vasubandhu, 6 vols 
(Brussels: Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes Chinoises, 1971). 
Lessing, F. D., and Wayman, A., Mkhas-grub-rje's Fundamentals of the 
Buddhist Tantras. [Rgyud-sde spyi'i mam-par gzhag-pa rgyas-par 
brjod] (The Hague: Mouton, 1968}. 
Levi, S., Mahiiyiim;-sutra-alarr,kiira , de Asanga, 2 vols (Paris: 
Bibliotheque de L'Ecole des Hautes Etudes, 1907, 1911). 
Luk, C., The Vimalakfrti Nirdesa Siltra (Berkeley: Shambala, 1972). 
Matics, M. L., Entering the Path of Enlightenment. [Bodhicaryii-vatiira] 
(London: Macmillan, 1970). 
Obermiller, E., History of Buddhism- Chos-!Jbyung- By Bu-ston. 
(Heidelberg: 1931). 
Rhys-Davis, T. W., and Oldenberg, H., Vinaya Texts, Sacred Books of 
the East, Vols. XIII, XVII, XX (London: Oxford University Press, 
1881-2, 1885).

--- PAGE 232 [DIRECT] ---

218 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
Roerich, G. N., The Blue Annals of Gzhon-nu-dpal, 2 vols (Calcutta: 
Royal Asiatic Society, 1949, 1953). 
Snellgrove, D. L., The Hevajra Tantra, 2 vols (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1959). 
Suzuki, D. T., The Lankavatara Sutra (London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1932). 
Woodward, F. L., and Hare, E. M., The Book of Gradual Sayings. 
[Anguttara Nikiiya], 5 vols (London: Pali Text Society, 1932-6). 
Secondary Sources 
A 
Books 
Banerjee, A. C., Sarviistiviida Literature (Calcutta: Mukhopadhyay, 
1957). 
Beyer, S., The Cult of Tiirii (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1973). 
. 
Chandra, L., Mal'}qalas of the Tantra-Samuccaya (New Delhi: Inter-
national Academy of Indian Culture, 1967). 
Chattopadhyaya, A., A tiS a and Tibet (Calcutta: Indian Studies, 1967). 
Conze, E., Buddhist Thought in India (London: Allen & Unwin, 1962). 
--, The Prajfi.iipiiramitii Literature (The Hague: Mouton, 1960). 
--,Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies (Oxford: Cassirer, 1967). 
Das, S.C., Contributions on the Religion and History of Tibet (Calcutta: 
1881-2), reprint (New Delhi: Mafijusli, 1970). 
Dasgupta, S. B., An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism (Calcutta: Uni-
versity of Calcutta, 1958). 
Dayal, H., The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 
(London: 1932), reprint (Delhi: Banarsidass, 1970). 
Dutt, S., Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India (London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1962). 
--,Early Buddhist Monachism (London: 1924). 
Eimer, H., Berichte Uber Das Leben Des Dipainkarairijfi.iina (Bonn: 
Friedrich Wilhelms Universitat, 1974). 
Frauwallner, D., The Earliest Vinaya and Beginnings of Buddhist 
Literature (Rome: Istituto Italiano PerIl Medio Ed Estremo Oriente, 
1956). 
Guenther, H. V., Buddhist Philosophy in Theory and Practice. 
(Berkeley: Shambala, 1971). 
--, The Life and Teaching of Niiropa (Oxford: Clarendon, 1963). 
-· -, The Royal Song of Saraha (Seattle: University of Washington, 
1969). 
Matics, M. L. Entering the Path of Enlightenment (London: Macmillan, 
1970). 
Matsunaga, D. and A., The Buddhist Concept of Hell (New York: 
Philosophical Library, 1972). 
Murti, T. R. V., The Central Philosophy of Buddhism (London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1955).

--- PAGE 233 [DIRECT] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 219 
Nagao, G. M., A Study of Tibetan Buddhism (Tokyo: Shoten, 1954). 
Pachow, W., A Comparative Study of the Pratimolqa (Santiniketan: 
Sino-Indian Cultural Society, 1955). 
Raju, P. T., The Philosophical Traditions of India (London: Alllen & 
Unwin, 1971). 
Robinson, R. H., Early Madhyamika in India and China (Madison: 
University of Wisconsin, 1967). 
Snellgrove, D., and Richardson, H., A Cultural History of Tibet (New 
York: Praeger, 1968). 
Sopa, G. L., Lectures on Tibetan Religious Culture, 2 vols, unpublished 
text (University of Wisconsin, 1972). 
Speyer, J. S., The J atakamala (1895), reprint (Delhi: Banarsidass, 1971). 
Stcherbatsky, Th., Buddhist Logic, 2 vols (1930), reprint (New York: 
Dover, 1962). 
--, The Central Conception of Buddhism {1923), reprint (Delhi: 
Banarsidass, 1970). 
--,The Conception of Buddhist Nirva11a (1927), reprint (The Hague: 
Mouton, 1965). 
Streng, F. J., Emptiness- A Study in Religious Meaning (Nashville: 
Abingdon, 1967). 
Suzuki, D. T., On Indian Mahayana Buddhism (London: Rider, 
1950). 
Thomas, E. J., The History of Buddhist Thought {1933), reprint (New 
York: Barnes & Noble, 1971). 
--, The Life of the Buddha (1927), reprint (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1969). 
Tucci, G., The Theory and Practice of the Mandala (New York: Weiser, 
1969). 
--,Tibet (New York: Stein and Day, 1967). 
--.Tibetan Painted Scrolls, 2 vols (Rome: 1949). 
Vostrikov, A. 1., Tibetan Historical Literature (1962), reprint (CalCutta: 
Indian Studies, 1970). 
Waddell, L. A., The Buddhism of Tibet (1894), reprint (Cambridge: 
Heffer & Sons, 1959). 
Wangyal, G., The Door of Liberation (New York: Girodias, 1973). 
Warder, A. K., Indian Buddhism (Delhi: Banarsidass, 1970). 
Wayman, A., The Buddhist Tantras (New York: Weiser, 1973). 
Willis, J. D., The Diamond Light of the Eastern Dawn (New York: 
Simon .and Shuster, 1972). 
Wylie, T. V., The Geography of Tibet (Rome: Istituto Italiano Per II 
Medio Ed Estremo Oriente, 1962). 
B Articles 
Banerjee, A. C., "Bhik~ukarmavii.kya", Indian Historical Quarterly, 
Vol. XXV, No.1 (March, 1949), pp. 19-30. 
Das, S. C., "Bodhi Patha Pradipa" [Translation of Stanzas 1 to 30], 
JBTS, Vol. I, Part I (January, 1893), pp. 39-48.

--- PAGE 234 [DIRECT] ---

220 
A LAMP FOR THE PATH AND COMMENTARY 
, "Tibetan Text. Bodhi Patha Pradipa", JBTS, Vol. I, Part I 
(January, 1893), pp. 57-64. 
--, "Bodhipatha Pradipa" [Translation of Stanzas 31 to 65], JBTS, 
Vol. I, Part III (1893), pp. 21-6. 
Obermiller, E., "The Doctrine of Prajfia-paramita as exposed in the 
Abhisamayalamkara of Maitreya", Acta Orientalia, Vol. XI (1933), 
pp. 1-354. 
Ridding, C. M., and La Vallee Poussin, L., "A Fragment of the Sanskrit 
Vinaya. Bhik~unikannavacana", Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
Studies (London Institution), Vol. I, Part III (1917), pp. 123-43. 
Wayman, A., "Introduction to Tsong-kha-pa's Lam-rim chen-mo", Phi 
Theta Annual (Berkeley); Vol. 3 (July, 1952), pp. 60-70. 
--, "A Report on the Sravaka-Bhiimi and its Author (Asailga)", 
Journal of the Bihar Research Society, Vol. XLII, Parts III & IV 
(September-December, 1946), pp. 316-29, 
C Lexical Materials 
Conze, E., Materials for a Dictionary of the Prajfziipiiramitii Literature 
(Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation, 1967). 
Csoma de Koros, A., A Grammar of the Tibetan Language (Calcutta: 
Asiatic Society, 1834). 
Dagyab, L. S., Bod Brda'i Tshig Mdzod -
Tibetan Dictionary 
(Dhannsala: Imperial, 1966). 
Das, S. C., An Introduction to the Grammar of the Tibetan Language 
(1915), reprint (Delhi: Banarsidass, 1972). 
--, A Tibetan-English Dictionary with Sanskrit Synonyms (1902), 
reprint (Alipore: Government Press, 1960). 
Edgerton, F., Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary, 2 vols 
(New Haven: Yale, 1953). 
Jaeschke, H. A., A Tibetan-English Dictionary (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1881). 
Monier-Williams, M., A Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1899). 
Tibetan translators and Indian pandits, Mahii-vyutpatti (9th century), 
reprint (Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation, 1965).

--- PAGE 235 [DIRECT] ---

Index 
~bhayagiri-vasina sect 72 
Actirya (teacher) xiii, 44-6, 168, 184 
n. 9,192 
Action Tantras 168, 170 
Admon~t~ons for the ~ing Surra 56 
AdmomtLOns on Deszre Surra 73 
Aggregates 192 
Atds to conviction 192 
Aids to liberation 101, 153, 192 
Ajitanatha 68, 70, 80 
Akanistha 34 
Akasa~ King, on unremitting practice 
103 
Alcyayamata Sutra 33, 46-8, 59 
Ambaraja ritua17, 91 
A para sect 72 
Apparition Bodies 45, 156 n. 8, 157 n. 
16, 179, 192 
Appeasement 183 n. 6; rites of 11 
Arhat 156 n. 8, 192 
Arrest of Misconduct Sutra 73-4 
Asailga 33, 44, 46,52-3,63, 70, 90, 91, 
93,94,96,98,104,122,139,153,192 
Asvagho~a 103, 150, 151 
AtiSa, Indian saint and scholar ix, xiii, 
xiv, xv, 184 n. 9, 185 n. 19; and 
Discipline 82 n. 15 
Avalokttavrata 140, 142 
A valokitesvara Siitra 105 
A van taka sect 72 
Bahusrutlya school of Buddhism 72 
Banishment for scandal83 n. 35 
Basic Stanzas on the Middle Way 10, 
137, 157 n. 17 
Benefits of the Thought 55-7 
Bestowal30, 31 
Bhavaviveka 140, 150 
Bhavya 146, 151, 159 n. 53 
Bka'-gdams-pa 
('Word-Instructed') 
religious orders xii 
Blaze of Reasoning 121, 137, 142 
Blessed One 96, 117, 134, 135, 142, 
147, 149, 159 n. 39, 168, 171, 173, 
175 
Bodhibhadra guru 17, 20, 46,66-7,70, 
92,119,132,133,139,144,147,193 
Bodhisattva xii, 19-50 passim, 186 n. 
39, 193; Beginner 101-6; vows 66, 
67,88-109 
Bodhisatvattva Levels 7, 52-5, 88, 134 
Bodhisattva Section Sutra 148 
Body-offerings, worship of27 
Broad Practice 193 
Buddha(s) 68; as Body of Truth 33; 
worshipping 33 
Buddha-Enlightenment 153 
Buddha-field 193 
Buddhajiianapada 172 
Buddhapalita 140 
Buddha Sakyamini 156 n. 8 
Buddhism, eighteen schools of 71-2; 
growth of xtv; suppression of xiv; in 
Tibetxiii 
Bu-ston 184 n. 9 
Byang-chub-'od disciple xiv, 17, 18, 
183, 193 
Cakrasarhvara 180, 193 
Calmness 118, 119-23, 124 n. 11, 155 
n. 1, 159 n. 40, 193; achieving 9; with 
signs 121, 122, 125; without signs 
121, 122, 125 
Candragomin on vow taking 95 
Causally-Similar effect 99, 148 n. 34 
Candrakirti, works of 139, 140, 146, 
150, 151 
Candramitra 150, 151 
Chapter on Concentration Equipment 
119,120,121, 124n. 9, 125n.l5, 151 
Chapter on Conduct91, 94,98 
Chapter of Ever-Weeping 33 
Chapter of Sadiiprarudita 149 
Classification of the Middle and 
Extreme99 
Clear Words 137 
Cloud of Jewels Siitra 29, 88, 94, 102, 
104,131 
. 
Commentary on "The Sixty Stanzas of 
Reasoning" 140 
Commentary on "Twenty Verses on the 
Vow" 66-7,70,93, 95,98 
Community 193; acts of the four kinds 
74-6, 83 n. 24 
Compassion 43, 156-7, n. 13, n. 14 
Compassionate guru 89, 90 
Compassion Siitra 95-6 
Compendium of Doctrine Sutra 59 
Compendium of the Sutras 51, 134 
Compendium of Thamess: a Major 
Tantra68 
Compendium of Training 32, 50-1, 60, 
61,91,92,93,94, 123,134 
Concentration 34, 114, 153, 160 n. 63, 
193 
Conceptual Thought 11, 193 
Conduct 70, 114, 118, 119, 193; all-
inclusive 89; benefits of 94; extent of

--- PAGE 236 [DIRECT] ---

222 
INDEX 
91-3; for garnering virtue 97; for the 
good of others 97; perfection of 134; 
of purified body 96; training 96-8; 
VOW of 66, 96-7 
Confession of Failings 31 
Confession, methods 79 
Confession of Sins 30, 31 
Conquest of the Triple World 134 
Conscious Stream 193 
Contemplation 141-3 
Conversations of the Perfections 134 
Conviction, ordination by 75 
Dedicatory verse 16 
Deeds of the Conqueror as Mother 
Sutra 149 
Deeds of Samantabhadra 5 
Defamation 174 
Deferred NirvaQa 132, 155-6 n. 8 
Dependent Origination Proof 138, 193 
Descentinto Lanka Sutra 101, 148, 180 
Desire, dangers of 73 
Despairs, five 78-9 
Destinies 194 
Destruction 145, 146, 184 n. 6 
Destruction of Errors about the Middle 
Way 142 
Devapala, King 172 
Devasarma 140 
Dharani rituals 167, 169, 170 
Dharmakirti 145 
Dharmottara 145 
Diamond Seat 34 
Diamond-Particle Proof 137 
Dipathkarasri 12 
Diparilkarasrijiiana 181 
Dipathkarasripada 182 
Disciple, study of 72, 73, 75 
Discipline 78-80, 194 
Discipline-Master 77, 194 
Dissociation effect 99, 108 n. 34 
Doctrine 194 
Dominant effect 99, 108 n. 34 
Domination 184 n. 6 
Eightfold Path 194 
Eight Great Powers 166, 167, 184 n. 7, 
194 
. 
Eight serious virtues, ordination by 76 
Eight unfavourable conditions 194 
Elder (sthavira), Atisa as xiii 
Elements 194 
Emptiness 135-8,141,152,154, 183n. 
2, 185 n. 13, 194 
Enjoyment body 69, 157 n. 16, 194 
Enlightened Ones 157 n. 16 
Enlightenment 18, 49, 98, 103, 114, 
153, 154, 166; see also Enlighten-
ment Thought 
Enlightenment Thought 20, 24, 31, 
42-63, 132, 133, 134, 141, 170, 171, 
179, 181, 183 n. 2, 194; see also 
Enlightenment 
Entreaty 30 
Equipment of Enlightenment 11 
Equipment of Knowledge 98, 166, 167 
Equipment of Merit 25, 98, 120, 166, 
167 
Equipment Path 25, 44, 45, 153 
Equipment, perfecting 98-101, 115 
Equipment of Virtue 134 
Equipoise 194 
Essay on Enlightenment Thought 142, 
143 
Essential Reality 195 
Etiquette rules 81 n. 15 
Evil Works of Mara 93 
Excellence of Intention 105 
Excellence of Practice 105 
Excellence of Prior Cause 105-6 
Exhortation to Higher Intention 94, 
103, 115-17, 175 
Existence 145, 146, 152 
Expanding the Thought 57-8 
Exposition of the Undifferentiated 
Nature of All Phenomena 147 
Expulsion offence 77, 80 n. 4, 81 n. 4 
Extensive Sutra: Compendium of all 
Phenomena 131 
Faith, worship of27 
Families, classification of persons 80 n. 
2; five types of 68 
Family 67, 68, 81 n. 9 
Finely Woven Sutra 174 
Finger-Length Instruction 140 
Fire-offering 170 
Five Bovine Articles 195 
Five Branches of Knowledge 195 
Five Chapters on the Middle Way 140 
Five Converts 75 
Five Dominants 195 
Five effects of vows 99 
Five Eyes 195 
Five Monks, ordination by 76 
Five Paths 195 
Five Powers 195 
Five Wisdoms 153, 195 
Flaming Jewel Formula 28-9 
Flask initiation 170 
Food-offering 170 
Forbearance 89,90 
Form-Body 132 
Forsaking the vow 93 
Four Applications of Mindfulness 195 
Four Bases of Miraculous Power 123, 
195 
Four Basic Sins 195 
Four.Ciasses ofTantra 184 n. 9 
Four Diamond Seats Tantra 133

--- PAGE 237 [DIRECT] ---

Four Dispositions 144 
Four Extremes 136-7, 145, 146 
Four Great Proofs 139, 141, 151, 157 
Four Gross Sins 75 
Four Infinitudes 46, 97, 195 
Four Means of Attraction 97, 195 
Four Modes of Life 44, 196 
Four Noble Truths 160 n. 63-4 
Four Resources 196 
Four Right Efforts 123, 196 
Four Truths 35, 192, 196 
Four Truths in the Vision Path 160 n. 
64 
Four Virtues Sutra 94 
Fourfold Motion-with-Acts 74 
Fourteen Evil Things 93, 107 n. 16 
Giving, Perfection of 10 
Glang-dar-ma, 
persecution 
of 
Buddhism xiv 
Glorious Compendium of Diamond 
Knowledge: a Great Tantra 168 
Glorious Original Tantra 154, 178 
Glory of the Blessed One 103, 171 
Golden Splendour 103 
Good Flask 196 
Good Practice 103, 105, 154 
Good Practice Resolves 27, 30 
Great "Finely Woven": a Middle Way 
Treatise 140 
Great Lords of the Ten Levels 69 
Great Path of the Great Vehicle 91-2 
Great Peacock-like Dhtiranis 169 
Great Seal45, 62 n. 3, 185·n. 20 
Great Tantra Elucidating Meaning 
173-4 
Great Tantra of Primal Buddha 12 
Great Union Tantras 168 
Great Wagons, Path of the 17, 46 
GuQadatta 140 
Gul}amati 140 
GuQaprabha 75 
Gunasn140 
Gurus 20, 43, 51-3, 88, 89-90, 105, 
106, 118, 172, 196 
Haribhadra 153 
Harsh Destruction 173, 174 
Hearers 174, 196 
Hearers Level35-6, 108 n. 30 
Heart of Enlightenment 34-5 
Heart of Wisdom Compendium 140, 
142 
Heavenly Adorned Siitra 34 
Heavenly Treasure Siitra 28, 33, 59, 
123 
Hermaphrodite, becoming 77,85 n. 34 
Higher Insight 127-61 
Higher Intention 196 
Higher Meditation, training for 111-23 
INDEX 
223 
Higher Vision 123, 124 n. 11, 151, 196 
Highest Mundane Phenomena 178 
Highest Mundane Virtue 45, 62 n. 4 
Hinayana 156 n. 8; schools 158 n. 21; 
siitra and sexuality 73 
Homage, worship of27, 30 
Human-Activity effect 99, 108 n. 34 
Hundred Explanations of the Doctrine 
105,134 
Identity and plurality 137-8 
Ignorance 144, 145 
India's major philosophical traditions, 
157-8n. 20 
Inferior Person 5, 18 
Infinitudes 131 
Initiations 12, 169-72, 177 
Injunctions on Dealing with Women 
Siitra 178 
Insight, 10, 11; kinds of 124, 196; 
Perfection of 9; investigative 122, 
196; and means 130-61 
Insight-Initiation 196 
Insight-Wisdom 185 n. 19 
Instruction on the Non-Production of 
All Phenomena 104, 175 
Intermediate State 196 
Intrinsic Nature 196 
Jetavaniya sect 72 
Jfianakirti35, 131,132 
Jo-bo-rje 
("The 
Noble 
Lord"), 
Tibetan name for Atisa xiii 
Joyous Level196 
Kiilacakra 185 n. 19 
Karma 196 
Kaurakullaka sect 72 
Kusulupa 139 
Lack of identity 158 n. 24 
Lamp for "The Insight" 140 
Lamp of the Three Methods 155 
Lay Devotee 74, 197; precepts and 
rules 70-1, 81 n. 13; training of 
( upiisaka) 35 
Laymen and religious initiation 176 
Levels of Yoga Practice 70 
. 
LimbsofCalmness9, 119,120-4,197 
Limbs of Enlightenment 123 
Limbs, meaning of 124 n. 13 
Lion's Roar Siitra 33 
Liquor, dangers of72 
Lord of the World 197 
Love42-3 
Madhyamika 183 n. 2 
Mahasamghika, five schools of71 
Mahavihiira-vasina sect 72

--- PAGE 238 [DIRECT] ---

224 
INDEX 
Mahayana xii, xiii, 17, 18,35-6,66-7, 
69, 73, 74, 80 n. 2, 105 
Mahisiisaka school of Buddhism 72 
Maitreya bodhisattva 6, 49-50, 117, 
197 
Major E?tposition of the "Treasure" 
70 
MaJ;IC,lala 170, 177, 197 
Maftjugho~a guru 144, 151, 197 
Maftjusri7, 197 
Mantra 11, 166, 167, 173, 176, 177, 
178, 180, 183 n. 4, 186 n. 3, 197; 
initiations 169-72; defaming 174; 
Tantras of 173; Vehicle of 166-7, 
169, 170, 174, 175, 183 n. 1 
Mantrayiina 171, 183 n. 2 
Maturation effect 99, 108 n. 34 
Means 9, 10, 157 n. 16, 197 
Means of Attraction 131 
Mediocre person 5, 18, 106 
Meditation, defects and remedies in 
'120-1 
Meditative worship 25, 27,28-31 
Meru, mountain 197 
Messenger, ordination by 76 
Middle Way 139, 143-7, 197 
Middle Way Treatise "Finely Woven" 
137 
' 
Mindfulness of the Buddha Sutra 123 
Miracle of Resolute Calm 94 
Monastic life 66-81 
Monk 72-3, 197; training 71 
Moon-Lamp Sutra 94, 114, 148 
Mount Gaya Siltra 130, 131 
Mundane Paths 35, 44 
Niigarjuna 34, 44, 50, 51, 68, 70, 118, 
137, 139, 140, 142-7 passim, 150-8 
passim, 178, 179, 182, 198 
Nme degrees 109 n. 52 
Nirviil)a 54, 101, 132, 156 n. 8, 198 
No-Family system 67, 68 
Non-conceptual Progress Formula 11, 
147 
Non-discursive reasoning 143 
Non-existence 145, 146, 152 
Non-person, acts dealing with 75 
Non-Self 198 
Not turning back, interpretation of 
34-5 
Novice 74; vow 71 
Nuns 16, 17, 71, 74,82 nn. 16, 17, 198 
Objective-basis worship 31, 32 
Obscuration 198 
Ocean of Discipline 148 
Odantapuri xiii 
Offence against monastic rule, eight 
classes 80 n. 4 
Omniscient One 147 
One-day vows 70 
One Hundred Thousand Stanza Per-
fection of Insight 123 
Ordinary things, worship of27 
Ordination 76: ceremony 80 n. 3, 83 n. 
23, 84n. 28 
Ordination of the Sixty Bhadravargas 
76 
Ornament of the Middle Way 158 n. 24 
Ornament of Realisations 61, 63 n. 33, 
153, 160 n. 60 
OrnamentoftheSutras61,80, 121 
Ornament of the Wisdom Engaging the 
Sphere of All Buddhas 148 
Ornaments of Virtuous Practice 198 
Own Existence 198 
Padma vajra 174 
PaiQc;liipatika Avadhiitipa, monk 173, 
175, 176, 177, 178, 186 n. 30 
Palace of the Greatlewel171 
Pa~rjita, master of Sanskrit xiii 
Path 131, 152, 186, n. 39; to Enlighten-
ment 114; of the Bodhisattvas 17; of 
the Great Wagons 88, of Mahayana 
36; of the Ordinary Person 108 n. 36; 
of the Perfection 153, 184 n. 11; of 
Practice 35; of Vision 153, 192 
Penances 83 n. 25 
Perfect Enli~htenment 6-9, 44, 54, 55 
Perfect Enlightenment of Vairocana 
132 
Perfection of Conduct, nine titles 
88-9,135 
Perfection of giving 10, 131 
Perfection of Insight Siltra 32-3, 38, 
39, 52, 120, 123, 124 n. 1, 130, 139, 
159, 180, 186n. 41 
Perfection Path 170 
Perfection Vehicle 23, 171, 183 n. 1 
Perfections 130, 134, 135; siitras 134 
Permanence 145, 146 
Persons, acts dealing with 75 
Petition 30, 31; ceremony 37-8 
Phenomena 198 
Place, preparation of36 
Pleasing objects, worship of28-9, 30 
Plurality proofs 158 n. 24 
Po~adha 79, 198 
Powers 167 
Practice 184 n. 9 
Practice Path 153 
Practice Tantras 168 
Praise, worship of27 
Prajiiaptiviidii school of Buddhism 72 
Priitimoksa 7, 35, 36, 82 n. 14, 180, 
186n. 
39, 
199; 
requisite 
for 
bodhisattva vow 66-9; seven ranks 
of 69-71, 96; Siitra 79; vows 67, 68, 
69, 77,88,185

--- PAGE 239 [DIRECT] ---

Preaching, dangers of 115 
Preceptor-Initiation 12, 170, 171, 172, 
185 nn. 19, 20 
Precious Garland of Discourses 105, 
140 
Presentation of gifts 46 
Producing Power of Faith Sutra 123, 
131 
Profound View 199 
Progress in Knowledge 70 
Progress Mind/Thought 199 
Progress in Practice 32, 49, 51, 60, 92, 
103, 105, 134 
Progress-Thought of Enlightenment 
58-62 
Prosperity 183 n. 6; rites of 11 
Pure Life/Celibacy 199; of monk 72-3 
Purification of body, speech and mind 
95-8 
Purification, Twelve Qualities of 79, 
85 n. 37, 199 
Purva sect 72 
Qualities of Enlightenment Thought 
49-50 
Questions of Celestial King Druma 
Sutra96 
Questions of Kiiiyapa Sutra 58, 74, 178 
Questions of King Udayana-vatsa 73 
Questions of Ugra 104 
Questions of Upiili 104 
Questions of Vi'radatta Sutra 6 
Ranks of the community 69-71 
Realm of True Reality 199 
Refu~e-taking 35-8, 76 
Rejmcing 30,31 
Relation of conduct to concentration 
114 
Relative Truth 44 
Religious celibate initiations 176, 177 
Religious life 199; five kinds of70 
Removal of Ajiitaiatru's Regrets 149 
Repetition of the Thought 55 
Resolution/Resolve-mind/Resolve 
Thought 199 
Resolve and Progress, difference 
between 60-2 
Resolve, reading for 103 
Resolves 154 
Resolve-Thought of Enlightenment 
60,61 
Retreat examination 84 n. 27 
Rice Seedling Sutra Commentary 140 
Rites 183 n. 6; ofTantra 166-7 
Ritual of Begetting the Thought 43-4, 
57,5S' 
Ritual for Confession of Failings 79 
Ritual, learned in 89-90; for taking the 
vow91 
· 
River of Brine Sutra 31 
Royal Resolves 25-7 
INDEX 225 
Royal Union Tantra: Cakrasamvara 
182 
Siigaramati Sutra 31 
Siigaramegha, monk, 52 
Samantabhadra, deeds of25 
!)al)lsiira 5, 101, 132, 199 
Siintaraksita 138 
Santideva 32, 44-95 passim, 98, 114, 
, 118, 136-7, 140-52passim 
Siintipa, guru 99, 108n. 36, 139 
Saraha 118, 124 n. 9 
Siiriputra 48, 60 
Sarviistiviidii 71, 72, 75,77 
Sastra 139-41, 200 
Schools 139-41 
Sde-gzhung Rin-po-che, guru 185 n. 19 
Self-ordination 75 
Sense-Bases 200 
Setting Forth the Triple Pledge 171 
Setting Forth the Two Truths, Sutra 142 
Seven Classes of Tantra 167-72 
Seven Limbs of Enlightenment 200 
Seven Limbs of Worship 30 
Seven Noble Riches 123, 200 
Seven Precious Things 28, 200 
Seven Ranks of Priitimoksa 200 
Sevenfold Way, The, on sexuality 73 
Sevenfold Way Sutra: Questions of the 
Bodhisattva A valokitesvara 58, 122 
Sevenfold Worship 5, 25-8, 38, 
109-49,200 
Seventeen Ornaments of Religious 
Practice 79, 85 
Seventy Resolves 103 
Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness 10, 140 
Sexuality and danger of women 73 
Six Mindfulnesses 123, 125 n. 29 
Skill Tantras 168 
Solitary Buddhas 68, 174, 200 
!)pace 34-55 passim, 93, 94, 200 
Sri-diparhkarajii.anapiida, guru 182 
Srigupta 138 
Sri-jii.iinakirti 63 
Stalks of Array 6, 60 
Sthavira sects 71, 72 
Sthiramati, Elder 140 
Striving Family 68, 69 
Suffering 200 
Superior person 5, 18, 20, 46, 66, 106, 
181 
Superknowledges 8, 9, 58, 114-25,200 
Supplement to "The Middle Way" 137, 
140, 142 
Supreme and Perfect Enlightenment 
54, 153 
Supreme Tantras 169; Union Tantra 
183 n. 3, 184 n. 9, 186 n. 4

--- PAGE 240 [DIRECT] ---

226 
INDEX 
Supreme Worship 27, 29, 31 
Siira 105, 134 
Sutra(s), bibliography of 149-50; 
study 50-60, 104, 123; teaching on 
Conduct92 
Sutra on the Ten Stages 103 
Sidra Set Forth by Aksayamati 123, 131 
Sutra SetForth by Vimalakfrti 130, 131 
SuvarQadvipa gurus 17, 20, 46, 68-9, 
139,176,200 
Suvikriintavikriimf 
Perfection 
of 
Insight 148 
Tamra5atixa school of Buddhism 72 
Tantra xti, xiii, xiv, 133-4, 144, 
165-87, 201; of Mantra 173; of Bu-
ston 184n. 9 
Tantra Mahayana see Mantra Vehicle 
Tara 170,201 
Taraniitha 185 n. 18 
Tathagata 7, 24, 31, 32, 33, 67, 88, 
95-6, 103, 117, 118, 149, 156 n. 8, 
175 
Teacher of Healing 103, 171 
Teaching in Sevens: Sexuality 73 
Ten Directions 201 
Ten Favourable Conditions 201 
Ten Great Bestowals 103 
Ten Levels 2ot' 
Ten Perfections 97, 201 
Ten Religious Practices 201 
Ten Thoughts of Enlightenment 97, 
201 
Ten Unvirtuous Acts 96,201 
Ten Virtuous Acts 201 
Thatness 146,177-8,201 
Thirteen Mantras (Atisa) 186 n. 31 
Thirty-seven Enlightenment Wings 
202 
Thought of Enlightenment 58, 166 
Three Conduct Trainings 8, 107 n. 29 
Three Excellences 105 
Three Heaps Sutra 27, 30, 105', 202 
Three Jewels 24, 25, 30, 36, 37, 43, 97, 
101,106,123,133,202 
Three Persons Theme 18 
Three Refuges, beginner and 105, 171, 
202 
Three Turnings of the Wheel 158 n. 33 
Topics for Calmness 121-5 
Training, three kinds of 38, 45, 171 
Transgression 77, 78,81 n. 14,93-4 
Treasure of Phenomenology 20 n. 4, 
70, 77 
Tripitakamiila 155, 166, 183 n. 1 
Triple Declaration, Actof74, 75 
Triple Refuge 24-39, 43 
True Nature 202; Family 68, 69 
Truth Body 69,202 
Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba, monk 17, 182, 
183,202 
Tho-ling Monastery xii, xiii, xiv 
Twenty Verses on Gathering Merit 103 
Twenty-seven MaQQalas 24 
Two Equipments 115, 166, 167,202 
Two Truths 202 
Ultimate Element 68 
Ultimate Truth 118, 186 n. 41 
Uncertain Family 68 
Unfailing Discipline 178 
Unfailing Thought, marks of 100-1 
Union 184 n. 9 
Vaidurya 103, 171 
Vaisravana (god of riches) 49 
Vajra-Preceptor 184 
Vajradhvaja, bodhisattva 103 
Vasubandhu, scholar 17, 19, 75, 77, 
100,101,158,181,203 
Vatsiputriya sect 72 
Vehicles 186 n. 39,203 
Vehicle of the Hearers 155 
Vehicle of Mantra, see Mantra 
Vehicle of Mysticism 163-87 
Vehicle of Perfection, see Perfection 
Vehicle 
Vikrama5ila monastery xiii 
Vimuktisena 153 
Vinaya 80 n. 3, 180 
Vision Path 160 nn. 63, 64, 153 
Vows7-8, 76-9,90,96-7,98 
Wagons203 
Wisdom 11, 142-3 
Wisdom ofThatness 177-8 
Worship, kinds of28-34 
Yellow Hats, group of monks xiii 
Yoga 122-3, 153; Tantra 134 
Yogacara school80, n. 2, 105
