=== PAGE 1 ===
Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism

L. S. Cousins

This paper is concerned with a relatively little known form of Buddhism,
now found mainly in South-East Asia. There is a surprisingly widespread
notion that Theravada Buddhism is, at least doctrinally, a rather uniform, if
not monolithic, type of Buddhism. This is certainly a mistaken impression;
so in the first part of this paper I shall begin by attempting to outline briefly
some aspects of the historical diversity of this type of Buddhism and then go
on to survey the various trends of twentieth century and contemporary
Theravada Buddhism as different scholars have described them. Having
established something of the nature of this in fact rather varied history, I
shall then discuss the historical origins of the specific tradition which I shall
call Esoteric Buddhism and which some other scholars refer to as Tantric
Theravada. In the second part of the paper I survey certain of the particular
ideas of this type of Buddhism, giving passages from texts which adopt this
approach.

Part One

Historical roots

The name Theravada strictly refers to a branch of the Buddhist sangha
which adheres to a version of the monastic rules deriving from the second
century after the Buddha’s parinibbana and claiming to be the original
teaching (theravdda), later understood as ‘doctrine of the Elders’. Since the
alternative (more conservative) version of the Mahasanghikas ceased to be
used in the late medieval period (probably in Nepal), the monastic
traditions deriving from Tibet and China are properly speaking also
Theravadin, or at least belong to traditions which were once Theravadin.
This usage is quite comparable to such terms as ‘Catholic’ or ‘Orthodox’ in
the history of Christianity. (Both parties would of course claim to be both


=== PAGE 2 ===
186 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

orthodox and catholic.) So for the most part I shall use the more satisfactory
(and neutral) geographical designation of Southern Buddhism.

This reminder of the historical origins of Southern Buddhism serves to
recall the considerable extension of this tradition in both space and time. It
is the religious tradition of the majority in the present-day countries of
Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, Ceylon (Sri Lanka), Laos and Thailand
(Siam) with smaller populations in geographically contiguous areas of
Bangladesh, China, India, Malaysia and Vietnam. In total numbers the
Buddhist population amounts to over 120 million people in this homeland
area, not counting a few millions in the recent missionary outreach, mainly
in India and Indonesia and among Chinese diaspora populations but also
in smaller numbers in Europe, the Americas and Australasia.

In much of this homeland area Buddhism has quite ancient roots. ‘This is
most obviously the case with Ceylon which archeological data suggests was
colonized from northern India around the sixth century Bc, probably as
part of a more general process in which urban settlements were extended
southwards from the Gangetic area by colonisation.' The recent discovery
at Anuradhapura of Brahmi inscriptions which appear to date from a
century or two before the reign of the Emperor Asoka in the third century
BC indicates close contact with cultural developments in the north.? We may
then suspect that Buddhism had already reached the island and made some
headway before its official introduction in the third century. Normally this
kind of royal acceptance is likely to follow after a degree of prior penetration
among the general population has already taken place. At a slightly later
date the widespread nature of the Buddhist presence is well-evidenced by
the archzological discovery of some hundreds of cave sites for monastic
practice, scattered over a large part of the island.

Buddhism also has ancient roots in other areas of its present
geographical outreach. Tradition in fact attributes to the Emperor Asoka
missions to Suvannabhimi ‘the Gold Country’ — this must be either a
particular location in Southeast Asia or a general term for the whole area.
Scholarship has generally rejected the historicity of these accounts, perhaps
rightly; however, given the level of sea-born trade and other contacts they
cannot be wholly ruled out. Future archeological research may yet provide
evidence of them. Indeed it is clear from the archeological discoveries at
Beikthano and elsewhere that the up-country Pyu people had obtained
technical innovations directly or indirectly from Mauryan India. At present
there is little firm evidence of cultural importations in the period from
around the third century Bc to the second century ap. Caution must be
exercised here, however, since it is possible that Mauryan-style Buddhism
would in any case have left little in the way of material remains.

In any case it is probable that forms of Buddhism using some kind of
Middle Indian (Pali or closely related) were present among the Pyu and
Mon peoples of present-day Burma and Thailand by the second century

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 187

AD and even perhaps somewhat earlier.? Most probably Buddhist traditions
were introduced there from Ceylon or South India together with a form of
Brahmi writing in the early centuries ap. It is likely that this would have
been a form or forms of the Vibhajjavadin tradition current in Ceylon and
the Tamil country. This would be a pre-Buddhaghosa form and not
necessarily exclusively of the orthodox Mahavihara school.

Indeed it is clear from both literature and archeology that throughout
the first millennium ap. other schools and traditions of Buddhism were
present in Ceylon itself. In particular the important and at times
numerically stronger* Abhayagiri school, while preserving a slightly
divergent recension of the Pali scriptures, seems to have also studied North
Indian Sanskrit literature, especially that of the Mahayana and later also
that of the Mantrayana. Archeological discoveries of Sanskrit texts, statues
of bodhisattvas and various cult objects make this reasonably certain. Indeed
some Mahayanist practices continued until relatively recent times with a
few remnants still current today.°

A similar picture emerges for Lower Burma in the mid-first millennium.
Hence the presence of Sanskrit materials and Mahayana cult objects does
not necessarily indicate the presence of Sarvastivadin or other schools. It
could equally be accounted for by the presence of a branch of the
Abhayagiri tradition or some similar Pali-based school open to
developments on the Indian subcontinent. In either case we could expect
traditions and practices from diverse sources to be handed down to
posterity. In fact even the orthodox Mahavihara school incorporates a
good deal of material of North Indian origin in its little-studied later
commoentarial literature. However, at a later period, as the evidence from
Pagan clearly shows, distinct influences from the predominantly tantric and
Sarvastivadin Pala Buddhism of Eastern India were certainly present in
Burma.’

Looking more widely, there is no doubt of the presence of Sanskrit-based
schools of Buddhism in Indo-China, and in some parts of present-day
Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia. We can then be sure that South-East
Asia received a rich and varied heritage of Buddhist traditions from its own
ancient beginnings, from later developments in India and equally from a
plural situation in Ceylon.

Varieties of Southern Buddhism

There has in fact been considerable discussion among scholars of differing
trends and tendencies in the Southern Buddhist countries. We cannot
summarize the whole literature here, but some key points must be
mentioned. First of all, the distinction between traditional and innovative,
modernizing forms of Buddhism was already known to scholarship in the
late nineteenth century. In 1962 Heinz Bechert adopted the term ‘Buddhist


=== PAGE 3 ===
188 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

modernism’ to describe the latter, offering (in 1964) a (non-exhaustive) list
of twelve main characteristics. In 1970 Gananath Obeyesekere coined the
memorable expression ‘Protestant Buddhism’. This has been preferred by
some scholars, but I must confess to finding it slightly tacky.

It is of course clear that there is no such thing as a monolithic movement
of Buddhist modernism. Some of the tendencies classified under this
heading have clearly been endemic in Buddhist history. For this reason,
writing in 1984, I preferred to speak of three important trends, variously
combined with traditionalism: modernism, reformism and ultimatism. By
modernism I meant to indicate both institutional change to accommodate
new social and economic circumstances and the adoption of concepts and
practices influential in the modern world. Reformism on the other hand is
the attempt rather to restore an earlier, ideal state of Buddhism in general
and the sangha in particular. This is hardly something new — indeed it is
probably as old as the formation of the Theravada itself. A new element is,
however, introduced through awareness of modern historical criticism,
which differentiates more sharply the various strata of the tradition. The
third trend, ultimatism, is the tendency to focus on the higher aspects of
Buddhist practice and neglect traditional preliminary practices and
outward forms. It too is a perennial in the history of Buddhism.

More recently still George Bond has distinguished three new develop-
ments alongside and partly stemming from Protestant Buddhism. The first
of these and certainly the most important is Neotraditionalism, understood
as a return to traditional ways with a minimal accommodation to the needs
of the modern situation. The other two are the Insight meditation move-
ment and moves towards an emphasis on social action.

The pace of change has, however, accelerated greatly in the last few
decades with the result that scholars are now beginning to speak of Post-
Protestant Buddhism (and perhaps even Post-modernist Buddhism?). ‘The
former term has been adopted by Obeyesekere and Gombrich to describe
what they see as radical changes in recent decades in Sri Lanka. They
characterise these as an infiltration of devotional religiosity and magical
practices.®

In a recent paper Bechert has surveyed ten major new trends in
contemporary Buddhism. I list them briefly in slightly amended form:

The Buddhist contribution to the world-wide so-called ‘green’
movement,

A reaction against Buddhist nationalism;

Reassertion of the teachings and values of traditional Buddhism;
Radical return to the roots of Buddhism (e.g. Santi Asoke);
Renewal of the ideals of the ‘forest-dwelling’ monks;

Revival of samatha meditation;

Revival of ritualism;

-

TOG EO ND

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 189

8. Syncretism with various other Buddhist traditions;
g. A tendency towards ‘remythologization’;
10. Reassertion of women’s rights.°

The fourth of these is a form of what I call ultimatism. The majority of
the others could be classified as either Neotraditionalism (3;7;9) or as a
further development of tendencies long present in Buddhist modernism
(1;8;10). Some contain elements of both these (5;6).

One other important cause of change is the movement of ideas and
practices around the different Southern Buddhist countries. This is clearly
very old and can sometimes be circular. Note the way in which the monastic
ordination was restored to Ceylon from Burma under Vijayabahu at the
end of the eleventh century, only to be exported to both Burma and
Thailand on various subsequent occasions, restored again from Thailand in
the eighteenth century and imported several times from Burma in the
nineteenth century. There could easily have been other occasions which we
do not know about. Similar movements have clearly occurred both with
texts and with ritual and meditation practices. We must then bear in mind
that the study of individual Buddhist countries in isolation could be
misleading.

Nor is this the only problem that could arise from the process of study
itself; Some of the perception of change is clearly a result of the greatly
increased numbers of scholars studying various aspects of Southern
Buddhism. Many of these tendencies have probably been present
especially in South-East Asia, for a very long time, simply coming into
fashion and going out of fashion at intervals. Ceylon on the other hand
may be something of a special case, as Buddhism on the island appears to
have passed through a kind of genetic bottleneck under Hindu and
Christian rule in the late medieval and early modern period, particularly
as regards the Buddhism of the élite.

The origins of Esotericism

The above discussion has directed our attention away from the background
practices of traditional Buddhism. In fact even this shows a great deal of
variety, incorporating and preserving elements from many different
sources. Given the long historical background mentioned above this should
not be surprising. It is clear too that an elaborate and varied interface with
popular deity cults has been the norm for almost all forms of Buddhism
since at least the time of Asoka and quite probably earlier.
Moreover, in traditional Southern Buddhism a rich ceremonial and
elaborate ritualism has also been the norm for a very long time. Much of it
goes back to the last centuries of the Anuradhapura kingdom in Ceylon
and no doubt to a similar date elsewhere. Some at least is pre-Buddhaghosa,


=== PAGE 4 ===
190 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

with apotropaic elements deriving from the Canon itself.!° This ritualism is
sometimes attributed to Mahayana influences, but may equally be derived
from those elements of pre-Mahayana Buddhism which underlie the
development of Mahayana. Similar problems arise if it is attributed to
Hindu influences — it may equally have its source in the cult of the deities
which was certainly a normal part of the life of lay supporters of the
Buddhist sangha since the very beginnings of Buddhism. Of course, this is
not to dispute the existence of many elements imported from Mahayana
and Hinduism at a later date. Rather, it is to suggest that they could be
introduced precisely because they fitted well with practices already current.

What I am concerned with here is a specific form of Southern Buddhism
which I call Esoteric Buddhism. Let me first make clear that this is not the
same as the more general practices of a magical kind which are as endemic
in the Southern Buddhist countries as they were in Europe until quite recent
times — in their local form involving the use of yantra or mantra and/or ritual
for purposes of protection, healing, harming, empowering and general
assistance. Nor is it the same as the equally endemic trance-based ecstatic
and mediumistic practices used for similar purposes.

These are phenomena which are widespread in agricultural societies the
world over. Gombrich and Obeyesekere draw attention to the way in which
they have recently invaded the urban milieu in Sri Lanka. Similar
phenomena can be seen in Bangkok. It should be noted, however, that this
can itself be seen as an aspect of Buddhist modernism, a tendency which
often in practice amounts to Europeanisation. I have myself seen European
spiritualist literature displayed at centres for spirit-mediumship in Bangkok.
More generally the last thirty years has seen produced in both Europe and
North America a large body of occult literature of various kinds. Inevitably
such works have an influence in Asia; it is precisely the urban middle class
which is most exposed to them. Equally, young people studying abroad
have met such ideas and practices.

Returning to esoteric Buddhism, what I am referring to is a type of
Southern Buddhism which links magical and ritual practices to a
theoretical systematisation of the Buddhist path itself. Of course the
distinction I have made is in part an artificial one. Popular magic and ritual
is on the one hand the raw material of esoteric Buddhism, while on the
other we see rituals and mantras derived from esoteric Buddhism widely
used at a popular level. A growing tendency since the mid-nineteenth
century has been pressure from reformist groups (often supported by
modernizing governments) to remove elements identified with esoteric
Buddhism from monastic practice, but there is some evidence to suggest
that it was a widely accepted part of normative Southern Buddhism before
the nineteenth century.

Research in this area has been spearheaded by the work of F. Bizot,
based originally on contacts with the still living form of this tradition in

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 191

Cambodia. He has collected a number of manuscript works of this kind
and translated some of this material into French. It is not yet entirely clear
where this literature fits in the overall history of Southern Buddhism, but
Bizot has, as John Strong puts it:

... managed to show that, where many had once seen only “corruptions” or
“popular aberrations”, there may in fact be found a genuine tradition,
complete with its own history, ideology, ritual and soteriological endeavours."

At present there is no agreed terminology to designate this material.
Bizot tended originally to speak of the unreformed Mahanikaya tradition
and more recently of non-Mahaviharavasin currents. Bechert seems to
prefer to speak of ‘tantric Theravada’, a term also sometimes used by Bizot.

Bizot sees the origins of this tradition in the ancient Buddhism of the
Mon. This may well be correct, but still leaves the problem of the ultimate
source. There are at least five possibilities. It is perhaps useful to look at these:

1. The Mantrayana Buddhism of the later Indian Mahayana.

This could be either a direct import from Bengal or via the Mantrayana
traditions which were at some points influential in, for example, Indochina
and Java. The objection to this is well-indicated by Bechert:

There is not the slightest hint at the influence of any Mahayanistic thought
nor are there any traces of the terminology of those forms of tantric
Buddhism which are known to have existed in India. In terms of its doctrinal
background, this “tantric Theravada” is based on the scriptures of
Theravada in Pali exclusively. The followers of this tantric Theravada,
however, discover a deeper meaning behind the obvious one in the doctrines
and texts of the Theravadins.'?

2. Influences from Saivite traditions formerly current in Cambodia and elsewhere.

The objection to this is similar. There are a few concepts which perhaps
derive from brahmanical tantric traditions. Notably the terms for some of
the inner channels within the body seem to be Pali versions of those used in
various Hindu traditions. Overall, however, the resemblances do not seem
very great.

3. A home-grown product which developed in Southeast Asia.
Bechert has recently put forward this view:

It seems that the esoteric teaching of tantric Theravada originated when new
methods of concentration and psychic cultivation which became known
under the name of “tantra” in India spread over the whole world of Indian
religion... . At that time Buddhism in mainland India was predominantly
Mahayana, and thus tantric Buddhism arose on the basis of Mahayanism
there. The Theravada communities of Southeast Asia, however, have largely


=== PAGE 5 ===
192 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

remained Hinayanistic. Thus, the new methods were adapted to Hinayanistic
Theravada and the terminology of Mahayanistic Tantrism including the use
of the word tantra was avoided.'*

This hypothesis would certainly account for the emergence of esotericism
in Southern Buddhism and even possibly imply a fairly ancient date for
this. There are other possibilities:

4. A product of the Abhayagin school in Ceylon.

A similar process to the above might have taken place among the non-
Mahavihara schools in Ceylon or among the followers of that school in
mainland India. Unfortunately it has not so far proven possible to identify
material which is clearly of this origin.* Moreover, the Abhayagiri school
in Ceylon seems to have adopted Mahayana teachings and their Sanskrit
literature without inhibition.

5. A product of the Mahavthara tradition.

We cannot as yet rule out the possibility of a development within the
bounds of the orthodox tradition itself: Certainly of all schools this was the
one most attached to the Pali language and the use of Pali terms to derive
mantras is a strong feature of these Esoteric Southern Buddhist texts. Such
a development could have occurred at various points in the history of the
Mahavihara tradition. Indeed it might do much to explain that tradition’s

successful resistance to the trends which led to the demise of most other
forms of Indian Buddhism.

Buddhaghosa mentions secret texts (gu/hagantham) in three of his works, in
the context of teachings which will not be received from a teacher if one
does not pay proper respect.'® The author of the Abhidhamma commentary
and Upasena (c. 500 AD) refer to such secret texts, while discussing stinginess
as to teaching (dhamma-macchariya).'° There are also references to various
texts prefixed by the appellation ‘secret’, but these were certainly considered
heterodox.'” The word gilha can hardly admit of any interpretation other
than secret.’* (Gantha of course does not necessarily refer to written texts.) So
it is likely that trends towards esotericism were already developing before the
fifth century ap. There is obviously no way of knowing for certain the
content of Buddhaghosa’s secret texts, but it is highly significant that the
idea of such works was present and the very existence of the term could
easily have been sufficient to open the door to an esoteric interpretation.

We may speculate that the content of these is likely to be similar to the
meditation manual which was found in Central Asia and subsequently
translated into German by Dieter Schlingloff.!* Although this is presumably
of (Mila-)Sarvastivadin origin, it is very much based upon the application of
visualization techniques to the traditional topics for meditation. It is not
Mahayanist, although it could be seen as tending towards the Mahayana.

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 193

Alexander Soper drew attention to various works preserved in Chinese with
a similar orientation towards visualization.” For our present purposes it is
significant that the Apadana, a late canonical Pali work, already contains a
marked tendency towards visualization.

Dhammapala, closely followed by Sariputta, the twelfth century
commentator, explains Buddhaghosa’s secret texts as: “Secret texts expound
emptiness [and] are connected with the truths, the taking rebirth (patisandhi)
of beings and [the law of] conditionality”.”* The mention of the taking
rebirth of beings is interesting; in the mahdtika to the Visuddhimagga, also
attributed to Dhammapala, we find reference to the other items but not to
this. Instead Dhammapila refers there to the item of kammatthanagantham.”
Since the aka writers normally stay rather close to one another, this is likely
to be a deliberate change. It may imply that he considered the notions of
kammatthana and taking rebirth of beings as equivalent in the context of
‘secret texts’. It is tempting to suggest that he knew of an esoteric tradition of
the kammatthana (spiritual path,” in this context) concerned especially with
the process of rebirth. The material discovered by Bizot could certainly be
so described."

If this tradition was known to Dhammapila it perhaps tells us a little
about its origins. Clearly it was accepted by him as orthodox, since he is
prepared to connect it with the by then long-established notion of the ‘secret
texts’ to be taught to the meditation pupil. Unfortunately the date and even
the number of Dhammapalas is somewhat debatable.”® Lily de Silva has,
however, established that by the twelfth century a single Dhammapala was
believed to be the author of most of the works traditionally attributed to
him.* H. Saddhatissa has advanced arguments which go far to identify the
Dathanaga mentioned in the introduction to the mahatika to the
Visuddhimagga with a tenth century figure.” It is likely then that we are here
dealing with a writer or writers of the late tenth century, probably based in
South India rather than Ceylon, but in close contact with the Mahavihara
tradition.

If such an interpretation did develop in Ceylon or South India, this

‘would most probably have occurred as part of the general growth of tantric

tendencies in Indian religion, as Bechert has suggested. Perhaps the most
likely period for such a development in Ceylon would be between the sixth
and the ninth centuries. At present this is definitely a possibility, but it is
certainly not yet conclusively established.

Which of these five alternatives is correct ? I do not think this question
can be answered at the present time. Indeed they are far from mutually
exclusive. It is quite possible that present-day esoteric Buddhism contains
ideas and practices deriving from more than one of these sources.
Nevertheless it is certainly premature to assume that it has its origins in
unorthodox circles.


=== PAGE 6 ===
194 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti
Part Two

Nature of Esoteric Buddhism

In the second part of this paper I shall present some of the principal ideas
of esoteric Buddhism as accessible at the present time. Let me begin with a
quotation to set the tone.

The tree grows as high as is nibbana.
Its roots of crystal
number twenty six.
Set with diamonds is the precious trunk
which unfolds beyond
the four continents.
The first branches,
like six marvellous stars,
subdivide into nine smaller branches
whose thick foliage
very rarely
withers.
The upper branches,
which number sixteen,
with leaves that are
close-set and evergreen,
carry fruit that
last long before they fall.
The succeeding branches
— there are nine most beautiful —
are very thick {with foliage]
of leaves, some old, some new,
which, when their time has come,
fall one by one.
From the midst of the branching
which separates many times
in countless forkings
come forth four healing branches,
a permanent refuge
which protects all beings.
These are the four requisites (paccaya)
of man today,
the constant source of protection
which spreads good fortune,
happiness and success.
They bear leaves, flowers and fruit
which ripen and fall

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 195

in the network of the world,
and transform [on reaching] the ground
to bring about the birth of figtrees
which possess five branches.
An indriya [bird] keeps guard
upon each of these five branches
so as to devour human beings.
Such is the search for the crystal spheres, the fruits and flowers of the figtree.”®

Here we meet already the search for the crystal sphere to be found in
the figtree with five branches, i.e. our body with its five senses. This is
somehow connected with a cosmic tree which extends beyond the four
continents and reaches to nibbana.

Perhaps this is enough to show already that this kind of Buddhist
esotericism is about mapping worlds, both visible and invisible ones.”
Indeed the wider context of which it reminds one is a type of mysticism
which I shall call tantro-kabbalistic for the purposes of this article. By this I
mean a form of mysticism which utilizes a rather elaborate map of
correspondences between the human body, the cosmos and some kind of
higher reality or knowledge. In the process it draws on the full resources of
the widely-dispersed traditions of magic and the occult — letter, sound and
number symbolism together with the use of structured patterns of shape or
gesture. Often these are applied in ritual. Typically too this is linked with the
spiritual practice of one of the higher religions in a manner which integrates
the system of correspondences with a model of the spiritual path and with
various modes of spiritual practice. I do not mean to imply that this form of
mysticism is only to be found in the Jewish Kabbalah or in Hindu and
Buddhist Tantra. Similar traditions are certainly to be found within Taoism
and Islam, for example. I simply wish to take Tantra and the Classical
Kabbalah as loosely paradigmatic. Needless to say, each such tradition has
its own unique features.

Let me now try to illustrate some of the above features by means of
quotations, mainly but not entirely, translated from the French of Frangois
Bizot.

1. Correspondences with the body

. The fig-tree is first of all the trunk.

. Its branches are the two arms and the two legs.

. Its leaves are the two ears.

. The flower of the fig-tree is the umbilical cord.

. Its fruit is the child established in the womb.

. Its roots are the three [parts]*° of the male sex organ which contain the
generations to come — that is to say, the precious water which flows and gives
birth in the realm with seven crystal walls. Hide so that no one may see.*!

Oo fP CO ND oe


=== PAGE 7 ===
196 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakh
2. Correspondence with the cosmos

Herewith some passages taken from another text (with omissions):

The land of the Rose-apple tree

It is located to the south of holy Mount Sumeru. Around Mount Sumeru is
situated first Mount Giri, then Mount Vulture Peak and lastly the seven
ramparts of Mount Sevenfold Ring.

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 197

A is the holy Adikamma; PA is the holy Pacittiya, MA is the holy
Mahdavagga, CU is the holy Cilavagga; PA is the holy Parivara. These
are the names of the holy Vinaya.

DI is the holy Dighanikaya; MAM is the holy Mayhimantkaya; SAM is
the holy Samyuttanikaya, AM is the holy Ariguttarantkaya, U is the holy
Khuddakanikaya. These are the names of the five books of the holy
Suttanta.

Mount Sumeru

In the five aggregates of our bodily form, our head is Mount Sumeru; our
chest Mount Giri; our pelvis Mount Vulture Peak; the two knees, the two
ankles and the two soles, the seven stages of Mount Sevenfold Ring, the
ramparts of Mount Meru. The four lakes situated at the foot of Mount
Sumeru are the four elements in our bodily form.

SAM is the holy Sargani; VI is the holy Vibhanga; DHA is the holy
Dhatukatha, PU is the holy Puggalapafifatt; KA is the holy Kathavatthu;
YA is the holy Yamaka; PA is the holy Mahapatthana. These are the
names of the seven books of the holy Abhidhamma.

MA — ie. passdsa, breathing expels and draws in, first jhana;?’

The figtree

The five aggregates of our form are called the figtree. That which grows up
in the land of the Rose-apple tree is the two Children of the Heart*? who
are reborn in the maternal womb.**

A — ie. assdsa, absence of breathing, second shana;
U — ie. nissdsa, breathing expels, thifd jhana.*

The connexion made now is with the constituent parts of the Pali
Canon — the vehicle of the Buddha word itself. This can be, and is, linked
to the idea of developing a dhammakaya or body of Dhamma.”

In the Vimuttimaggadassana, a Pali text preserved in Ceylon,* we have
the syllables of araham linked with the three treasures (ratana) as follows:

A— Buddha RA— Sangha HAM — Dhamma.*!

Here we see the traditional geography centred on Mount Meru now
linked to the system of correspondences. The form of the figtree, here and
elsewhere associated with the five aggregates and the four (or five) ele-
ments, is used for this purpose.

Another passage:

“O Children of the Heart! In that place there is a fig tree with each of its
fruits concealing a precious crystal sphere. It casts a delicious scent over
countless world spheres. This is the holy** Dhamma. The crystal sphere
placed in the flowers of the fig tree - magnificent and glorious — this is the

The same passage then goes on to relate assdsa to Sutta-pitaka, passasa to
Vinaya and nissasa to Abhidhamma.?

4. Letter and number symbolism

holy Buddha. The fig tree has four long branches, which extend in the four
directions beyond the limits of the world sphere. Its roots extend down-
wards as far as the lightless Unending (avici) hell. Its topmost spike reaches

g. Add together the virtues of the mother and father, which makes
thirty-three. This then is called the thirty-three letters which create
all human beings.

35
to the Great Brahma realm of the Eldest devas, 10. Add the thirty-three letters to the five aggregates, and one obtains

the thirty-eight virtues of the holy Dhamma. This is the holy
Dhamma in person.

1. Take NA MO BU DDHA YA —

NA, the twelve virtues of the mother;
MO, the twenty-one virtues of the father;
BU, the six virtues of the king;

DDHA, the seven virtues of the family;
YA, the ten virtues of the teacher.

In this second case the vertical cosmology of the heaven realms and
hell worlds is made use of in a similar way.

3. Correspondence with higher knowledge

A PA MA CU PA — this is the quintessence of the five books of the
holy Vinaya.

DI MAM SAM AM U** — this is the quintessence of the five books
of the holy Suétanta.

SAM VI DHA PU KA YA PA — this is the quintessence of the

seven books of the holy Abhidhamma. These are the five aggregates which give the fifty-six virtues of the

holy Buddha. This is the holy Buddha in person.



=== PAGE 8 ===
198 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

12. Combine the three: passaisa, assasa and nissdsa, with SAM VI DDHA
PU KA YA PA and with the four elements NA MA A U. One
obtains the fourteen virtues of the holy sarigha. This is the holy sangha
in person.

13. Adding all of these together gives 108.
14. This is found in our body.

15. This is that which all noble sons, all people, all men, must seek to find
and understand completely clearly.*

Obviously this passage could be discussed at great length. For present
purposes it suffices to note two aspects. Firstly the use of the number thir-
ty-three seems to be deliberately intended to reinforce correspondences. It
is of course the number of the deities in the second heaven (cp. also the
Burmese thirty-seven Nats**) and seems to have led to the expansion of
the traditional number for the parts of the body from thirty-two to thirty-
three.*° This is also connected to a version of the Pali alphabet with thirty-
three letters. It could also be related to the thirty-two marks of a great
man (mahapurisalakkhana).

Secondly the overall aim of the passage is to link the figtree to the
virtues (guna) of the Triple Gem. To illustrate, fifty-six is the number of the
syllables of the itipiso, often in fact referred to as the Buddhaguna — an
extremely widely used formula in ritual, protective and meditative con-
texts. The overall figure of 108 is the commonest number of beads in a
rosary as used in Southern Buddhism and indeed elsewhere. It may also
have astrological links as it is the number of padas in the yearly cycle.*

5. Ritual

It is difficult to select a short passage to convey adequately the ritual
aspects of Southern Buddhist esotericism, since ritual texts tend not to be
very readable as coherent pieces. Suffice it to say that chants and practices
which derive from this tradition seem to be widespread at a popular level
in Thailand and Cambodia and probably elsewhere. Elaborate forms of
ritual are of course typical of traditional forms of Southern Buddhism. In
the past they seem to have contained a strong esoteric element, although
some of this has been removed as a result of recent reforms. Bizot has
made a substantial study of the texts associated with one form of ritual
performed for various purposes including the prolonging of life.*’

6. Application in daily life

Whenever it is necessary to undertake a journey of some kind, take three
strides. Crouch down on the heels and recite:

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 199
“MA is the holy Vinaya; A is the holy Abhidhamma; U is the holy Suttanta.
MA dukkham — sivam nibbanam.

A aniccam — sotabbam nibbanam.

U anatta — nirodham nibbanam.”*®

Concentrate upon that. Fasten nissasa in the heart. When nissdsa penetrates,
one obtains cessation.*®

This extract usefully demonstrates the thin line in this kind of religious
tradition between spirituality and superstition. Note the use of syllables
together with attributions to the t#pztaka. The three syllables, although
obviously related to the Vedic AUM = OM, are commonly derived in
Thailand from a Pali stanza®:

Araham sammasambuddho / Uttamadhammamayhagii //
Mahasangham pabodheti /icc eva ratanattayam //

Yet we have here direct reference to the three signs (antcca, etc.) of
insight meditation as well as to the embryonic breathing (nzssasa) of the
esoteric tradition. This brings us to:

7. Spiritual practice : meditation methods

The meditation methods of Buddhist esotericism have a strongly mantric
component, although breathing techniques and visualisation also have an
important role. There has been a tendency in scholarship to regard the
repetition of syllables and devotional phrases as something distinct from
meditation: a kind of prayer or mechanical repetition. In fact it plays an
enormous part in traditional Buddhist circles in all the Southern Buddhist
countries, even in Burma where it would originally have been regarded as a
type of samatha or calm meditation based upon concentration.°*!

This kind of meditation is found quite widely in use among lay devotees.
Often it is no doubt rather minimalist, although in other cases it is
something more serious. It is quite long-standing. As an illustration we can
quote Robert Percival (in Ceylon from 1796-1800), who describes Buddhist
monks: “To their girdles they wear suspended strings of beads made of a
brownish or black wood; and mutter prayers as they go along”.® (They are
described as wearing the robe with the shoulder bare and carrying a
painted cane in one hand with a palmleaf umbrella in the other.) Later on
he describes the Ceylonese as wearing beads and muttering prayers “as
they count them and go along the road”.®* He understands these as
preventives against “the evil spirits which surround them”.

One who enters the order and honours the three robes, must apply himself
to recollection of repugnance, to the ugly and the beautiful and perceive a


=== PAGE 9 ===
200 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

noble altar within as without. One who enters the order and honours virtue,
must know the interior objects and observe the bodily postures (iriyapatha) as
the Lord has taught in his holy word. Within and without are entirely alike.
If one receives dana from a dayaka, let there be enough requisites to
correspond with the [different elements in the] womb of the holy mother.
Then one will have followed the rules of the holy Vinaya.

All of you, brothers, pay heed. Let us reveal {what it is like] when one is in
the place of the embryo, that is in the belly of the mother, for ten months —
clinging to the umbilical cord of the holy mother, seated with the knees
drawn up, the eyes closed, the mouth practising the holy syllables: NA KA
AM. When one is expelled at birth, one is dazed, distraught, lost,
unconscious. One seeks in vain to remember the three holy syllables. This is
why the Lord has urged that one should prostrate oneself in order to practise
the exterior holy syllables: A RA HAM. Those are the exterior things.

Prostrate oneself in order to practise as if residing in the womb. The Lord
has one to fold the legs, set the right hand in the left hand and pronounce the
syllables of the holy A RA HAM. If, for example, one prepares oneself to
receive an offering, one must conform to the posture in the womb. If one
receives the eight requisites,* the robes must conform to the objects of the
noble altar as in the place of the embryo in the belly of the mother. Then
one is in correspondance with the noble teaching. When one is established in
the place of the embryo in the belly of the mother, one possesses all the
objects. They are the colour of blood, red like a ball of gum resin (gamboge).
One possesses all the objects in full. If in the place of the embryo in the belly

of the mother, these objects are incomplete, our bodily form deteriorates and
cannot grow.

All of you, brothers, pay heed. If, having entered the order in order to pay
honour to sila and to the precepts, you do not possess the seven pieces in full,
the sila and the virtues which you honour will deteriorate and then
disappear.

Let us continue to reveal what exists within: the under-robe, the waist band,
the cloaking robe (civara), the breast band, the inner robe (sanghati), the sash,
the stole. These are the seven elements. Know that they are the elements
within. The waist band is the cord at the umbilicus, The breast band is the
end which is attached [to the placenta]. The sash is the part which remains
with the holy mother. The stole is the bag of waters which contains a little
blood. The cloaking robe is the amnion (innermost membrane). The inner
robe is the placental envelope. The under-robe is the pocket for excrement.

When the body is established in the womb of the excellent holy mother, the
waters are above our head and flow continually drop by drop upon our
bodily form. If this water does not irrigate our body, we cannot live. That is

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 201

why one must know the within and the without alike and must observe
bodily postures in accordance with the laws of the within and the without. It
must not have any colour there except red like a ball of blood. If another
colour is mixed with it, the form cannot be born. If sila and the precepts are
not observed correctly, one decomposes like the body.”

Now we see a rather fuller exposition of some aspects of the assimilation
of the process of gestation to the experiences of meditation. At the same
time the environment of the embryo in the womb is compared to the seven
items of the traditional dress of the Indo-Chinese Buddhist monk (now
widely replaced by a simpler form of monastic clothing considered closer to

the canonical model).
8. Spiritual practice: the path
The wind descends from the nose down to the neck. This then is called the
holy Vinaya in five books. This is the path of the stream-enterer. The wind
descends from the neck down to the chest.°* This is the path of the once-
returner. The wind descends from the chest down to the navel. This is the

path of the never-returner. The wind descends from the navel down to the
coccyx, without leaving or entering. This is the wind of the path of arahatship.

He attains cessation. Concentrate your attention correctly and you find
yourself as you were when you were inside your mother’s womb. Do not let
the wind leave or enter. Following these instructions is to invite the eightfold
ariya-sangha [in order to enter the way to the attainment of cessation, by the

four paths].

The wind descends from the nose down to the neck. Practise correctly and
you will be able to contemplate the holy light that is like a firefly. This is
called obtaining the fruit of stream-entry.

The wind descends from the neck down to the chest. Practise correctly and
you will be able to contemplate the holy light that is like the morning star.
This is called obtaining the fruit of the once-returner.

The wind descends from the chest down to the navel. Practise correctly and
you will be able to contemplate the holy radiance that is like the full moon.
This is called obtaining the fruit of the never-returner.

The wind descends from the navel down to the coccyx. Practise correctly
and you will be able to contemplate the holy radiance that is like the rising
sun. This is called obtaining the fruit of arahatship.

One attains cessation. Leave cessation.
The breath leaves the coccyx and rises to the navel.

Practise correctly and you will be able to contemplate [the holy shimmering
radiance that is like the splendour of the sun and moon].


=== PAGE 10 ===
202 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

The breath leaves the navel and rises to the chest. Practise correctly and you
will be able to contemplate the moon and the stars.

The breath leaves the chest and rises to the neck. Practise correctly and you

will be able to contemplate the holy radiance that is like the combined
splendour of the sun, the moon and the stars.

There appears a shining light which sparkles. One contemplates the ten
gates, One contemplates truly the realm of nibbana.

The breath leaves the neck and rises up towards the fontanelle. Practise
correctly and you will see the holy light that opens the gate to nibbdna.

The mind, balanced and concentrated, should be kept like a hair belonging
to an inhabitant of the continent of Western Goyana. Then the mind will be

able to enter into mbbana, the peaceful and glorious realm of the highest
happiness.*”

This final passage should probably be considered as exemplifying
another general feature of Tantric religious forms. It is quite typical of
such traditions to utilize practices based upon the imitation of the higher
spiritual states which are sought. In the Buddhist context this has often
involved an attempt to mimic the yuganaddha quality of the transcendent
(Jokuttara) path i.e. the manner in which the experience of awakening
(bodht) unites and somehow harmonizes both the peaceful (samatha) and the
insightful (vipassana) aspects of Buddhist practice. The idea no doubt is that
imitation can ultimately induce the relevant mental states. Similarly in
visualisation practices the body of a Buddha is imitated by visualising the
marks of the Great Man.

In the present context the aim is to imitate the various stages of the
transcendent path (path of stream-entry and so on). By doing so, in a form
of meditative ritual enactment, conditions are created which can lead the
advanced meditator towards his goal.

Notes

1. Allchin, 1989, pp. 1-16; 1990, pp. 163-73.

2.  Coningham and Allchin, 1992, p. 166; Deraniyagala, 1990, pp. 149-68.

3. Lucet, 1974; Janice Stargardt, 1990, (reviewed by K. R. Norman in JRAS (1992) pp. 114-17);
Smith and Watson, 1979; Wales, 1969, p. rof.; Allchin, 1989, pp. 1-16; Allchin, 1990,
pp. 163-73.

4. This at least is the implication of the account by the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hsien. However, his
contacts were with the Abhayagiri school and may therefore exaggerate its importance. In
particular the strongholds of the supporters of the Mahavihara seem to have been in the south
of the island and Fa-hsien may have been unaware of them or uninterested in up-country
Buddhism. Similar considerations may apply to the seventh century account of Hsiian-tsang

who does not seem to be aware of the existence of non-Mahayanist Theravadins, except in
Bengal and the Tamil country!

ad

12.
13.
14.

15.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 203

Holt, 1991. On the Mahayana in Ceylon, see also: Paranavitane, 1928, pp. 35~71; Mudiyanse
1967; Bechert, 1977, pp. 361-8; Dohanian, 1977; Ruelius, 1978, pp. 89-99; Norman, 1978,
pp. 28-47; Schopen, 1982, pp. 100-108; Smith, 1987, pp. 257-78, and citing: Donanian,
“Prolegomena to the Study of the Mahayana in Ancient Ceylon,” in India’s Contribution to
World Thought and Culture (Vivekananda Commemoration Volume).

e.g. Cp-a 276-332.

Guillon, 1985; Strong, 1992.

Gombrich and Obeyesekere, 1988.

Bechert, 1995.

Mostly in later portions of the #pztaka, but we should note that there is a tendency to date
material as late precisely because of the presence of such elements. There is an obvious
danger of circularity here.

Strong, of. cit., p. 185.

Preface to Bizot, 1988, p. 9.

Ibid., pp. 11-2. .
There is one passage related to the Vimuttimagga of Upatissa, but it is uncertain whether this
was a work of the Abhayagiri school or not. Indeed, even if it was, it may have been written
at a date before there was significant doctrinal divergance from the Mahavihara.

Ps II 264 = Mp V 97; Vism 115. Dhammapala’s Mahafika explains the Visuddhimagga reference
as: “kammatthana texts which are profound and concerned with such [teachings as] the truths
and conditioned arising or those which are connected with emptiness” (C* 1928: githam
ganthan ti kammatthanagantham saccapaticcasamuppadadisahitam gambhiram, sufifiatapatisamyutiam va,
(BY 1977: ... ca). Vism-sn is slightly different. Compare also Patis-a 674 which links several of
these expressions: The ‘secret meaning’ (attha) or ‘hidden goal’ is the transcendent (/okuttara)
‘because it is completely outside’ (cf. Patis-gp).

Dhs-a 374 (mt: gantho ti palit), Nidd-a I 112.

The Secret Vesssantara, the Secret Vinaya, the Secret Ummagga, etc. These and others constitute the
“counterfeit saddhamma’. The reference is probably to the early Mahayana in view of Spk-pt II
(Bt 1961) 171. See Sp I 232; IV 742; Sv II 566 (pt); Spk II 201; Mp putt 160. According to
Sariputta’s fik@ to the Vinaya (to Sp I 232), these are “suttas of the dwellers in the
Mahasanghika-nikaya”. ;

So Adikaram, 1953 [1946], p. 97ff. and Bechert (cited in note 12 above), p. 11. A different
view: Collins, 1990, p. 116f. n. 55. Collins correctly points out that githattha, ‘hidden meaning’,
used at a much later date in the title of certain works (and at Patis ii 195), need not imply
esotericism. However, Buddhaghosa refers to texts (gantha) as hidden or secret, not their
meaning (attha).

Schlingloff, 1964.

Soper, 1959, Chapter III Jconography; cp. Kloppenborg and Poelmeyer, 1987, pp. 83-95; Beyer,
1977, pp. 329-40; Harrison, 1990.
Pome Br 168 % Mp-t (Br 1977) 369: Dhammakathabandhan ti paveni-agatam pakinnaka-
dhammakathamaggam. Saccasattappatisandhipaccayakarappatisamyuttam sufifiatadipanam gulhagantham.
Some editions of Ps and Ps-pt read guyhagantham, but this probably does not affect the sense.
Vism-sn has kammasthana(-)satya-. ;

See my note on this topic in Hinnells, 1984, p. 179. The two Senses of kammatthana are
distinguished clearly in Abhidh-s-mht (N¢® 1965: 236); cp. mt to Vibh-a 263.

Bizot, 1976. ; ; ; ;

See Cousins, 1972; Pieris, 1978; Jackson, 1990. As I have pointed out in the introduction to
Nanamoli, Dispeller of Delusion, Vol. 1, p. x, n. 3, Dhammapila’s commentary on the Udana
appears to cite the anufika to the Katthavatthu commentary. This poses difficulties for the theory
of two Dhammapilas, unless they are contemporaries in the tenth century (suggestion of P.
Jackson in a letter dated 31.1.92). If there is an earlier Dhammapila, author of various
“atthakathas to the Khuddaka-nikaya, he cannot be before the sixth century at the earliest.

Sv-pt I Introduction pp. li-lv.

Hammalawa Saddhatissa, 1965, p. 29.

Bizot, 1976, p. 117f. .

An earlie sion of this paper was presented at a conference of the Traditional Cosmology
Society (Lampeter, 1992) on the theme of “Mapping Invisible Worlds.”

The two testicles and the penis.


=== PAGE 11 ===
204 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

31.
32.
33-
34-

35:

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.
4I.

42.

45.
46.
47.

49-
50.

Bizot, 1980, p. 250.
Cittakumara and Cittakumari.
Bizot, 1976, p. 119f.
Here and below the honorific is rendered by ‘holy’. This no doubt overstates the case, but is
intended as a corrective to the common practice of not rendering honorifics in South-East
Asian languages which underplays the reverential element in some forms of traditional
Buddhism.
Bizot, 1976, p. 83. This was the first text translated from the Khmer by Bizot. A version of the
same text in the northern Thai dialect of Lanna was discovered in 1983 with the title
Pavarabandha. Other versions have subsequently been found. See the comparison in
Lagirarde, 1994.
As Bizot points out, this should be KHU. He Suggests that this occurs frequently because of
the similarity of the writing of the two syllables. However, it may also have been due to a wish
at some point to make the five syllables for Vinaya begin with A and the five for Suttanta end in
U ie. two of the three parts of MA A U.
Bizot points out that the normal rendering would be: passdsa, (i.e, pasvat) breathes in; assdsa
breathes out; nisdsa, absence of breathing.
Bizot, 1976, p. 101.
For bibliographic references, see: Reynolds, 1977.
On this text, see now: Bechert, 1989.
The beginning of T. W. Rhys Davids, Yogdvacara’s Manual, London, 1896, p. 2 identifies the
syllables of araham with the three ratana as follows:

A — Dhamma RA — Buddha HAM — Samgha.
This section is, however, missing in the Sinhalese edition given at the end of the Vimuttimaggo
referred to above. Both the Yogdvacara’s Manual and the Vimuttimaggadassana are texts of the
same (still extant) South-East Asian meditation tradition which is now treated in some detail
in Bizot, 1992.
66b —A-karo Buddha-ratanam ra-karo Dhammam uttamam |
66c — ham Sarighatthan ti yojetd janitabbam visum visum. | |
67a —Assaaso Suttapitakam passaso Vinayam tatha |
67b —_nissdtso Abhidhammo ti janitabbam visum visum. | |
(Ratanajoti and Ratanapala, 1963, p. 114.) (uncorrected)
Bizot, 1980, p. 252.
There are of course thirty-seven chief deities present in the sabha of the second heaven, as
the Four Kings are present as guardians of the directions, See the important series of articles
on this topic by Shorto, 1963, pp. 572-91; Shorto, 1967, pp. 127-41; Shorto, 1978, pp. 152-64.
The thirty second item of the later canonical sources — “the brain in the skull” — becomes
two items, brain and skull.
Conveniently there are four padas in a lunar mansion and nine in a sign of the zodiac; so the
padas could function to link the solar and lunar lists (4x 27 = 108; 9 x 12 = 108).
Bizot, 1981.
Perhaps translate: MA is suffering, but nibbana is happy. A is impermanence, but nibbana
must be heeded. U is no-self, and nibbana is cessation.
Bizot, 1976, p. 102.
A version of this stanza is the first two lines of the Ratanattayappabhavabhiydcanagatha (“Verses
invoking the Power of the Triple Gem”), now attributed to King Mongkut. However, even if
the attribution is correct, they could be older as this kind of Pali composition sometimes
incorporates earlier stanzas of special importance. See e.g.: Anon, 1975, p. 121.
See Houtman, 1990.
Percival, 1975 [1805], p. 143.
Ibid. p. 150.
According to Bizot these are the seven items of monastic dress together with the bowl.
Bizot, 1980, pp. 244-47.
Lit. the xiphoid appendage.
Bizot, 1980, p. 248f.

Aspects. of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 205

Bibliography

Adikaram, E.W,, Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon, M.D.
Gunasena/Puswella, Colombo/Migoda, 1953 [1946].

Allchin, F. R., “City and State Formation in Early Historic South
Asia,” SAS , 5, 1989, pp. 1-16.

—, “Patterns of City Formation in Early Historic South Asia,’
SAS , 6, 1990, pp. 163-73. .

Anon, The Book of Chants. Bangkok: Mahamakut Rajavidydlaya
Press, 1975.

Bechert, Heinz, “Mahayana Literature in Sri Lanka: The Early
Phase,” in Prajfitaparamita and related systems: Studies in honour of
Edward Conze, ed. Lewis Lancaster. Berkeley: 1977, pp. 361-68.

———,, “Vimuttimagga and Amatak4ravannan4,” in Amala Prajna:
Aspects of Buddhist Studies, P. V. Bapat Vol., eds. N. H. Samtani
and H. Prasad. Delhi: 1989.

, “Buddhistic Modernism: Present Situation and Current
Trends,” in Buddhism into the Year 2000. Bangkok: Dhammakaya
Foundation, 1995, pp. 251~60,,. .

Beyer, Stephan, “Notes on the Vision Quest in Early Mahayana,” in
Prajfiaparamita and related systems: Studies in honor of Edward Conze,
ed. Lewis Lancaster. Berkeley: University of California, 1977,
PP. 329740.

Bizot, Francois, Le Figuier a Cing Branches. Recherche sur le bouddhisme
khmer, Publications de I’Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient Vol.
CVIL. Paris: Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1976.

———, “La Grotte de la Naissance. Recherches sur le bouddhisme
khmer, I,” BEFEO, LXVII, 1980, pp. 221-73.

——_——., Le Don de Soi-méme. Recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer III,
Publications de l’Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, Vol.
CXXX. Paris, Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1981.

———,, Les traditions de la pabbaga en Aste du Sud-Est. Recherches sur le
bouddhisme khmer, IV, Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Gottingen, Philologisch-Historische Klasse,
Folge 3, Nr. 16g. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck u. Ruprecht, 1988.

———, Le Chemin de Lanka, Textes bouddhiques du Cambodge. Paris:
Ecole frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1992.

Collins, Steven, “On the very idea of the Pali Canon,” 7PTS, XV,
1990.

Coningharn, Robin and F R. Allchin, “Anuradhapura Citadel
Archeological Project: Preliminary Report of the Third
Season of Sri Lanka-British Excavations at Salgaha Watta,
July-September 1991,” SA'S, 8, 1992, p. 166.

2


=== PAGE 12 ===
206 Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti

Cousins, L. S., “Dhammapala and the tika literature,” Religion, 1972,
PP. 159-65.

Deraniyagala, S. U., “Radiocarbon dating of early Brahmi script in
Sri Lanka,” Ancient Ceylon, 11, 1990, pp. 149-68.

Dohanian, D. K., The Mahayana Buddhist Sculpture of Ceylon. New
York: 1977.

-, “Prolegomena to the Study of the Mahayana in Ancient
Ceylon,” in India’s Contribution to World Thought and Culture
(Vivekananda Commemoration Volume).

Gombrich, Richard and Gananath Obeyesekere, Buddhism
Transformed. Religious Change in Sri Lanka. Princeton: 1988.
Guillon, E., L’Armée de Mara. Au pied de L’Ananda (Pagén — Birmanie).

Paris: 1985.

Harrison, Paul, The Samadhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the
Present, Studia Philologica Buddhica Monograph Series V.
‘Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 1990.

Hinnells, J. R., The Penguin Dictionary of Religions, 1984.

Holt, J. C., Buddha in the Crown. Oxford: 1991.

Houtman, Gustaaf, “Traditions of Buddhist Practice in Burma,”
Ph.d, London, 1ggo.

Jackson, P, “A note on Dhammapila(s),” PTS , XV, 1990,
pp. 209-11.

Kloppenborg, Ria and Ronald Poelmeyer, “Visualizations in
Buddhist Meditation,” in Effigies Dei: Essays in the History of
Religion, ed. D. Plas. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1987, pp. 83-95.

Lagirarde, F., “Textes bouddhiques du pays khmer et du Lanna: un
exemple de parenté,” in Recherches nouvelles sur le Cambodge, ed. F
Bizot. Paris: Ecole francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1994, pp. 63-77.

Luce, G. H., “The Advent of Buddhism to Burma,” in Buddhist
Studtes in Honour of I. B. Horner, eds., L. S. Cousins, A. Kunst
and K. R. Norman. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing
Company, 1974, pp. 119-38,.

Mudiyanse, Nandasena, Mahayana Monuments in Ceylon, M. D.
Gunasena & Co. Ltd, Colombo, 1967.

Norman, K. R., “The role of Pali in early Sinhalese Buddhism,” in
Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist
Countries, ed. Heinz Bechert. Géttingen: 1978, pp. 28-47.

Paranavitane, S., “Mahayanism in Ceylon,” C7Sc. G., II, PP- 35-71,
1928.

Percival, Robert, An account of the Island of Ceylon, reprint of 2nd ed..
Dehiwala: 1975 [1805].

Pieris, Aloysius, “The Colophon to the Paramatthamafijiisa and the
Discussion on the Date of Acariya Dhammapala,” in Buddhism
in Ceylon and Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries, ed.
Heinz Bechert. Gottingen: 1978, pp. 61-77.

Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism 207

Ratanajoti, G. and K. Ratanapdla, Vimuttimaggo. Colombo: 1963.
Reynolds, Frank E., “The Several Bodies of Buddha: Reflections on
a neglected aspect of Theravada tradition,” HR, 16, 1977,
pp. 374-89.

Rhys Davids, T. W,, Yogavacara’s Manual. London: Pali Text Society,
1896.

Ruelius, Hans, “Mafijusribhasita-citrakarmasastra,” in Buddhism in
Ceylon and Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countnes, ed.
Heinz Bechert. Gottingen: 1978, pp. 89-99.

Saddhatissa, Hammalawa, Updsakajanalankara. London: Pali Text
Society, 1965.

Schlingloff, Dieter, Fin buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch. Berlin: 1964.

Schopen, Gregory, “The Text on the ‘Dharani Stones from
Abhayagiriya’,” FIABS, 5, 1, 1982, pp. 100-108.

Shorto, H. L., “The 32 Myos in the medieval Mon kingdom,”
BSOAS , XXVI, 1963, pp. 572-91.

., “The Dewatau Sotapan: A Mon prototype of the 37 Nats,”

BSOAS, XXX, 1967, pp. 127-41.

., “The planets, the days of the week and the points of the
compass: orientation symbolism in ‘Burma’,” in Natural Symbols
in South East Asia, ed. G. B. Milne. London: 1978, pp. 152-64.

Smith, Bardwell, “Varieties of religious assimilation in early
medieval Sri Lanka,” in Buddhist Philosophy and Culture — Essays
in honour of N. A. Jayawickrema, eds., D. J. Kalupahana and W. G.
Weeraratne. Colombo: 1987, pp. 257-78.

Smith, R. B. and W. Watson, Early South East Asia. Oxford: 1979.

Soper, Alexander Coburn, Literary Evidence for Early Buddhist Art in
China. Ascona: Artibus Asiae Publishers, 1959.

Stargardt, Janice, The Ancient Pyu of Burma, Vol. 1, PACSEA.
Cambridge: 1990.

Strong, John S., The Legend and Cult of Upagupta. Princeton: 1992.

Wales, H. G. Quaritch, Dvaravati, the earliest kingdom of Siam, 6th to 11th
century AD. London: Quaritch, 1969.



=== PAGE 13 ===
INDIAN INSIGHTS:
BUDDHISM, BRAHMANISM

AND BHAKTI

Papers from the Annual Spalding Symposium on Indian Religions

EDITED BY

PETER CONNOLLY
and
SUE HAMILTON

ORIENTAL


=== PAGE 14 ===
LUZAC ORIENTAL
46 Great Russell Street, London WC1

1997

© Luzac Oriental 1997

ISBN I 898942 I5 3

All rights reserved: no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without prior permission of the Publishers.

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data.
A catalogue record of this book is available
from the British Library.

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Bookcraft (Bath) Limited,
Midsomer Norton, Somerset
