# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2002-davidson-indian-esoteric-buddhism.pdf
# Title: Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement
# Author: Ronald M. Davidson
# Publisher: Columbia University Press, New York, 2002
# Total Pages: 497
# Extraction Status: CLEAN_DIGITAL_TEXT (100% genuine text layer)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
  

--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 4 ---
/Iswashndian /Eswashsoteric /Bswashuddhism
      
 . 
   ⁄   

--- PAGE 5 ---
columbia university press
Publishers Since 1893
New York Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 2002 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Davidson, Ronald M.
Indian esoteric Buddhism : a social history of the Tantric movement /
Ronald M. Davidson
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN ‒‒‒ (cloth) — ISBN ‒‒‒ (paper)
1. Tantric Buddhism—India—History. I. Title.
BQ.. D 
. ' ' —dc 
Columbia University Press books are printed
on permanent and durable acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
p 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- PAGE 6 ---
Maps and Illustrations ix
Preface xi
Acknowledgments xv
Pronunciation and Orthographic Guide xvii
1 Introduction: A Plethora of Premises 1
Habits of the Heart, Deductive Premises, and Buddhist
Inhibitions 7
Petrarch’s Method: Artes Historicae in the Renaissance 15
Tropes, Heuristics, and Other Dangerous Things 22
2 Prayers in the Palace, Swords in the Temple:
Early Medieval India 25
The Occlusion of the Medieval 26
Early Medieval Political and Military Events 30
The Culture of Military Opportunism 62
Aesthetics and the Apotheosis of Kingship 68
Feudalization of Divinity 71
Conclusion: Early Medieval Vitality 74
3 The Medieval Buddhist Experience 75
Guilds, Commerce, and Political Legitimacy 77
Politics, Patronage, and Ethics—The Loss of Kuntala 
and Andhrapatha 83
Medieval Women’s Buddhism—Hidden from View or
Missing in Action? 91
/Cswashontents

--- PAGE 7 ---
A Loss of Footing: The Agenda of Skepticism 99
Looking Elsewhere for Direction: The Turn to Epistemology 102
Big Important Monasteries—Administrators in Maroon Robes 105
Conclusion: A Tradition Under Duress 111
4 The Victory of Esoterism and the Imperial Metaphor 113
Chronology: The Seventh-Century Beginning 116
Becoming the Rajadhiraja—The Central Mantrayana Metaphor 118
Mandalas and Fields of Plenty 131
Becoming the Institution 144
Monks and Their Rituals 153
Sacralization of the Domain 160
Conclusion: Esoteric Buddhism as Sacralized S amanta
Feudalism 166
5 Siddhas and the Religious Landscape 169
Some Siddha Social Models 171
First Moments in Siddha Identity 173
%aiva and %akta Ascetic Orders 177
Marginal Siddha Topography 187
Religious Relations: The Agonistic Landscape 191
Buddhist Siddhas and the Vidy adharas 194
Chronological Concerns and %aiva Exchanges 202
Indian Sacred Geography 206
Siddha Divinities—Bhairava and Heruka 211
Kapalika-Buddhist Conversions 217
The Other %aivas: The Pa$upatas 218
Siddhas in the Tribal Landscape 224
Conclusion: A Complex Terrain 233
6 Siddhas, Literature, and Language 236
Regional Towns and the Lay Siddha 237
The Hidden Scriptures 239
From Transmission to Reception 245
The Buddha’s Talking Skull Excites Women, Kills Snakes,
and Belches a Book 247
Everything You Know Is Wrong 252
The Magic Decoder: The Construct of Coded Language 257
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Coded Language as Secret Ritual Words 262
Secret Sacred Sociolinguistics 269
Extreme Language and Comedy in the Tantras 277
Conclusion: The Literature of Perfection 290
7 Siddhas, Monks, and Communities 293
Siddha Mandalas, Circles of Goddesses 294
Siddhas in a Circle, Siddhas in a Line, Siddhas in a Mob 303
Hagiographical Communities: Buddhajñanapada’s Travels 309
Gatherings and Ganacakras—The Ritual Community 318
Rules of Order 322
Self-Criticism and Correction 327
The Imperial Metaphor Reconsidered:
Becoming the Vidyadhara-Cakravartin 330
Conclusion: It’s a Siddha’s Life 334
8 Conclusion: The Esoteric Conundrum 336
Appendix: Probable P a$upata Sites 341
Glossary 345
Notes 349
Abbreviations 417
Bibliography 419
Indic and Ostensibly Indic Tibetan Sources 419
Chinese Sources 434
Indigenous Tibetan Sources 435
Archaeological and Epigraphic Materials 438
General Modern Sources 444
Index 465
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 10 ---

1. Political and Cultural Areas in Early Medieval India. 32
2. Major Indian Powers, c. 750–950 c.e. 47
3. Early Medieval Orissa. 136
4. Probable Sites of Buddhist Siddha Activity. 314

1. Nalanda: District Patna, excavated remains. 108
2. Vajrapani with the Ritual Vajra of Royal Ofﬁce. Kashmir, c. eighth
century. Brass with silver inlay, 8-3/4 x 5 in. 128
3. The Mandala of States According to Indian Political Theory. 134
4. Trailokyavijaya Mandala, showing the arrangement of Buddha 
families. 138
5. Sarvavid Mahavairocana from Nalanda. Eighth to ninth centuries.
Guilded bronze. National Museum, no. 47.48. 149
6. Interior of Hirapur Yogini Pitha in Orissa. 181
7. Yogini from Hirapur displaying human sacriﬁce. 182
8. Lakuli$a from Para$urame$vara Temple. Bhubaneshwar, Orissa,
seventh century. 185
9. Siddh %ri Baba Balak Nath of Himachal Pradesh. New Delhi street
shrine, c. 1985. 189
10. Vidyadhara from Nalanda, ﬂying with emblematic sword in hand.
Vedibandha of north face of temple site 2, seventh century. Granite. 195
11. Vaitaldeul temple: probable Kapalika site. Bhubaneshwar, Orissa, mid-
eighth century. 208
/Mswashaps and /Iswashllustrations

--- PAGE 11 ---
12. Bhairava holding khatvaNga club in his left hand and a damaruka drum
in his right. South India, thirteenth century. Stone, 113.36 x 49.23 cm. 212
13. Samvara from Ratnagiri, Orissa. Eleventh century. Bihar State
Museum. Arch no. 6505. 215
14. Seated Ascetics. Kashmir, fourth century. Terracotta, 50.80 x 30.60 ×
5.20 cm. 220
15. %abara woman. Hoysala, Mysore, twelfth century. National Museum
no. 2/5/1249. 230
16. *Marga-phala lineage painting. Clockwise from upper left: Vajradhara,
Nairatmya, Kanha, Virupa. Tibet, second half of the ﬁfteenth century. Color
and gold paint on cloth, 57.5 × 50.2 cm. 260
17. Anandaprabhu Vihara, Sirpur. Chhattisgarh, early eighth century. 277
18. Candika from Hirapur Yogini Pitha. Orissa, ninth century. 282
19. Mahasiddha Virupa. Chinese, Ming dynasty, Yung-lo mark and
period, 1403–1424. Guilt bronze, 43.6 cm. high. 286
20. Kubera. Ahichchhatra, second century. National Museum Acc. no.
59.530/2. 287
21. Samvara with a mandala of Dakinis in the background. Bengal,
eleventh century. Indian Museum, A25188/9210. 298
22. Brahmaur. Caurasi-sidh Square, seventh to thirteenth centuries. 310
23. Siddha having achieved sword siddhi and become a Vidy adhara.
Ratnagiri, Orissa, eleventh century. Detail of base of Crowned Buddha.
Bihar State Museum Arch. no. 6501. 333
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 12 ---
/Sswash
imilar to other works of extended scholarship, this work has taken far
too long to write. Like many authors in a similar position, having com-
pleted the manuscript, I cannot understand why such a work has not yet
been attempted, nor can I comprehend why it took me as long as it did. In
writing the work, I sometimes feel like an apprentice illusionist seeing prac-
ticed conjurors seducing the unwary—their manipulations of reality appear so
easy in the practiced hand, and I can only aspire to such apparent felicity. 
I have attempted this text with a goal that appears somewhat quaint and
perhaps ill conceived: I wished to honor those Indian Buddhist masters who
have constructed esoteric Buddhism in their own time. The quaintness stems
from my dissent from the modern proclivity of writers to ﬁnd fault when our
forebears do not measure up to a conceptual architecture erected after their
time. My ill-conception is that I have approached those of saintly aura and
sought humanity where others seek holiness, having looked for the fragile
edges of their personalities while the tradition afﬁrms the impenetrable core of
their personas. My compulsion to extend praise to these gentlemen proceeds
despite our differences, for much that they did I have found disturbing or even,
at times, dishonorable. Yet they produced a form of Buddhist praxis and iden-
tity that sought sanctity in a world unraveling before their eyes. So, perhaps as
an extension of my American heritage, I have searched for the well-tamped
earth of common ground, ﬁnding a meeting place on the horizon of history,
one that displaces the sublime hierarchy of their preferred environment. Those
of the Buddhist tradition will fault me for my critical, historical method, while
those on some form of ideological crusade will castigate me for my lack of doc-
trinal rigor. I am at peace with either dissatisfaction. 
It is normative for authors to thank their professional colleagues ﬁrst, but I
wish to defer the task, for I have never been able to express sufﬁciently my
gratitude to my family. Since she ﬁrst began to work on medieval English
/Pswashreface 

--- PAGE 13 ---
manuscript microﬁlm in the kitchen, my mother, Marie Davidson, has been
an important, supportive presence in my life. She labored over my English
prose when I wanted to study Sanskrit grammar and has assisted in ways be-
yond measure. My late wife, Law Young Bao, sacriﬁced her own health and,
ultimately, her life, through the most difﬁcult years of my career, believing in
me when few others did. Our daughter, Stephanie, has continued to grapple
with the challenge of her mother’s untimely death and to blossom in ways un-
foreseen. My second wife, Dr. Katherine Schwab, has become my confessor
and conﬁdant, revealing to me the importance of art history and material re-
mains in a manner I could but dimly perceive, and whose patience in the face
of my brash archaeological reductionism is for ever treasured.
Among my teachers, ﬁrst and foremost must be Ngor Thar-rtse mkhan-
po, whose death in 1987 robbed me of both friend and teacher. As all relation-
ships do, ours ran the gamut of emotions, but I can never repay the years he
spent reading with me through the treasures of his Sakya tradition. I also wish
to thank my professors, Padmanabh Jaini, Lewis Lancaster, Barend A. van
Nooten, Fritz Staal, Michel Strickmann, David Snellgrove, Katsura Shoryu,
Steven Beyer, and others, who have provided me guidance, support, and con-
sideration. My other Tibetan and Indian teachers—including rGya-sprul
mDo-mang Rin-po-che, mDo-grub chen, Kun-dga’ Thar-rtse zhabs-drung,
Jagannath Upadhyay, and Padma ‘Byung-gnas—cannot go unmentioned for
their generosity and instruction. 
This book could not have come to pass without the extraordinary support of
my colleagues. David Germano provided me a forum at the University of Vir-
ginia to inﬂict various stages of the manuscript on his students, who suffered
through its growing pains. He has consistently helped through diverse phases
and made penetrating suggestions. Phyllis Granoff at McMaster has been a
true friend and supporter, even while she has had so many other duties and ob-
ligations. Without her attention to detail and assistance above and beyond the
call of duty, this work would have been very much poorer. I am also indebted
to Matthew Kapstein, Janet Gyatso, Anne Klein, Leonard van der Kuijp,
Steven Goodman, Kenneth Eastman, Paul Groner, Fred Smith, Douglas
Brooks, and Gregory Schopen for their suggestions and ideas. John Thiel and
Paul Lakeland and my other colleagues at Fairﬁeld University have been in-
variably supportive. 
I have been fortunate enough to receive support from the Council for the
International Exchange of Scholars, the United States Information Service,
the American Institute of Indian Studies, United States Educational Founda-
tion in India, Fairﬁeld University Humanities Institute, Fairﬁeld University
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Research Committee, and Dean (now Academic Vice President) Orin Gross-
man of Fairﬁeld University. While in India, I have had the pleasure to be as-
sociated with Sampurnand Samskrit Vishwavidyalay, the Central Institute of
Higher Tibetan Studies, and have received great kindness from the Library of
Tibetan Works and Archives. My guides and colleagues in these establish-
ments, Laksmi Narayan Tiwari, Professor Samdhong Rinpoche, the late Dr
Jagannath Upadhyay, Dr. Banarsi Lal, and Losang Shastri have sped my jour-
ney. My friend Virendra Singh has made my trips to India both enjoyable and
memorable; he taught me the Hindi I actually learned. I was treated well by
the Indian Museum, the National Museum, the Bihar State Museum (Patna),
the Archaeological Survey of India, the Anthropological Survey of India, the
Asiatic Society, Sahitya Akademie, Orissa State Archaeological Department,
Tibet House, and the Tribal Research Institute (Bhubaneswar). Indian an-
thropologists, especially Mr. S. C. Mohanty, Dr. R. K. Bhattacharya, and Dr.
J. Sarkar have been exceptionally helpful in understanding India’s tribal reali-
ties. I have also received exemplary assistance from Dr. Klaus-Dieter Mathes
of the Nepal Research Centre and from the Nepal National Archives. 
Finally, I am indebted to the many reviewers of this book in its various
stages, most especially to Phyllis Granoff, David Germano, their students, two
anonymous reviewers, and Cynthia Reed. Their efforts have made this an in-
ﬁnitely better book, although all too many errors of fact and interpretation no
doubt remain, for which I alone am responsible. I am especially indebted to
Wendy Lochner at Columbia University Press, who has sped this manuscript
along faster than I imagined possible, all the while remaining gracious and
temperate. Her staff has been invariably kind and considerate. My carto-
graphic assistant, Rich Pinto, took my rudimentary drawings and turned them
into professional illustrations, relieving me to worry about words. In retro-
spect, it seems to me that there were friends, colleagues, and helpers as nu-
merous as the proverbial sands of the River Ganges; to each and all those who
have assisted, I give my heartfelt thanks. 
/Rswashonald M. /Dswashavidson
fairfield, connecticut
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 15 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 16 ---
All the maps and ﬁgure 3 are courtesy Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto. 
Figure 1 permission of the Archaeological Survey of India.
Figure 4 is by permission of Dr. Lokesh Chandra and the International
Academy of Indian Culture.
Figures 5, 10, 13, 20, and 21 are courtesy of the American Institute of Indi-
an Studies, Art and Architecture Library. 
Figure 15 courtesy of Katherine A. Schwab. 
Figures 2, 12, 14, 16, and 19, courtesy of the Cleveland Museum of Art. 
Quotations from the following works are by permission of the publishers:
P. A. Brunt, trans. (1976) Arrian: History of Alexander and Indica, Loeb
Classical Library, no. 236 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Morris Bishop (1966), Letters from Petrarch(Bloomington & London: Indi-
ana University Press).
Colette Caillat, ed. (1989), Dialectes dans les Littératures Indo-Aryennes,
Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, Fascicule 55 (Paris: Éditions
e. de Boccard).
Georges B. J. Dreyfus (1997), Recognizing Reality—Dharmakirti’s Philoso-
phy and Its Tibetan Interpretations (Albany: State University of New York
Press).
Thomas M. Green (1982), The Light in Troy: Imitation and Discovery in Ren-
aissance Poetry (New Haven and London: Yale University Press).
Philip Jacks (1993), The Antiquarian and the Myth of Antiquity: The Origins
of Rome in Renaissance Thought (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press).
Keith N. Jefferds (1981), “Vid usaka Versus Fool: A Functional Analysis,”
Journal of South Asian Literature 16.
John Keegan (1993), A History of Warfare (New York: Alfred A. Knopf).
/Aswashcknowledgments

--- PAGE 17 ---
Philip Lutgendorf (1991), The Life of a Text: Performing the Ramcaritmanas
of Tulsidas (Berkeley: University of California Press).
John Morrell (1983), Taking Laughter Seriously (Albany: State University of
New York Press).
Harmut Scharfe (1993), Investigations in Kautalya’s Manual of Political Sci-
ence (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz).
Roberto Weiss (1969), The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity (Ox-
ford: Basil Blackwell).
Joanna Gottfried Williams (1982), The Art of Gupta India: Empire and
Province (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
All of the balance of the quotations fall within the Fair Use Clause for
copyrighted material.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 18 ---
/Tswash
he pronunciation of Sanskrit should provide few problems, except
that even authorities on some of the Buddhist systems continue to
pronounce the names incorrectly. Generally, a long mark over a
vowel should be treated as equivalent to a stress mark, and inappropriate stress
is surely the greatest failing in Sanskrit pronunciation in the United States
today (e.g., Madhyamaka continues to be incorrectly pronounced in the
United States as Madhyamaka, although it is never spelled that way). There is
also the general problem is differentiating $ from s (both sounding to us like
“sh”) or differentiating the various retroﬂex (t, th, d, dh, and n) from their cor-
responding dentals (t, th, d, dh, and n). Americans tend to pronounce our
sounds between these, not quite retroﬂex (which sends the tongue farther
back) and not quite dental (requiring the tongue farther forward).
Out of consideration for general readers, I have rendered Tibetan into a sem-
blance of English pronunciation, and the correct orthography is found in the
notes or in the bibliography, except in the case of some well-known names (e.g.,
Trisong Detsen). However, I intended this book as a tool for access to India, and
I certainly hope that Indian students will be stimulated to learn Tibetan and to
seek out Tibetan references. The romanization system for Tibetan orthography
is the now-standard “modiﬁed Wylie,” although David Snellgrove appears to ac-
tually be the ﬁrst to have proposed the system. The reader will also notice that I
have used the somewhat out of date Wade-Giles romanization system as well,
rather than the more modern Pinyin. I have done so for one primary reason. The
standard Pinyin system runs all the words in a title together, so that the I tsu fo
ting lun wang ching would be romanized Yizifodinglunwangjing, a linguistic ca-
tastrophe for the neophyte. Until an acceptable alternative occurs, I have elect-
ed to retain the more accessible form.
/Pswashronunciation and Orthographic /Gswashuid/eswash

--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 20 ---
  

--- PAGE 21 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 22 ---
But now, I will speak of those among the twice-born laymen, virtuous in
the Dharma, who, through their persistent employment of mantras and
tantras, will be engaged in the functions of the state.
There will be in the whole world at a calamitous time, the best of the
twice-born, and his name will be pronounced with a Va.
Wealthy and completely familiar with the Vedas, let him wander all of this
earth—girdled by three oceans—for the purpose of polemical eloquence.
He will love to ﬁght with those non-Buddhist partisans [ tirthika].
Yet he always keeps the bodhisattva visualized before him, and recites the
six-letter mantra, restrained in speech.
Thus, he will be a prince bearing the song of Mañju *ri because of his
motivation for the welfare of beings.
Indeed, celebrated for his accumulated performance of rituals, his intellect
is superb.
There will be Jaya and the famous Sujaya, and also %ubhamata. They
will be from a well-placed family, along with the righteous, ennobled,
excellent Madhava. There will be Madhu and Sumadhu as well.
There will be Siddha and thus *Madadahana (Destroyer of Pride). 
There will be Raghava the %udra, and those born among the %akas. 
They will all in this life recite mantras of the prince Mañju *ri, with their
speech restrained. 
They will all be esoteric meditators, learned and intelligent. 
They will be present among councilors of state [ mantrin] for they will be
completely based in the activities of government. 
—Mañju*rimulakalpa, LI.955a–963b.1

-
/Iswashntroduction: A Plethora of Premises

--- PAGE 23 ---
/Tswash
he Mañju*rimulakalpa’s obscure Mr. Va and his peers are enticing
examples of the intersection of the religious and the sociopolitical
realms in early medieval India. Rhetorically dedicated to the welfare
of all beings, Mr. Vaevidently employed his energy, wealth, and intelligence to
travel over much of India to haggle, debate, and generally harass the adversaries
of the Buddhist Dharma. Espousing a doctrine leading to the end of passion,
he and the others were passionately involved in the affairs of state, employing
the newly evolved tools of the vehicle of secret spells (Mantray ana or
Vajrayana) to gain a hearing in the courts of kings and at the tables of tyrants.
While the authors of the Mañju*rimulakalpa clearly believed Mr. Va to be an
outstanding exemplar of the virtuous layman at the middle of the eighth cen-
tury c.e., there can be little doubt that he was both an emblem and culmina-
tion of the profound shift of Buddhist public life from the seventh century for-
ward.2 Around this time, India fragmented politically and saw the rise of
regional centers in a manner unprecedented and unexpected after the stable
gravity of the Imperial Guptas and the Vakatakas (c. 320–550 c.e.). Pressed by
military adventurism, populations moved across the subcontinent, while
Buddhist coalitions sustained crippling setbacks in various parts of South Asia.
The changes of fortune and the generation of new Buddhist institutions have
remained almost as obscure as our quasi-anonymous Mr. Va, even if there can
be little doubt that the contested domains of Indian political, military, and reli-
gious life profoundly affected Buddhist activity and self-representation. 
This work discusses the factors in the formation of esoteric Buddhist tra-
ditions in the cauldron of post-Gupta India. Its thesis is that esoteric Bud-
dhism is a direct Buddhist response to the feudalization of Indian society in
the early medieval period, a response that involves the sacralization of much of
that period’s social world. Speciﬁcally, this book argues that the monk, or yo-
gin, in the esoteric system conﬁgures his practice through the metaphor of be-
coming the overlord of a mandala of vassals, and issues of scripture, language,
and community reﬂect the political and social models employed in the sur-
rounding feudal society. Our investigation accordingly explores selected forms
of Indian Buddhism that ﬂourished in the early medieval period, here taken as
the time from c. 500 c.e. to 1200 c.e. Ultimately, medieval Buddhist systems
became fatally wounded in the profoundly altered Indian culture that coa-
lesced in the fractious aftermath of the founding of Muslim states in the late
twelfth and early thirteenth centuries. Yet these same systems and institutions
had demonstrated successful strategies of survival through more than ﬁve cen-
turies in the volatile world of medieval South Asia and had served as the plat-

--- PAGE 24 ---
form for the profound Buddhist cultural transmissions to the surrounding so-
cieties of Southeast, Central, and East Asia. Our primary concern in examin-
ing the evidence is the tension that developed between forms of esoterism that
evolved within the hallowed walls of Buddhist monasteries and those forms
synthesized by the peripatetic ﬁgures of the Buddhist “Perfected” (siddha).
These latter were reputed saints—mostly laymen like our Mr. Va ,as opposed
to monks—who conducted themselves in a wide variety of venues and who
were frequently agonistic in their interactions with the non-Buddhist world. 
The received hagiographies of both monks and siddhas are constructed
from the interaction of romantic literature, religious inspiration, vernacular lit-
erary movements, and institutional and noninstitutional developments in In-
dic Buddhism and were principally brought into focus by the serendipitous ar-
rival of Tibetans in early eleventh-century India. Most of these historical
trajectories are still refractory to precise chronological placement, and we have
no early archaeological or early datable non-Buddhist references to most of the
protagonists found in the traditional hagiographies of its saints. Indeed, one of
the problems of this era’s historical presentation has been scholars’ willingness
to rely on certain Buddhist compendia of the saints’ lives, especially theCatur-
a*itisiddhapravrtti (Lives of the Eighty-four Siddhas), attributed to Abhaya-
datta*ri. This work must be handled carefully, however, and the present work
emphasizes instead the far greater number of individual hagiographies that
have circulated in India, China, and Tibet. 
As conceived, therefore, this work is an analysis of factors and contexts in
the generation of the vehicle of secret spells, a movement speciﬁcally ground-
ed in the Buddhist experience of the sixth to twelfth centuries in India. Even
though the development of this form of Buddhist spirituality was clearly in-
ﬂuenced by the manifold and dramatic transformations in India’s culture, the
complexity of the context has not been fully considered to date. Certainly, sev-
eral excellent studies have been written on its literature, ritual, and meditative
praxis. However, Buddhological writing on India has sometimes neglected the
context, a lament about the discipline rightly voiced by other Indologists. Thus
a complete assessment requires that we consider the sociopolitical matrices of
the Indian environment and their inﬂuences on the persons, texts, and tradi-
tions that came to constitute the new, ritually oriented Buddhist system.
To this end, chapter 2 covers the military and political background of ear-
ly medieval India, with a view to Keegan’s thesis that a culture of belligerence
is the result of many factors and becomes itself the agent of social transforma-
tion, such that all facets of culture are subsequently inﬂuenced. We are fortu-
nate that in the past several decades this period has received much attention,
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 25 ---
through the work of both Indian and European historians. Like esoteric Bud-
dhism, the early medieval period has been something of an orphan of histori-
ans’ sustained interest in the Gupta era, which is widely portrayed as India’s
golden age. In response, the chapter situates medieval India in its dynastic and
military developments from the fall of the Guptas to the rise of the Delhi Sul-
tanate, from around 500 to 1200 c.e. The chapter seeks to demonstrate that,
precipitated by the idealization of the universal conqueror, medieval Indian
politics and literature recast kingship into a form of divinity. One consequence
of the kings’ apotheosis was a concomitant feudalization of the gods in reli-
gious literature, such that the divinities become reformulated as royalty. 
Chapter 3 addresses the Buddhist institutional and individual responses to
the disintegration of previously supportive consortia in Indian society and its
consequences for the Buddhist subculture. This chapter is concerned with the
background of esoterism as a result of the convergence of both events external
to Buddhist monasteries and decisions made within the Buddhist Mahayana
intellectual and contemplative communities. The evidence reveals a declining
capacity of Buddhists to direct political agendas or even establish parameters
for much of their own discourse. The chapter identiﬁes eight changes that
mark the early medieval Buddhist cosmos, including the loss of guild-based
patronage, the loss of the Krsna River Valley and the lower Deccan plateau to
Buddhist institutions and the decline of women’s participation in Buddhist ac-
tivities at almost all levels. They further extend to the development of philo-
sophical skepticism, the espousal of non-Buddhist epistemological axioms,
and the rise of large Buddhist monastic establishments. Finally, we ﬁnd the
development of an institutionally based form of Buddhist esoterism and the
phenomenon of the Perfected (siddha), the new variety of Buddhist saint.
Chapter 3 examines the ﬁrst six of these changes in the context of the medieval
Indian world. 
Chapter 4 continues with a consideration of the emergence of institution-
al esoterism. It argues that esoteric Buddhism is the most politicized form to
evolve in India. This chapter proposes that the deﬁning metaphor for esoteric
Buddhism is that of the monk or practitioner becoming the Supreme Over-
lord (rajadhiraja) or the Universal Ruler (cakravartin). An examination of the
issue of consecration rites providing ritual access to mandalas, and their origin
in the realpolitik of the seventh century, forms much of the discussion in this
chapter. The position of Vajrap ani as the mythic guardian and military agent
of the new doctrine is examined through the lens of literature. The chapter
proceeds with an brief discussion of the new canon accepted by Buddhist in-
stitutions, the vidyadhara-pitaka (Sorcerer’s Basket). A paradigmatic example
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 26 ---
of the new monk, in the eighth century person of Buddhaguhya, is viewed
through a fragment of his surviving letter to a Tibetan king and his received
hagiography. Finally, esoteric Buddhism is seen as an attempt to sacralize the
medieval world, with the Buddhists seeking to transform the political para-
digms into vehicles for sanctiﬁcation. 
Chapter 5 begins to investigate the world of Buddhist Perfected (siddha)
and its ideological and cultural landscape. The chapter examines the back-
ground of sainthood in Buddhism and related systems. Previous models of this
variety of Buddhist saint are considered, but alternative models are presented
to explain the complex interaction between %aivas, %aktas, and the emerging
Buddhist siddha subculture. The development of the new siddha goal—artic-
ulated in an ideological context that included outcaste, village, and tribal peo-
ples—is examined through the surviving documents, epigraphy, and modern
tribal ethnography. In the area of religion, particular attention is given to the
successful %aivite and %akta orders: the Lakuli*a Pa*upatas, the Kapalikas and
the Kaulas, in terms of their contributions and discontinuities. The siddhas
understood themselves placed within arrangements of imagined and real ge-
ography, and these schematisms are brieﬂy discussed. The question of variety
is considered as well, with the siddhas revealing a greater behavioral variation
than monks, probably as a consequence of their irregular involvement with the
socializing milieus of the Buddhist monasteries or princely courts.
Chapter 6 addresses the questions of language and scripture. The rise of
new forms of Buddhist literature, principally that classiﬁed as mahayoga and
yogini tantra, is examined, especially with regard to its use of sexual images and
coded language. I look at the earliest siddha narratives of scriptural revelation
and argue that siddha scriptural composition is best described by interactive
and social, rather than individualistic, models of authorship. The earliest doc-
ument on the myth of Indrabhuti is featured, demonstrating lay siddhas’ scrip-
tural transmission and their proclivity for ritual performance. A classic in-
stance of extreme language in the Buddhakapala-tantra is taken as a test case
for the apologetic that all esoteric language is secret, with the commentators’
lack of hermeneutic consensus as indicative of this position’s difﬁculties. The
communication through secret signs and coded language is discussed in light
of the multiple sources, such as the Sarvabuddhasamayoga-tantra, that discuss
such materials, and a Dravidian or tribal element is posited. Moreover, because
of the siddhas’ employment of new languages, sociolinguistic issues of func-
tion, bilingualism, diglossia, and related questions are broached. The chapter
concludes with a discussion of models of humor and play in siddha scriptures
and hagiographies.
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Chapter 7 examines siddhas and monks in communities, both imagined
and, so far as we can understand, real. As an idealized community, the ma n-
dala form is reexamined, and one variety of siddha ma ndala appears drawn
from earlier goddess temple arrangements. The idealized communities are
also seen in the layout of the eight cemeteries. This latter, in turn, precipitates
questions of numbering, particularly the emphasis on the number eighty-four,
which is seen in some of the compendia of siddha narratives. This curious
number, and most other siddha formulae, appears to have their grounding in
village organizational units, which were developed for the purpose of political
administration and taxation. In view of ascertaining real communities, Vita-
pada’s record describing the early ninth-century congregations experienced by
Buddhajñanapada is presented, as well as an early eleventh-century descrip-
tion of Naropa. The chapter continues with the codes for siddha socialization
and Indrabhuti’s discussion of the sacramental process of the tantric feast. In-
ternal critiques of siddha behavior are also examined. Finally, the chapter tests
the model of esoteric Buddhism ﬁelded in chapter 4 and seeks to demonstrate
that a shift of signiﬁcation occurred. Analogous to the metaphor of the prac-
titioner’s becoming the Supreme Overlord, Buddhist siddhas seemed to es-
pouse a goal of kingship and dominion over the sorcerers (vidyadhara) and the
gods themselves. 
Chapter 8 offers a summation about the nature of Buddhists’ contested do-
mains. Its survey seeks to reintegrate the Buddhist developments into the pe-
riod’s wider culture. The book concludes with an appendix listing the impor-
tant early medieval Pa*upata sites with their approximate dates. 
At the outset, I have been encouraged to disclose the topics not included in
this work, and this seemed good advice. Many readers might naturally expect
that a book on esoteric Buddhism would include a detailed discussion of its
rites and yogic practices. Other works, however, have provided excellent de-
scriptions of speciﬁc rituals and their rationales, and we may anticipate many
more studies in the near future. The available coverage is particularly good in
the case of late Indian works popular with Tibetans, such as the Hevajra
Tantra, the Guhyasamaja, the Kalacakra, and the six yogas attributed to the
siddha Naropa.3 Increasingly, too, works dedicated to the esoteric forms found
in medieval China and Japan have been written at a very sophisticated level.
Likewise, individual textual studies and translations have been compiled with
excellent results, and we can anticipate even better examples as more Sanskrit
texts are brought to light. Discrete ritual systems, such as the ﬁre sacriﬁce
(homa), have been given some consideration and examined in speciﬁc studies
of lineages and terminology. 4 However, since the genesis for all these activi-
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 28 ---
ties, ideas, doctrines, rituals, and behaviors arose in the context of early me-
dieval India, it would seem important to provide a frame story for the vehicle
of these interesting and inﬂuential Indian masters. 
   ,  ,
  
Such an attempt at religious history is not without difﬁculties. The documen-
tation available is elusive, difﬁcult, incomplete, and highly charged in meta-
physical presuppositions. Modeling the genesis, development, efﬂorescence,
and success of the esoteric system will challenge our understanding at virtual-
ly every level. However, some of our best tools have been called into question
through a variety of factors. Three categories of theoretical obstacles have im-
peded our understanding of esoteric Buddhist history. The ﬁrst might be
called a habit of scholarship, the way that Buddhist studies research has tend-
ed to avoid the historical evaluation of early medieval Buddhism, despite a
plethora of sources and evidence. Second, the rhetorical statements of some
modern theoreticians, especially those questioning the epistemological or eth-
ical validity of historical inquiry, have disquieted classical Indology. Finally,
the epistemological claims to exclusivity by the Buddhist tradition itself have
caused some serious scholars to pause in their inquiry, often in hopes that the
tradition will respond to the challenge of critical method with an indigenous
alternative. These three factors appear to have cast a pall over the historiogra-
phy of medieval Indian Buddhist traditions generally. As a result, I would like
to employ the balance of the introduction to discuss a few observations on
both theory and methodology. The purpose of this analysis is simply to sug-
gest the strengths of the humanist historical methods generated during the
Florentine Renaissance of the fourteenth to ﬁfteenth centuries and their bear-
ing on the contemporary study of other cultures.
Scholarly habits, once ingrained, are difﬁcult to modify, especially when
they have yielded such apparent treasures in the study of Indian and Buddhist
history: edited texts, linguistic descriptions, lexicons, and the like. One of the
most pervasive habits is the search for origins, however these origins are iden-
tiﬁed or articulated. Source privileging is perhaps an outgrowth of the Judaic
heritage and the position of Genesis in religious literature. It may also be the re-
sult of a similar fascination found in Greek literature, at least since the Theogony
of Hesiod. Beyond these, the emphasis on beginnings in Indian historiography
was fueled by the curious assessment of India as essentially “unchanging” since
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 29 ---
time immemorial. This stance has been supported by both the Brahmanical
doctrines of eternal religion (sanatana-dharma) and by the colonial recasting of
the Hellenistic dictum concerning the transport of enlightenment to the be-
nighted barbarians. 
In the case of the Buddhist tradition, it was exacerbated by the European
post-Enlightenment ideology of a religious decline over time and valorized by
the indigenous Buddhist doctrine of the degradation of the true law (saddhar-
mavipralopa). Paradoxically, according to this reading, India was a static soci-
ety, but one in which the great religious ﬁgures—Buddha, %aNkara, and so
on—had been increasingly misunderstood by their followers, revealing a pre-
sumption that religious change can only be for the worse. Thus the purport-
edly unchanging nature of Indian society was being gradually eroded by the
obtuse and ritual-bound excesses of those followers of the great religions who
perverted the true message of the founders, misled the masses, and caused the
disintegration of society. Behind this scenario is the equally sustaining per-
spective that civilizations either progress or decline in the face of superior cul-
tures—all good social Darwinism. As actually applied, the model precipitated
the search for the least corrupt level of culture. Consequently, British and Eu-
ropean historiography has emphasized the Rg Veda (the oldest scripture), the
life of the Buddha (the founder of Buddhism), the activities of A*oka (the ﬁrst
emperor of South Asia), the composition of the P ali canon (purportedly the
oldest scripture), the advent of Islam, and so forth. 
Speciﬁcally Buddhological writing has occasionally suffered from the sup-
position that the rise of literary and institutional systems occurs with scant
concern for the social world. According to this model, developments in the
doctrines or meditative traditions of Buddhism occur principally or exclusive-
ly because of internal circumstances. So, the reasons for the occurrence of the
doctrine of emptiness espoused in the Prajñaparamita (Perfection of Insight)
scriptures or the elaborations on meditative practice concomitant with the
bodhisattva vow are simply Buddhist considerations without recourse to non-
Buddhist discourse or the sociopolitical context. Such assessments are an un-
derstandable reaction to the earlier proclivity of some authors—Jean Przylus-
ki as an example—to seek for indigenous developments primarily as the result
of the inﬂuence of other religious traditions.5 In this reductive line of thought,
Maitreya, for example, must have been the recast Mitra; Amitabha (or Vairo-
cana) was the reformulation of Ahur a Mazda, and so forth. These directions
are developments of a diffusionist paradigm, in which portions of religious ex-
pressions—doctrines, ideas, or rituals—are presumed to be taken as whole
pieces from other systems. Diffusionist models were the stuff of nineteenth-
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 30 ---
century anthropology, with Franz Boas and his followers the primary expo-
nents, and they had an electric effect on religious studies since the time of
Frazer’s Golden Bough. 
The understandable response to such unsophisticated diffusionist models
was to accept the idea of indigenous development as the sine qua non of Bud-
dhological writing, and certain undeniable realities motivated these directions.
First, the Buddhist scriptural corpus is simply enormous and unwieldy. The
principle of social economy suggests that internal causation be examined be-
fore external causation. Since the received canons have not been entirely ex-
plored, some feel safe in simply continuing the arduous procedure of under-
standing internal Buddhist systems. There is much to be said for this
philologically sound and historically fundamental procedure, especially as the
canons are still terra incognita in so many areas. Thus we can all proﬁt ad-
mirably from the astute philological work of those who attempt the difﬁcult
and frustrating task of textual editions, sources, and relations. 
Second, Buddhist texts were uniquely the objects of the greatest translation
efforts humankind has ever witnessed. There is simply no precedent for or
analogue to the translations made into Chinese and Tibetan during more than
a millennium of effort. Concomitant with these translations, moreover, is an
enormous quantity of historical material, chronological data (true and sus-
pect), putative authorship, differing recensions, textual strategies, and so forth.
Buddhist studies has only begun to unravel some of the thorny issues relating
to the translation of the texts, canon relationships, authorship questions, to but
begin a long list of desiderata. Yet it is equally clear that, out of all the vast
wealth of religious composition produced in India before the solidiﬁcation of
Islamic power, Buddhist texts and authors enjoy a far greater sense of chrono-
logical identity than those of any other Indian tradition. 
The irony of these trajectories is that the period of greatest chronological
conﬁdence, the medieval period, is paradoxically the era most neglected. Al-
though this period has received attention from Sinologists, Tibetologists, and
Singhalese specialists, little analogous exploration has been found in the his-
tory of Indian Buddhism. Indeed, the emphasis has been almost entirely on
the ﬁrst or the second half-millennia (500 b.c.e. – 1 – 500 c.e.) of Indian Bud-
dhist history, rather than on the period in which the manuscripts, translations,
authorities, and scriptural formulae were, in so many cases, actually produced. 
This neglect appears grounded in the assessment that the forms of Bud-
dhism made popular in medieval centers were questionable, if not degenerate,
as their opponents have claimed. Here, the diffusionist model is sometimes ac-
cepted and posed as a presumptive textual question: to what extent do Bud-
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 31 ---
dhist esoteric scriptures (tantra) rely on %aiva compositions? This question is
posed in a text-critical manner, which presupposes the unilateral borrowing of
Buddhist materials from %aiva systems and has been recently reafﬁrmed by
Alexis Sanderson.6 However, while the study of Buddhist esoterism can some-
times localize the composition of a text to within decades, %aiva tantras can,
in most cases, be speculatively placed in the neighborhood of centuries, with
Abhinavagupta’s Tantraloka (c. 1000 c.e.) being the major watershed in deter-
mining the evidence for a speciﬁc %aiva work. 
Little wonder that attempts at the history of esoteric Buddhism, as seen in
the efforts of David Snellgrove and Matsunaga Yukei, de-emphasize the dif-
fusionist ideal. In their excellent descriptive works, they endeavor to explain
the received system found in the documents, yielding an analysis with a di-
minished Indian historical—social, economic, political—horizon. 7 The pri-
mary direction taken by these and other scholars is to discuss the connections
between the various texts of the tradition, to our collective beneﬁt in under-
standing these works. The traditional form of textual analysis is concerned
with the relationships of Buddhas in ma ndalas, the identity of mantras, and
the stratiﬁcation of texts. However, to date this direction has often yielded tex-
tual descriptions with a curiously disembodied sense of authorship, and we are
left asking questions of audience, language, teaching environments, or patron-
age. Yet these compelling questions cannot be entirely ignored, and Y orito-
mi and Strickmann have shown that even their limited movement in this di-
rection can yield extraordinary results. 8
Moving beyond data analysis, forms of historical writing embedded in lit-
erary ideals have come to inﬂuence much of the humanities in Europe, the
United States, and India. Although earlier systems were structuralist in nature,
later authors espoused poststructuralist or postmodernist ideals. Extreme pro-
ponents of both have been less concerned with evidence than establishing
hegemony and creating a space in which the fundamentals of historical epis-
temology have negotiated authority.9 For such authors, the afﬁrmation of ob-
jective validity is suspect and objects—such as epigraphs, texts, manuscripts,
and material ﬁnds—lack foundational realities.10 Instead, they speak of power
differentials and the arrangement of the episteme. This is because postmod-
ernists articulate a turn to the subject, some to the point that Dirlik—himself
a postmodernist—has written of the “crisis of historical consciousness” in our
ability to speak with validity about the past. 11
Moreover, it has become part of one intellectual trend to assume that the
eighteenth to twentieth centuries were dedicated to the purpose of providing
us with a distorted perception of the world, so that Euro-American colonial-
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 32 ---
ism could move forward in its need for universal power. This proposal sup-
poses that all traditional academic writing is grounded in, and tainted by, an
imperialistic civilization whose discourse embodies its method of securing
power over the colonial objects. Such rhetoric, particularly among intellectuals
from the Middle East and India, employs the position of the Orientalist cri-
tique, a manner of dismissing Western critical evaluation of non-Western re-
alities, particularly historical realities. Motivated by the works of Edward Said
and others, critics of Orientalism have deﬁned it as including the academic
persons (Orientalists), the style of thought, and the corporate institution of the
academy. Irrespective of method or direction, we are informed, those of the
West cannot help but express the power differential between India and the
Euro-American academy. During the empire, this was done to deﬁne the
West as essentially different from and legitimately in dominion over the Ori-
ent. Since history and Indology arose at this time, neither can be extracted
from a discourse of modernity that expresses power over Asia, if only because
of the media and geopolitical realities of the present. Members of the Subal-
tern Studies collective like Chakrabarty have furthermore maintained that
“‘Europe’ remains the sovereign, theoretical subject of all histories.”12 Accord-
ing to this idea, any discipline claiming all of humanity as its domain is by def-
inition Eurocentric. Thus not only the person of the foreign historian but the
very discipline of history itself colonizes India. 
Characteristically, the disciplines of religious studies and Buddhist studies
have lagged behind other disciplines in their engagement of these issues.13 So,
while Brennan can conﬁdently mark the passing of Orientalist critiques in
other areas, such is not the case for the study of Indian religion, in part be-
cause religion remains at the heart of the modern nationalist agenda. 14 The
immediate consequence of many of these challenges is a turn toward the sub-
ject, in which the character or intentions of the historian become the topic of
discussion. At its best, this procedure can result in a productive reﬂexiveness
on the process of historical composition. Too often, however, the redirection
has meant that European or American scholars working in the ﬁeld of Indol-
ogy or religious studies have been called on to justify virtually every aspect of
their discipline. 
Indeed, some historians of Indian thought and culture, excited by new
ideas and interested in the application of usable theoretical systems to the
data at hand, ﬁnd the politicizing rhetoric of the current ﬁeld unhelpful. The
problem is not that new theories of historical writing, however challenging,
are not welcome. Theoretical systems—structuralist, postmodernist, critical,
or some other ﬂavor—often provide the opportunity to reassess our sources,
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 33 ---
our methods, our areas of investigation, to mention but a few of the many
ﬁelds made richer by the discussion. 15 Some of these are used in this study to
examine the intertextuality of several of our documents and the larger literary
ﬁeld.16 Interesting new directions—including Subaltern Studies—have made
our discussion more nuanced in its revisiting of the issues of agency and au-
thority. The dismantling of essentialist formulations of group structure and
identity is most welcome, although some authors seem to erect other mono-
liths in their place. Moreover, issues of iconicity and symbolic representations
have fundamentally proﬁted by the observations forwarded in poststructural-
ist works.
However, we must also admit that theoreticians’ sweeping claims to au-
thority have inhibited aspects of the historical investigation of medieval India.
Sheldon Pollock, for example, has written on the malaise of purpose afﬂicting
Indologists as a result of Orientalist critiques.17 Those of us wishing to employ
whatever ideas and methods that we may, have found ourselves rebuffed for
not committing ourselves to a position. Patterson, for instance, has maintained
that historiography without theoretical commitment is equivalent to criminal as-
sault and armed robbery.18 Yet we can also see problems with such claims to au-
thority, for even Abou-El-Haj has called attention to the fact that some theory-
based scholars lack the linguistic ability to evaluate their texts in the primary
languages.19 Seemingly, then, one consequence of the new authority of theory is
found in a concomitant erosion in practice, so that we ﬁnd in some theory-based
scholars a weakened comprehension of the original documents in the languages
of their composition.
In the cases of both structuralist and postmodernist systems, Richard
Evans and others have provided a balanced response. He has afﬁrmed that
historians should remain open to the discussion while seeing that sometimes
certain authors demonstrate a confusion between their theories, on the one
hand, and method and evidence, on the other. 20 In postmodern diction, we
frequently hear of an author’s methodology, when in fact a theoretical agenda
is being speciﬁed. As Richard Etlin observes in the realm of artistic value,
poststructuralist authors sometimes project their claims into a frame of their
own creation.21 Conversely, Murray Murphey has taken a different approach,
by providing a systematic review and defense of historical epistemology, based
on the ﬁndings of cognitive science. 22 Here, we see that some categories ap-
pear natural to us as a species and are cross-culturally part of our perceptual
process. Thus relativist agendas seem weakened in their criticism about the
foundations of knowledge, for humans appear to have some common cate-
gories of perception. 
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 34 ---
Similarly, analyses of Said and his followers have showed that many Ori-
entalist critics are engaging in an action that precludes the possibility of
knowledge or the representation of cultural entities, particularly by foreign-
ers.23 In the hands of nationalists, the agenda has been extended to guard the
history or topics of non-Western cultures from critical assessment.24 Oriental-
ist critiques sometimes have as their covert agenda the preservation of tradi-
tional hierarchies, with the sense of history as cultural property. Whereas some
British colonial authors, to use an example drawn from the literature on Ori-
entalism, certainly treated India as the colonial Other, that capacity assisted
the maintenance of the critical distance required to engage in crucial historical
research. This has given us the disciplines of historical linguistics and soci-
olinguistics, developed the ﬁrst Indic library catalogues, inaugurated excava-
tions, begun a rigorous examination of Indic epigraphy and a systematic nu-
mismatics, and developed both a typology of the history of architecture and
the stylistic classiﬁcation of sculpture, to name but a few areas enriched by
their efforts.25 The individual personas of these pioneers were not universally
laudable—they were sometimes fraudulent and occasionally criminal—but
their results constituted the basis for much of later Indology.26 Moreover, with
the commodiﬁcation of the postcolonial critique by Indians and others in ac-
ademic positions in the West, we might wonder whether ethical questions are
those of foreigners alone.27 At some point, it would seem advantageous to dis-
sociate the personality issues of British, French, and German Orientalists from
the discipline of Indology, but that remains anathema to some critics, who
propose an essentialism in the discipline while denying it in their own cul-
ture.28 Even those promoting a renovation in the study of Indian religion, such
as Richard King, have found themselves struggling against the categories of
postcolonialist discourse.29
Analogous in scope is the opinion—sometimes voiced by Buddhists—that
we are not in the position to really understand the ideas and propositions of
Buddhist scripture or representative Buddhist authors unless and until we ex-
perience complete awakening. The argument is predicated on the ideology
that the experience indicated by the texts in question is so profound that only
a meditator passing through the “lightening-like concentration” (vajropama-
samadhi) could possibly comprehend the true import of the material. This idea
holds that the Buddhist scriptures are a natural expression of the enlightened
condition, so only those partaking of that condition can understand their
meaning. We are instructed that great scholarship is but a step leading to
higher knowledge, and the best model of scholarship is to learn the texts ac-
curately, but not to question such historical incidentals as authorship, compo-
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 35 ---
sition, contradiction, discontinuity, and so forth. Especially, we are encour-
aged to consider all scripture as true scripture, so that scriptural works remain
as canonical in Los Angeles as they were in Lhasa or Beijing. 
Apologetic statements to the contrary, Buddhist exegetic systems them-
selves provide us with the rationale for understanding scriptural materials be-
fore our own awakening, if we are ever so blessed. We may recall that virtual-
ly all schools of Buddhism uphold the trifurcation of insight: insight is
constructed of learning, reﬂection on the learned material, and ﬁnally its culti-
vation until the terrace of omniscience is attained (*ruta-cinta-bhavana-mayi
prajña). This trifurcation indicates that both a thorough grounding in the tex-
tual tradition and a critical reﬂection on its propositions are held to be of ex-
ceptional value. Indeed, Matrceta lauds the Buddha for his ability to withstand
the scriptural imperative to test all doctrines, and *D rdhramati reinforces
Aryadeva’s observation that doubt is the vehicle for entering the Mahayana.30
Most Tibetophiles, for example, are unaware that there is an entire genre of
Tibetan literature from the eleventh century forward that attempts to discuss
and adjudicate what is legitimate Dharma and what is not (chos dang chos min
rab ‘byed). Much discursive consideration and actual debate went into the ar-
ticulation of canonical criteria and resulted in the exclusion of selected works
from the canon. These discussions simply relied on the consensus and under-
standing of scholarly opinion, with minority voices being represented—in
some ways similar to academic discourse today.
With or without orthodox approval, however, we should engage this ma-
terial with the critical faculties at our disposal. We might separate this mode
of address from that required by traditional Buddhism by understanding that
reﬂexive historical awareness is different from direct spiritual experience. His-
torical understanding has the capacity to evaluate according to speciﬁc logical
and linguistic structures, structures that are not transhistorical but are durable.
These procedures are neither Buddhist nor speciﬁcally religious, but human-
istic in origin and are elicited to some degree by the textual and artistic mate-
rials at our disposal in Tibet, India, Central Asia, and China. In its monastic
or Asian context, Buddhist indigenous history and hagiography provide ex-
emplars of behavior and sanctity for the individual communities, which could
not survive without its legacy. For our purposes, though, both Buddhist liter-
ature and its related iconology demonstrate a concerted movement away from
the personal to the prototypical, so that personalities are primarily considered
valuable to the extent that they embody the characteristics deﬁned by the tra-
dition.31 We can detect a movement toward synthetic forms approved by tra-
dition and away from the personality of the individual. 
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 36 ---
Thus, in a sense, these three inhibitory positions are similarly essentialist:
the method of addressing the early medieval material is predetermined, with
little regard to the nature of the period. For those undaunted by these posi-
tions—not secured by habits of scholarship, unmoved by theoretical rhetoric,
or not intimidated by traditional Buddhist disapproval—still, there is the
problem of ethical viability. Philologists may wonder why historians cannot
simply be content with the positivism that some presume in their manuscripts.
Humanist historians are looked at askance by their more fashionable col-
leagues, who are only satisﬁed when a commitment to theory has been voiced.
Finally, they are considered outside the pale by Buddhist apologists, for whom
any questioning of the received tradition is an attack on the foundations of the
sacred Dharma. All too often, this has left some historians apologizing for not
being current, committed, or narrowly philological. Yet the curiosity of the
above positions is that they are articulated without an understanding of the
matrix from which the historians’ craft was generated.
 ’ :
ARTES HISTORICAE   
For those of us interested in modern Indian intellectual developments, the
confrontational gestures of some modernist historians is perplexing. These
challenges to traditional historical representations may indeed be desirable on
issues of colonial or postcolonial Indian history, but many of the most basic
questions for the ancient and medieval eras have yet to be addressed. Oriental-
ist critiques, in particular, tend to posit India as a constructed artiﬁce, with lit-
tle objective content, but such a strategy is unhelpful if the fundamentals have
been systematically occluded. Authors espousing this critique identify even the
fundamental epistemology necessary for a constructive contribution as irre-
deemably Eurocentric and colonial, for it was generated during the Enlighten-
ment, at the moment of European expansion on the cusp of modernity. Ac-
cording to this assessment, the study of religion was an extension of a secular,
scientiﬁc rationality that was presumed to be universalistic and value free. Yet,
we are assured, the Enlightenment’s discourse was really an attempt to en-
shrine Eurocentrism in its position of cardinal authority. Thus we are to accept
that the very foundations of Indology are inspired by the colonial movement,
and other civilizations need not submit to its hegemonic presumptions.32
However, another perspective exists that is both fruitful and constructive.
One direction is to recover the intellectual ground before the eighteenth
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 37 ---
century, to see whether the Enlightenment was in fact the generative matrix
of the Indology’s grammar. 33 While it is true that the study of India really
began during the late eighteenth century, the bases for the critical study of
religion started with the foundations of historical writing and are intimately
linked to it. The development of modern critical history is the direct result
of the humanists of the Italian Renaissance, beginning with Francesco Pe-
trarcha (1304–1374). Their task was to look at their own religious legacy in
their own country, with a focus on the city of Rome. 34 These gentlemen did
not employ the generalized sense of humanist used in the modern period, a
person exercising empathy and reason in acting for the common welfare and
dignity of humanity. Rather, they were scholars of studia humanitatis: the
collective disciplines of grammar (we would say classical philology), rhetoric,
history, poetry, and moral philosophy. These fields were first generated in
the salons and college of Florence during the latter half of the fourteenth
century and spread throughout Northern Europe. Studia humanitatis is most
explicitly distinguished from studia divinitatis , a differentiation excluding
theology from the humanities. The first creation of critical history (and its
related methods) was begun by Petrarch and reached its conclusion in the
late Renaissance with the 1566 publication of Jean Bodin’s Methodus ad
facilem historiarum cognitionen. Collectively, the authors of this period laid
the foundations and surveyed the fundamentals.
Petrarch’s development of humanistic historical ideals, which eventually were
to be called collectively artes historicæ, was fostered by a romantic fascination
with Roman antiquity and antiquities. He was not the ﬁrst to be so enthralled.
Guidebooks to the city had ﬂourished in the twelfth century. An otherwise un-
known English traveler, the “magister Gregorius,” was sufﬁciently taken in to
compile a “guidebook” to the city as it was understood through the received wis-
dom and legends maintained by the cardinals of the church.35 Preeminent with-
in this genre, however, was the composition of the canon Benedict of St. Peters,
the Mirabilia Urbis Romæ(The Marvels of the Roman City). Benedict’s task was
to present Rome as the “crown of the world” (caput mundi), with the remaining
ediﬁces and myths of the monuments mixed together in a blend of the legends
of Rome, the works of Ovid, speculative identiﬁcation, passions of the martyrs,
personal observation, and hagiographies of the saints. Benedict was, by all ac-
counts, learned after his period, but his portrayal was clearly a panegyric to the
city of Romulus. Beyond the guidebooks, Petrarch’s enthusiasm for antiquity
was also foreshadowed by two jurists in Padua, Lovato Lovati (1241–1309) and
his nephew Rolando da Piazozola.36
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 38 ---
Petrarch, however, was categorically different from these precursors by his
vision of a Rome in which the pagan fall was not the inauguration of the
Church Triumphant. In 1337, he and his friend Giovanni Colonna di San Vito
strolled through the ruins, only to begin the long process of discovery precip-
itated by the realization that behind both texts and visible remains lay the
traces of prior, unknown remnants of civilization. Thomas Greene has articu-
lated the process:
To say that Petrarch “discovered” history means, in effect, that he was the
ﬁrst to notice that classical antiquity was very different from his own me-
dieval world, and the ﬁrst to consider antiquity more admirable. . . . Thus
Petrarch took more or less alone the step an archaic society must take to
reach maturity: he recognized the possibility of a cultural alternative. With
that step he established the basis of a radical critique of his culture: not the
critique that points to a subversion of declared ideals, but rather the kind
that calls ideals themselves into question. 37
Petrarch was aided in this process by the cultivation of a mental habit to look
to other times for personal resolution. We can certainly be sympathetic to his
proclivity, given the extravagance of Pope John XXII and the corruption of the
Papal court at Avignon, to which Petrarch was attached early in his life. In-
deed, his repugnance with his own period is framed by both his intermittent
involvement with Papal politics and the Great Plague of 1348. In his autobio-
graphical Posteritati (Letter to Posterity), he demonstrates that seldom was
there a person less directly a product of the zeitgeist:
I devoted myself, though not exclusively, to the study of ancient times,
since I always disliked our own period; so that, if it hadn’t been for the
love of those dear to me, I should have preferred being born in any other
age, forgetting this one; and I always tried to transport myself mentally to
other times. 38
Although it is not clear that anyone can be entirely extracted from his time,
Petrarch’s originality was not simply a negative response to his period, for
this would have turned him into another crusader like Savonarola. Instead,
he extended his habit of mental transportation into his literary endeavors.
Not only did he write a letter to posterity introducing himself, but also he in-
dulged his affection for the classical authors—most particularly Cicero and
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Augustine—with regularly imagined dialogues between himself and them in
a transport of romanticism. Yet he was equally capable of clear-sighted
philology, correctly ascertaining that an ostensible donation by Caesar to the
Hapsburgs was a medieval Austrian forgery. 39 And even beyond his quota-
tions and considerations of Latin inscriptions, Petrarch established the stan-
dard for Renaissance numismatists. 
The heirs of Petrarch cultivated and extended his methods in their fasci-
nation with Roman antiquities.40 Inﬂuenced by Petrarch, Giovanni Boccaccio
sought Greek and Latin manuscripts, epigraphic rubbings, and Greek in-
struction, high and low. A Paduan physician, Giovanni Dondi dell’ Orologio,
visited Rome in 1375 and was so excited by the remains that he began to make
physical measurements of the ancient buildings, along with copious notes.
Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406), the great humanist bibliophile, not only col-
lected more than eight hundred manuscripts for his personal library but
brought the study of inscriptions and the analysis of Latin orthography up to
the numismatic standard already established by Petrarch. Salutati also con-
vinced the Byzantine scholar Manuel Chrysoloras (c. 1350–1414) to teach
Greek in Florence during 1396–1400, so that the humanists might have re-
course to accomplished Greek scholarship and a direct reading of ancient
Greek philosophers for the ﬁrst time.41 “Anonimo,” the anonymous author of
the Tractatus de Rebus Antiquis et Situ Urbis Romæ of c. 1411, began to employ
the Constantinian regionary catalogues to understand Roman topography;
these catalogues were to become more fully exploited by Signorili around 1425
in his Descriptio urbis Romæ.42 In the analysis of various levels of construction,
through the differentiation of materials and procedures evident in the ancient
gates of Rome, Poggio Bracciolini (1380–1459) virtually invented the concept
of stratigraphy and made public his results in De varietate fortunæ in 1448.43
Because of the humanist emphasis on the employment of the Latin of the
classics, a foreshadowing of historical sociolinguistics—articulating levels of
glossia—was considered in a controversy between positions represented by
Leonardo Bruni (1370–1444) and Flavio Biondo. In 1435 these two gentlemen
debated the nature of colloquial Latin of the classical period. Phillip Jacks con-
textualizes the circumstances of the argument:
Biondo posited the theory that the ancient Romans had spoken a single lan-
guage, of which modern Latin was an approximation. Through regional di-
alects it was possible to detect how classical Latin had been pronounced be-
fore the barbarian incursions. Bruni . . . reasoned that there must have been
both a colloquial form of Latin (sermo) spoken among the plebeians, and a
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 40 ---
more literary form (latine litterateque loqui) understood only among the ed-
ucated patriciate.44
But, if Biondo was interested in language, he was absorbed in archaeology.
Through Biondo, the archaeology of the Renaissance achieved its greatest
progress with his Roma instaurata, completed 1444–1446. Biondo’s achieve-
ment is summarized by Roberto Weiss:
Altogether, with the Roma instaurata it was now possible to have a reason-
able idea of ancient Rome, not only from a topographical standpoint, but
also as far as its growth and the functions of its buildings were concerned.
Here, in this work, the historian reveals himself side by side with the ar-
chaeologist, the student of ancient institutions with the humanist who has
the classics at his ﬁngertips. 45
Biondo’s investigations were to last through the 1460s and were particularly
concerned with the relationship of topography to demography and ancient
institutions. 
All these accomplishments of the humanists had yet to be formalized in a
treatise on historiography. Cicero’s deﬁnition of history was simple and ex-
pressed as the validation of a lesser discipline: for Cicero, history was “the wit-
ness of time, the life of memory, the mistress of life and the messenger of an-
tiquity.”46 George of Trebizond, the Greek scholar who brought the study of
Greek rhetorical treatises to the Renaissance, understood history as the accu-
rate description of past events, rather than either the events themselves or their
recollection. Certainly, the position of historical writing in classical antiquity,
whether in the Greek of Thucydides or the Latin of Tacitus, had much to do
with the emerging Renaissance awareness of models of good history, even if
this understanding was not well articulated in historical criticism. The histor-
ical description, distinguished from other arts by its verisimilitude to the past,
was to be chronological and to focus on causes and motivations, as well as on
the consequences of acts. 47 Trebizond’s sketch of history’s goals—separate
from rhetoric or poetry—was to be reproduced through the humanist move-
ment of the ﬁfteenth century. 
Jean Bodin, however, provided the ﬁrst systematic methodological treatise,
his Methodus ad facilem historiarum cognitionen of 1566. A jurist by avocation,
Bodin had already produced a short treatise on jurisprudence with his Juris
universi distributo (1559), but elected to compose a better analysis of the insuf-
ﬁciencies of medieval law, complete with a synthesis of juridical experience,
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 41 ---
the Methodus.48 In it, Bodin sought to reform juristic science into universal
law, since “The best part of universal law resides in history” (in historia juris
universi pars optima est). 49 The procedure outlined by Bodin included reﬂec-
tions on the writing of history, the analysis of sources (both primary and sec-
ondary—an innovative distinction), questions of bias and partiality, as well as
issues of reliability and conﬂicting testimony. 50
This seemingly lengthy digression, for which I thank the reader’s patience,
is actually a rudimentary sketch of the development of historical and archaeo-
logical methods. The goal was not the afﬁrmation of colonial authority, let
alone Orientalism, for it began a century and a half before the Treaty of
Tordesillas (June 7, 1494) enshrined the Portuguese and Spanish claims to
colonial authority. The subject of Artes Historicæ was not Europe, but the city
of Rome and, by extension, the ancient Greek and Roman world. Thus the
ethical basis of historical understanding is grounded in the experience of Flo-
rentine humanists who were attempting to comprehend their own religious
and cultural past. Similarly, it marked not the inauguration of modernity but
the advent of the Renaissance. 
It is instructive to realize that most of the above gentlemen were trained in
law—either civil or Canon—or were themselves noted jurists. Their fascina-
tion with Rome was in some sense a subset of this legal and ethical involve-
ment: Roman law provided a universalistic approach to the problems of the
idiosyncratic regulations of small communities and the difﬁculties that travel-
ers, businessmen, scholars, and others encountered in the morass of conﬂict-
ing rules. Yet the replacement of the many standards of jurisprudence and the
multiple bodies of statutory decisions by a universal Roman law would destroy
conﬁdence in local precedent and the force of individual legal decisions. Law,
like good history, must be concerned with evidence, testimony, doubt, proba-
bility, uncertainty, conﬂicting positions, and a reﬂexiveness on past patterns of
behavior. Like history, law also proposes an ideal of impartiality, even if real-
ized only in its absence, as a goal never absolutely attained yet never entirely
relinquished. Both history and law may be twisted to evil ends as well, and
both have been turned to the purpose of oppression and enslavement. Finally,
like law, history must be content with a continuing degree of uncertainty, nev-
er to claim that it has rendered the perfect decision, for new evidence may—
even when all the principals are deceased—render the verdict incorrect, al-
though it appeared an ironclad decision at the time. 
Since the study of medieval Indian Buddhism has lagged so perilously be-
hind other disciplines, it might be appropriate to reassert the bases of histori-
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 42 ---
cal epistemology, a proposal with which postmodernist authors like Dirlik can
agree.51 Our Florentine predecessors had the good sense to identify four pri-
mary sources of evidence: ﬁrst, we must consider documents, primary and sec-
ondary, and assess as required the nature of their manuscript and printing his-
tories. Engaged as we are in the study of a religious tradition, it is insufﬁcient
to limit ourselves to the documents internal to the Indian, Chinese, or Tibetan
Buddhist traditions, for these are internal documents. We must also consider
the evidence that might accrue from external sources not recognized as legiti-
mate within the religion, but authentic nonetheless. With the unbelievable
wealth of documents at our disposal, of course, a degree of circumspect limi-
tation is necessary, and herein lies the value of our accepting the counsel of
both traditional and modern scholarship on essential or important texts. 52
Second, we must consider the epigraphic remains of the period, again ac-
knowledging the plethora of epigraphs and the reality that many are unob-
tainable, either because they remain unpublished or because the sources in
which they were originally published have been irretrievably lost, and the orig-
inal stones broken or the plates sold. Third, the archaeology of important ﬁnds
should be considered, even though many of the most important sites have had
the misfortune of their excavators’ indolence, so excavation reports have fre-
quently never been ﬁled. Indeed, many is the time that Indian historians have
lectured members of the Archaeological Survey of India on the necessity for
excavation reports, with less than complete success. Fourth, the coins from the
period may be of assistance, although, as we shall see, there is a paucity of
coinage in Indian Buddhist areas during the early medieval period. 
To these four sources already identified during the Renaissance, we might
add a source specific to India—the sealings from the monasteries, imperial
personages, and important merchants that provide so much excellent data.
Finally, Petrarch and his followers did not have to investigate the modern
culture of Italy to understand Rome, for they were Italians. Since the time of
Herodotus’ description of the Skythians in his Histories, however, partici-
pant-observer data have proved of extraordinary value in assessing foreign
cultures, whether accrued by the historian, by anthropologists, or both, as in
the case of this book. We cannot underestimate the value to the historian of
learning the colloquial languages of these cultures, living in villages, or (in
our case) in Buddhist monasteries. Indeed, many Indologists would affirm
that they did not truly understand much of this complex society until they
had lived and worked there among the descendants of those very people un-
der investigation. 
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 43 ---
, ,  
  
If I may claim a method in my attempt to delineate the formative social fac-
tors of esoteric Buddhism in India, it is to use occasionally the model of the
Renaissance recovery of the classical world as a trope for what must be done.
In a real sense Petrarch, the Italian humanists, and their modern historians
were wrestling with many of the same issues. They inherited a grand load of
literature, much of which was indifferently understood or never examined,
having lain dormant in monasteries and personal libraries for centuries. Many
of the materials only survived in Latin translation; some had never been trans-
lated into any language. Their world system was inhabited by fabulous crea-
tures and miraculous saints, witches and sacred sites, Emperors and gods, rit-
uals and demons. The Church had skewed understanding of many translated
texts—like the works of Aristotle—by appropriating them for unforeseen pur-
poses, frequently in service of aristocratic values or noble families. The texts
were written with a technical vocabulary, some of which had yet to be lexi-
graphically identiﬁed, while the sociolinguistics of the materials had still to be
addressed. When the humanists began to examine the sources, like the Miri-
bilia, for accuracy and conformity to the existing material remains, they dis-
covered much inaccuracy and discontinuity in the process. 
Mutatis mutandis, many of these parameters are encountered by one inves-
tigating medieval Indian Buddhism. The surviving texts—in Sanskrit, Tibetan,
Old Bengali, Apabhram*a, and Chinese—have long rested in monasteries and
personal libraries, seldom printed, infrequently catalogued, and read predicat-
ed on the accidents of history. Engagement of the literature has been based pri-
marily on commitment to a lineage, and speciﬁc works are selected to the detri-
ment of others. The printing of much of this material is adventitious: with the
exception of the Chinese, no systematic printing was done before the eigh-
teenth century, and much of it is still not effected. Little effort has been made
to accurately associate the surviving archaeological sites with the literature of
esoterism, and the development of historical consciousness in the tradition has
been rather narrowly circumscribed. Tibetans, Newars, and Chinese have been
occasionally critical in their evaluation of events within their own borders but
infrequently toward India. The sociolinguistics of the materials have seldom
been considered, as has the circumstance of modern ethnographic descriptions.
Political and social realities, then, have been rarely applied to the formative
process of much of this material, even though it has been examined in ques-
tions of its cross-cultural transmission to other countries. Systematic epigraphy
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 44 ---
of medieval Buddhist venues is virtually unknown and questions of critical as-
sessment are held hostage to systems privileging hagiography over intelligent
history.53 Authors inquiring after Buddhist topics have sometimes examined
Hindu materials only enough to refute them, as Hindu nationalists have them-
selves done with Buddhist texts. 
In sum, I must confess that I ﬁnd myself, like Petrarch, unable to take the
literature at face value. Like adherents to all known religious systems, Bud-
dhists have had a multidimensional relationship to their surrounding societies.
External inﬂuences and sociopolitical realities are sometimes treated cavalier-
ly in rhetoric, even while being incorporated through a systematic apologia of
unfortunate necessity (skill in means: upayakau*alya). Thus the sources for
much of the doctrinal, ritual, and literary developments are hidden or ignored.
Yet spirituality and its institutionalization seemingly cannot be reduced to
naked politics, economics, or power. Even theory-based scholars like Dorothy
Figueria and Richard King have begun to question whether prior theoretical
models have not been overly reductionistic in their assumptions about some
aspects of human behavior. 54 For its part, esoteric Buddhism and its hagio-
graphical representations were not hatched on the back stairs of a Buddhist
monastery a little after midnight, with the purpose of political dominion, eco-
nomic gain, or the subordination of subalterns at all costs. 55
Conversely, we should not err in the opposite direction, for esoteric Bud-
dhism has a very strong political dimension that is occluded in the modern
Buddhist apologia. We are often privy to the conversations between religious
and political authorities, conversations determining the outcome of speciﬁc
traditions or the exchange of ideas and power. Even a casual examination of
the documents reveals that the economic and political context was inﬂuential,
sometimes overwhelming so. Indeed, the records of these conversations are
not the humble textual artifacts from the personal expressions of enlightened
saints. When the eighth-century esoteric author Buddhaguhya, for example,
replies to an invitation by the Tibetan emperor Trisong Detsen, he is not
simply writing his reﬂections of the moment based on deep personal values. 56
Rather, he is rearticulating themes from the previous literature in Indian
Buddhism on the epistles written to kings—whether by M atrceta to Kaniska
or Nagarjuna to the unidentiﬁed S atavahana monarch. These letters, in turn,
are moments reﬂective of other discussions stretching back through the dia-
logues between kings and their counselors, the Buddha and Bimbis ara, the
monk Nagasena and the Indo-Greek ruler Menander. Moreover, they are in-
dicative of the many anonymous conversations between Buddhist authorities
and local tyrants or individual monks and imperial envoys since Buddhist in-
:     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 45 ---
stitutions began to cast such great physical and intellectual shadows on the
Indic landscape. 
Similarly, kings appropriated Buddhist authority for reasons of both public
authenticity and personal commitment, crowning themselves in the name of
Dharma and vowing to uphold the teachings of the teacher. Such acts were
performed even while the monarchs exercised a realpolitik that subverted the
ethical and intellectual foundations of the tradition they evidently believed in
and publicly claimed to embrace. Much of the history of Buddhism in the var-
ious civilizations of Asia revolved around monks’ development of strategies to
effectively counter, manage, and conform to political and economic realities
that continually inﬂuenced the decision-making systems of Buddhist institu-
tions. Even then, we should not be enticed into believing that Buddhist rep-
resentatives were willing to sacriﬁce all ideals for the moment, or even that
they were moderately successful in their endeavors. While reconﬁguring their
ideals and discourse in light of the models of the day, they had other compe-
tition and so frequently found themselves unwilling or incapable of soliciting
the patronage that they may have desired or even desperately needed.
Indian Buddhists had, early on, developed a rhetoric of being outside the
authority of the bureaucrats, rendering to Caesar that which was Caesar’s only
when absolutely necessary, so that canon law was supposed to supersede civil
and criminal statutes in the cases of monks and nuns guilty of transgressions.
Perhaps almost fatally, the Buddhist representatives believed their own doc-
trines of the separation of church and state, even while occasionally making
exaggerated claims for royal patronage and, sometimes, catering to the whims
of murderous despots. This doctrinal stance of Buddhist political and legal in-
dependence is seductively familiar to modern readers of Buddhist texts, well-
schooled in Lockean ideology, even if its fundamental fallaciousness is readily
apparent to those spending any length of time in Asian monasteries. Politics,
economics, and Buddhism are not simply strange bedfellows but are symboli-
cally and symbiotically related in so many aspects of intellectual and spiritual
life. However, because there are no continuously surviving Indian Buddhist in-
stitutions, we all too often have believed uncritically that the Indic Vinaya texts
have provided for us the whole picture of the religious system, even though,
upon reﬂection, we can easily see that this is not and cannot have been true.
Buddhist monasteries were not hermetically sealed and isolated from the out-
side world—indeed, if anything they frequently appear intensiﬁed microcosms
of that very world in which they dwelt.
 ⁄ :    

--- PAGE 46 ---
[The earth itself] is being tortured by “Lords of Men”—they are speciﬁc to
this era with their intrusive arrogance, crude cunning, insatiable appetites,
and systematic insults to propriety in their base stupidity.1
—Ya$odharman’s Mandasor Edict, c. 530 c.e.
And the mandala of states is strewn only with allies and enemies. Yes, the
world is supremely selﬁsh—how could neutrality be found anywhere? 2
—Kamandaka’s Nitisara of the seventh to eighth century c.e.
/Iswash
f we are to understand the rise and victory of esoteric Buddhism, the ear-
ly medieval period must be our initial focus, for this is the time—be-
tween the sixth and twelfth centuries—that mature Buddhist esoterism
first appears in the available historical materials. The extent to which we can
know its chronology is discussed below, but all our best indicators are in ac-
cord with the statement of the Chinese monk Wu-hsing, writing about 680
c.e., that the popularity of esoterism was a new event in India. 3 As seen in
chapter 4, the Indian political systems defined models that were accepted
and extended within the scriptures and rituals of the new Buddhist praxis.
Accordingly, this chapter examines the political and military events of these
several centuries and stresses the genesis of a climate of military and politi-
cal opportunism. The importance of this new dimension is based on the ob-
servation of the military historian John Keegan that cultures of warfare fun-
damentally alter the nature and relationship of their component parts. Thus
the activities of Indian princes were to have extraordinary consequences for
all the aspects of early medieval Indian culture, from literature and ritual to
government and the economy. 
During the early medieval period, northern India, heretofore dominant or
at least equal to the south in the military and political dynamics of the sub-
continent, became for the ﬁrst time subordinate in the energy and exuberance

-
/Pswashrayers in the Palace, Swords in the Temple:
/Eswasharly Medieval /Iswashndia

--- PAGE 47 ---
of the new period. Instead, South India and its %aiva kings assumed center
place and took the initiative in so many ways. First and foremost, this meant
that northern polities were increasingly forced to submit to invidious raids on
their territories, their wealth, and the safety of their cities. As a consequence,
the great northern cities suffered a population decline, whereas emerging re-
gional centers in Central and East India became increasingly important, with
new families of modest roots taking control of previously tribal domains. Seek-
ing legitimacy and identity, Indian kings from all areas began to increase their
patronage of literature and to strategize their support for religion, searching
for religious counselors that could bolster their political and military agendas.
They also developed patronage relations with those who could validate their
local aesthetics and valorize their locales. In the process, the uniformity of
court culture that marked the Gupta and V akatakas was seriously compro-
mised. Finally, the early medieval period is marked by the apotheosis of kings,
who assumed the positions of divinities or their incarnations and manifesta-
tions. The corollary to this was the feudalization of divinity, wherein the gods
became perceived as warlords and the rulers of the earth. 
    
“Early medieval” here identiﬁes the period after the ﬁnal demise of the Impe-
rial Guptas around 550, and especially following the death of Har sa in 647,
with the subsequent collapse of the Pu syabhuti dynasty. This time is now
gaining attention after its previous neglect, and our understanding of its dy-
namics has accelerated in the past several decades. Principally, the evidence is
based on the data available in land grant proclamations ($asana)—usually in
copper or stone—and augmented by information from literature, coins, and
the archaeological record. As a consequence, there is a growing awareness of
the fundamental contours of these centuries’ events. The sudden appearance
and disappearance of aristocratic families, visions of armies in conﬂict, the vi-
cissitudes of cities, the transformation of economies, the religious background
of the period, the position of belles lettres and art—all of these are now un-
derstood with much greater clarity than before. 
Part of the problem in understanding the medieval has been an undue em-
phasis on selective great empires in Indian history. This emphasis has inhibit-
ed our comprehension of the sometimes more ephemeral but no less impor-
tant cultures that survived in duration from several decades to more than two
centuries. Accordingly, the third-century b.c.e. Mauryan domain of A$oka has
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 48 ---
been the focus of much research, and the continued search for India’s identity
tacitly begins with understanding India as the area encompassed by A $oka’s
edicts.4 After A $oka, historians have been fascinated with the Gandh aran
epoch, particularly from the time of the Indo-Greeks until the conquest of
Gandhara by the Sasanians, inclusively c. 160 b.c.e. to 225 c.e. Indic history af-
ter the Gandh aran Ku sanas and before the complete Turkic control of the
north around 1200 c.e. has emphasized the Gupta and V akataka period and
dominions (c. 320–550 c.e.). We need only observe that four of the ﬁrst ﬁve
tomes of the massive Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum were dedicated to the
A$okan, Kusana, Gupta, and V akataka inscriptions. Yet we certainly have an
abundance of epigraphs from the Gurjara-Pratiharas, the Palas, the Colas, and
many other polities. Therefore, the attractiveness of the Mauryan, Gandharan,
and Gupta dynasties to European aesthetics seemingly had much to do with
their selection and presentation to date.
By contrast, the early medieval period, approximately from c. 500 c.e. to
1200 c.e., is messy and confusing and has been perceived as uninteresting and
chaotic. It is the period of the rise of cultural forms that British and continen-
tal authors loved to hate and that some Indians acknowledge with chagrin:
tantrism, bhakti, excessively sophisticated poetry, sati, the solidiﬁcation of the
caste system, and the rapacious appropriation of tribal lands, to mention a few.
The historiography of these centuries is enveloped in the language of decline
and fall, of degeneration and decay. This language persists despite the fact that
some of the dynasties—for example, that of the Gurjara-Prat iharas (c. 725–
1018 c.e.) or the P alas (c. 750–1170 c.e.)—lasted as long as or longer than the
Guptas. A language of chaos does not acknowledge the reality that the R as-
trakutas dominated India in a manner that the Guptas never achieved. 
A contributing element has been the social or political agendas of those
writing Indian history. British authors of the nineteenth century posited a
moral basis in Alexandrine historiography for their appropriation of power on
the subcontinent.5 Indian authors, having limited critical models for indige-
nous history, have both followed and reacted to the British lead. 6 Moreover,
some have employed their own history to search for a period of (Hindu) uni-
ﬁcation that could serve as a counterpoint to the colonial enterprise of the
Ghaznivids, the Maliks, the Mughals, and the British.7 In both the Indian and
the British camp, there has been a tendency to search for a “golden age” of In-
dia, in which the aesthetic, literary, or political values have deﬁned the best in
the civilization. Inﬂuenced by British historiography, the fundamental para-
digm was either Periclean Athens or Augustan Rome—although the imperial
image of Macedonian Hellenism was also inﬂuential—and the temporal locus
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 49 ---
frequently selected to be the golden age was the period of the Imperial Gup-
tas. Alternatively, the Guptas have occasionally become the basis for tenden-
tious quests: postindependence north Indian nationalism and linguistic hege-
mony, claims for the superiority of Indian civilization, modern nationalistic
deﬁnitions of “Hinduness” (hindutva), and a multitude of other purposes.
The reliance on British historiography has inﬂuenced some historians to
invoke the periodization strategies of Europe in the assignment of categories
to Indian history. Analogous to the decline and fall of Rome, effected by the
Hunic invasions, the decline and fall of the Guptas was seen as precipitated by
the Ephthalite Huns between 460 and 530 c.e. According to this model, the
ancient world is followed by the medieval, which occupies the period until the
rise of the modern, and the medieval is dominated by the political institution
of feudalism, variously interpreted. The similarities between the two appeared
to some to provide India with a status equal to that of Europe, and a teleolog-
ical vector toward the modern as well.
Despite some interesting similarities between European and Indian devel-
opments, we must be wary of carrying the analogy too far. India did not expe-
rience a series of events similar to the Renaissance, for example, nor did it have
a highly structured Church that a reformation could contest. Nor did claims
to universality under any analogue to the Holy Roman Empire appear with
conﬁdence. The model is further problematized by the extraordinary changes
in the subcontinent induced by the gradual colonization of India from the ﬁrst
Islamic raid on Th ana in 644 c.e. to the solidiﬁcation of Muslim power with
Mu’izzu’d Din’s victory at the Second Battle of Tarain in 1192 c.e. Nonethe-
less, the relative acceptance of the medieval designation for this period of In-
dian history shows that many in the scholarly community ﬁnd it a useful, if
troubling, term. 
There may be nothing inherently wrong with applying European peri-
odization to Indian history, although such application comes with much bag-
gage and can become a tool for dubious strategies: disinformation, cultural im-
perialism, or the search for nationalistic legitimacy. Such a state of affairs is
especially true when presumptions concerning the nature of the medieval pe-
riod or of feudalism have inhibited our understanding of changes over time in
Europe, within India, and concerning the fundamental differences between
the two. To the degree that we employ the nomenclature of periodization as a
convenient rubric—and nothing more—we may facilitate an understanding of
these matters. 8 Most particularly, a judiciously employed periodization
demonstrates a commitment to envisioning India as a society in which change
was the rule. 
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 50 ---
In counterpoint to the apparent uniﬁcation of India under the great empires,
in the medieval we encounter the value placed on region and locality. During
these centuries, there was no one center for anything: politics, religion, eco-
nomics, or culture. Instead, we see new core areas of authority asserting their
independence, their own aesthetics, their religious authenticity, their ways of
doing business, and their languages and individual stories, embedded in literary
systems and political models. The period witnessed the generation of regional
styles of sculpture and monumental architecture, the profusion of literary lan-
guages in the four corners of the land, the struggle of royal houses for imperial
hegemony, the efﬂorescence of literary forms, and the proliferation of castes
and classes. All these developments were made possible by the crystallization of
a sense of spatial identity and local valorization never before seen. Each place
becomes valuable, consecrated by gods and heroes, visited by saints, enraptured
by famous lovers, immortalized by poets, and contested by warlords.
Yet this same movement toward regionalization contributed to much of the
literary culture, and the medieval is the source of so many Indian literary genres,
an observation particularly true of religious texts. In terms of Buddhist works,
the majority of the ﬁnal edited versions of scriptures in the Pali Canon stem
from the work of Buddhaghosa and his contemporaries, coming at the cusp of
medieval Buddhism. Mahayanist texts gained ground, especially philosophical
works but also scripture and literature. Such learned medieval dynamism was to
inﬂuence much of Buddhist activity. Almost all of the translations into Tibetan
and most of those into Chinese, a high proportion of surviving manuscripts,
many of the important commentaries, independent treatises, canonical formula-
tions, lists of scriptures, and historical discussions are from the early medieval
period as well. In terms of personalities, so many essential authors, the prepon-
derance of Chinese Buddhist pilgrims (with their records), and many of the
Buddhist saints derive from the medieval era, not from the earliest centuries of
the Indian Buddhist order. 
In the wider Indian culture, this process was even more obvious. Monarchs
sponsored or supported many of the great plays, romances, and epics of San-
skrit and Prakrit literature, as well as the development of massive %aiva and
Vaisnava temple complexes. Their activity was so compelling that Southeast
Asia saw the creation of Indianized states, where Sanskrit was an ofﬁcial lan-
guage. All these factors and more speak of a richness that is poorly served by a
language emphasizing decline and ignoring creativity and opportunity. Indeed,
the problem with the medieval centuries is not an absence of activity but a sur-
feit. There are too many lineages, building programs, claims to authority, and
challenges to the previous paradigms; there is too much military adventurism,
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 51 ---
literary activity, and inscriptional and documentary evidence. The excessive
richness of our material—increased almost daily by excavations and epigraphic
ﬁnds—makes this perhaps the most intellectually challenging epoch of Indian
history. The wealth of disparate political strategies, literary cycles, military
events, religious formations, and the ever-shifting dynamics of allegiance and
behavior, all these present us with a bewildering montage of rapidly developing
relationships between geographic locales and social formulae. 
And yet, there is an undeniable malaise to parts of this period, something
of a continuing struggle for power and position that speaks, not of a collapse
of culture, but of a paucity of public discourse on the responsibilities of pow-
er. There is a sense of license and adolescent willfulness to many of these dy-
nasties, a willfulness that is both pervasive and corrosive. We have only a mod-
est sense of alternative voices or agendas in our records. Anticipating the
issueless politics of some leaders in postindependence India, the early medieval
period leaves us with a disquieting sense of intellectual and religious person-
ages in the process of abandoning cultural criticism. Sycophancy and patron-
client relations appear to seize the ﬁeld, and the entire society suffers as a re-
sult. Thus the locales not only became sites of provincial valorization and
divinity but fortresses against the onslaughts of armed men and often were
rendered perilously parochial in their horizons.
     
‒ ..
Our primary concern—the area of greatest esoteric Buddhist activity—is
North India and the Deccan, from the K rsna River valley to the Himalayas
and from Bengal to Gujarat. Consequently, this discussion initially concen-
trates on the events that brought down the two great empires governing this
area toward the beginning of the sixth century c.e. The ﬁrst was the Imperial
Guptas in the modern Indian states of Rajasthan, northern Madhya Pradesh,
Kashmir, the Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Bengal. The Guptas were on
a cultural continuum with the Vakatakas in southern Madhya Pradesh (south
of the N armada and Son Rivers), Maharashtra, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Jhark-
hand, Andhra Pradesh, and parts of Karnataka. Loosely, these areas respec-
tively deﬁne northern India and the Deccan plateau. 
It is appropriate to begin the discussion with the ﬁerce assault on the north
waged by the Ephthalite H una peoples. The Ephthalites (or Hephthalites),
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 52 ---
who probably came from the Wakhan area of the Amu Darya River in the
eastern region of what is now Afghanistan, had been enormously successful,
seizing Gandhara from the Kidara Kusanas sometime in the mid-ﬁfth centu-
ry.9 They destabilized Buddhist institutions during that century and defeated
the Sasanian emperors Yazdigird in 454 and Firoz in 480 . Skandagupta ap-
parently engaged the king of the Ephthalites, possibly Toram ana, in battle
between these dates. Skandagupta’s Junagarh rock inscription in Gujarat—on
the same boulder inscribed by A $oka and Rudrad aman before him—identi-
ﬁes that he had conquered otherwise unidentiﬁed foreigners (mleccha) by
455–458. This announcement is normatively interpreted to indicate his defeat
of the Huna army.10 The Ephthalites, however, continued to be active. A lit-
tle-known chieftain of M alava named Prak a$adharman of the Aulikara line-
age claims to have once again turned back Toram ana in an engagement
sometime before posting his stone inscription of 515–516 .11 This may have
temporarily stopped the southern advance of the Ephthalites, but they
pressed east and around 520 conquered Kashmir. They were ﬁnally prevent-
ed from overrunning all of North India by another Aulikara, Ya $odharman,
apparently the successor to Prak a$adharman, around 530 .12
Ya$odharman’s Mandasor inscription, written in 533–534, states that this
Aulikara monarch held sway throughout North India, from the Brahmaputra
River valley, in modern Assam, to the far west. His claim was probably an ex-
aggeration, but one with a simple signiﬁcance: the Imperial Guptas were no
longer important in the military affairs of their ancestral lands. Indeed, there
is only one further Gupta inscription available, a land grant in the Ko tivarsa
area made in 542–543, by the last of the imperial line, Vi snugupta.13 This
chronology for the demise of the Guptas is supported by the Jaina version of
the Harivam$a epic of Jinasena, which maintains that the Guptas were recog-
nized as surviving for 231 years, from c. 320 to 551 .14 Thus the end of the great
imperial line occurred, as so often seen in India, through a simple absence in
the inscriptional record. 
Yo$odharman himself, and his Aulikara clan with him, seem not have to sur-
vived much beyond his epigraphic self-promotion. Yet in the wake of the Gup-
ta’s loss of position, a horror vacui in North Indian polity facilitated the precip-
itous rise and sudden decline of noble lineages and bloodthirsty princes for the
next ﬁfty years. What is remarkable is that much the same process occurred in
the Deccan, where the main Vakataka house in Vidarbha (around modern Nag-
pur) and their subsidiary branch in Vatsagulma (Washim, Maharashtra) had
held power at least since the beginning of the fourth century c.e. Their contri-
butions to religious life were particularly noteworthy—the main house special-
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 53 ---
map 1 Political and Cultural Areas in Early Medieval India.
Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto

--- PAGE 54 ---
ized in erecting Hindu temples while the Vatsagulma branch was responsible for
much of Buddhist Ajant a construction.15 For reasons that are still not clear,
however, the Vakataka dynasty did not survive much into the sixth century. 
Thus, by the middle of the sixth century, the Guptas, V akatakas, and
Aulikaras had surrendered the ﬁeld, while the H unas had been successfully
stymied in the Indus basin, leaving much of the subcontinent—from the Krsna
River to Ka$mira and from Bengal to Gujarat—accessible to opportunistic ap-
propriation. In a pattern that would recur after the fall of great states, two
kinds of groups came to power: clans that already had gained authority as
feudatories of the previous great dynasties, and those houses that seemingly
came from nowhere, gaining control through speed, ingenuity, ruthlessness,
and luck. Available positions were ﬁnite in number and to some degree dictat-
ed by geographical parameters. For our purposes, seventeen regions exhibited
sustained importance during the era (Map 1). Along the Gangetic valley, ac-
tive areas include the delta of Bengal (historically known as VaNga/Samatata),
the Brahmaputra River valley (historically K amarupa), the Ganges up to the
doab (Magadha), the area around the Ganges-Yamuna doab (Madhyade $a),
and the fertile plain of the modern Punjab and Haryana states (Kuruk setra).
Elsewhere in the north, vital zones include the valley of Kashmir, the western
border of the desert in modern Rajasthan, the plain between the Narmada and
the Chambal rivers (Malava), and the Kathiawar Peninsula (Saurastra). In cen-
tral India, the strategic regions are the plain around the upper God avari ex-
tending to the N armada (Vidarbha), the upper Mah anadi valley (Dak sina
Ko$ala), the combined Tapti and Narmada deltas (Lata), the KoNkan coast on
the west, Utkala/Tosali in northern Orissa and Kali Nga on the south Orissan
coast in the east. Finally, toward the south, we will be concerned with the com-
bined deltas of the Godavari and the Krsna (Andhrapatha/VeNgi), and the up-
per Krsna valley (Kuntala).16
The historical designations I have given for these places are simply the best
known during the period, but alternate names are encountered with alarming
suddenness in epigraphs and literature. Just as disconcerting, geographical terms
are used in a hazy and imprecise manner, such that Uttar apatha (the north)
means one thing to a soldier from Kanauj, while it means something entirely dif-
ferent to a poet from Kuntala. The problem of the relationship between desig-
nation and locale can be acute, especially in medieval Buddhist literature. 
However indicated, these areas became the sites for much of the action in
medieval India and, mutatis mutandis, have continued to dominate much of In-
dian cultural geography down to the present. The struggle for these areas began
almost as soon as the Guptas and Vakatakas ceased to be important, and mili-
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 55 ---
tary adventurism was dominated initially by the Later Guptas of Magadha, the
Maukharis of Madhyade$a, the Gaudas of VaNga, the Varmans of K amarupa,
the Maitrikas of Saurastra, Kalachuris of Malava, and the Chalukyas of the city
of Vatapi in Kuntala. Because Indian historical writing has traditionally pre-
sented a confusing series of partial pictures with little effort at depicting a co-
herent continuum of events, the present discussion attempts to present the mil-
itary-political interaction between the major players as a whole.17
table 2.1 Chalukyas of Vatapi
Pulake$in I (c. 543–566)
Kirtivarman (c. 567–597)
MaNgle$a (c. 597–609)
Pulake$in II (c. 609–654/5)
Vikramaditya I (654/5–681)
Vinayaditya (c. 696–733/4)
Vijayaditya (c. 696–733/4)
Vikramaditya II (c. 733/4–744/5)
Kirtivarman II (c. 744/5–753)
Almost simultaneously, around 550 c.e., Maukhari I$anavarman (reigned c.
550–565) and the founder of the Ch alukyas, Pulake$in I (c. 543–566) began to
move against their neighbors. 18 Pulake$in sought to extend the boundaries of
his rule east against the Kadambas, a group farther up the K rsna, and against
the Nalas, a group living along the TuNgabhadra, which is a Krsna River trib-
utary. While he was accomplishing these ends, I$anavarman was also involved
in a series of raids to the east, against the Gau das, and south, where he en-
countered the Chalukyas.
Whereas the Ch alukya king made efforts to solidify his domain, the
Maukhari lord was apparently in search of temporary bragging rights, with lit-
tle concern for permanence. This difference of agenda—between kings in
search of domain versus those more dedicated to personal promotion—is seen
time and again in the early medieval period. 
table 2.2 Maukharis of Madhyade$a
Harivarman
Adityavarman
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 56 ---
I$varavarman
I$anavarman (c. 550–565)
%arvavarman (c. 560–575)
Antivarman (c. 575–600)
Grahavarman (c. 600–605)
Part of I$anavarman’s problem was close to home, where the Later Guptas
were beginning to exercise their own search for dominance. The Maukharis,
who comprised an old aristocratic house, had been important vassals of the
Imperial Guptas, and I$anavarman was probably the nephew of Vi snugupta,
the last of the Imperial Gupta line. Clearly, the Maukharis moved to claim the
crown, but Kumaragupta (c. 550–560) stood in their way. His house had per-
haps been vassals of the imperial line, and although they employed the desig-
nation “Gupta,” they were apparently unrelated to the Imperial Guptas. All we
know for certain is that they enjoyed status as aristocracy ( sadvam$a) in the
early sixth century and that they used titles similar to those employed for Gup-
ta vassals.19 Kumaragupta encountered I$anavarman sometime around 560 c.e.
and stopped the Maukhari leader in the ﬁeld of battle. So great were the
stakes, and so incomplete the outcome, however, that on the Aphsa d stone it
is inscribed that Kumaragupta committed suicide at Prayaga, perhaps because
his vow of conquest remained unfulﬁlled. 20
table 2.3 Later Guptas of Magadha
Krsnagupta
Harsagupta
Jivitagupta
Kumaragupta (c. 550–560)
Damodaragupta (c. 560–562)
Mahasenagupta (c. 562–601)
Madhavagupta (c. 601–655) 
Adityasena (c. 655–680)
Devagupta (c. 680–700)
In a manner well known in Indian history, the Maukharis found themselves
ﬁghting on two fronts, since the Hunas had used this opportunity to come into
conﬂict with them, as they had done to so many other rulers before. After stop-
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 57 ---
ping the Ephthalite army, either I$anavarman or his son, %arvavarman (c.
560–575), engaged the next Later Gupta ruler, Damodaragupta, around 562 c.e.
Although the Later Guptas claimed victory for their forces, their king,
Damodaragupta, was evidently killed in the ﬁght. The Aphsad inscription in-
dicates that he had temporarily passed out on the ﬁeld of battle, only to be
awakened by the touch of the lotus hands of heavenly damsels in his new heav-
enly abode.21 The real outcome, though, was the Maukharis’ realization that
their belligerence had not succeeded; for the moment, Magadha was safely in
the hands of Mahasenagupta (c. 562–601), the young son of Damodaragupta.
table 2.4 Maitrikas of Saurastra
Bhataraka
Dharasena I
Dronasimha
Dhruvasena I
Dharapatta
Guhasena 
Dharasena II
%iladitya I (c. 590–615)
Kharagraha I
Dharasena III
Dhruvasena II
Dharasena IV
Dhruvasena III
Kharagraha II
%iladitya II (c. 648–662)
%iladitya III
%iladitya IV
%iladitya V
%iladitya VI
We have little information on the next two decades, and the sense is that
the rulers of most areas were solidifying control—this is clearly indicated in in-
scriptions from such disparate areas as Va Nga, Utkala, Dak sina Ko$ala, and
Saurastra.22 The former three represented newly coalesced rulerships of a
Gauda kingdom, the house of M ana (Utkala), and the aristocratic P andu-
vaM$is, while Saurastra was governed by an established aristocratic house that
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 58 ---
had served as feudatories of the Imperial Guptas, the Maitrikas. Sometime in
the beginning of the last quarter of the sixth century, however, individual
princes began to test the waters to see whether conquest could be achieved.
The K alachuris, who had already controlled much of Maharashtra, under
Krsnaraja (c. 550–575) extended their domain to the KoNkan coast, subjugating
the Mauryas of the area and continuing on into Vidarbha. 23
table 2.5 Kalachuris of Malava
Krsnaraja (c. 550–575)
%aNkaragana (c. 575–600)
Buddharaja (c. 600–620)
Chalukya Pulake$in’s successor, Kirtivarman (c. 567–597) began a raid or se-
ries of raids up the coast of the Bay of Bengal, from the mouth of the K rsna
River to the Gauda kingdom.24 About the same time, the Magadhan monarch
Mahasenagupta mounted a more sustained campaign against K amarupa, de-
feating its king, Susthitavarman (c. 570–590), along the shores of the Brahma-
putra River. It is likely that part of Bengal also became temporarily included
in Mahasenagupta’s domain at this time. The Gaudas, though, had come into
their own, uniting under Jayanaga (c. 570–600). Eventually, the Later Guptas
found themselves surrounded on three sides by very strong and belligerent ad-
versaries: the Maukharis in the north, the Varmans of K amarupa and the
Gaudas in the east, the P anduvaM$is and the M anas in the south, with the
Chalukya raids adding to the problem. Around 585, then, the Later Guptas left
Magadha and took up residence in M alava, probably settling in its most im-
portant city, Ujjain. Why Mah asenagupta elected to move there is an open
question, but Devahuti has suggested that he may have had relations in Mala-
va.25 Gauda Jayanaga apparently used this opportunity to extend the Gau da
inﬂuence. He followed up on the Later Guptas by invading Kamarupa around
595, capturing Susthitavarman’s sons soon after his death, but releasing them
to govern as Gau da vassals.26 However, if Mahasenagupta thought his prob-
lems were over by moving to Ujjain, he was dreadfully wrong. The Kalachuris
evidently resented the presence of the Later Guptas so close to their capital,
Mahismati, on the N armada River. K alachuri %aNkaragana (c. 575–600)
marched north to take Ujjain in 595–596. 27 As a consequence, the Later Gup-
tas apparently became “guests” of a K alachuri vassal, even if the accommoda-
tions were not to their liking. 
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 59 ---
table 2.6 Varmans of Kamarupa
Pusyavarman
Samudravarman
Balavarman
Kalyanavarman
Ganapativarman
Mahendravarman
Narayanvarman
Mahabhutivarman
Candramukhavarman
Sthitavarman
Susthitavarman (c. 570–590)
Supratisthitavarman
Bhaskaravarman
At this low ebb to Later Gupta fortunes, the Vardhanas of Thaneswar
came to the rescue. They were initially established in Thaneswar by the semi-
mythical ancestor, Pu syabhuti (var. Pu spabhuti), and their house has fre-
quently been identiﬁed with the designation Pusyabhuti/Puspabhuti as well as
Vardhana. Thaneswar (Sth anvi$vara) itself is now the relatively insigniﬁcant
town of Kurukshetra in Haryana, about 100 miles north of Delhi. The curious
part, however, is that it was apparently no more politically signiﬁcant then
than it is now, and the Vardhanas, who were members of the merchant caste
(vai$ya), had gained political and military power. Somehow, Mahasenagupta’s
sister, Mah asenagupta, had been married to the Thaneswar monarch,
Adityasena (c. 555–580), some years before, establishing an alliance between
mutual foes of the Maukharis in an exercise of classical Indian political strat-
egy.28 Their son, Prabh akaravardhana (c. 580–605), became the ﬁrst of the
Vardhanas to establish complete independence and was noted for his belliger-
ence and adventurism, so B ana (Har savardhana’s court poet) describes this
ruler’s militarism with unmistakable language.29
table 2.7 Vardhanas or Pusyabhutis of Thaneswar
Pusyabhuti
Adityasena (c. 555–580)
Prabhakaravardhana (c. 580–605)
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 60 ---
Rajyavardhana (c. 605–606)
Harsavardhana (c. 606–647)
Thus engaging so many of the local lords of North and West India,
Prabhakaravardhana made a name for himself and his court and became ca-
pable of encountering the K alachuri’s vassal, Devagupta. The moment they
chose probably coincided with Devagupta’s sudden loss of reinforcement,
since the Ch alukya monarch Ma Ngle$a (c. 597–609) invaded the K alachuri
domain in 601, seizing the K alachuri’s treasury.30 Around the same date,
Mahasenagupta appears to have passed away and his sons M adhavagupta
and Kumaragupta become wards of the Thaneswar court and friends to the
heir apparent, R ajyavardhana, and the younger Har sa, who became particu-
larly attached to M adhavagupta. 31 The elevated fortunes of the Vardhanas
did not escape the notice of the Maukharis, who offered (or were coerced
into) diplomacy in the form of a marriage alliance between the new ruler,
Grahavarman (c. 600–605) and Har sa’s younger sister, R ajya$ri. This was
quite a distinction for Prabh akaravardhana’s provincial merchant clan, to be
aligned with the ancient aristocratic lords of Kanauj, a far older and more
prestigious family than the Later Guptas. The grand wedding occurred
around 603–604, and Prabh akaravardhana sent his sons hunting H unas in
the Himalayas as a reward, no doubt cognizant that the prestige of his fam-
ily rested securely on the force of arms. 
Unfortunately, the good times were soon to be over, and events in the next
few years would entirely change the political landscape of North India. In 605,
Prabhakaravardhana fell ill and quickly passed away. At the moment of the an-
nouncement of his death, Devagupta—seeking revenge for the humiliation at
Prabhakaravardhana’s hands—moved on the Vardhana/Maukhari alliance and
killed the young king, Grahavarman, sending his young widow, R ajya$ri, to
ﬂee into the woods to seek refuge with a Buddhist hermit. Har sa had come
back to Thaneswar in time to hear his father’s last testament, and his brother
Rajyavardhana—learning of Devagupta’s opportunism—sought out the Mala-
va king and killed him in battle. Devagupta, though, apparently had entered
into an alliance with a new ﬁgure on the military landscape, the Gau da lord,
%a$aNka (c. 605–625). %a$aNka had taken over Bengal following the death of
Jayanaga and was perhaps a vassal to Grahavarman’s father, Antivarman (c.
575–600), using that position to solidify control over Bengal and throwing off
the yoke of vassalage with the death of Grahavarman. 32 Whatever the precise
nature of his relationship with the central Indian states, certainly %a$aNka used
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 61 ---
the opportunity to put forth his own agenda and saw the Thaneswar brothers
as his primary opponents. We can understand the opportunity, with the
Maukharis heirless, Malava leaderless, the Kalachuris recovering from the on-
slaught of the Chalukyas (who were themselves entering into a war of succes-
sion), and the peripheral states of K amarupa, Utkala, Dak sina Ko $ala, and
Saurastra in the hands of weak or disinterested rulers. 
Clearly, the Vardhanas were susceptible to marital alliances, so %a$aNka of-
fered his daughter in marriage as a ploy. The offer was duplicitous, however,
and while R ajyavardhana was in the Gau da king’s camp discussing arrange-
ments, %a$aNka murdered him, apparently by his own hand.33 %a$aNka ﬂed back
to Gauda, and Har sa made arrangements to follow him, ﬁrst proceeding to
Kamarupa to form an alliance with Bhaskaravarman, who agreed to be Harsa’s
vassal. Together they assaulted Bengal in 606–607, going as far as the great city
of Pundravardhana to encounter %a$aNka, but the engagement was inconclu-
sive.34 Harsa’s punitive expedition certainly did not stop %a$aNka from entering
North Orissa in 608 or taking all of Utkala and parts of KaliNga by 611, even if
Harsa did manage to thwart %a$aNka’s designs on Magadha and Madhyade$a.35
While these events were unfolding in the east, K alachuri Buddharaja had
recouped his strength from the Ch alukya incursions—mostly because of the
Chalukya war of succession that resulted in Pulake $in II’s ascension around
609. Buddharaja used this opportunity to move against Vidi $a in 608–609 .
Unfortunately, the reemergence of K alachuri expansionist designs, and the
preoccupation of Har sa with the east and the Ch alukya’s involvement in the
south, no doubt assisted the Maitrikas in entertaining their own plans. Around
610, the Maitrika king %iladitya I (c. 590–615) invaded the Malava country, ap-
propriating it from the Kalachuri’s vassals and eliminating Kalachuri inﬂuence
north of the N armada River.36 The Maitrikas were to occupy M alava and its
principle city, Ujjain, for the balance of the next decade. 
Detecting an opportunity to complete the beginning made by Ma Ngle$a
before he was deposed, Ch alukya Pulake $in II invaded the K alachuri land
from the south in c. 620, and eliminated the inﬂuence of this family in West
India for more than two hundred years; they would reemerge as the rulers of
Tripuri in the mid-eighth century. Pulake$in II subjugated Lata, Malava, and
part of the Gurjara kingdom, which had extended its domain into southern
Rajasthan. He drove the Maitrikas back into Saurastra and coerced them into
an alliance. Much of this area was to remain in Ch alukya possession until the
death of Pulake$in II in 642.
In the east, though, in about 625 %a$aNka’s dreams of conquest were end-
ed by his death. Har sa, who could not defeat the murderer of his brother in
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 62 ---
life, invaded Gauda after his death, issuing grants there in 628 as his royal pre-
rogative.37 Harsa controlled much of North India by this time, but decided to
extend westward, where he had not previously gone. With %a$aNka safely
dead, Harsa tried to expand the empire to the extent enjoyed by the Imperial
Guptas, and Saur astra was in the Ch alukya political ma ndala. Thus, around
630, Harsa pressed westward and encountered the young Maitrika Druvasena
II with such ferocity that the Maitrika monarch took refuge with the L ata
ruler and founder of the Gurjara house there, Dada II, who was himself di-
rectly supervised by the Chalukyas. Pulake$in II could not stand by and see his
territory so dramatically diminished, so the great Ch alukya army—already in
possession of most of the Deccan plateau—met the Thaneswar monarch on
the ﬁeld of battle. Unfortunately for the Vardhanas, Har sa had overestimated
his ability to wage war in the Deccan, and his elephants were overthrown by
the southerners. 
Flushed with victory and with the issue of the west decided, Pulake $in II
extended his family’s domain eastward as well and shortly thereafter estab-
lished the “Eastern Ch alukyas” in Andhr apatha (Krsna and God avari River
valleys), where they were to remain a force for several centuries. Not satisﬁed
with his accomplishment, the Ch alukya monarch also began a series of cam-
paigns up the Bay of Bengal, bringing Kali Nga under Chalukya rule. To cele-
brate his victories, Pulake $in II commissioned the poet Ravik irti to compose
the exuberant Aihole inscription of 634–635, which is explored in more detail
below.38 Not to be outdone, Harsa began a series of campaigns against Orissa
between 637 and 642, campaigns that once more brought him up against the
area claimed by the Ch alukyas. Har sa interrupted his southern policy only
with a brief threat to Kashmir. 
Pulake$in II had not just focused on the north, but had conducted cam-
paigns in the south as well, particularly against Kañcipuram, the capital of the
dynamic and powerful Pallava kingdom. This latter aggression brought the
Chalukyas to grief, however, for what Har sa could not do, the Pallavas ac-
complished. In 642, the Pallava prince Narasimhavarman marched north with
his military might and laid waste to the Chalukya capital of Vatapi, killing Pu-
lake$in II.39 Even then, the Chalukyas remained a force in Vatapi for the next
century. Indeed, despite their eventual loss of power in their traditional home-
land, in a manner similar to that of the K alachuris of Madhya Pradesh,
branches of the house of Ch alukya continued to operate in various milieus
throughout the early medieval period. 
Harsa by this point had moved his capital to the metropolis of Kanauj,
claiming the Maukharis’ city by virtue of authority, a claim he enforced as his
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 63 ---
sister was the widow of the last Maukhari lord. Yet the rapacious Har sa nev-
er was able to defeat either of his two nemeses: %a$aNka died of a debilitating
illness and Pulake$in II was to be conquered by another southern ruler. Still,
when Pulake$in II’s Aihole edict records his enemies, Har sa stands out as a
signiﬁcant ﬁgure in the Chalukya desire for universal conquest. The Vardhana
prince was only able to outlive his nemesis by ﬁve years. By 647, Har sa was
dead, and his empire was unraveling before the eyes of his courtiers. Thus, in
all, the 150 years between 500 and 650 were enshrined in elaborate verses by
poets north and south: Ravikirti among the Chalukyas and Bana in the Kanauj
court. Beyond their capacity in composition, both lesser poets and the Chinese
Buddhist pilgrim Hsüan-tsang have praised the rulers of the regions of India,
even while articulating their patrons’ rapacious conduct. Others, however,
were not so laudatory of this endless warfare, and the T’ang dynasty’s imperi-
al annals, Chiu T’ang shu, noted that the period 617–627 was one of profound
disturbances in India, with ceaseless bloodshed. 40
‒ c.e.
A similar statement was appended in the T’ang annals after the death of Harsa,
but the other years visible to us through the faulty lens of epigraphs and litera-
ture appear no less troubled or difﬁcult. Moreover, we have a less complete
record of the military and political machinations of Indian dynasts in the cen-
tury following the deaths of Harsa and Pulake$in II. We should not, however,
infer that there was a reduction of adventurism—much of the behavior exhib-
ited by the major actors during the periods of the Chalukya and Pusyabhuti do-
minion also was manifest on a smaller scale after their collective demise. 
This period started off badly, with the Pallavas occupying V atapi and
with Kanauj embroiled in a battle for succession. The Ch alukyas, though,
were able to regain the throne of V atapi, and Vikram aditya I (654–681) as-
sumed control in 654–655 with the assistance of his relatives and vassals, the
GaNgas of Manyapura (Mysore district). 41 The course of events in the Dec-
can and the south during the next few years appears confused, with break-
away attempts by the vassals of the Ch alukyas and corresponding efforts at
domination by Vikram aditya I. Clearly, by c. 670, Vikram aditya I had
reestablished Ch alukya dominion over much of the western Deccan, up to
KoNkan and L ata. These gains were solidified with a branch of the
Chalukyas becoming one of the great forces in the Gurjara-M alava area for
the next few centuries. One of their traditional foes, the previously Pu sya-
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 64 ---
bhuti feudatory Maitrikas, was overcome during this operation, and %ila-
ditya II (c. 648–662) seems to have been the lord defeated by the new
Chalukya house, headed by Dhar a$raya Jayasi Mha. 
The great bane of the Ch alukyas of V atapi, however, remained the
Pallavas, centered in Kañci. Pulake$in II’s two efforts at humbling Kañci were
again tried by Vikramaditya I, with little better results, and the balance of the
latter’s reign is taken up with struggles in the south; both V atapi and K añci
suffered sacking by opposing forces during the last decades of the seventh cen-
tury. Indeed, the Ch alukya-Pallava conﬂict continued to consume the south
of India for the ﬁrst half of the eighth century, and Vikram aditya II was not-
ed as having humiliated the Pallavas by taking K añci thrice during his life,
once as the agent of his father Vijayaditya (c. 696–733/4), and twice during his
own reign (c. 733/4–744/5). 42 The only entertainment available to the V atapi
Chalukya rulers was to maintain their hold on the Deccan. Ch alukya edicts
toward the end of their dynasty depict the princes of the realm holding court
in military encampments over a vast area, from Ellora in Maharashtra to the
far south. 
We know little of the events in Kanauj, although it is evident that Har sa
made insufﬁcient allowance for his succession. In all likelihood, the various ar-
eas of India once administered by the aristocratic Pusyabhuti vassals were now
claimed as their own by those same houses. The Maukharis appear to have
gained control over Madhyade $a, with its capital Kanauj. Magadha had been
put into the hands of Madhavagupta, the Later Gupta scion who had come to
the Thaneswar court in 601 as a boy. He evidently did not, however, command
the area north of the Ganges, for a strange episode unfolded there between the
T’ang envoy, Wang Hsüan-tse, and the prince of Tirabhukti, *Arjuna.43 The
event—in which *Arjuna took Wang Hsüan-tse into custody—resulted in the
intercession of Tibet and Nepal into Indian life and the presence of foreign
troops on Indian soil, some measure of the unsettled conditions of the period.
This nominal subaltern status of northern Magadha to Tibet lasted until per-
haps 703.
Harsa’s previous vassal, Bh askaravarman of K amarupa, used Har sa’s
death as a pretext to invade Gau da, which had no effective leadership at that
time.44 Also adopting this strategy, M adhavagupta’s successor, Adityasena
(c. 655–680), extended the Later Gupta control into parts of Uttar Pradesh,
the Chota Nagpur Plateau, southern Bihar, and parts of Bengal. 45 He was
able to make a marital alliance with the Maukhari Bhogavarman—whose ex-
act position is unknown, but probably was a ruler of some variety—in recog-
nition of the importance his dynasty had assumed. Power attracts power, of
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 65 ---
course, and the Ch alukya king Vinay aditya (c. 680–696) began a series of
raids on the north at this time, coming into conflict with Adityasena’s son,
Devagupta (c. 680–700), to the defeat of the latter around 695 .46
The seventh century marks the initial intrusion of Islam into South Asia,
beginning with the unauthorized raid on Thana (close to Mumbai) in 644 and
followed by the attack of the Arab general Ism a’il on the port of Ghogh a in
677.47 From then on, regular attacks on the trading cities of western India oc-
curred, leading up to the wholesale invasion of the Sindh section of the lower
Indus valley (current Pakistan). The offensive was launched by Al-Hajj aj, the
governor of both Iraq and much of the old Sasanian domains, as part of the
great expansionist movement that took them into Kabul and Transoxiana as
well.48 In 711, six thousand Syrian cavalry and soldiers with six thousand more
camel-riders, support troops, and catapults, attacked the city of Debal, where
the inhabitants were slaughtered over three days as a lesson. In succeeding
months, principally combatants were killed, while the much of the population
of defeated cities were sent back to Al-Hajj aj as slaves, a common Muslim
practice. The Arab conquest continued to send out raiding parties, but their
forward movement appears initially to have been checked in Gujarat by the al-
lied forces of the Lata Gurjara ruler, Jayabhata IV, and the Maitrika king %ila-
ditya V (c. 710–735) around 725, and in M alava by the Gurjara-Prat ihara
founder, Nagabhata.49 The Arabs, however, tried to avenge their loss, and at-
tacked Lata, overrunning it and went as far down the coast as Navsari, be-
tween modern Surat and Mumbai. There—as the Navsari Plates proclaim
with gory graphic details—Avajinaj a$raya-Pulake$iraja defeated the “T ajika
army.”50 From this point on, the Gujarat branch of the Chalukyas became the
great power from Lata to Saurastra, and into Malava. 
Dramatic changes in power were taking place elsewhere in the north, how-
ever. In Kashmir, the Karkota dynasty had established itself as supreme in the
valley but were feeling themselves extraordinarily pinched by the Arab aggres-
sion in the Indus valley. Moreover, Central Asia had become the battleground
between the Tibetan imperium, the T’ang Chinese, the Arabs, and the
Turks.51 Evidently invoking the Indian theory of the politicomilitary mandala,
in 713 the K arkota king Candr apida (c. 711–720), had asked the new T’ang
ruler, the Hsüan-tsung emperor, for assistance in defense against the Arabs.
The Chinese were the geographically remotest enemies of the two powers—
Tibetans and Arabs—immediately threatening him. Candr apida received
something of a respite while waiting for his reply, since in 715 there was a
change of Umayyad caliph in Damascus. 
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 66 ---
table 2.8 Karkotas of Kashmir
Durlabhavardhana
Pratapaditya 
Candrapida (c. 711–720)
Tarapida (c. 720–725)
Lalitaditya Muktapida (c. 725–756)
Kuvalayapida 
Vajraditya
Prthivyapida
Samgramapida
Jayapida Vinayaditya (c. 779–810)
Lalitapida 
Samgramapida II
Cippatajayapida 
Ajitapida
AnaNgapida
Utpalapida
The immediate consequence of this change was that the great conqueror of
the Amu Darya basin, Qutayba bin Muslim, rebelled against his new lord and
was killed by his own troops.52 The new caliph also began a diplomatic initia-
tive in 717 to solidify gains in Transoxiana in the name of Islam. In response
to both these realities, the Hsüan-tsung emperor did not send aid to Can-
drapida, but in 720 did offer him the status of vassal state, which was part of a
larger Chinese effort at containment of Tibetan and Arab imperial forces.
Kashmir’s recognition had been preceded since 717 by China’s own diplomat-
ic initiatives to many of the countries in the western Himalayas, Pamirs, and
the Hindu Kush. 53 This Chinese policy primarily meant that Kashmir’s back
was covered from Tibetan imperial aggression, a fact made clear with the de-
struction of a Tibetan garrison on the Wakhjir pass in 722 and the capture of
a sizable Tibetan force. 
If the new K arkota king, Lalit aditya Muktapida (c. 725–756), felt himself
secure, he had little time to enjoy his status. Once again a young belligerent
with designs of conquest arose, by the name of Ya $ovarman, who initially
seemed as if he would follow in the footsteps of Ya $odharman and Harsa be-
fore him. Ya $ovarman apparently came from a branch of the Maurya aristo-
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 67 ---
cratic family, and he usurped the throne of Kanauj about 720 .54 Thereafter,
he cut a swath through North India, defeating and killing the last of the Lat-
er Guptas around 725–730 . His “world conquest” (digvijaya) is celebrated in
the Prakrit poem, Gaüdavaho (Slaughter of the Gau da King), by one of his
illustrious littérateurs, V akpatiraja. In a fictionalized account, Ya $ovarman is
represented as defeating the kings of Magadha, Gau da (whence the epic’s
name), South India, and, after crossing the Malaya Hills at the southern tip
of India, the king of Persia (poet’s geography). 55 His victories over the Ma-
gadha king, probably J ivitagupta II of the Later Guptas, and the Gau da
rulers were almost assuredly authentic, but Ya $ovarman certainly did not
progress to the lower Deccan, where Ch alukya Vikram aditya II was at the
height of his power. 
In the wake of Ya $ovarman’s conquest of the Gangetic valley—coupled
with the reality that the Gurjaras, Maitrikas, and Ch alukyas were all tied up
with the Arab threat to the western Deccan until 737—Lalit aditya decided to
pursue and defeat Ya $ovarman. Using his status as a Chinese vassal and ene-
my of the Arabs, Lalitaditya recruited from border areas and obtained his ma-
gician/general Ca Nkuna from Tokharisthan. 56 Lalitaditya then launched an
attack on Ya $ovarman’s forces, taking Kanauj in 733 and proceeding through
much of the Madhyade$a/Magadha area, before ﬁnally returning to Shrinagar
in 747. Between these dates, Lalit aditya is credited with conquering most of
the areas of the Deccan, the Ko Nkan coast, Broach, and Rajasthan. As in the
case of other poets, we have to temper the enthusiasm of Kalha na’s Kashmiri
boosterism, although, given the uncertainty of the military situation between
733 and 747, it might be closer to the truth than the depiction rendered for
Ya$ovarman by V akpatiraja.57 Whatever his actual sweep of the Deccan and
West India, Lalitaditya eventually began a campaign against northern areas—
Baltisthan, western Tibet, and the Tarim Basin. This was to be his ﬁnal
march, for it was his fate to die in the deserts of the Tarim Basin around 756,
a victim of his own aggressive aspirations and the swiftly changing geopoliti-
cal circumstances of eighth-century Inner Asia. 58
‒ c.e.
One of the more remarkable facts of the early medieval period was the rather
dramatic simultaneity of dynastic instability. The Gupta and Vakataka houses
fell within a relatively short period in the mid-sixth century. Likewise, in the
eighth century the Vatapi Chalukyas rapidly disintegrated in the south and the
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 68 ---
map 2 Major Indian Powers, c.750-950 c.e.
Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto
   ⁄ 


--- PAGE 69 ---
new powers of the north—Ya$ovarman and his Karkota nemesis—swiftly de-
clined. These aristocratic clans seldom entirely disappear, however—the Mau-
rya and Maukhari, the Chalukya and Kalachuri, as well as a host of lesser lin-
eages, continued to submerge from historical perception and resurface later
throughout these centuries. Sometimes they acted as vassals to a temporarily
ascendant clan; sometimes they were lost to any records for a century or more;
sometimes they fragmented into multiple lineages and operated as subalterns
in multiple locales in diverse capacities. Many lines were analogous to these,
and one of the most confusing aspects is trying to control the nomenclature of
clan designations and their hydralike immortality. 
About the middle of the eighth century, though, another great change in
Indian history occurred. Simultaneously, three major dynasties emerged, dy-
nasties that were to control much of the political and military history of the
subcontinent for the next two centuries: the R astrakutas of the Deccan, the
Gurjara-Pratiharas of M alava-Rajasthan, and the P alas of Bengal (Map 2).
The geographical designations should be familiar, since the areas involved
were quite similar to those governed by Pulake$in II, Harsa, and %a$aNka over
a century before. The durability of the Krsna-Bhima-Godavari River valleys of
the Deccan, the area between the N armada and the Ganges-Yamuna doab,
and Gauda in the east at sustaining major military/imperial forces is intrigu-
ing. These eighth-century dynasties and their ever-shifting kaleidoscope of
vassals continued to function from the time of the major Arab incursions un-
til just after the middle of the tenth century. Only the Palas retained a contin-
ued, but limited, venue until the arrival of Muhammed ibn Bakhtyar Khalji at
the beginning of the thirteenth century. One of the ironies of the political his-
tory of this period is that each of these dynasties’ capacity to wage war made
the unity of the subcontinent practically impossible for any one of the imperi-
al houses. Their collective collapse provided the occasion for the adventurism
of Muhammed of Ghazni in the eleventh century and ushered in the Turkic-
Muslim conquest of North India. 
In the power vacuum of the Deccan after the defeat of the Arabs in 737, two
leaders managed to put together sufficient military organizations to make
use of the opportunity: N agabhata I (c. 725–760) of Ujjain and Dantidurga
of the western Deccan. 59 We may recall that N agabhata had participated in
one of the decisive battles against the Arabs, probably around 725 . He was
witness to the manner in which weak aristocratic houses were destroyed
when his own relations, the Gurjaras of L ata, were routed by both the Arabs
and the Ch alukyas in 737, never to gain authority again. 60 With the Ch a-
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 70 ---
lukyas keeping a close watch on the west, however, N agabhata chose first to
pursue the path of least resistance. He began to strike eastward, particularly
as there was no imperial authority after the withdrawal of the K arkotas from
the Ganges/Yamuna valley in 747 . His eastward movement, though, was
brought up short by Karkar aja, the ruler of the area around Bhopal, so nei-
ther he nor his nephews, who ruled after him, were very successful in the
east.61 They retained their seats of government in Ujjain, where it remained
at least until 800 .
table 2.9 Gurjara-Pratiharas
Nagabhata I (c. 725–760)
Devaraja (c. 750–)
Vatsaraja (c. –790)
Nagabhata II (c. 790–833)
Ramabhadra (c. 833–836)
Mihira Bhoja (c. 836–885)
Mahendrapala (c. 890–910)
Mahipala (c. 910–?)
Bhoja II (c. ?–914) 
Vinayakapala (c. 930–945)
Mahendrapala II (c. 945–950) 
Vinayakapala II (c. 950–959) 
Vijayapala (c. 960–1018)
Rajyapala (c. 1018–1019) 
Trilocanapala (c. 1020–1027)
Mahendrapala II 
By contrast, Dantidurga (c. 735–755), the founder of the R astrakuta line,
immediately embarked on a widely successful strategy of conquest even while
still a vassal of the Ch alukyas.62 Within a few years, he had gained the sub-
mission of the rulers of Ko$ala, KaliNga, and %ri$aila, probably representing his
victories in the name of his suzerain. Following this, he continued southward,
attacking K añci around 743 and asserting a victory over the Pallavas. Then
turning northward, he established his authority over parts of Gujarat, the Gulf
of Cambay, and the lands along the rich N armada River valley, seizing Ujjain
itself for a short time. 63 This action was probably contemporary with N agab-
hata’s action in the east. When N agabhata returned, however, the Prat ihara
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 71 ---
king clearly could control both his capital and the Narmada, since the Hansot
plates indicate that by 756 he was able to promote the C ahamana house as his
vassal in Lata.64
table 2.10 Rastrakutas
Dantivarman I
Indra I
Govinda I
Karka I
Indra II
Dantidurga (c. 735–755)
Krsna I (c. 755–772)
Dhruva Dharavarsa (c. 780–793)
Govinda III (c. 793–814)
Amoghavarsa (c. 814–880)
Krsna II (c. 878–914)
Indra III (c. 914–928)
Amoghavarsa II (c. 928–929) 
Govinda IV (c. 930–935) 
Amoghavarsa III (c. 936–939)
Krsna III (c. 939–967)
Khottiga (c. 967–972) 
Karkka II (c. 972–973)
The period 745–760 is certainly unclear, with claims and counterclaims made
by poets in boastful epigraphic panegyrics for their royal patrons. In any event,
the Rastrakutas seemed destined to clash with their Chalukya lords. This con-
ﬂict ﬁnally materialized around 750, when Dantidurga overthrew the last over-
lord of the V atapi Ch alukyas, K irtivarman II, ending the two centuries of
domination this house had enjoyed in the K rsna River valley. Subsequent
charters indicated that Kirtivarman II continued to exercise power in a limit-
ed venue for sometime thereafter, and Dantidurga’s uncle and successor, Krsna
I (c. 755–772), also claimed victories over this last of the Chalukya monarchs.65
Krsna I continued Dantidurga’s vision of an imperium, asserting control of the
KoNkan coast, perhaps in at attempt to shore up the R astrakuta fortunes after
the loss of Lata and Malava to the Gurjara-Pratiharas. Around 765–770, Krsna
I took his conﬂict to the south, where he engaged and defeated the Ga Ngas
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 72 ---
close to Bangalore, and then to the east, where the Eastern Ch alukya branch
ruled the K rsna and God avari delta area of Andhr apatha. Both these aristo-
cratic houses submitted to the R astrakuta lord, turning K rsna I into the
supreme ruler of a third of India. 66
table 2.11 Bhaumakaras of Orissa
%ivakaradeva I (c. 736–780)
%ubhakaradeva I (c. 780–800)
%ivakaradeva II (c. 800–820)
%antikaradeva I (c. 820–835)
%ubhakaradeva II (c. 835–838)
%ubhakaradeva III (c. 838–845)
Tribhuvanamahadevi (c. 845–850)
%antikaradeva II (c. 850–865)
%ubhakaradeva IV (c. 865–882)
%ivakaradeva III (c. 882–890)
Tribhuvanamahadevi II (c. 890–896)
Tribhuvanamahadevi III (c. 896–905)
%antikaradeva III
%ubhakaradeva V
Gaurimahadevi
Dandimahadevi
Vakulamahadevi
Dharmamahadevi
Source: Adapted from Yoritomi 1990, pp. 142–143.
The reason eastern India was not affected in this process was that it had only
just achieved a degree of political unity and afﬂuence. In Orissa, the Bhau-
makaras solidiﬁed control of Utkala around 736 and were to maintain this posi-
tion for approximately the next two centuries. Yet they were scarcely involved
with the wider political matrix, except in their interactions with Daksina Ko$ala
and Bengal. Bengal, conversely, began to emerge from a lawless period described
in the literature as “the manner of ﬁshes” (matsyanyaya), which is a metaphor
analogous to the English “law of the jungle,” indicating the rule of the merci-
lessly powerful.67 The chaotic period—which had begun about a hundred years
earlier with the deaths of %a$aNka (c. 628) and Harsa (647)—was brought to a
close by one individual gaining control, Gopala (c. 750–775), the founder of the
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Pala dynasty.68 He is said to have been elected by a community of his peers, an
appropriation of the old myth of Manu, the lawgiver. However he came to pow-
er, it is clear that he achieved control in Gauda and extended it into other areas
of Bengal, which had not seen order since the time of %a$aNka. Gopala’s effec-
tiveness is all the more curious, since he came from a family described as scribes
(kayastha) by the later Arab author Abul-i-Fazl or as belonging to a menial caste
(dasajivinah) by the authors of the Mañju$rimulakalpa.69 We know little of
Gopala’s reign, except that one of the authors of the Mañju$rimulakalpa had a
rather dim view of his ability to sustain even a rudimentary government. 70 In
about 775 he was succeeded by Dharmap ala, who, perhaps more than anyone
else, is responsible for the fame of the dynasty. Since we know little of the actu-
al extent of Gopala’s domain, we have little knowledge of how Dharmapala in-
creased its extent or solidiﬁed Gopala’s prior gains. 
table 2.12 Palas
Gopala (c. 750–775)
Dharmapala (c. 775–812)
Devapala (c. 812–850)
Mahendrapala (c. 850–865)
%urapala (c. 865–873)
Vigrahapala (c. 873–875)
Narayanapala (c. 875–932)
Rajyapala (c. 932–967)
Gopala II (c. 967–987)
Vigrahapala II (c. 987–992)
Mahipala (c. 992–1042)
Nayapala (c. 1042–1058)
Vigrahapala III (c.1058–1085)
Mahipala II (c.1085–1086)
%urapala II (c. 1086–1087)
Ramapala (c. 1087–1141)
Kumarapala (c. 1141–1143)
Gopala III (c. 1043–1058)
Madanapala (c. 1158–1176)
Govindapala (c. 1176–1180)
Palapala (c. 1180–1214)
Source: Adapted from Huntington and Huntington 1990, p. 542, chart 1.
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 74 ---
By the 780s, though, it had become clear that the great powers of India were
headed toward a military engagement. The precipitating event was trouble in
Madhyade$a, and Kanauj remained everyone’s ﬁrst prize. Then ruling in Kanauj
was a relatively weak dynasty known as the Ayudhas, obscure in origin. Va-
jrayudha, the ﬁrst known king, became the target of an attempt by the Kashmiris
to recapture lost glory. In about 780, Lalit aditya’s grandson, Jayapida Vinaya-
ditya (c. 779–810), made a raid from the north, conquered Vajrayudha, and cap-
tured his throne.71 With this dramatic demonstration of weakness in the center,
the Pratihara monarch Vatsaraja elected to try for the entire state, ill content
with capturing a gloriﬁed chair. After Vajrayudha’s death—perhaps as a result of
the Kashmiri war—a succession dispute had broken out in Kanauj, and in about
784 Vatsaraja marched in and defeated the sitting king, Indr ayudha, allowing
him to remain on the throne as a vassal. The Palas must have considered Mad-
hyade$a part of their propreitary domain, and Dharmapala took on the cause of
the other disputant to the throne, Cakr ayudha.72 Following the standard me-
dieval mode of settling disputes, the Prat ihara and P ala leaders brought their
armies to battle close by Pray aga, the conﬂuence of the Ganges and Yamuna
Rivers. Unfortunately for the Bengali contingent, Dharmapala’s army was de-
feated, and the two white umbrellas that he used as his imperial standards were
seized by Vatsaraja on the ﬁeld. 
The Rastrakuta king, now Dhruva Dh aravarsa (c. 780–793), had been fol-
lowing the troop movements of his two greatest competitors with personal in-
terest and used the opportunity to invade M alava in Vatsaraja’s absence.73 In
about 786 Dhruva moved his army along the same path as Vatsaraja’s army had
followed, from Ujjain to Kanauj, for much the same reason. There, he en-
countered the Pratihara monarch and took from him the two umbrellas he had
earlier taken from Dharmapala, sending Vatsaraja to seek shelter in the desert.
By then, Dharmapala had moved up his re-equipped and reinforced army to
encounter the Rastrakutas on the ﬁeld, only to have his newly acquired white
umbrellas taken away by Dhruva as well. Dhruva now had four of the Pala um-
brellas and was in possession of virtually all of India, but elected to abandon
the north, which remained hostile to the southern invader. 
Despite the distressing loss of four of his best umbrellas, Dharmap ala ac-
tually became the beneﬁciary of these engagements, all of which he had lost.
Dhruva contracted his forces to the south and, after his death in 793, his four
sons became involved in a decade-long succession battle. 74 The Prat iharas
were trying to put their shattered country back together during the continued
occupation of its southern sector by the R astrakutas. Vatsaraja died disgraced
around 790 and was succeeded by Nagabhata II (c. 790–833). Dharmapala used
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 75 ---
this opportunity to advance to Kanauj for the third time, depose Indr ayudha,
and place Cakrayudha on the throne as the Pala vassal. Thus, for a brief peri-
od of almost a decade at the end of the eighth century, the P alas were the
undisputed lords of the north. Their satisfaction was, however, short-lived.
Nagabhata II was interested in retrieving his family’s fortune and reputation.
He organized another army in the interim and had established several of the
Deccani kings—now no longer involved with the R astrakutas—as his vassals.
In about 795 he moved on Kanauj and conquered Cakr ayudha, the Pala pup-
pet. Dharmap ala responded, as he had to, and engaged N agabhata II on a
broad front on his home ground, apparently culminating in a battle at
Monghyr, now in modern Bihar. Alas, the noble Bengali king was again de-
feated by a Pratihara army, doubtless losing more umbrellas in the process. 
Govinda III (c. 793–814) had emerged from the R astrakuta succession bat-
tles around 796 completely conﬁdent and in charge of much of the south, hav-
ing conquered twelve great southern kings, who had sided with one of his
brothers.75 Not content to rest on these laurels, he elected to march northward
as his father had done and once again seize the fruits of the Gangetic valley,
since the warring north again provided the same fertile ﬁeld for southern ag-
gression. Govinda’s loyal younger brother, Indra, now governor of M alava,
paved the way for his brother to come up through the N armada valley, much
as his father had done. The Deccani army encountered N agabhata II, proba-
bly south of Kanauj, and utterly routed the Prat ihara army, as his father had
done to Nagabhata’s parent. Then Govinda proceeded to Kanauj, where he re-
ceived the submission of Cakr ayudha, who had already been almost everyone
else’s vassal and demonstrated remarkable survival skills. Accurately assessing
the course of events, Dharmapala evidently joined Cakrayudha in this process
of submission, and, now shockingly short of umbrellas, he offered an image of
Tara to Govinda III as a token of his subordinate status. Govinda III, having
claimed the authority to attack anyone on the subcontinent, retreated to his
source of power in Ellora. 
The ninth century thus began with the complete dominion of the R as-
trakutas over everyone; they were enjoying the height of their power, an illu-
sory position, as Govinda III was to ﬁnd to his chagrin. In his approximately
two-year absence from the south, his client states formed alliances and rebelled
against their suzerain, a pattern that was to occupy the Rastrakutas for most of
the ninth century.76 In 802 the Eastern Chalukyas had rebelled and were sup-
pressed by Govinda. Immediately thereafter, a confederation of the Ga Ngas,
Pallavas, Karnatas, and others challenged R astrakuta supremacy, an uprising
that took the better part of two years to quell. 
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 76 ---
However, whereas the last ten years of Govinda’s reign were relatively
peaceful, the north was beginning to heat up again. Nagabhata II had used the
opportunity of Dharmapala’s death around 812 to occupy Kanauj again, solid-
ifying his position by 815 .77 The Prat iharas would occupy Madhyade $a for
most of the ensuing 150 years. Dharmap ala’s successor, Devapala (c. 812–850),
wisely did not challenge the Pratiharas for Kanauj, avoiding his father’s error.
Instead, he used his time in strategies of encroachment against N agabhata’s
regime, gaining ground slowly and establishing vassal states in Assam and
Orissa as well. Nagabhata II died in 833, and his son Ramabhadra (c. 833–836)
was poorly suited for the medieval military life. Devapala, realizing his chance,
struck out against the Prat ihara occupation of Madhyade $a, obviously pursu-
ing a successful military strategy. 78 Devapala’s adventurism, coupled with
Ramabhadra’s ineffectual leadership, caused a crisis among the Pratiharas, and
in 836, Ramabhadra was murdered by his own son, Mihira Bhoja (c. 836–885),
who was to become the Pratiharas’ most dynamic and ruthless tyrant. 
The Rastrakutas also had a new ruler, Amoghavar sa (c. 814–880), who as-
cended the throne as an adolescent, after the death of Govinda III. Again the
Eastern Chalukyas rebelled, and Amoghavarsa ﬂed the throne from 818 to 821,
when he was restored by the combined military sagacity of his uncle and a suc-
cession dispute among the Eastern Ch alukyas. For approximately a decade,
Amoghavarsa had the opportunity to grow up, and this may have been the
time during which the capital was moved from Ellora to Malkhed, in the
modern state of Karnataka. His respite was not to last. His greatest challenge
emerged from his own R astrakuta relatives in Gujarat, who had been placed
there initially by his father after the successful northern campaign. This in-
ternecine conﬂict was to last from around 835 to 860 and created considerable
internal problems for the Rastrakutas.79
Back in the north, the new Pratihara leader, Mihira Bhoja, and others used
the situation to their advantage. The Arabs had embarked on a new series of
raids and were repelled by Bhoja’s vassals, the Cahamanas, in 842.80 With this
behind him, Bhoja engaged Devapala shortly thereafter, defeating the Bengali
king with the assistance of Prat ihara vassal states, particularly the K alachuris,
who had resurfaced in Tripuri, close to modern Jabalpur.81 Disposing of these
threats to his security, Bhoja elected to use the R astrakutas’ problems to his
advantage. In about 860, Bhoja moved his army down along the Narmada val-
ley toward L ata and engaged those vassals loyal to Amoghavar sa even while
they were ﬁghting the Gujarati R astrakutas.82 Unexpectedly, the appearance
of the Prat iharas as a common foe caused the various R astrakuta factions to
quickly settle their differences and unite. With their collective strength, they
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 77 ---
repelled Bhoja’s army back north and brought to an end the lengthy R as-
trakuta civil war. 
Amoghavarsa used the settlement to turn again to the rebellious Eastern
Chalukyas, who continued to have the temerity to desire independence. In
about 860, Amoghavarsa again took VeNgi, to the discomﬁture of Vijayaditya
III (c. 849–892), the Eastern Ch alukya king. The Chalukyas, though, did not
take their defeat lying down. During the end of Amoghavar sa’s life, the con-
tentious Gujarati Rastrakutas in the west were replaced by the hostile Eastern
Chalukyas as the main source of trouble for the Malkhed imperium. From 870
off and on until around 899, past the death of Amoghavar sa in 880, the war
between Malkhed and Ve Ngi continued, having been taken up by their heirs,
Krsna II (c. 878–914) and Bh ima.83 With the death of Amoghavar sa, Vijaya-
ditya III took the conﬂict to the Eastern Ga Nga and Kalachuri vassals and al-
lies of the Rastrakutas, establishing his military capacity through the agency of
his redoubtable general, PandaraNga. Although the Chalukyas did achieve in-
dependence, it was not to last. Krsna II reﬁtted his forces after the death of Vi-
jayaditya III and even brieﬂy captured the Eastern Chalukya successor, Bhima
(c. 892–921). Bh ima, however, continued his uncle’s struggle and around 899
ﬁnally claimed victory and independence from the R astrakutas after thirty
years of conﬂict. 
One of the reasons for the Rastrakuta’s protracted problems was that Krsna
II in reality had to ﬁght on two fronts, since Pratihara Mihira Bhoja’s age had
not brought him indolence. From around 870 to 880, Bhoja had been involved
in a series of conﬂicts with the Palas, who had to suffer through succession dis-
putes that brought two brothers and a cousin to the throne within approxi-
mately twenty-ﬁve years: Mahendrap ala (c. 850–865), %urapala (c. 865–873),
and Vigrahap ala (c. 873–875). 84 Bhoja evidently tried to use the P ala’s own
strategy of encroachment to obtain some ground, although its success is not
entirely clear. After Vigrahapala’s abdication in favor of his son, Narayanapala
(c. 875–932), however, the circumstances stabilized, and N arayanapala’s reign
was long enough to re-establish conﬁdence in the court. Then, Amoghavarsa’s
death around 880 provided Bhoja with the opportunity to attempt again the
domination of L ata that he had not achieved in 860 .85 Assisted by his C a-
hamana vassals, he once more moved his troops down the Narmada valley, this
time successful in his bid to dominate the eastern shore of the Gulf of Cam-
bay. Krsna II, having lost the battle, elected instead to win the war. With fresh
reinforcements, he drew his troops back, moved to the east, crossed the N ar-
mada, and took Ujjain from the Prat iharas, dealing Bhoja a political and psy-
chological setback deep in the Prat ihara homeland and causing his retreat
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 78 ---
from Lata. Bhoja’s failure in the west was exacerbated by problems later, at the
end of his life, and the Kashmiri king %aNkaravarman used Bhoja’s failing
years to annex part of the northern areas around 886 .86
Bhoja’s death in 888 did not end the Prat ihara desire for a resort on the
Gulf of Cambay. His son Mahendrap ala (c. 890–910) once again invaded
around 900, but this time the campaign was successful, ending the R astraku-
ta dominance there.87 The consequences for the Rastrakutas were several: Gu-
jarat—with which they now had no overland communication—was taken
from the subsidiary branch of the R astrakutas and administered directly from
Malkhed, perhaps because of its perilous position. The loss in the west of the
Lata vassals, and especially the L ata vassal forces, contributed to the R as-
trakuta’s loss of the Eastern Chalukya lands.88 Unfortunately, the next centu-
ry would see the eclipse of two of the three dominant states, and the rise of
new forces from all sides. 
‒ ..
Undaunted by the erosion of Rastrakuta territory, Krsna II bided his time, and
around 910, when Pratihara Mahendrapala died, he used the ensuing struggle
between the three heirs as an opportunity to invade the north. Mahendrapala’s
three sons—Bhoja II, Mah ipala, and Vin ayakapala—all competed for the
throne, in a conﬂict similar to the one among the Pala rulers half a century be-
fore. The exact course of events is not clear, but it is likely that for a very short
time Mahipala achieved dominance.89 This may have been the point that the
Rastrakutas intruded on the north, as part of a confederation with the Tripuri
Kalachuris to back the placement of Bhoja II on the throne. 90 Krsna’s cam-
paign was little more than a humiliating raid, though, and Bhoja II did not last
past 914. By then, however, Krsna II had died, and his grandson Indra III (c.
914–928) assumed the Rastrakuta mantle. With Bhoja II gone, Indra III real-
ized that the Rastrakutas had lost their authority in the north, and, in 916–917,
Indra III mounted an extensive campaign of invasion, which resulted in the
temporary occupation of Kanauj and left behind a trail of corpses. 91 Mahipala
survived, thanks to the assistance of the increasingly powerful Candella clan of
Khajuraho; these Gond tribal rulers assisted reinstating their increasingly
nominal overlord on his tarnished throne. 
Having tested the waters, Indra III decided to attempt the retaking of
Eastern Chalukya domains, lost by his grandfather after so much strife. The
opportunity came in 921, when K rsna II’s nemesis, Chalukya Bhima, died.92
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 79 ---
Bhima’s eldest son held ﬁrm, even if it cost him his short life, for he died on
the ﬁeld. The Eastern Ch alukya victory was Pyrrhic in more ways than one.
Like the destabilizing succession battles that afﬂicted the Palas and the Prati-
haras before them, the Eastern Chalukyas were to go through six rulers in the
next few decades, severely limiting their capacity to maintain their position.
This eventually resulted in their being taken over for twenty-seven years by the
Telugu, Jata Choda Bhima (c. 973–1000).93
For the Prat iharas, the succession dispute was temporarily resolved with
the ascension of Vin ayakapala around 930, whose reign of approximately ﬁf-
teen years was undistinguished. Their problems re-emerge around 945, with
multiple claimants to the throne, and the Prat ihara empire suffered through
divided rule and succession battles for some years. During the reigns of Ma-
hendrapala II (c. 945–950), Vin ayakapala II (c. 950–959), Vijayap ala (c. 960–
1018), Rajyapala (d. 1019), and Trilocanapala (c. 1020–1027), the Pratiharas de-
clined precipitously.94 Trilocanapala was to be the last of the Pratihara emper-
ors, a line of potentates whose domain was eroding by the year. These ﬁnal
Pratihara rulers faced not only internal dissention but the aggressive rise of
their previously subordinate vassal states: the Candellas of Khajuraho, the
Paramaras of Malava, the Guhilas of R ajaputana, the Cahamanas of Sakam-
bhari, and others. Indeed, R ajyapala was to lose his life at the hands of Can-
della Vidyadhara, who came to despise the Pratihara’s cowardice in the face of
the new threats from Mahmud of Ghazni, the feral Turkic prince. So, too, the
Pratiharas not only were diminished by the loss of previously loyal client states,
but were caught between the Ghaznavid onslaught (c. 1000–1027) and the op-
portunism of long-term hostile forces in the Deccan. 
Among them were the Prat ihara’s old nemesis, the R astrakutas of
Malkhed, who had experienced their own succession battles after the death of
Indra III in 928 . The ﬁrst in line, Amoghavar sa II (c. 928–929), possibly was
murdered by his brother Govinda IV (c. 930–935). Govinda IV, considered too
dedicated to the women of his seraglio, was deposed by a confederation of
Rastrakuta and his uncle, Amoghavar sa III (c. 936–939), who assumed the
throne under duress.95 It was Amoghavarsa’s son, Krsna III (c. 939–967), who
seemed to revive the martial spirit of the R astrakutas.96 He subdued the
Tripuri Kalachuris in 938, even before he assumed the throne. Once in power,
he led blitzkrieg raids on the Co la kingdom in the south in 943, eventually
conquering the Cola army in 949. Clearly now emulating the great Rastraku-
ta warlords of the past, such as Indra III, K rsna III captured Ve Ngi, subdued
the Eastern Chalukyas, and placed his puppet on the throne. The newly pow-
erful Candellas had evicted some of his northern garrisons, and K rsna III re-
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 80 ---
sponded with a northern expedition in 963–964 . There, he defeated the Can-
dellas and moved on the diminished Prat ihara army, probably under Vijaya-
pala. They were routed, and Krsna III continued on to gain victories in Mala-
va against the Paramaras, as well as in Gujarat. 
These ﬁnal raids ended up costing the R astrakutas dearly. S iyaka, the
Paramara monarch, was not one to accept the inevitable fact of R astrakuta
domination, as had so many of the northern lords in the past. Instead, S iyaka
put together another army, in confederation with princes who had also suf-
fered from Krsna III’s conquest. In 972, after a series of engagements, S iyaka
gained Malkhed and sacked the R astrakuta capital. 97 Krsna III had already
passed away, leaving his son Kho ttiga (c. 967–972) to hold the throne. Kho t-
tiga died as a result of the war, however, and his successor, Karkka II, lasted
little more than a year as the Rastrakuta monarch. In the end, the Rastrakutas
were brought down by their continual oppression of their predecessors: the
Chalukyas. Seeking to end his subordinate status, Taila II, a local chieftain
tracing his lineage back to the royal Vatapi Chalukyas, put together a confed-
eration of states—the K alachuris, the Yadavas, and other Ch alukya houses—
to bring the Rastrakuta empire to utter ruin by December 973 .
The last of the three great empires was the only one capable of maintaining
itself, the Palas of Magadha and Bengal. They had managed to stay out of much
of the conﬂict after the time of Devapala, and the last half of the ninth century
saw them consumed with their contentious succession problems. Narayanapala’s
lengthy reign, c. 875–932, contributed to stability there even as others were rent
by internal dissension. In the interests of stability, the P alas had attempted to
make multiple diplomatic alliances by marriage to the Kalachuris and the Ras-
trakutas, although these never came with guarantees of peace. Indeed, both the
Kalachuris and the Candellas began a series of raids on Pala territories, from the
middle of the ninth century on, contributing to the climate of instability. 98
Moreover, the problem of ambitious vassals plagued the Palas, as it had every-
one else. We often see the capacity for a new leader to come in, act as a dutiful
subject during a period of power consolidation, and then set up an independent
principality at his lord’s expense. 
In this manner, Narayanapala’s son Rajyapala (c. 932–967) had to contend
with the fragmentation of Bengal, through the agency of the Candras, who
took over the eastern and southeastern sections of P ala territory and ruled
there until the middle of the eleventh century. 99 Whereas the Candras appear
indigenous to Bengal, that was not the case for the K ambojas, who were evi-
dently a tribal group from the Bengal-Burma border. 100 The ability of tribal
leadership to coalesce and take control during the early medieval period was
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 81 ---
astonishing, a fact that had great consequences for the period. Previously, the
Candellas had been a tribal band, evidently members of the larger Gond eth-
nicity, who had been supremely successful in establishing their credentials.
The Kambojas appropriated both the Gau da principality of western Bengal
around 975, during the reign of Gop ala II (c. 967–987), and even ﬁlched the
names of the P alas themselves. Thus not only do we ﬁnd that the Prat iharas
had adopted P ala names for themselves (Mahendrap ala, etc.), but the K am-
bojas mimicked the cognomen “P ala” as well. As a result, they are frequently
identiﬁed as the “Kamboja Palas” of Gauda.101
By the end of the tenth century, the old P ala domain had been eroded on
all sides and was mostly conﬁned to the modern state of Bihar below the
Ganges. Not until the time of Mah ipala (c. 992–1042) did the P alas begin to
regain sections of Bengal that had been lost. His most serious problems were
to occur from the south, with the Cola invasion of 1021–1023 and the Kalachuri
occupation of Banaras in 1034.102 Unfortunately for the dynasty, Mahipala was
to prove the last great P ala emperor, and his death marked the beginning of
the end for this royal house, which was to sputter on until its subordination at
the hands of the Senas in the mid-twelfth century .
‒ ..
For our purposes, a concise summary of the succeeding two centuries will suf-
ﬁce to conﬁgure the course of events. In the Deccan, the takeover of the R as-
trakutas and the occupation of Malkhed by Taila II with his Chalukya confed-
eration in 973 marked the beginning of a new dynasty. This was the Chalukyas
of Kalyani, named for the capital that they constructed upriver from Malkhed
in the middle of the eleventh century.103 Their major conﬂicts over the next two
centuries were with the Colas and other peoples of the Deccan and south of the
Krsna River. The Chalukyas of Kalyani were ﬁnally brought down by much the
same institutional problem that had destroyed the Gurjara-Prat iharas before
them: the rebellion of previous vassal states. In the last quarter of the twelfth
century, a group of former feudatories—led by the K alachuris, Yadavas, and
Hoysalas—repeatedly engaged the remnant of the Ch alukya house and re-
moved it from power around 1190.
In the north, the previous domain of the Prat iharas was divided into mul-
tiple smaller states: the C ahamanas, Guhilas, Param aras, Tomaras, and so
forth. Most of these are classiﬁed by historians as Rajput houses, a loose cate-
gory that includes various military clans from Gujarat to Bihar. Many of them
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 82 ---
claimed descent from Agni (agnikula), tracing their lineages to a myth of the
creation of a race of warriors in a ﬁre altar by the sage Vasistha at Mount Abu
(Arbuda). This was in distinction to houses descended from the Sun
(suryavam$a) or the Moon (somavam$a), in the manner of previous K satriya
families.104 Much of Gujarat was still under the control of the remnants of the
Chalukyas who had been instrumental in turning back Arab aggression in 737.
Similarly, they bore the brunt of the initial assaults of Muhammed of Ghazni
from 1000 to 1027 . His destructive raids marked the dramatic renewal of the
thrusts of Islamic armies into India, which culminated with the loss of the
north to the Ghurids of Afghanistan and the founding of the Delhi Sultanate
with the ascension of Shams al-D in Iltutmish in 1210. 105 Analogously, a
greater part of the western Deccan plateau was under the Y adavas while the
Paramaras remained in power in M alava until their subjugation to the K ala-
churis in the mid-eleventh century. Indeed, two dynasties of very different cir-
cumstances were to emerge as major forces in the north: the K alachuris of
Tripuri and the Gahadvalas. Under the adventurism of kings like GaNgeya (c.
1015–1041) and Kar na (c. 1041–1073), the K alachuris became the dominant
power of central and northern India during the eleventh century.106 In Kanauj,
the Gahadvalas had taken power in the absence of authority with the fall of
the remnants of the Prat iharas. They solidiﬁed control of Madhyade $a while
the Kalachuris were involved with the Candellas and the Paramaras, eventual-
ly extending their hold into areas of northern Bihar. 
Thus the Palas were increasingly surrounded by forces of agonistic rulers—
east, west, and south. From the east, the Kaivartas challenged the Pala hold on
north Bengal, while the Candras (and later the Varmans) controlled the east-
ern sections of Bengal. 107 The biggest threat, though, came from the Senas,
who dominated southern Bengal. 108 Following the lead of an adventurous
warrior from Kar nataka, the Senas were to expand their control of areas of
Bengal until virtually the entire area was theirs. The Palas were confronted on
the west by the Gahadvalas, who had begun encroaching on Pala territory and
eventually took all of northern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 109 From the south,
the Kalachuris invaded multiple times, but their interest was in the spoils of
war, rather than in long-term dominion. The end of the P alas ﬁnally came in
the second half of the twelfth century, around 1170, when Madanap ala could
no longer hold off the combined forces of the Gahadvalas in the west and the
Senas in the East. Thus one of the longest-lived dynasties in Indian history
came to an end, with the P alas continuing as only a minor house subservient
to the Senas until the Muslim conquest of Magadha by Muhammed ibn
Bakhtyar Khalji around 1204/5.
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 83 ---
This review of the political and military history of India is highly defective in
at least one respect: scale. We have concentrated on the large battles, the major
changes, the subcontinent-wide movements of men and forces. Yet for each of
the large changes, there were many more conﬂicts between the vassals of a ma-
jor power. Since these were not perceived as determining the direction of impor-
tant events, the major powers of India elected to allow their feudatories almost
unlimited scope for low-level conﬂict in the early medieval period. Such localized
conﬂicts in fact had an overwhelming impact. The feudatories attained positions
of importance by appropriating lesser princes and rose to challenge their over-
lords at an opportune moment. The battles extracted their tolls, not simply on
the warrior class, but on the entire population, as shown in more detail below.
Beyond that, the license to engage in conﬂict that does not encroach on the ma-
jor powers meant that, at the level of local chieftains, skirmishes over villages,
borders, and resources happened with predictable regularity. Consequently, small
princelings could work their way up the ladder of political-military hierarchy by
sanguinary callousness. Thus our review of the conﬂicts must be understood to
have been mirrored at lower levels with much greater frequency. 
    
Both inscriptions and documents preceding the opening of the early medieval
era suggest that the rulers were broadly divided between two kinds of persons.
The ﬁrst kind were those who followed the older chivalry (rajadharma) es-
poused in the Manava Dharma %astra, the %antiparvan of the Mahabharata,
and related texts. The author of the Manava Dharma %astra identiﬁed the king
as an entity whose primary function was protector of the populace (I.89) and
dispenser of justice (VII.10). Because of the compilatory nature of the text,
there is no uniform message about military aggression from this author. In one
place (VII.198) he advocates that the king should exercise three of his four
means (upaya) for overcoming an adversary: offering the adversary conciliation,
offering him gifts to solicit his favor, and sowing rebellion within his camp.
Never, the verse tells the reader, should a king overcome his enemies by resort-
ing to the fourth means, that of war (na yuddhena kadacana). Yet elsewhere the
text offers triumphal homage to a king’s military virtue: 
Engaged on the ﬁelds of battle, the Lords of the Earth seek each others’
death. Never diverting their faces from being fought with supreme strength,
they ascend to heaven (upon their mutual destruction). (VII.89)110
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 84 ---
This form of chivalry is analogous to that found in the Ramayana, where
Rama is depicted as the ultimate self-effacing prince—he is willing to do any-
thing, including relinquishing power, to protect his father’s word and there-
fore his sense of justice. 
In distinction to this chivalry was the attitude exhibited by the Pandavas in
the Mahabharata, where they precipitated the destruction of their kinsmen for
personal vindication. Their complicity in so much devastation for its own sake
is recognized as an ethical dilemma both before the battle—for example, in the
opening chapters of the Bhagavadgita—and after the actual conﬂict itself. It
has been long understood that the %antiparvan is a lengthy treatise motivated
by Yudhisthira’s profound unhappiness at his and his brothers’ behavior dur-
ing the conﬂict, in which many of their relatives had died. The %antiparvan
begins with the simple statement to the rsi N arada about the evils the ﬁve
brothers have brought on their world (12.1.13–44). It is ultimately up to Bh is-
ma—the paradigmatic warrior who is ridiculously depicted as skewered by Ar-
juna’s arrows so completely that he rests not on the ground but on the pro-
truding tips of the arrows—to teach Yudhisthira the reasons for such carnage.
The balance of the %antiparvan is Bhisma’s extended treatise on both Ksatriya
behavior (rajadharma) and liberation (moksadharma). Along with the Artha$as-
tra and the Manava Dharma %astra, the %antiparvan represents a base line that
we may use to assess the development of the early medieval culture of military
adventurism, since the bulk and direction of these three works were produced
during or before the time of the Imperial Guptas. 111
If Yudhisthira’s literary persona is concerned about the behavior of the In-
dian military in battle, some modern authors have been less apologetic. For a
variety of reasons, it has been common to depict ancient and medieval Indian
warfare as a benign event in which only the chivalrous combatants lost their
lives.112 Those adopting this position most frequently appeal to the single tes-
timony of Megasthenes, as recorded in Arrian’s Indica and Strabo’s Geography.
In his discussion of the castes, Megasthenes maintains that “if there is an in-
ternal war among the Indians, it is not lawful for them to touch these land
workers, nor even to devastate the land itself; but while some are making war
and killing each other as opportunity may serve, others close by are peacefully
ploughing or picking fruits or pruning or harvesting.” 113 Megasthenes’ infor-
mation, however, suggests the proclivity of some Indians to misrepresent
themselves to foreigners.114 Megasthenes’ report also shows that those travel-
ing to India frequently have their own agenda, and he employed India as a
stage for the fabulous. Megasthenes, for example, presents the genealogy of
Candragupta Maurya, the founder of the ﬁrst pan-Indian state, as the 153d
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 85 ---
generation descending from Dionysus and denies that Indians have slaves—
clearly an inaccurate reporting of both Indian ideas and Indian behaviors.
While his testimony is valuable in some areas, our Greek ambassador was also
the victim of his own credulity by reporting that he had seen mouthless hu-
mans living on vapors (? Gandharvas), unicorns, gold mining ants, and a host
of fabulous beasts. His testimony was questioned by his peers and was dis-
missed by Strabo and other Greek historians. 115
Our evidence suggests that war in ancient and medieval India was not a be-
nign affair. We can surmise this from the requirements of similar warfare else-
where and from the epigraphs, procedural manuals, and explicit concerns of
those who had to clean up in the aftermath. Curiously, most of the damage to
the society was not the direct result of the narrow conﬂict of armies on an as-
signed battleﬁeld. Ancient pitched battles were seldom more than a few hours
long, were relatively ritualized in nature, and entailed a loss of life that was min-
imal compared to the wider pattern of destruction.116 Predominantly, the dev-
astation of the environment and citizenry was the result of military foraging,
the violence inﬂicted on crops and citizens outside the battleﬁeld, and such
practices as burning of cities, poisoning wells, and enslavement of populations.
Moreover, the pollution of water supplies by battleﬁeld runoff, the spread of
disease and famine, and the violence of renegade soldiers all contributed to the
long-term population declines in cities targeted in such conﬂicts.117
Foraging was and is required for armies in the ﬁeld. The difﬁculty was that,
for most of the history of warfare, soldiers have been capable of carrying only
about seventy pounds per man, including weapons, armor, clothing, and
food.118 The balance of provisions, medicine, weapons, tools, and so forth
must be either transported or secured in the target area. The enormous dis-
tances covered by these armies involved in pitched battles meant that the
primitive transportation systems of India must have concentrated on irre-
placeable items, and certainly de-emphasized food for the soldiers and fodder
for the cavalry, chariot, and elephant corps. These developments are evident
from the archaeological record, epigraphs, and the major contemporary
sources for political systems and military expediency—the Artha$astra (ﬁrst to
second century c.e.) and the Nitisara of Kamandaka (seventh to eighth centu-
ry c.e.).119 Such sieges meant that armies initially relied on local produce, lat-
er to be replaced by goods from a larger area of supply. These supplies required
well-organized units, and we can infer that they eventually evolved into sup-
ply specialty groups, such as the Bañjaras of the Mughal period. 120 To offset
the effects of the siege, a ruler might poison the wells or burn the standing
crops, practices validated in the Nitisara under the recognized doctrines of de-
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 86 ---
ceitful strategies (kutayuddha).121 Even in the Artha$astra, recommended
methods included the employment of tribal peoples to act on behalf of the in-
vading force: they might poison the cultivators, burn their crops, or set ﬁre to
the fortiﬁcations.122 We can also surmise that they would be motivated to take
revenge for intrusion into traditional tribal lands or for the suppression of trib-
al peoples, as in the case of the Guhilas over the Bhillas. 123
The results of these and other practices were manifold, but principally en-
tailed the erosion of the difference between private and public violence, so that
conscripts both learned the skills of organized butchery and became desensi-
tized to its consequences. 124 Whether in the heat of battle or in the lives of
surviving participants, war is a paradoxically private affair, but with grave pub-
lic consequences on noncombatants in its immediate proximity and on the cit-
izenry when the soldiers return home. 125 The effects of such practices on the
unarmed populace was articulated in A $oka’s Shabazgarhi inscription, where
he writes that the battle of KaliNga resulted in 150,000 enslaved, 100,000 com-
batants killed in the battle itself, and many times that number losing their lives
in the aftermath as a direct result of the conﬂict.126 Although the absolute ﬁg-
ures might be inﬂated, as has been frequently suggested, the ratio of combat-
ants, slaves, and slaughtered innocents appears appropriate. Many among the
populace lost their lives because of militarily engineered famine or through
poisonings, hatreds by third parties, and reprisals by military commanders. 
The conﬂagration of medieval cities was common enough for Hira Lal to
remark, “The burning of capital towns seems to have been a favorite form of
annoyance to unfriendly rulers and was perhaps regarded as a great achieve-
ment.”127 Religious tracts acknowledge the burning of cities as a subset of bel-
ligerence, and works like the Buddhist Siddhaikaviramahatantra specify rituals
for the paciﬁcation of agonism and conﬂagrations. 
This king of mantras is recited to pacify all strife, antagonism, argumenta-
tion, misfortune and destitution, and they all become paciﬁed with the homa
sacriﬁce using rice chaff. Whatever ﬂowers may be obtained, say the mantra
over them, and release them into water. Then all peace and victory will be
obtained, have no doubt. When a city is burning, stand facing the ﬁre and
address praise to seven handfuls of water, then throw them on the ﬁre. One
desiring to protect his home from incineration will thus preserve it.128
Many of our sources warn commanders against such activities for Machiavel-
lian reasons—they would turn the populace against them. However, such ar-
guments are appropriate only when territorial gain is the primary goal, which
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 87 ---
was only one of many reasons for battle. 129 For the conquerors, though, who
did not seek further domains, few of these inhibitions are evident. So, when
Karkaraja defeated N agabhata, the Bhopal R astrakuta prince is depicted by
the court poet as laughing in the devastated city of his enemy. 130
Thus the great cities of Kanauj, Varanasi, Gauda, and so forth had difﬁcul-
ty retaining primacy as centers of culture, for their preeminence had revealed
their attractiveness to opportunistic invasion. Kanauj frequently became the
goal of armies, and this reality forced such rulers as the Prat iharas to found a
series of subsidiary palaces and regional centers in the periphery, well outside
the actual path of potential invasion.131 Armies tended to approach cities along
established trade routes, so the greenbelts of those cities could be sources of
supply. Conversely, overland routes, which may have been shorter, were not
preferred.132 An aggressive force approaching the regional capital might not
only seize the ofﬁces of government and, if possible, members of the royal
house. They might also avail themselves of the copperplate records (from which
they can get information on vassals), the treasury, the wealth of the large bank-
ing houses, and other potential sources of revenue. Following this, the burning
of cities in the aftermath of the invasion was a means of dispersing the popu-
lace and dissuading counterattacks, particularly if the invading force did not
wish to establish a new confederate on the throne or to acquire the territory for
itself. Thakur and Jha have reviewed the list of twenty-one mercantile cities
found in the eighth century Prakrit story, the Samaraiccakaha, and have found
that, for those having had some level of archaeological examination, virtually
every one experienced rather dramatic decline during this period.133
Moreover, as has been discovered by China in the aftermath of the Cul-
tural Revolution, the United States in the wake of the Vietnam war, and the
Soviet Union after its conﬂict in Afghanistan, not all returning soldiers be-
come law-abiding citizens. Having learned the business of slaughter and in-
timidation, the demobilized conscripts sometimes form criminal gangs, where
they apply their training in the use of armament and military tactics. The af-
termath of conﬂicts provides them a perfect series of abandoned buildings to
employ as hideouts. Requiring revenues to make up for the losses during the
campaign, the central government will just as frequently turn a blind eye to the
intrusion on civil authority and accept from the pirates whatever payments of
tribute that might serve its purposes. 
This process assisted the transformation of the feudal practice of gift giving
and rewards into corruption and rapacity. Indeed, much of the discussion of the
reigns of previous dynasties in Kalhana’s RajataraNgini (1148–1149) is taken up
with the corruption of kings and ofﬁcials (to which even Manu agrees). Kalhana
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 88 ---
demonstrates the cruelty of such behavior when he shows rulers like Jayapida (c.
779–810) seizing the entire harvest of Kashmir for three years running.134 This
conduct was also in evidence on the coasts, where piracy was endemic—some-
times conducted directly by a local warlord, sometimes by privateers surrender-
ing part of their booty to the prince.135
As a consequence of the emergence of this culture of military adventurism,
decentralization and the coalescence of ﬁefdoms became primary characteris-
tics of the period. 136 These in turn yielded the castelization of parts of India
with the development of fortresses and armed encampments in various locales.
By the early medieval period, Indians had developed all three normative forms
of fortiﬁcations: refuges, strongholds, and large strategic defenses. Keegan
notes that the castelization of a country is the sign of its lack of centralized au-
thority. As he observes, “Strongholds are a product of small or divided sover-
eignties; they proliferate when central authority has not been established or is
struggling to secure itself or has broken down.” 137
The sage Ka$yapa in the %antiparvan graphically articulates the experience
of a kingdom falling into lawlessness by the metaphor of the emergence of
Rudra, the personiﬁcation of evil and destruction:
Where the treacherous obtain conﬁrmation in the assembly, even when
they have killed women or Brahmans, and appear without fear in the pres-
ence of the king—the Ksatriya lives in terror of that estate.
For there the god Rudra emerges at the moment when treachery is out-
rageously crafted by rogues. Through these evil deeds, those rogues produce
Rudra, indiscriminately harming both the virtuous and venomous alike.
Rudra is the soul lurking in the hearts of vicious men, killing each of
their own bodies as well as the bodies of others. They say Rudra is like cru-
el catastrophes by the winds of the world. His form looks like clouds and
conﬂagrations.138
We will catch up with Rudra—recast as Mahe $vara—again in later chapters,
but I emphasize Keegan’s fundamental argument that war is not, as Clause-
witz has classically claimed, an extension of political intercourse by other
means.139 Clausewitz’s proposition was based on the reductionism of Aristo-
tle and his followers, who maintain that man is a political animal, indicating
that all behavior is essentially political, despite the clear evidence that political
goals and institutions are frequently subverted and destroyed by war, as they
are by other cultural systems. Rather, Keegan argues that war is an extension
of cultural forms, an activity in which all the elements of the culture come into
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 89 ---
play and by which all these elements are themselves are affected and trans-
formed. The lengthy list of the recognized causes of war given by Kamandaka
around the seventh to eighth centuries—including everything from the ab-
duction of women and the arrogance of leaders to divine guidance—seems to
support Keegan’s model.140
     
Perhaps the most telling aspect of warfare, and the strongest veriﬁcation of
Keegan’s thesis in this culture, is the early medieval period’s substantial change
in the representation of rulers and their military belligerence. 141 War became
depicted as a facet of the erotic play of the king, who was understood as the
manifestation of a divinity. Such representations were embodied in verse pan-
egyrics (pra$asti) that had become part of mainstream epigraphic statements, at
least by the time of Harisena’s verses in honor of Samudragupta, written around
350 c.e.142 Poets certainly had been part of the Gupta courts, and we ﬁnd
Harisena emphasizing the importance of poetry in Samudragupta’s court, es-
pecially by claiming that the king himself was a “poet king” (kaviraja) with his
own command of poetic literature.143 Yet the simple presence of poets did not
immediately invoke the erotic sentiment on behalf of kingship, a process that
required time to mature. Skandagupta receives a rather prosaic epigraph in his
Bhitari Stone Pillar Inscription, despite the mention of the songs and adulation
(gita, stuti) generated by vandanajana (panegyrists) on his behalf. 144 In fact,
though, the Guptas’ epigraphic panegyrics were, for the most part, indicative of
value systems familiar to the great epics, and we ﬁnd the frequent invocation
that a concern for the country’s citizens was the model of kingly behavior.
The ﬁrst indication of a new direction is seen in Vatsabha tti’s 473–474 c.e.
verses in praise of Bandhuvarman, who was governing the city of Da$apura on
behalf of Kumaragupta.145 There Vatsabhatti demonstrates a trend that will be-
come obligatory during the early medieval period: the divine erotization of
kingship and, ultimately, of warfare. This trajectory took some time to devel-
op, however, and Vasula’s praise to Ya$odharman is relatively toned down in
the c. 530 c.e. Mandasor inscription, again demonstrating concern for the wel-
fare of the world.146 Yet the 533–534 epigraph of his subordinate Visnuvardhana
emphasizes the eros of kingship and belligerence, and mentions the role of po-
ets singing in Sanskrit and Prakrit in praise of one of the king’s ancestors.147
From this time forward, we ﬁnd an idealization of warfare and the apotheo-
sis of kingship in Indian inscriptions and literature. Living monarchs would be
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 90 ---
accorded the same level of panegyric previously reserved for incarnations of di-
vinity, with whom they would be incessantly compared. Bringing with them
their training in poetic sentiment, the court poets increasingly constructed vers-
es of praise to the monarch and his ancestors (pra$asti), inspired by the canons of
poetry as these latter developed. In their verses, belligerence is recast in the lan-
guage of eroticism ($rNgara-rasa)and heroism (virarasa)—exactly the sentiments
afforded divinity. War is no longer the assembly and slaughter of frightened men
for dubious purposes, but the seizure and seduction of the goddess Fortune (%ri:
wealth) from the cities of the enemies into the harem of the conqueror. In
Ravikirti’s 634–635 c.e. Aihole lineal panegyric (pra$asti) to the Chalukyas, for
example, Jayasimha-vallabha, the ﬁrst Chalukya monarch identiﬁed there, won
through battles and “by his bravery made Fortune his own, even though she is
suspected of ﬁckleness.”148 The conquering king carries out his agenda, not by
force—although the battleﬁelds drip with gore (“thousands of headless bodies”
in the epigraph)—but by dint of his divine virility, so that the wealth of the tar-
get kingdom helplessly throws herself at his feet. Even more, Pulake$in II in a
later verse in the paean simply has Fortune obsessed with him at birth. His con-
quering of Vanav asi is rendered in language that portrays the city as a coy
woman and the warlord as her ardent lover; their embrace depicted as the dal-
liance of idle courtiers, not the bloody pillaging of a terriﬁed populace. 149 Ex-
amples could be multiplied from the inscriptions and literature of the Kalachuris,
Pusyabhutis, and others in the north as well, although %aiva kings and poets over
all seem to be particularly susceptible to this variety of diction.150
In the hands of such noted authors as Ravikirti, Raja$ekhara, Bana, and Vak-
patiraja—to name only the most famous of medieval poets—the cultured folks
at home were treated to the elaborate descriptions of the seductiveness of their
lords in the ﬁeld of battle. These court poets invoked the diction of the heroic
and erotic sentiments—sometimes allied with the ferocious (raudra)—in San-
skrit and Prakrit poetry, so warfare become draped with language of play (vilasa)
and games (krida), as if between lovers. Our warlords, seen as extensions of the
divinities they accrued during their coronations, demonstrate their lack of seri-
ousness of purpose, as did Rama or Krsna in their destruction of demons for the
welfare of mankind. Kielhorn has shown, for example, that the Aihole panegyric
is closely modeled after Kalidasa’s epic poem dedicated to the life of Rama, the
Raghuvam$a.151 Likewise, the Bilhari Stone Inscription of K alachuri Yuvara-
jadeva II makes pointed comparison between its composition and the work of
the famous poet Raja$ekhara.152 It is just this intersection of the belligerent, the
erotic, and the sacred that motivated Johan Huizinga—ﬁrst trained as an Indol-
ogist—to articulate his model of humanity as homo ludens (the playful man).153
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 91 ---
We will return to the element of play later, but here it is sufﬁcient to note that
the erotization of warfare served the purpose of sanctioning belligerence: it was
now the divine play of gods. The depiction of war as play allowed the rulers of
early medieval India to establish a sense of their own action as both divinely in-
spired and without the serious consequences that would mitigate its being just
good fun. This is exactly the attitude warned against in works on law and poli-
ty, for their Brahman authors were all too often required to ﬂee from burning
cities and the devastations of cruelly armed men. 
The impact on Brahmans, in fact, was unprecedented. As a result of the en-
suing medieval warfare on a large scale, the period became a time of great Brah-
manical migration, in which the highest caste not only sought patronage and
protection but also spread the values of caste and ritual into the new regional
centers. When these priests and their families would arrive in a new area, they
would be given (if they were lucky) land that was considered “waste” (bhumic-
chidranyaya); they were granted areas that were wild and in need of clearance for
farming purposes. Our records indicate that Brahmans crisscrossed northern In-
dia during most of the period in question, emigrating from Madhyade$a, Ben-
gal, Magadha, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Kashmir, and other locales at various times
to seek employment in regions such as Madhya Pradesh, the Deccan, and, pre-
eminently, Orissa. Their individual reasons for relocating, though, are not in-
scribed in the land grants they received. Swati Datta, who has studied the phe-
nomenon, became convinced that Brahmans emigrated to escape the military
adventurism of the period and the lawlessness that followed in its wake.154 Singh
has studied the Oriya circumstances in some detail, however, and has pointed
out that the possibility of free land was doubtless a contributing factor, so the
émigrés were part refugees, part opportunistic homesteaders.155 Whichever may
be the case, there can be no question that Brahmans served the interests of mon-
archs by spreading normative, caste Hindu values, acting as de facto propagan-
dists for the new order, Hinduizing the immediate area contiguous to their
farmland by their inﬂuence on tribal religious systems, and so forth. 
Our sources suggest that the primary beneﬁciaries of royal largess were
those Brahmans whose specialties included the rituals associated with their
lineages (gotra) or those with an expertise in the legal literature (dharma$astra,
smrti). The former specialty was clearly part of the symbiotic relationship be-
tween those who represent the sacred power (brahma) and those who invest
that power in the social order (ksatra). Monarchs during the early medieval pe-
riod unquestionably required the presence of Brahmans to assist in coronation
and related rituals, which assured the divine authority of the ruling house. In-
dian polity required that the law be administered—in the idiom of the day, the
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 92 ---
staff of coercion (danda) be held—by a king representing the sacred order and
embodying its capacity for protection and dominion. Brahmans conferred this
sacrality by their presence in the kingdom, and it served the interests of both
parties for them to locate in the royal proximity. 
Legitimacy was a central concern for these new regional rulers, since many
of the ruling houses did not derive from traditional K satriya lineages. Some
were tribal in origin, some were from other castes, and some were simply in-
determinate, since the caste system was besieged by new clan designations and
ethnonyms that had no direct correspondence to traditionally afﬁrmed cate-
gories. The result of these phenomena was technically known as the doctrine
of the “mixture of the castes” (varnasamkara), in which new groups were iden-
tiﬁed as having been brewed from inappropriate unions between members of
existing lineages. This designation represented a convenient prevarication but
one that brought a signiﬁcant indeterminacy about correct relations—food,
marriage, or employment, to name the most important. But even beyond rit-
ual, the knowledge of polity (niti), legal literature, and administrative systems
(artha$astra) was a boon to any new ruling house, and the new rulers needed
both the talent and learning of Brahmans who found themselves looking for
such opportunities. The freshly empowered rulers of the newly developed or-
der—installed in the position of divinities on earth at their coronation—re-
quired all the assistance they could obtain. The rulers’ survival required that
any informed bearers of the emerging social order be turned to the valoriza-
tion of the warlords’ clans, their domains, and their political aspirations. 
  
In the medieval militarized culture, the apotheosis of the king served his strat-
egy of divine right to the assumption of power, irrespective of his actual line-
age. However, the process of divine royalty conversely implied the royalty of
divinity, so the apotheosis of rulers entailed the feudalization of the gods.
Kulke and Rothermund have pointed out that the gods began to have hierar-
chies, and the imperial divinity (rastradevata) favored by an overlord became
the divine overlord for the family and village divinities worshiped by the
monarch’s vassals. They called this process the “royalization of divinity”—the
gods became part of the political process and advanced in their public aura as
their royal patrons succeeded in their strategies to obtain vassals and domin-
ion. For our purposes, though, it might be understood as the “s amantization”
of the gods, a term they applied to the development of Indian feudalism in the
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 93 ---
political sphere. 156 By samantization of the gods, I mean that the great and lo-
cal deities of the period became feudalized as lords and ladies, with their per-
sonalities assuming the position of the paradigmatic feudal lord (samanta).
They occupied positions in metaphysical space analogous to the positions con-
trolled by their devotees in terrestrial space, with all the attendant rights and
responsibilities. At the same time, lesser divinities became understood as rep-
resentatives of the imperial divinity, who protected and them in a complex ex-
change of divine services, just as the vassals owed allegiance and loyal to the
monarch through the exchanges of goods, services, land, and booty. 
Eventually, this phenomenon became thoroughly worked out in the early
medieval literature. Its emerging synthesis was based on the erosion of cate-
gorical differences at the apex of human and celestial societies. If kings could
become divine in their playful belligerence, the mythology and ritual respect
eventually accorded divinities in the new grand temple complexes would rein-
force the conception of a deity’s imperial status. Thus R ama, portrayed as a
supremely heroic king in the V almiki Ramayana, became an incarnation of
Visnu in the Puranas, and even members of his retinue, like Hanuman, even-
tually attained godlike status. Likewise, %iva, heretofore an ascetic, became
married to Parvati, so the new Ruler of the World (Loke$vara) was revealed as
a domesticated emperor with children. With his minions (gana), %iva engaged
in battle with demons and accordingly was recognized as the Destroyer of
Three Cities. His activity became the model for medieval terrestrial monarchs,
because of both his violent manifestations and the erotic nature of his aesthet-
ics and iconology. 
The emergence of the new Puranic literature at this time embodied the un-
derstanding that gods were in competition for hegemony over the cosmologi-
cal and ritual landscape, so that the previous battle between gods and demi-
gods now included divine competition. Whether %iva or Visnu, Durga or Kali,
the theological protagonists of Pur anic narratives became involved in their
own divine military culture, in which they would make alliances, ﬁght the
challenges to their authority, and subvert the domains of their neighbors. Do-
mestically, they were royalty as well, with palaces and gardens, children and at-
tendants. Thus Puranic divinities lived in fortresses, married, received guests,
held court, supported poets, and feasted their favorites. 
As a consequence of this conﬂuence of imperial and sacred spheres, cou-
pled with the rise of the emerging regional centers, a new dynamic in reli-
gious art and architecture developed as well. The period saw a very rapid
buildup of temple construction, most frequently for reasons of political expe-
diency and cultural authority. Without an urban cultural center of gravity, the
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 94 ---
early medieval period saw an efﬂorescence in regional styles. With the fall of
the Guptas, as Williams has noticed:
Finally, in both architecture and sculpture, a new pluralism of regional
styles appears, which means that some of the above generalizations are not
fully borne out in certain areas. We no longer see the old koine of style [un-
der the Guptas], including both motifs and their treatment, that had
stretched from Gujarat to Bengal and from the Salt Range to the Vindhya
Mountains. The development of regional styles, familiar in later medieval
architecture, is also apparent in the less plentiful and less well-preserved
structures of the late sixth and seventh centuries. 157
Williams’s observation on pluralism can be integrated into our models only by
acknowledging that the previous metropolitan centers of culture—V aranasi,
Kanauj, and Avanti (Ujjain)—had, by the sixth- and seventh-century percep-
tions, become dramatically eroded in their authority. 158 Regionalism is an ex-
uberant expression of locality for artists and is the means for integrating styles
normatively outside the canon—preeminently tribal and folk representa-
tions—into media of permanency (stone especially). These durable media are
not standard for local artists until patrons from that area wish to represent
themselves as being on a par with remote authorities. This entails a loss of
aura for those in P ataliputra, Varanasi, Kau$ambi, or Mathur a, so that they
can no longer command taste and establish standards of connoisseurship in
areas far distant. 
In erecting the new temple complexes, kings became patrons to the new di-
vinities that commanded the areas under the rulers’ political control. Thus the
new temples satisﬁed many different functions. They became testaments to
royal legitimacy, with the rulers using the temple walls as a tabula rasa for the
epigraphs that communicated royal piety, regal decisions on legal matters, im-
perial conquests, formal alliances with other houses, and a host of matters ren-
dering them archives for a ruling house. For example, the temple of
Bhime$vara at Dr aksarama, close to the mouth of the God avari River, was
used as an Eastern Ch alukya place of public pronouncement, after its tenth-
century construction.159 As soon as it was seized by the Colas in 1076 c.e., they
also inscribed their statements of piety on its hallowed walls. Similarly, the
MukhaliNgam complex (KaliNga) between c. 600 and 1100 c.e. and the Vara-
ha Narasimha temple at Simhacalam (N. Andhra) between 1000 and 1600 c.e.
both served as the centers of religious culture and as the sites of regal pro-
nouncements.160 The net result was that the sacred zones became the palaces
   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 95 ---
of the gods and the temples of the kings, with both enjoying feudal privileges
over the domain under temple control.
:    
The turn of events after the fall of the Gupta and Vakataka dynasties support-
ed the emergence of a new culture of military adventurism, which became in-
creasingly the reference point for the other facets of Indian society. Contrary to
the received language of chaos, the period is rich in speciﬁc kinds of institutions
and structurally embedded systems that emphasize decentralization and re-
gionality. Many of these institutions and systems arose as a response to the un-
certainty of safety in the large metropolitan centers, which lost population to an
increasing number of regional locales that achieved importance through the in-
ﬂux of new talent and the clearing of tribal lands for agriculture. The new po-
litical and military ideology of the universal conqueror is evident in the use, ap-
propriation, and dissemination of culture through the agency of the royal courts
and by the eclipse of alternative systems of cultural maintenance. During this
period, there was a weakening of support for some previously strong systems
(Vedic ritualism, Buddhism), but there was also the rise of elaborate temple
building and the development of regional schools of art. We see the coalescence
of schools of poetry and the emergence of Sanskrit and Prakrit connoisseurship,
with its articulation of ideas of appropriate literature and standards of criticism.
Poets not only became the mechanism for royal propaganda but served to bring
local aesthetics into conformity with the Sanskrit high culture.
With the valorization of regional identity came the apotheosis of kings and
their new lineages, contributing to the discourse of divine power. Ultimately,
this would lead to the feudalization of divinity as well, so that the gods became
kings even as the kings became gods. Religious ediﬁces not only supported the
kingship claims by clans of indistinct or even disreputable lineage but resulted in
the rise and development of regional styles of art and architecture and the recog-
nition of local gods as important. These new temples became the showpieces of
royal self-representation and the tableaus for epigraphs indicating statements of
royal piety and naked power. It is in this new world of rapidly changing feudal
alliances and evolving religious orders that the great Buddhist monasteries and
lay associations would ﬁnd themselves challenged on all sides.
 ⁄   

--- PAGE 96 ---
Then there will be renunciates—ﬁrmly committed to the dispensation of
%akyamuni and always attached to the pronouncement of mantras—who
will work for the beneﬁt of the teaching. 
I will speak of them, O Prince, those who will live when the best of
sages, the Excellent Unique Eye of the World, has passed away—so
listen attentively! 
Yes, have no doubt that, with the eon’s denouement, in the devastation
of the Teacher’s message, there will be monks influential within
political domains.
—Mañju$rimulakalpa, xxxvii :933–9351
/Tswash
he weight of early medieval India fell on all its institutions, but in an
uneven manner, affecting some much more than others. Certain
facets of society, such as the Jaina traditions and the secular military
systems, responded with resilience, having developed coping strategies. Some
forms of culture entered a period of efﬂorescence, especially institutions sur-
rounding the courts of local lords. These groups participated in the develop-
ment of an international ideology of reﬁned culture and its political reﬂex. 2
Buddhist congregations, however, found themselves under attack from with-
out and challenged from within. The vitality that the monastic and lay insti-
tutions had demonstrated before and during the Gupta period appeared to fal-
ter in the face of successive challenges at both the institutional and ideological
level. Our sources indicate an attrition in external support and an erosion of
conﬁdence inside the Buddhist communities, so that Buddhists no longer
could point to the obvious beneﬁts of participation in their activities. Little
wonder, then, that medieval orthodox representatives, like %aNkara, could suc-
cessfully depict the dispensation of the Buddha as an intentional deceit, mis-
leading the masses and ushering them down the path of delusion. 3

-
/Tswashhe Medieval /Bswashuddhist /Eswashxperienc/eswash

--- PAGE 97 ---
This chapter aims to articulate the Buddhist experience in the midst of the
early medieval ebb and ﬂow of political, economic, and religious cultures. The
frame of reference is reduced from that of chapter 2, so that we can examine
how the larger sociopolitical realities affected the minority Buddhist culture.
Subsequent chapters will cover the development of esoteric Buddhism within
this reduced frame of reference. As shown below, this new form of Buddhist
praxis evolved both as a response to the eroding sociopolitical environment
and as a strategy for religious reafﬁrmation in the face of unparalleled chal-
lenges to Buddhist institutions. The evidence suggests that the rise and devel-
opment of the Buddhist esoteric forms were the result of a complex nexus of
external social forces and internal Samgha dynamics. Consequently, it appears
that the Mantrayana was at once the most socially and politically involved of
Buddhist systems and the variety of Buddhism most acculturated to the me-
dieval Indian landscape. 
In the course of our investigation, we might keep in mind questions of
agency and authority, for the esoteric turn was accompanied by changes in de-
cision systems at the social level. In this respect, three groups appear at the
center of medieval Buddhist decision-making—the monks of the orthodox
Samgha, the informed Buddhist laity, and the new form of Buddhist person-
ality represented by the Perfected (siddha). However, the narrowly Ma-
hayanist-type informed laity became less inﬂuential as the medieval period
progressed, for they were the ﬁrst to experience the radical alteration of Indi-
an life in the economic and political arenas, and consequently they became the
ﬁrst casualties of the era. Thus authority shifted to an uneasy alliance between
the monastic community, on the one hand, and the increasingly radical sid-
dhas at the margins of Buddhist society, on the other. Accordingly, the fol-
lowing chapters consider this distinction between institutional and noninstitu-
tional esoterism, the former based on decisions predominantly made within
the monastic community, and the latter the product of the Buddhist siddha
culture. This chapter explores the circumstances that deﬁne and circumscribe
the medieval Buddhist experience and, by extension, that of the Mantray ana. 
The present chapter concerns six speciﬁc realities of the post-Gupta Bud-
dhist world. Several were consequences of the transformation in cloister/lay
involvement, while others were primarily monastic in nature. First, the older
Buddhist patronage system lost its bearings and required the search for new
directions of support. Second, because these new directions were of limited
success, Buddhist institutions experienced a contraction in both the number
and the geographical distribution of sites. Monasteries fundamentally ceased
operation in the Krsna and Godavari River valleys and became concentrated in
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 98 ---
the northern and southern corners of India. Third, the nature of women’s par-
ticipation in Buddhist activity changed, seen both in the lack of resources
available to fully ordained nuns (assisting the demise of nuns’ orders during
this period) and in a net contraction of the number of women involved in Bud-
dhist lay practice of any variety. Fourth, some Buddhist intellectuals developed
a radical form of skepticism, the PrasaNgika Madhyamaka, which claimed the
intellectual high ground and was successful, in part, by virtue of its extremism.
Fifth, other Buddhist intellectuals became engrossed in the development of a
Buddhist version of Brahmanical epistemology, with a concomitant degrada-
tion of traditional Abhidharma-based Buddhist scholasticism. Sixth, with the
simultaneous change of patronage and rules of survival, many Buddhist mon-
asteries began to assume the position of landed ﬁefdoms, with a growth in the
net size of some of the great monasteries and the new development of the
“supermonastery” (mahavihara). These great institutions, in turn, generated a
curriculum that supported the new intellectual turn of the tradition. 
, ,   
Central to the altered dynamic of medieval Indian Buddhism was the destabi-
lization of guilds and their roles in national and international commerce. Bud-
dhist institutions may have received their great impetus from A$oka, but their
capacity to spread through multiple language and ethnic groups and their abil-
ity to elicit patronage generation after generation depended as much on their
symbiotic relationship with the guilds of Indian tradesmen and merchants as
on their attractiveness to princes needing access to the advances of Indic cul-
ture. Ever since the myth of the ﬁrst Buddhist laymen—Trapu sa and Bhalli-
ka—and the ﬁrst grand monastic patron, An athapindada, Buddhist institu-
tions have relied on the largess and prestige of commercial patrons. In return,
monks taught merchants’ sons, ministered to their medical needs, lent them
capital, provided them with temporary residences at speciﬁc points in their
journeys, made them amulets, provided them with linguistic feats of transla-
tion, and introduced them to local personages. 4
Guilds were either concerned with manufacturing or involved with distri-
bution, although there was invariably some overlap between the two, and both
were held in high esteem during the Gupta hegemony. 5 Both types had in-
termittently supported the Buddhist cause, although the involvement of na-
tional and international trading cooperatives and service guilds with the
Teaching of the Teacher was far more dramatic than those whose purpose was
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 99 ---
light manufacturing. The company of monks is evident in the petroglyphs
along the Indus trade routes, where st upas and icons of the Buddha are en-
graved along with the names of merchants, princes, and local personages of
means.6 We even ﬁnd evidence of monastic ﬁnancial instruments, like a
promissory note written in Kuchean, evidently written from one %ilaraksita to
his associate Aryavarman—one Buddhist monk to another—to buy various
types of copper straps. 7
As Buddhists altered the perceptions of the importance of trade, they were
themselves affected in the process; monks embedded the images of merchants
and guildsmen in their own diction. We ﬁnd, for example, a trade-inﬂuenced
ordination lineage inscribed along a Gilgit caravan path, with the monks
Satya$resthi and Dharma$resthi—Guildmaster of Truth and Guildmaster of
the Dharma—engraving their names in rock. 8 In the scriptures, as well, the
leader of the caravan (sarthavaha) and analogous ﬁgures become powerful
metaphors for awakened activity. In the Gandavyuha, for example, Vasant i,
the goddess of the night, explains that, as a bodhisattva, she may appear in the
guise of a caravan master or other personage, to lead to safety those lost and in
danger, whether in forests, on mountains, on the oceans, and so forth. 9 There
is a commercial expansion of earlier mythic and ritual directions, and Ray has
shown that myths of bodhisattvas (ultimately Avalokite $vara) as protectors of
mariners represent strong trajectories in earlier Buddhist scriptures; converse-
ly, the contemporary Hindu Dharma $astras discourage or forbid maritime
travel.10 Caravan leaders eventually become the model for bodhisattvas in the
Da$abhumika-sutra—a bodhisattva is to be as dedicated toward the goal as the
caravan master—and the caravan master becomes an apt metaphor for the
Buddha himself in panegyrics over time from M atrceta to %antideva.11
In the political arena, Buddhist monks gave legitimacy to royal patrons, es-
pecially those outside the Gangetic valley. Whether in Gandh ara or Ka$mira
(Indo-Greeks, %akas, Kusanas, Ephthalites, Shahis), in the Sindh, in quasi-
tribal areas like Orissa (Bhaumakaras, etc.), and analogous polities in Central
and Southeast Asia. For these royal patrons, Buddhist monks ﬁrst inscribed
foreign languages (Kuchean, Khotanese, G andhari, etc.), acted as scribes for
court proceedings, and encouraged both capital expenditures by courts and the
value of artistic enterprise. These services allowed the mercantile community
to prosper in a way unforeseen without Buddhist monastic assistance and en-
titled royal patrons to reap the beneﬁts of the ﬁrst Asian foray into a global-
ized culture. As a result, Buddhist monks spread their Dharma by extending
the domains of such services to the fertile Indus valley, the oases of Central
Asia, the ports of Southeast Asia, and eventually to China. 12
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 100 ---
Even before the early medieval period, patronage patterns had been chang-
ing, as demonstrated in the transformation of language from the Middle Indic
Prakrits to Sanskrit. For example, the brothers Mah apanthaka and Culapan-
thaka—well-known arhats and standard personalities in the Avadana litera-
ture—are considered illegitimate sons of a wayward daughter of a banking
guildmaster (setthi) in the versions found in the Pali canon. 13 Yet when their
stories are rendered into Sanskrit or languages appropriate for the movement
into Central Asia, they become the sons of Brahmans.14 Such surprising alter-
ations of narrative contents are comprehensible only in the face of equally
dramatic transformations of sociolinguistic expectations and audience appeal.
The narrative changes, in this case, are reﬂective of the ability of Sanskrit to
transmit sociopolitical values and indicative of the social composition of those
versed in this language.15 In North India and Central Asia, the merchants ap-
parently supported these changes, for Buddhist monks were actively involved
in the commercial transactions, as is evident from the records in the Sanskrit
or Hybrid Sanskrit Vinayas of the Sarv astivada, the Mah asaNghika, and the
Mulasarvastivada, their Chinese analogues, and within materials in regional
languages like Gandhari.16
The geopolitical realities of the early medieval period, however, had ex-
traordinary consequences for guilds at both the national and the international
level. Nationally, Indian merchant guilds began to emulate the political struc-
ture by turning into landed feuda, resolving their prior national trade network
into a system of personal allegiances to local lords. In this, they had little
choice. The guilds represented a reservoir of available assets for those intent on
military adventurism, and the paucity of minted monies during the era only
served to increase the attractiveness of these guilds as temporary resources.
The medieval decline of both trade and artisan guilds in North India is to
some degree tied to their perception as a consistent source of income for sov-
ereigns, beyond the royal booty secured from war. Military campaigns are both
extraordinarily expensive and an unreliable source of funds, so guild and tem-
ple treasuries represented a manipulable base of revenue and subject to “spe-
cial” taxes. The RajataraNgini, in particular, provides many episodes of ofﬁcial
rapacity in the history of the period, and the tendency for kings to take what
is not theirs is frequently noted in the seventh–eighth-century Nitisara and
elsewhere.17 Even then, such special taxes were not always successful, and the
ﬁnancial burden of military adventurism is suggested by the consistent pattern
of coin debasement for many of these dynasties. 18
Guilds and temples both represent potential challenges to K satriya power,
since dynasties may be founded by either militarized merchants (e.g., Pusyab-
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 101 ---
hutis) or armed Brahmans (as the Parivr ajikas possibly were) or inﬂuential
%udras (Palas). Guilds even would go to the extent of arming the ascetic or-
ders, and the eighth-century Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha mentions the %aiva or-
der of the P a$upatas acting in exactly that capacity. 19 One means of control-
ling guilds, then, was to provide them with a land grant, requiring continual
involvement with the structure of government and investing them in a spe-
ciﬁc place at the rulers’ discretion. Long-distance trading guilds in particular
experienced erosion of their position. Their eventual displacement by Arabs
in much of the south under the R astrakutas simply made good sense by the
standards of the day. Arabs could be easily isolated, heavily taxed, and re-
moved at any time, for the south was at that time under no direct threat by
Islamic armies. 
As a result, much of the wealth that had previously been in the hands of
long-distance merchants and caravan directors became accrued by those in po-
sitions of political power. This is probably the greatest single economic differ-
ence between the Gupta and the medieval and was one of the causes for the
paucity of coinage and its replacement by trading in kind for small purchases
or by bullion and gold dust for larger ones. Only a few of the long-distance
mercantile guilds ($reni, go sthika) managed to sustain a pattern of success.
South India was home to the infamous Vira-Banañjas of the Ayyavole guild—
who brag in their epigraphs about being heavily armed and beholden to no
one—and in Rajasthan were the horse-dealing Hedavikas, who make an anal-
ogous claim.20 Other areas of the north show a noticeable decline in inscrip-
tions and a quick disappearance of sealings, indicating that northern trading
activity became deinstitutionalized, with some kinds of trade being handled
through government agencies acting in the administrative capacity of guilds.21
In the long run, few of the great North Indian trading guilds seemed to
have survived. For their part, the manufacturing cooperatives frequently had to
relocate with the shift in population from the previously large metropolitan ar-
eas to smaller cities in the hinterlands, with much more problematic roads and
systems for the transportation of goods.22 Nationally, after the seventh centu-
ry we ﬁnd the greatest evidence for South Indian trading guilds—the various
groups claiming the name Ayy avole—which became armed, landed, and not
supportive of Buddhist causes, at least until the eleventh century. 23 Already,
the Simhavyuha-raja-bodhisattva-pariprccha, translated into Chinese in 663
c.e., demonstrates the change of religious afﬁliation. The text—probably from
South India or %ri Lanka—depicts the bodhisattva Vijayasambhava trying to
convert a guildmaster or merchant named Uttaradana, who neither believed in
the Dharma nor had respect for the Buddha. 24
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 102 ---
Internationally, the mid-seventh to mid-eighth centuries brought on the
greatest alteration in the manner of the disposition of commercial enterprise
since the opening of the silk trade in the second century b.c.e. The role of Is-
lam in the destruction of Buddhist sites from the eleventh century on has been
well documented and, some would say, excessively emphasized. However, the
extraordinary changes in international patterns of trade brought about by the
simultaneous rise of Islam and the coalescence of the T’ang dynasty in China
has not been well examined by those concerned with Indian Buddhism. Per-
haps this is because the relatively benign inﬂuence of the Sasanians in the area
from Gandhara to Transoxiana has seldom been acknowledged, but it deﬁni-
tively provided the background for the change under Islam. Sasanian gover-
norship of the area provided some of the greatest support for Buddhist mer-
cantile practices and the spread of the religion, which was only interrupted
with the Ephthalite incursions in the ﬁfth to sixth centuries. After the death
of Yazdgird III in 651 c.e. at Merv in eastern Khorasan, the Sasanids came to
an end and the Umayyads spent the next century trying to suppress the frac-
tious Iranian peoples and their continued uprisings. 
In Bactria and Afghanistan, Buddhist sites like Tepe Sard ar in Ghazni,
Bamiyan, Hadda, Balkh, and Kapi$a experienced a measured resurgence of vi-
tality.25 Transoxiana, as well, shows signs of new Buddhist activity in Adjina
Tepe by Kurgan-Tyube (Tajikistan), at Kuva in Fargh ana (Uzbekistan), and
at Ak-Beshim near Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan), which demonstrated Buddhist
building programs after the sixth century. Yet all this activity, with the excep-
tion of that at B amiyan and Ha dda, was relatively insigniﬁcant in both scale
and duration. In reality, we ﬁnd no Buddhist site activity after the ninth cen-
tury and most is eclipsed by the arrival of Islam in the mid-eighth century. 26
As Frye has noted, “The medieval world was a brutal world, but the [Islamic]
conquests in central Asia seem to have been exceptionally rough. One ﬁnds
many notices in the sources about the harsh treatment of the local people.” 27
The slave markets of Kuf a, Basra, Balkh, and Merv were ﬁlled with the hu-
man chattel that resulted from the Arab presence in Afghanistan and Tran-
soxiana, where both non-Arab converts to Islam (mawali) and nonbelievers
(kafir) would languish until sold to a buyer. Indeed, the consequence of the
‘Abbassid rapacity was the ninth-century rise of their nominal subjects, the
Tahirids in Iran and the Samanids in Turkharistan and other areas of Central
Asia, under whom these oases experienced an Islamic resurgence in the ninth
and tenth centuries.28
Until then, Sogdian merchants, already powerful in the Tarim long-dis-
tance trade, would temporarily become supreme. With them, their forms of
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 103 ---
religion, especially the D enavariya sect of Manichaeism, would prevail in the
hunt for patronage, at least through the eighth century. Manichaeans ﬂed
from the Amu Darya basin in advance of the Arab armies, and in eastern
Turkestan Manichaean Sogdians came to provide many of the same beneﬁts
to new Tarim groups that the Buddhists had offered half a millennium be-
fore.29 They acted as scribes, provided technological advice based on agrarian
experience in Transoxiana, and served as architects, military advisers, and
diplomatic consultants. Their ﬁnancial ability, international connections, and
technical expertise were not lost on the Uyghurs, among others. The Chinese
ﬁrst saw Manichaeans in Ch’ang-an in 694, but the court was eventually to
proclaim in 732 that Manichaeism was “a basically evil doctrine which deceives
the people by falsely calling itself Buddhism,” an allusion to its notoriously
syncretic character.30 The Uyghurs, however, understood the value of Sogdian
knowledge and Mou-yü Qaghan made Manichaeism a state religion in 762 for
perhaps the only time in its history. 31
Moreover, if the overland trade routes became increasingly problematic for
Buddhist-afﬁliated merchants, the sea lanes proved no better. During the
Umayyads, Arab merchants maneuvered themselves through the sea trade to
Indonesia and China. This was even more true after 749, with the transfer of
the caliphate to Baghdad under the ‘Abbassids, whose interest in stimulating
maritime trafﬁc was directly proportional to their reliance on international
trade for the maintenance of their hegemonic position in the Arab world. Both
Arab and Persian seafarers found numerous ports favorable to them, from In-
dia to China. The anonymous Akhbar al-Sin w-al-Hind, circulated in 851, in-
dicates that the R astrakuta monarch—probably Amoghavar sa (c. 814–880)—
was the friendliest of kings to the Arabs, while the Gurjara-Pratihara king was
irredeemably hostile. 32 If barter in kind or in bullion was most common, at
least one economic historian maintains that Arab dominance was such that,
when coinage was used, Arab dinars were the preferred currency. 33 The Ras-
trakutas apparently did not even bother to mint their own coins, for no exam-
ples of their imprints survive. Arab and Persian ubiquity extended into China;
when the foreign community in Canton was attacked in 878 during Huang
Ch’ao’s rebellion, abu-Zayd of Siraf claimed that 120,000 Muslims, Chris-
tians, Jews, and Magians were killed. 34 The net result of these exchanges was
that much of the wealth of South, East, and Southeast Asia was manipulated
by Arab and Sogdian merchants, with the surplus ﬂowing back to the Middle
Eastern Islamic caliphate. 
Merchants allied with Buddhist institutions would no longer be central to
the trade between Bengal and Indonesia, but became relegated to second-rate
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 104 ---
small businessmen, if they got any business at all in the face of the larger vol-
ume of Arab and Persian trafﬁc. The communities of %rivijaya, Burma, Nepal,
and Tibet were still partly or wholly Buddhist, however, with the result that
the relations between some areas of India and foreign rulers remained viable.
We note the donative inscriptions concerning of Balaputradeva of Suvar nad-
vipa to Nalanda in the ninth century, of the King Kyanzittha of Pagan in 1084,
1112, and the repairs of Lety amengnan of Arakan between 1112 and 1167, all
these latter concerning the Mahabodhi temple in Bodhgaya.35 Yet the foreign
interest is notable for two factors—their involvement is for the purpose of re-
vitalization or repair, and it is not done by merchants or those with guild af-
ﬁliation. Indeed, the principal sense we get of international merchant involve-
ment with Buddhism from the eighth to the tenth centuries is that found in
Nepal and Tibet. This is especially visible during the period of the Tibetan
Royal Dynasty’s interest in Buddhism and their extensive ties to sites in Cen-
tral Asia, which they secured through military prowess. 36 By the tenth to
eleventh centuries, the improved economic climate evidently stimulated mer-
cantile construction of Buddhist institutions once again, as is evident in in-
scriptions in Bihar and around Vatapi.37
, ,  
      ¯  
The result of these developments were threefold: funding, the ethics of pa-
tronage, and the contraction of Buddhist institutional range. With regard to
the first, it became clear over time that Buddhists could no longer rely on a
symbiotic relationship with merchant guilds to fund their large and costly in-
stitutions, and that their positions in state ceremonies associated with king-
ship also became threatened. The late seventh-century economic climate—
formerly conducive to the relatively quick accrual of capital and concomitant
social position—now became difficult for those seeking the financial avenue
to legitimacy. With Arabs in the sea lanes and Sogdians in Central Asia,
economic pathways no longer seemed to privilege Indians. Only the possibil-
ity of military adventurism remained open for newly developed groups, an
approach that some elected to employ. Consequently, economic opportunity
fell increasingly into the political sector, which meant that Buddhist mon-
asteries were secure primarily in those areas where the Buddhist tradition
was not seen as the adversary of the state or state-sponsored social systems.
Yet this was a difficult proposition for Buddhists, as Hindu divinities and
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 105 ---
Puranic ritual systems appeared to offer a closer fit in needs and values es-
poused by medieval states.
There can be little doubt that, traditionally, the alliance with commercial
representatives had allowed both merchants and monks the opportunity to
challenge received systems of power in a critical and effective manner. Scrip-
tures like the MataNgi-sutra—more recently relegated to the position of an in-
troductory story in the %ardulakarnavadana—articulated the authenticity of
the disempowered, in this case an outcaste woman who becomes an arhat. 38
These narratives indicated the Buddhist commitment to a theoretically egali-
tarian soteriological structure and quasi-egalitarian social system. Backed by
such afﬁrmations of legitimacy, the Brahmanical schematism was forced to
adopt a series of ad hoc strategies, like paradigms of the “confusion of castes”
(varnasamkara), which declared all new castes result from cross-caste mar-
riage. This allowed them to cope with such peculiar circumstances as the sud-
den rise of the number of people (formerly tribal or otherwise outside the sys-
tem) now claiming or being required to claim caste afﬁliation. Conversely,
Buddhist institutions afﬁrmed that these peoples did not inherently require
Brahmanical legitimacy for their authenticity, but the Buddhist position relied
on tangible methods—especially ﬁnancial—for their demonstration of the pu-
tative noninherence of social valorization. 
Alternatively, Buddhist monks had been very successful in legitimizing
new groups that had established themselves in positions of political or military
authority, and which sought afﬁrmation of their position by some religious or
ritual means. One of the rituals that Buddhists had employed with over-
whelming success throughout India was the cult of the st upa, which was one
of the royally sponsored rites whereby kings—of whatever persuasion—would
establish themselves in positions of imperial authority. St upa sanctiﬁcation,
elaborate donations to monastic centers, and the performance of one or more
of the great Vedic $rauta ceremonies were used in complementary but nonin-
tegrated roles for the afﬁrmation of regal potency. As Inden indicates:
Before the eighth century, the Buddha was accorded the position of uni-
versal deity and the ceremonies by which a king attained to imperial status
were elaborate donative ceremonies entailing gifts to Buddhist monks and
the installation of a symbolic Buddha in a stupa. . . . This pattern changed
in the eighth century. The Buddha was replaced as the supreme, imperial
deity by one of the Hindu gods (except under the Palas of eastern India, the
Buddha’s homeland) and the performance of $rauta rituals as separate cere-
monies was largely abandoned.39
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 106 ---
While we may not know the extent to which such rituals were actually em-
ployed, Buddhist political rites were, with few exceptions, eventually eclipsed
by the development of Puranic coronation (rajyabhiseka) ceremonies. This rit-
ual transformation in the public sphere was to have a profound inﬂuence on
esoteric ritualism, as seen below.
Even in the case of marginal peoples, Buddhists began losing their privi-
leged position of patronage. The previous Buddhist monopoly on dealing with
barbarians, outcastes, foreigners, and other ne’er-do-wells was effectively
countered in the early medieval period, ﬁrst by Pa$upata missionaries and then
by Brahmans who appeared willing to travel and populate the countryside in
return for land. The P a$upatas, in particular, were the ﬁrst semiorthodox
group of renunciates (samnyasin) capable of emulating the zealous Buddhist
proselytization among both marginalized Indians and non-Indians. Even
Buddhist monarchs supported this variety of %aiva ascetic, as shown in the
Bhagalpur plate of Narayanapala of about 900 c.e.40 These ascetics seemed to
work in conjunction with Brahmans in a manner as yet poorly studied. If
Pa$upatas appear to have been the focus of royal temple building and institu-
tional patronage, Brahmans were given uncleared land in proximity to the
temples. We can surmise that, in these instances, the Brahmans actually as-
sisted as the priests and kept the temple the focus of the lay population by in-
stituting and performing Brahmanical rites of passage, although sometimes
Pa$upatas are also speciﬁed as the ritual ofﬁciants. While this interaction is
broadly demonstrated through India from the sixth century on, it is in Cam-
bodia that Brahmanical religious culture most evidently usurped the position
Buddhism enjoyed in other societies. 41 The early religious inscriptions (604
and 624 c.e.) are by a Brahman, Vidy abindu, but succeeding inscriptions of
627 by Vidyavi$esa and 639 by Vidy apuspa indicate the dedication of li Ngams
and footprints of %iva and declare that Pa$upatas were to maintain ritual pre-
rogatives at the sites.42
We can only imagine how alarming this series of events was to Buddhist
institutional managers. In the course of a few decades in the mid-seventh cen-
tury, the most effective strategies for Buddhist support had come unraveled
and were being appropriated by others who successfully represented them-
selves as the successors to the original Buddhist initiatives. Both the Sogdian
Manichaeans and the Indian %aiva system of the P a$upatas appropriated as-
pects of Buddhist nomenclature and iconography for their own use. We have
seen how in China the Hsüan-tsung emperor’s government felt it necessary to
limit Manichaeism in 732 c.e., with the observation that they presented them-
selves as Buddhists. P a$upata iconography, similarly, presented its mythic
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 107 ---
founder Lakul i$a in exactly the representation of “turning the wheel of the
Dharma” (dharmacakrapravartanamudra), sometimes completely equipped
with the close curls and coronal dome (usnisa) of the Buddha, clearly a usurpa-
tion of Buddhist iconography. 43 With their previously secure social and eco-
nomic niches rapidly eroding in a culture increasingly dedicated to samanta
feudal forms and military adventurism, Indian Buddhists attempted to beg,
borrow, or steal new foundations for institutional survival. 
Unfortunately for the monks, feudal cultures engaging in opportunistic bel-
ligerence presumed that religious groups receiving patronage would valorize
their behavior and vindicate their authority. This brings us to the second point,
the problems Buddhists had with the evolving ethics of patronage. While it is
true that certain warlords who succeeded in putting together a confederation of
belligerents ultimately found their way into the Buddhist fold, this was relative-
ly rare. Some of the chief names stabilized their regnal positions via the Bud-
dhadharma, but it is by no means clear that they began as Buddhist supporters.
Perhaps most deﬁnitively, this path was taken by the members of the Pala dy-
nasty, around 750c.e. Certainly, they had no claim to Ksatriya status when they
ﬁrst appeared, and contemporary evidence indicates that they may have been
%udras or even outcastes. The Mañju$rimulakalpa, for example, contains two de-
scriptions of Gopala; the ﬁrst, from the viewpoint of a Madhyade $a monk, is
quite favorable, while the verses presenting the opinion of monks from Gauda is
very pejorative.44 Evidently the diversity of Buddhist opinion reﬂected the de-
gree to which the Pala monarch was conducting himself along approved Bud-
dhist lines in speciﬁc locales. The Madhyade $a monks liked his building of
monasteries and bringing justice, while the Gauda monks simply declared that
the time was unrighteous and the Buddha’s dispensation in trouble.
Overall, Buddhist institutions could not effectively compete for patronage
from militaristic princes, who increasingly found that they were best represent-
ed by %aiva values and rhetoric. %aiva systems made allowance for forms of be-
havior that Buddhist syntheses could not support, since even the most syncret-
ic Buddhist systems were not as open to negotiation about issues of violence,
power, and self-aggrandizement as were the medieval %aiva representatives. A
comparison of inscriptions written at the dedications of religious buildings by,
respectively, Buddhist and %aiva potentates shows how the ethical positions of
each religious tradition conﬁgured the rhetorical gestures of their respective
supporters. Although many examples could be found, I have selected two for
comparative purposes. The ﬁrst comprises excerpts from an inscription by De-
vapala (r. c. 812–850 c.e.) afﬁrming the construction of reliquaries and monas-
teries by his friend Satyabodhi, the contemporary abbot of N alanda. The sec-
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 108 ---
ond is part of a proclamation by the K alachuri prince Yuvar ajadeva II (r. c.
980–990 c.e.), who is dedicating part of the tax of a market town to the sup-
port of his friend Aghora$iva and the monastery of Hauhale$vara. The royal and
religious ﬁgures in both dedications are highly distinguished and of profound
importance for their respective lineages—whether sacred or secular. The repre-
sentation of the activities and qualities of the kings is our primary concern here
in either instance.
Gohsrawañ Inscription of Devapala
Then staying here for a long time, he, the quintessence of intelligence, be-
ing treated with reverence by the lord of the earth, the illustrious Devap ala
shone like the sun, endowed with splendor, ﬁlling the quarters with his dai-
ly rising, and dispelling the spread of darkness. He who, a friend like the
monks’ own self, as if the very arm of the holy monk Satyabodhi, by the de-
cree of the assembly of the monks was permanently steadfast in the protec-
tion of Nalanda and ﬁrm in the stability of the Samgha. Practicing the gen-
erosity of those who are friends of beings, by offering up his all as well as
manliness, eagerly directed toward the attainment of perfect wisdom and
vying with his other excellencies, residing here while his high holy ofﬁce
was continuing, he hoisted the banner of his fame on the two poles of his
family in the northern region. Whatever merit has been acquired by the
erection of this ediﬁce which is, as it were, the staircase to the city of salva-
tion, may through that the whole assemblage of men, headed by the circle
of his elders and including his parents, attain to perfect wisdom! 45
Bilhari Inscription of Yuvarajadeva II
(Describing an ancestor, Keyuravar $a) Even when his forces marched for
vanquishing the guardians of the quarters, sporting as at the time of world-
destruction, so as to rouse the apprehension of the three worlds, no mass of
dust could rise from the ground, inundated as it was with the streams of
tears ﬂowing from the eyes of the wives of his enemies who were again and
again taken captive. . . . He strew the battle ﬁelds all over with the heads of
his proud enemies who, exasperated with rage attacked him—their heads,
with skull bones falling off, being pressed by the machine-like hands of the
exulting female ghouls (vetalis), eager for the blood dripping from the parts
struck by his vibrating swift arrows, and which were honored with the side-
glances of heavenly damsels moving in the sky. “Our king is Rudra incar-
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 109 ---
nate . . . our king is an iron fetter for curbing the wayward princes!” When
the multitudes of excellent poets continuously uttered such brilliant words
of ﬂattery, the minds of his enemies present in his hall of audience were in-
comparably afﬂicted.46
We should avoid the conclusion that these kinds of inscriptions represent
actual reality, especially since prudence is even indicated at the end of Yuvara-
jadeva II’s panegyric with the ascription of these public verses to poets writing
for ﬂattery’s sake. Thus it is by no means clear that Buddhist kings were nec-
essarily less bloodthirsty than non-Buddhist kings. These inscriptions were
rhetorical in principle for the purpose of public presentation and collectively
have a tenuous relation to reality. Although Buddhist kings might hold up cer-
tain ideals associated with the Buddhadharma, that does not mean that they
were capable of adhering to the precepts of nonviolence in an increasingly mil-
itaristic culture. Indeed, in the N alanda copperplate charter Devap ala is de-
scribed as “acting as the guru for the initiation of all his enemies’ wives into
the state of widowhood.” 47 Similarly, N arayanapala’s Bhagalpur plate de-
scribes his “sword, which was actually blue like a lotus, appeared yellow and
red to his enemies out of fear (as it had drunk their blood), while it was ﬂick-
ering in the forefront of battle.” 48
Nor was the earlier Buddhist message on nonviolence unequivocal. Demié-
ville long ago called attention to the section in AsaNga’s Bodhisattvabhumi that
allows a bodhisattva to engage in the slaughter of thieves or brigands who are
about to commit one of the ﬁve sins of immediate retribution, so that the bod-
hisattva could go to hell rather than the criminals.49 The same section also al-
lows a bodhisattva to overthrow or otherwise remove a king, warlord, or evil
minister who oppresses his people.50 Such actions are justiﬁed under the rubric
of the bodhisattva’s “skill in means” (upayakau$alya) and are to be undertaken
solely for the service of beings, so that the bodhisattva replaces himself for the
other and suffers in his stead. This same rubric allows for a wide latitude in
questionable behavior, with the single mandate that all actions must by no
means be undertaken on the bodhisattva’s own behalf (svahitaya) but only for
the beneﬁt of others (parahitaya). Evidently this doctrinal basis was used by
Buddhist representatives to justify belligerence on the part of their favorite
monarchs. The Chinese monk Hsüan-tsang, in particular, repeats a lengthy
mythological justiﬁcation for Har sa’s extensive and debilitating campaign
against %a$aNka in the early seventh century. 51
Yet there must have been some relationship between the nature of these
pronouncements and the actual proclivity of royalty to military aggrandizement
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 110 ---
at the expense of both opponents and their subjects. The conﬁguration of iden-
tity, in particular, appears to have been central to this process. Vai snava kings
had panegyrics to themselves written, which articulate their emulation of the
righteous violence of Visnu’s incarnations, taking their cues from the expand-
ing corpus of Puranic literature. For example, the Bhitari Pillar inscription de-
picts Skandagupta running to his mother to happily report on the death of en-
emies, just like K rsna did, although other Vai snava inscriptions appear to
emphasize the violence of the Man-Lion (Nrsimha) incarnation.52 And, as can
be seen from the Kalachuri inscription of Yuvarajya II, above, the %aivas are of-
ten the ones who indulge in the expostulation of their attempts at turning the
world into the charnel ground of Mahe$vara. In reality, the %aiva regal inscrip-
tions are collectively the most extraordinary documents for the combination of
religious fervor, erotic sentiment, and graphically violent images. 
Perhaps the best index of the differences, though, is the alteration of epi-
graphic diction when a noble house exhibits a change of religious allegiance.
This happened at times to both the Palas and the Bhaumakaras; the former is
the well-known Magadha-Gau da house while the latter clan ruled the area
around much of Orissa from c. 736 to 930 c.e., before being displaced by the
Somavam$is’ extension of their domain from Daksina Ko$ala. In the Palas’ in-
stance, it is instructive to reﬂect that the %aiva devotee Vigrahap ala (r. c.
1058–1085) is described as acting as the “Lord of Death for the clan of his en-
emies,” in a manner beyond the pale of his predecessors. 53 In the Bhauma-
kara’s case, we might compare the Neulpur Grant of %ubhakaradeva (r. c. 790–
810)—very indicative of traditional Buddhist values—with the much more ag-
gressive Talcher plate of his descendent, %ivakara (reigned c. 885–894). 54
Whereas the former king has “the protection of his subjects as his highest aim”
and “has paciﬁed the afﬂiction of the world caused by the doings of his kins-
men,” the latter bragged that his older brother “was beyond delicacy in the
matter of crushing the lotus-like heads of irresistible foes.” 
Buddhist identity, then, reinforced—minimally—the posturing of the com-
passionate activity accorded bodhisattvas. When Devapala, for example, gains
the throne, he repeatedly states that he does it as a bodhisattva obtains the po-
sition of a Buddha, following the parinirvana of the previous teacher of the
world.55 This ideology was, moreover, shared by Buddhists and non-Buddhists
alike, and throughout the literature of the early medieval period Buddhists are
depicted as notably compassionate toward other beings. In B ana’s Harsacarita
(c. 630 c.e.), the Buddhist monk Div akaramitra becomes the vehicle for the
denouement of the saga. Har sa is in search of his sister, R ajya$ri, whose hus-
band, Grahavarman, and brother Rajyavardhana were slaughtered by %a$aNka
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 111 ---
in the belligerent politics of the period. He learns that she has taken refuge
with his old Brahman friend-turned-Buddhist monk, Div akaramitra (Indian
literature can be so Victorian), because Buddhists are noted for their compas-
sion toward beings in distress. 56 Similarly, the good eldress Kamandaki is the
primary agent for the welfare of the hero and heroine in Bhavabh uti’s classic,
Malatimadhava (c. 730 c.e.), the play named after these two. She organizes the
nuns and her friends to keep Malati from marrying the wrong man, persuades
soldiers to ﬁnd her when she has been captured by a murderous Kapalika asce-
tic, and acts as a point of humane moral reference throughout the plot. The
Buddhist reputation for kindness was sufﬁciently well known that Malladeva-
Nandivarman—a %aiva king of the Andhra-mandala (Central Andhra-Kar-
nataka)—maintained in 339–340 c.e. that “in reputation for the highest com-
passion toward all beings in the triple world, he was like a bodhisattva.” 57
Buddhist virtues like these did not present compelling reasons for patron-
age, when a king could just as easily reformulate his image in favor of the mod-
el of %iva, who was, after all, represented as a killer divinity with a permanent
erection. It appears, however, that wherever they received patronage, Bud-
dhists injected (or attempted to inject) the rhetoric of ethical responsibility
into their political dialogues. Perhaps the best example is the scathing indict-
ment of the behavior of kings found in the “Prophecy of Kings” section of the
Mañju$rimulakalpa. The authors of the chapter, written around 750 c.e., are
obviously eager for royal attention to Buddhist institutional needs. At the
same time, they are utterly scandalized at the real behavior of many of the
monarchs they describe. Yet all they can offer is a mythology of long life and
time in heaven for the righteous kings and signiﬁcant time in the lowest of
hells for those whose behavior harms the Buddhist religion.58 What is missing
from Buddhist discourse, however, is any intelligible, nonsectarian rationale
for the formal renouncement of military adventurism. Buddhist monks appear
never to have been successful in articulating a broad-based ethical system with
a compelling narrative that would motivate Indians to bring into civil society
the consideration and decorum delineated within the monastic sphere.
Indeed, from the seventh century on, wherever there is %aiva patronage, Bud-
dhist institutions withered, especially in the Deccan and in the Krsna and Goda-
vari River valleys. Between the Ch alukyas, the Pallavas, the Ga Ngas, and the
Rastrakutas, the entire range of area between MukhaliNgam, Kañci, and Vatapi
were largely dominated by aggressively %aiva monarchs. The Krsna River valley,
in particular, had been the site of so many Buddhist institutions over the previ-
ous thousand years: Nagarjunikonda, Guntupalli, Amaravati, Gurubhaktakon-
da, and Jaggayyapeta, to name but a few.59 There, new schools had ﬂourished,
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 112 ---
famous saints lived, and whole new directions were taken in sculpture and ar-
chitecture. By the sixth century, though, the region’s Buddhist population was
in serious decline. Vatapi and Aihole both have single Buddhist sites, developed
toward the end of the sixth or beginning of the seventh century and apparently
abandoned shortly thereafter. The sites occupied later appear to be solely those
of Jaggayyapeta (until the seventh century), Guntupalli (until the beginning of
the eighth century), Gummadidurru (eighth century), and perhaps Amaravati.60
It was not until the religious activity of the late tenth to early eleventh century—
for example, the queen Akkadevi’s Buddhist praxis in 1021c.e. and the rebuild-
ing of monasteries by V ira-Balañja guildsmen in 1095–1096 c.e.—that Bud-
dhists appear to make a modest return to the Krsna River valley.61
Buddhist monastic activity appears to survive primarily in the east (Maga-
dha, Utkala, BaNgala, Kamarupa, and Samatata), in the west (Lata, Saurastra,
Sindh, and KoNkana), in the north (Ka$mira, Odiyana, Jalandara, and parts of
Madhyade$a), and at the southern end of the subcontinent (N agapattinam).
Although Buddhist activity continued elsewhere, that does not mean it was
unaffected by the southern developments. Since the Deccan continued to pro-
duce the wealthiest and most powerful of the dynasties during the early me-
dieval period, the inﬂuence of their religious selections had a pervasive poten-
cy born of prestige. Throughout much of India, Buddhism no longer held the
pride of place previously accorded, and the monks felt themselves under pres-
sure to conform to the dominant paradigm—the Varna$rama Dharma, the af-
ﬁrmation of caste and the stages of life.
  ’ 
      
Conformity and reconﬁguration are something religious traditions are contin-
ually required to negotiate. Buddhist institutions could not capitulate to cer-
tain aspects of the Varna$rama model, but other facets were seen as deﬁnitive-
ly negotiable, particularly if it brought them closer to sources of support and
social legitimacy. The decline of women’s participation was part of this pro-
cess, and from the seventh century forward we see an erosion of women’s in-
volvement, most particularly in the virtually total eclipse of the ofﬁce of the
nun (bhiksuni) in North India. More broadly, though, the early medieval peri-
od saw the dramatic deterioration of support for and involvement of women
in Buddhist activities at any and every level, whether in the monastery, in the
lay community, or in the newly evolving siddha systems.
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 113 ---
While many feminist historians have proposed nuanced models of Indian re-
ligion, a few have challenged this perception of women’s declining participation
and have proposed a theory of “androcentric record keeping.”62 I understand this
terminology to invoke the principle that women were half the population and
therefore must have been half of those involved in all forms of religious practice.
According to this model, we do not see women’s participation because—as was
certainly evident in nineteenth-century anthropological explorations of tribal re-
ligion—men were keeping the records and ignored the activities of female par-
ticipants. Thus the argument is that women were victims after the fact of their
participation and not during their actual lifetimes. Individual authors point to
the disparity between archival records available in Europe and their representa-
tion within standard histories of European periods, noting that women’s partic-
ipation has been excluded from those later histories. They have argued by anal-
ogy that this must have been the case in early medieval India as well. 
Yet such models are, when viable at all, based on selected archives where
the records of women’s activities have still been kept. Although it is true that
men kept the records, the model of androcentric record-keeping cannot ac-
count for several realities. We ﬁnd discrepant accounts of women’s involve-
ment over time, speciﬁc archaeological data about women, the actual preser-
vation of women’s documents either alongside men’s or even in preference to
them (e.g., Therigatha, the hybrid Sanskrit text of the Mahasamghika Bhiksuni
Vinaya), and other phenomena. The record-keeping model as proposed actu-
ally relies on the astonishing logical fallacy that the absence of evidence is it-
self evidence for presence. This is a modiﬁcation of Fischer’s “furtive fallacy,”
which “begins with the premise that reality is a sordid, secret thing; and that
history happens on the back stairs a little after midnight.” 63 It is not clear,
moreover, how women would have been active in everything except the
archives of a tradition, especially since—according to the model—they should
have been half the active population, present in all areas of human endeavor.
It does not follow that women in the early medieval period had no religion—
that would be unintelligible and contraindicated by the evidence. 64 The evi-
dence merely suggests that women, like all humans, were excluded from some
varieties of religious activity, were persuaded with respect to other forms of be-
havior and actively selected certain methods of religious expression, based in
part on their sense of support and fulﬁllment. In this instance the evidence is
relatively uniform—increasingly, medieval Indian women did not participate
in Buddhism and most particularly in esoteric Buddhism. 
Our sources suggest that, even while individual women exercised power
and authority in political and economic affairs in speciﬁc regions during the
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 114 ---
medieval period, they did not extend that involvement into Buddhist institu-
tions. We have many ways of determining the approximate percentages of
women participating in Buddhist activities; particularly important are epi-
graphic, ethnographic, and textual sources. These sources show a remarkable
convergence: women probably constituted between approximately 1 percent
and 20 percent of individuals acting in most religious capacities from the me-
dieval period to the present. The data are sketchy, but they indicate that
women’s numbers precipitously declined during the period of esoteric Bud-
dhism, particularly in high status and authoritative religious positions. Far
from being supportive of women’s participation, the Mantray ana was decid-
edly deleterious to the religious aspirations of those women desiring participa-
tion as independent and equal persons. Just as evident is the clear message
that, although occasionally presented with higher-status options, Indian wo-
men from the medieval period on have predominantly participated at lower
levels of religious status. This is true even while those women from selected
families enjoyed high-status participation in political and economic venues
outside Buddhist communities. 
Archaeological materials can be particularly useful in the exploration of
marginal or marginalized ﬁgures. The depersonalization essential to the ha-
giographical process is part of a larger ritual and literary ﬁeld, for Indian ha-
giography appears to require that the process of legitimacy extend from either
an ancestral lineage or its immediate analogy, the religious lineage. Our epi-
graphic sources, which are not as subject to these factors—particularly the ret-
rospective, explicit, or implied forms of signiﬁcation endemic to hagiogra-
phy—show the greatest variation in women’s position in Buddhism over its
duration. Clearly, the early traditions evident in S añchi, Amaravati, Barhut,
Taxila, Gandhara, Sarnath, Vajrasana, and the other great sites demonstrate
ﬂourishing nuns’ communities.65 These are sites where bhiksunis commanded
sufﬁcient resources—or sufﬁcient prestige to act as a cipher for others’ re-
sources—to have erected railings and have their names inscribed in dedication
statues.66 In Mathura, for example:
In the year 39 of mah araja devaputra Huvi ska, in the 3rd (month) of the
rainy season, on the 5th day, on this date, the bodhisattva was set up by the
nun Budhadeva, the female pupil of the nun Pu$ahathini, together with her
parents for the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings. 67
If we consult Bühler’s list of epigraphs at Sañchi, conveniently tabulated in his
discussion, we can see just how signiﬁcant these inscriptions really were. Büh-
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 115 ---
ler lists names for 141 monks, 104 nuns, 250 men who are not designated as or-
dained, and 150 women not designated as ordained.68 This tabulation has some
degree of uncertainty. Some of the names are repeated, up to three times,
while others contain some question as to the actual name. For our purposes,
however, it is signiﬁcant that the ratio of nuns to monks exceeds the ratio of
undesignated women to men. The former is 104 : 141, or about 3 : 4, while the
latter is 150 : 250, or 3 : 5. Thus, in Madhya Pradesh, early Buddhist institu-
tions apparently enjoyed a great vitality of women’s participation—they re-
spectively represented 43 percent of the total clerics in inscriptions and 38 per-
cent of the laity. Even though Indian nuns and laywomen at this time (as at
other times) were relegated to a secondary status, they actively involved them-
selves at both householder and monastic levels to an extraordinary degree. 69
A review of the epigraphic materials for the medieval period, however, does
not indicate the enthusiastic participation of women at this level, and it has al-
ready been observed by Falk that nuns were increasingly in short supply.70 Her
observations are afﬁrmed by surviving inscriptions. For example, Huntington’s
review of seventy-seven inscribed and dated sculptures from the “P ala-Sena”
schools—both Buddhist and Hindu—lists no nuns at all. The only inscription
by a woman claiming even religious afﬁliation as a committed laywoman (up-
asika) comes from a pre-P ala fourth-century image. 71 Of the other Buddhist
images, inscriptions record donations by two queens, a princess, the wife of a
chieftain, a vintner’s daughter, the wife of a wealthy donor, a monk’s mother,
and four otherwise undistinguished wives of gentlemen of means. 72 All the
women listed in these inscriptions identiﬁed themselves through their rela-
tions to men. This information is reinforced by the data from the Kurkihar
bronze hoard, a group of speciﬁcally Buddhist statuary. Of the ninety-three
inscriptions listed, forty-two provide names of donors: nine are clearly donat-
ed by women (no nuns), while thirty-three are by men (ten clearly by monks),
yielding 22 percent women, the highest archaeological percentage I have seen
in the early medieval period. 73
These ﬁndings reinforce the suggestions available from the numerous per-
sonal sealings found in N alanda. As many as 173 personal sealings were listed
by Hirananda Sastri as the complete excavated inscriptions up to 1942 for the
ﬂagship monastery of the medieval Buddhist educational system. Of these,
only three identify women— %rimat-Siyadevi, %ri-Ijjadevi, and %ridevi—and
all of them well-respected ladies, as is indicated by their names. 74 Among the
largest class of other personal material from Nalanda, the 109 “unhistorical vo-
tive inscriptions,” only one name could possibly be construed as feminine,
Krsnatuka, and is otherwise unspeciﬁed religiously. 75 We need not be suspi-
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 116 ---
cious that Sastri was overlooking females; in fact he was assiduously seeking
them and misrepresented one name as feminine, which had to be corrected by
the editor, Chakravarti. 76 This hunt for nuns and Buddhist laywomen in
modern archaeology has been expressed to me many times by Archaeological
Survey of India or other excavators, who have almost uniformly indicated
their disappointment at not ﬁnding bhiksuni epigraphs at their digs. The Na-
landa data appear to conﬁrm the statements of the Chinese monk I-ching that
nuns were allowed no speciﬁc provision in monasteries of his acquaintance.
His rather cavalier attitude that women should just do as they were told ap-
pears a reinforcement of the late seventh-century unwillingness to engage
women’s participation.77
As the esoteric system appropriated and negotiated the values and behavioral
systems of some of the non-Buddhist %aiva and other clerical traditions—as ex-
amined in the ensuing chapters—it is germane to propose analysis by analogy:
what do we see in the respective level of Indian women’s involvement in the
ethnography of contemporary systems of renunciation (samnyasa / bramacharya
/ tantra)? Again, we most frequently come up with the 1–20 percent ﬁgure. For
example, Sinha and Saraswati noted in 1978 that two of the 239 Dandisamnya-
sis in Varanasi were women.78 Miller and Wertz’s study of Bhubaneswar iden-
tiﬁed two women among the forty-one that they found in the twenty-two mon-
asteries of the city in 1963–1964.79 Parry could not locate any women among the
estimated ﬁfteen Aghori (extreme tantric) ascetics he knew from 1976 to 1978, al-
though he heard of one woman who had died a few years before.80 In the most
complete study to date, though, Denton recorded 134 women among the esti-
mated thirteen hundred ascetics in V aranasi in 1981.81 The great majority of
these had not entered into the formal level of renunciate (samnyasini), which
pertained to only about a quarter of the 134 ascetics. The preference was clearly
for the ofﬁce of celibate ascetic studentship (brahmacarya). Only about a dozen
of the 134 were pursuing an active life of tantric ritual.
Even the above figures might prove misleading or somewhat generous in
their assessment, since in most cases we do not know their relative status
within the larger community. For example, in 1988, while reviewing Sinha
and Saraswati’s figures in light of his own fieldwork, Sawyer found that the
two reported women among the Da ndiswamis were not formal members of
the community. They neither carried a staff (danda) nor sat on the throne
(gaddi) but acted as devoted disciples of the community, not their peers. 82
The two women in the Miller and Wertz sample as well were widows who
took care of the monastic leader Jagad ananda as if they were his mothers
(guruma), not his peers. This is particularly an issue in Barrow’s nineteenth-
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 117 ---
century census figures, for “in the official Census Returns for 1881, which enu-
merate 93 (51 male and 42 female) Aghori followers in the Central Provinces
and 2,121 males and 1,046 females in the N.W. P. (Azimgarh District). In the
Ballia District there were 68, of whom fully half were women.” 83 Yet he la-
ter reports that the 1881 Punjab Census Report shows 316 Aghori individuals,
all apparently male. 84
Our textual sources of the period are solely those of esoteric hagiography, a
topic pursued in detail in the next several chapters. Yet the percentages for
most, but not all, of these sources mirror our ﬁndings in both epigraphy and
ethnography. Esoteric hagiography is the most problematic of our materials, as
might be expected, and reﬂects the greatest degree of variation. The difﬁculty
is exacerbated by the suspect nature of so many of the hagiographical sources—
they are universally represented as Indic, but many clearly speak of Tibetan is-
sues and some certainly appear to be Tibetan compositions. Even then, the ha-
giographical reporting of feminine presence is relatively modest, yielding ratios
of women to men of 0 : 85 (0 percent), 3 : 81 (4 percent), 1 : 50 (2 percent), 4 :
38 (10 percent), 4 : 80 (5 percent), and 3 : 81 (4 percent). 85 The exceptions to
these ratios are from a group of three texts to come out of Ding-ri and are as-
cribed either to the mythic siddha Phadampa Sangyé or to the translation of his
revelation by the Tibetan translator, Shama Lotsawa. These texts show an em-
phasis on women’s involvement with esoteric Buddhism and express a discor-
dant note (compared to the rest of the literature) because of it. For example, one
of these texts is entirely on stories (avadana) about thirty-ﬁve Dakinis, repre-
senting them in standard mythic Buddhist form.86 The other two represent ha-
giographical ratios of 19 : 60 (24 percent) and 136 : 245 (36 percent).87 We may
conclude, however, from a variety of factors that these texts are Tibetan refor-
mulations and represent the accelerated involvement of women in esoteric Bud-
dhism in eleventh- to twelfth-century Tibet. This increased involvement may
be seen in Tibetan lineage lists and was invoked in an observation made bitter-
ly by Shama Lotsawa’s sister, Shama Machig, to Indian Buddhist men she re-
fused to teach because she was “from a border country and, even worse (by In-
dian standards), a woman!”88
Indeed, the surviving literature shows the fallacy of assuming equal partici-
pation of women in the Indian esoteric system. Clearly, the literature conﬁg-
ures the ritual system as directed toward males and privileging male responses.
Out of the hundreds of ritual manuals from the esoteric period surviving in
Sanskrit, translated into Tibetan, Chinese, Newar, Uyghur, and other lan-
guages, out of the hundreds of exegetical works describing the ritual systems in
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 118 ---
those several languages, out of the lineages—living and dead—in Tibet, Nepal,
Burma, Nan-chao, China, Japan, Mongolia, %ri LaNka, and many other places,
esoteric specialists have yet to uncover a single text or lineage that preserves in-
structions about yogic or sexual practices that relate to women’s position. Those
texts treating speciﬁcally sexual rituals describe them in a manner anatomically
impossible for women to perform, if they were to be the primary agents.89 Be-
yond that, the several texts surviving that are reputedly authored by women
(and we have little cause to doubt such authorial ascriptions) all discuss the rit-
ual and meditative system from the viewpoint of the male. Perhaps the best ex-
ample of this is the Vyaktabhavanugata-tattva-siddhi, a text that has been laud-
ed by one feminist as “a gemlike treatise” because it ostensibly articulates an
afﬁrmation of the female body.90 Yet the ﬁrst chapter of the work actually af-
ﬁrms not the female body but how that body might be manipulated and em-
ployed by a yogin in search of his own goal.91
Moreover, the inapplicability of modern sisterhood models for this period
of Indian history is evident in light of the donative inscriptions of Indian
queens.92 Many individuals occupied that exalted position in various locales,
and some of them founded or donated to Buddhist monasteries. There is the
example of the well-known Dudda-vihara, founded by the Maitrika monarch
Dhruvasena I in the mid-sixth century c.e. on behalf of the princess Du dda,
or again the G ahadvala monastery of Kum aradevi at S arnath in the mid-
twelfth century. 93 I have not located a single inscription, however, demon-
strating early medieval benefaction by a Buddhist queen or a Buddhist lay-
woman to a Buddhist nunnery, despite their sometimes extensive, even
excessive, donations to monks. The very few nunneries recorded during the
period seem to have been constructed by kings, rather than queens, such as the
institution established by the Bhaumakara king, %ivakaradeva, in 888 c.e. at
the request of the local chieftain, Ranaka %ri VinitatuNga.94 This was chrono-
logically the ﬁnal inscription that has yet surfaced mentioning Buddhist nuns
in India. 
How can we make sense of the evidence at our command? Theory has
tended to depict women’s religion either as the result of their unequivocal op-
pression or as a vehicle for their assertive self -empowerment.95 I propose that,
in the case of early medieval India, it was neither of these two extremes, for
they imply an essentialization of and binary structure between agency and ac-
commodation.96 In the Harsacarita, Harsa’s sister, Rajya$ri, has found assis-
tance and refuge in the peacefulness of the forest with the Sa mgha under the
aegis of the compassionate monk Div akaramitra. After she is persuaded not
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 119 ---
to burn herself on a pyre in grief over the loss of her father, husband, and old-
er brother, she begs Divakaramitra to allow her (and, we expect, all her ladies
in waiting) to take the red robe of a nun. The good monk launches into a
moving soliloquy about the virtues of the monastic estate. Still, Div akarami-
tra ends his paean to renunciation by observing that her brother seems to have
reservations on this matter and that she should now follow his lead. Were it
not for Harsa’s reticence, who would deny her the robe?97 If we contrast this
story with the aggressive defense of the outcaste woman’s renunciation in the
%ardulakarnavadana, or similar episodes in early Buddhist literature, we ob-
tain a clearer view of the delicate web of medieval Indian social relations. 98
Neither is Divakaramitra shown insisting on Rajya$ri’s vocation, nor does she
herself try to resist her brother. While this is admittedly an epic poem, Bana’s
vignette may provide a degree of insight, especially when observed in light of
the other records. 
Divakaramitra’s hesitation shows that Buddhist monks—whether Ma-
hayanist or of the esoteric persuasion—were not enthusiastic about receiving
women into the order or even making room for their participation in the tra-
dition. As indicated by the warning issued by the Subahupariprccha-tantra
(translated into Chinese in 726 c.e.), the presence of a female body continued
to be a trial for some monks: 99
Smiling, they walk along in conversation, glancing aside with their eyes.
Every limb of their forms steals one’s mind.
The body of a woman is just like a beautiful sword—
It attacks a man’s mind. 
We must conclude that, overall (and with notable exceptions), medieval Indi-
an women were persuaded to leave Buddhist religious life behind and retreat
to the home, as their society (and, increasingly, their religion) exhorted them,
and frequently forced them, to do. In this they were neither passive pawns nor
independent agents, but, when they could, they made decisions for themselves
based on the inﬂuences of their time and society. Buddhist authors and insti-
tutions—male and female—internalized, articulated, and espoused these Var-
na$rama Dharma paradigms, since there appeared to be neither another option
nor an alternative sense of direction. The ritual focus of surviving literature at-
tributed to women of the period simply reinforces the virtual unanimity of this
decision and provides us with little recourse but to assume that they accepted
this position as they saw the doors of the Buddhist religion grow narrower be-
fore their eyes. 
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 120 ---
   :
    
In view of the decimation of the patronage base and the internalization of fun-
damentally non-Buddhist social models, the concomitant erosion of an inde-
pendent Buddhist intellectual agenda should come as no surprise. Before this,
the wealth of speciﬁcally Buddhist philosophical positions, supported by a
technical Buddhist language, was one of the highlights of the word of the
Buddha. Neither the Abhidharmikas, nor the Yog acaras, nor the Vi-
jñanavadins, nor the Sautrantikas, nor many other Buddhist doctrinal schools
seriously called this philosophical and doctrinal process into question. They
presumed the right and responsibility of the monastic intellectuals to deﬁne a
technical vocabulary and to support that vocabulary through an analytical ap-
paratus that posited a Buddhist address of reality. Typically, that apparatus in-
cluded the composition of new scriptures, which cast this technical vocabulary
as the word of the Buddha (buddhavacana) or the teaching of the Teacher ($as-
tuh$ a sanam). Yet, by the end of the seventh century c.e., certain inﬂuential
Buddhist teachers and thinkers had adopted positions whereby no new tech-
nical vocabulary was at all acceptable (prasaNgika-madhyamaka) or could be de-
rived only from the pan-Indic discourse (pramanavada). 
How could this extraordinary paradigm shift in intellectual values have tak-
en place? As with the other changes in the early medieval era, the disestab-
lishment of Buddhist technical terms had its roots in an earlier period, but
came to deﬁne the discourse only during the seventh century. It really began
with the crystallization of Buddhist skepticism at the hands of Nagarjuna, with
his afﬁrmation in the Vigrahavyavatani XXVIII–XXIX that no proposition
may be adopted in the middle way. 100 Only the level of truth available in the
world (samvyavahara) is the proper basis for speaking and communication.
Clearly directed toward those proponents of early Indian epistemology, the
text attempts to establish the priority of conventional usage, which Nagarjuna
makes the basis for both the teaching of absolute truth and the realization of
nirvana in Mulamadhyamakakarika XXIV.10.101
Similar to the Greek philosophical movement of Skepticism, the Madhya-
maka position appears really an afﬁrmation of the most basic fundamental
structures of the Buddhist path: karma, rebirth, and so forth. Clearly, it im-
plied that the deﬁning characteristics of these structures should not be subject
to metaphysical discourse or contentious debate. They refused to expose the
ethical parameters of the doctrine to the kind of minute examination that had
already been turned toward philosophical positions and accordingly tried to
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 121 ---
communicate a return to prethematic ethical purity. Both the Indian and
Greek traditions, however, had problems with the public perception that they
represented extreme forms of nihilism, even though their religious agendas
were actually central in their presentations. Although there is some uncertain-
ty about whether the authors of the Mulamadhyamakakarika and such works
as the Ratnavali were the same person, it is clear from the testimony of later
authorities that the Madhyamaka system supported a strong afﬁrmation of the
monastic regimen. 
However, the eventual consequences of Nagarjuna’s epistemological skepti-
cism became worked out in the PrasaNgika school. In this form, Buddhapalita
and, especially, Candrakirti (c. 600–650c.e.), dismissed any effort among Bud-
dhists to justify any independent philosophical voice or technical nomenclature.
In this regard, the PrasaNgika Madhyamaka may be most clearly compared to
the method emphasized by Parmenides, the ostensible founder of Skepticism.
Similar to Parmenides’ denigration of the “backward-turning path of ordinary
reasoning” (palintropos keleuthos), Candrakirti presumed that every statement
implicated the contrapositive, so that nothing could be said without implicat-
ing (prasaNga) its simultaneous antithesis.102
At its advent, the strong afﬁrmation of worldly conventions, and especially
the PrasaNgika criticism of Buddhist-constructed ideologies beyond such con-
ventions, may have been a neotraditionalist response to internal and external
pressure on Buddhist intellectual systems during the early medieval period. Yet
the unintended result was a validation of an ethical standard established by the
lowest common denominator in Indian society and the restriction of vocabu-
lary to a common-language assessment of reality. Both in Madhyamakavatara
VI.166–178, with its autocommentary, and in the lengthy Prasannapada com-
mentary on the Mulamadhyamakakarikas, Candrakirti consistently assails the
capacity of anyone to articulate an independent analysis outside of that accept-
ed in the ordinary perception of the world at large. 103 By the eighth century,
the deﬁnition of relative truth—the only kind capable of being enacted in the
world and the basis for the realization of the absolute—consisted of three ele-
ments. As has been shown by Eckel, relative truth is satisfactory when not ana-
lyzed, it consists of dependent origination, and it demonstrates efﬁciency in
cause and effect. 104 It would be difﬁcult to construct intentionally a doctrine
more inhibitory to intellectual enquiry and ethical values, yet this was not the
purpose but the unintended result of the PrasaNgika negation of all prior Bud-
dhist agendas.
Such a doctrine clearly had consequences for the religious institutions, a
difﬁculty already foreseen by N agarjuna in Mulamadhyamakakarika XXIV.11.
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 122 ---
Here he proposes the metaphor that when emptiness is poorly comprehended
it annihilates the individual, like a snake incorrectly handled or a spell im-
properly cast. Yet exactly this corrosive force came to bear against two of the
primary facets of Buddhism: its ethical regimen and its doctrinal structure. Al-
though Nagarjuna may have castigated literally minded individuals as dimwit-
ted (mandamedhas), it is clear that he constructed the ideal justiﬁcation for the
morally indolent to buttress their unwillingness to adhere to the precepts. Such
indolence was ever lurking in the background, and the early convocations of
Indian monks in the centuries preceding N agarjuna had been seen as a re-
sponse to a laxity of the rules. Buddhist monasteries relied on clerical virtue to
assure the laity that their donations would reap extraordinary rewards, yet the
history of Buddhist monasticism is a narrative about the extended testing of
preceptorial boundaries by the morally challenged. 
By the medieval period, this tendency fed on the erotized compositions of
the Sanskrit and Prakrit poets, and medieval literature contains several ac-
knowledgments that Buddhists were being led astray. Kalhana mentions in his
chronicle a purportedly sixth-century monastery in Kashmir, founded by a sub-
sidiary Kashmiri queen, Yukadevi. The monastery had to be divided into two
sections: one for monks adhering to the rules of discipline, the other dedicated
to monks with the accoutrements of householders—wives, children, cattle, and
property.105 I-ching further remarked in 692 c.e. on his trip to India, “Some
observing one single precept on adultery say that they are free from sin, and do
not at all care for the study of the Vinaya rules. They do not mind how they
swallow, eat, dress, and undress. Simply directing their attention to the Doc-
trine of Nothingness is regarded by them as the will of the Buddha.”106
In undermining the idea that ethical statements were to be taken as veridi-
cal as stated, Nagarjuna and Candrak irti clearly provided an avenue for those
seeking a ready-made authoritative voice for the neglect of the Buddhist pre-
cepts. The most famous literary example of this direction is found in the sev-
enth-century farce the Mattavilasa, by the Pallava monarch, Mahendravikra-
mavarman (c. 650). Here %akya Bhiksu Nagasena—the Buddhist monk—is
shown actively searching for the “true scriptures,” which allow to the clergy the
pursuit of women and the drinking of alcohol. 107 He bitterly complains that
the elders in the community are hiding them from him to keep him ignorant
about these sacred texts. Yet it was not only Hindu dramatists that noted that
medieval Buddhist ideology problematized the ethical system. %aNkara openly
declared that there could be no possibility of an intelligible path that was so-
cially approved, since the disparate elements in the Buddhadharma, and espe-
cially that of the Madhyamaka, rendered all such attempts puerile nonsense.108
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 123 ---
Apparently many both within and outside the Buddhist tradition understood
that walking the line of nonfoundational praxis was hazardous to the vows.
   :
   
Doctrinally as well, statements by M adhyamikas contributed to the disem-
powerment of normative Buddhist intellectual standards and assisted the
headlong rush into the Buddhist appropriation of epistemology. 109 Earlier
Buddhists had relied on the statements in the scriptures and had followed a
well-worn process of consensual afﬁrmation of Buddhist doctrine. In the me-
dieval period, however, these same fundamentals apparently lacked the reso-
nance and strength previously accorded them. Contributing to this perception
of weakness were the concerted physical and intellectual assaults on the Bud-
dhist order from their Brahmanical antagonists, as seen above. As a medium
for intellectual challenges, orthodox antagonists employed the epistemological
vocabulary that had become the language of the wider Indian world. For what-
ever reason, Buddhist intellectuals were grappling with the need to articulate
their own reliable sources of understanding. Eventually, they turned to the
larger Indian intellectual community to afﬁrm their own standards by means
of pan-Indic values. Among other consequences of this change of direction,
many intellectual monks took a turn toward epistemology in an unprecedent-
ed manner, seeking philosophical assurance in the standards developed in the
non-Buddhist epistemological circles. 
Although the initial forays into the discussion of epistemological standards
are as old as Buddhism, with the work of Dharmakirti (c. 650 c.e.) this form of
discourse moved from interesting marginalia to center stage. Asa Nga (c. 350–
400 c.e.) had already included some epistemological material in the %rutamayi
and Cintamayi Bhumis. There, he discussed the issues of hetu-vidya, which was
primarily concerned with syllogistic reasoning, valid and invalid proofs, and
many of the questions later to be classiﬁed under reasoned discourse (parartha-
numana).110 Yet the inclusion of this material into the larger corpus of the Yo-
gacarabhumi, and abbreviated in the Abhidharmasamuccaya, was not indicative
of epistemology’s centrality to AsaNga’s exegetical direction.111 Rather, like the
lengthy section on the sixteen varieties of opponents’ claims in the Savi-
tarkadibhumi, the purpose of the hetu-vidya presentation was ancillary to the
domain of meditative praxis and supplementary to the intellectual facets of the
system. We may presume that it was included primarily for the purposes of
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 124 ---
completeness in education.112 Indeed, the Abhidharmasamuccayaﬁnishes its dis-
cussion of epistemology by warning that one desiring his own beneﬁt (i.e., lib-
eration) will simply recognize the different varieties of verbal expression but will
not waste his time disputing with others. 113 This dictum resonates with the
fundamental Buddhist value that monks should follow gnosis but not those
forms of perceptual consciousness required in the pursuit of epistemology. 114
Clearly this warning by the doyen of Buddhist meditative systems was not
heeded in later centuries. 
The results of the epistemological turn are immediately seen in the work of
Dignaga, which ﬁnds its fulﬁllment in Dharmakirti. Dignaga apparently could
not verify the signiﬁcance of the word of the Buddha simply by the standards of
authenticity that had motivated Buddhists in the past.115 Because he was focused
on the criteria that had been introduced by non-Buddhists, Dign aga came to
vindicate the scriptures—and their forms of praxis—in light of commonly held
Indian values, rather than verifying them through ideals such as dispassion, nir-
vana, and so forth. He was therefore called on to reverse a long-standing Bud-
dhist tradition concerning the value of the teaching of the teacher, which was ad-
mirably summed up in the categories of the Adhya$ayasañcodana-sutra. This
scripture claims that anything well-said—so long as it is endowed with signiﬁ-
cance, is in accordance with the teaching, eliminates deﬁlements, leads to nir-
vana, and not the opposites of these—could be understood as the word of the
Buddha.116 All of these values were subservient to the ancient Buddhist ideal that
the Dharma was not dependent on the Buddha or any other individual. Monks,
therefore, should rely on the Dharma and not on individual personalities.
Because Dignaga could not enter into pan-Indic discourse based on this
model, he appropriated another instead. For Dignaga, the Buddha became the
embodiment of valid reasoning (pramanabhuta), an indication that the indi-
vidual as the source of the message was rapidly becoming more important than
the message itself. This personalization of philosophy became valid even with-
in intellectual communities, which had been resistant to the pressures of pop-
ular Buddhism until then. Dignaga’s position had short-term gains and long-
term consequences. In the near term, the Buddha became important for
Buddhist epistemologists because he was the source of valid cognition. Dhar-
makirti reﬁned this and dedicated an entire chapter to the deﬁnition of the
Buddha as the source of uncontradicted truth, thus placing him as a personal-
ity on a par with the personalities of the Vedic seers and the lawgiver Manu.
Thus, according to this new expression, the Buddha’s understanding and
speech remained uncontroverted by any element of observable or inferable re-
ality (pramanasiddhi).
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 125 ---
In the long term, however, the assumption of these positions was arguably
detrimental to Buddhist institutions. Dreyfus has both summed up the chal-
lenge represented to Buddhists by epistemology and glossed over the conse-
quences it had for them: 117
Starting from the discussions of the Nyaya-sutra and Vatsyayana’s commen-
tary, great attention was paid to argumentation and the theory of inference.
This resulted in the establishment of a logic that gained wide acceptance, so
much so that it provided intertraditional standards of validation. These de-
velopments created the relatively neutral framework within which compet-
ing claims of Indian philosophical schools, such as Ny aya, Mimamsa, Jain
and Buddhism, could be assessed. 
But, even as Dreyfus is forced to admit later, these standards were neither
neutral nor supportive of the traditional Buddhist path, although they provid-
ed the criteria whereby that path came to be assessed in the public forum. Per-
haps more indicative of the crisis, however, within the Buddhist intellectual
community was the fact that, after Dharmak irti, virtually all scholastic forms
of intellectual discourse seemed propelled toward the use of his nomenclature. 
From this point on, the questions asked in India would not be, for example:
is this text the word of the Buddha. Instead they are: do you mean that the Bud-
dha is in error or that the ideals of the Buddhist tradition do not live up to the
standards established for normative discourse in pan-Indian intellectual circles?
All these changes resulted in Buddhists’ adopting reference points that were not
initially developed within the tradition but emerged instead from systems an-
tagonistic to Buddhist ideals. To their credit, the Buddhist epistemologists fused
the doctrines of Vijñanavada idealism to the systemic requirements that discus-
sions of perception and syllogistic argumentation invoke. However, the result
was that the vocabulary and diction of Dharmakirti and his successors are more
familiar to those trained in the treatises of the Naiyayikas than to one versed in
the Abhidharma or earlier Mahayanist works. 
In engaging non-Buddhist systems, monks evidently overlooked the prin-
ciple that negotiations are successful from positions of strength. To be inﬂu-
ential, to capture the direction of the discourse, to conﬁgure the categories of
reality in one’s favor—all of these depend on the ideal that the message pro-
jected is taken by its believers as conﬁdently true. The public presentation of
the Buddhadharma from the seventh century on became resolutely epistemo-
logical and given to quibbling about shades of gray. This was a form of pres-
entation that those in positions of political and military authority would not
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 126 ---
hear and could not comprehend. What they did understand was that Buddhist
scholars had adopted as their primary standards of validation the systems gen-
erated in and matured by the Var na$rama Dharma. 
It must again be emphasized that the potential for each of these two direc-
tions (skepticism and epistemology) existed in Indian Mahayana for some cen-
turies before they overwhelmed the centers of monastic instruction. Neither of
their progenitors—Nagarjuna and Dignaga—lived in the early medieval milieu.
However, both of the primary institutionalizers—Candrak irti and Dharma-
kirti—were most inﬂuential from the mid-seventh century c.e. forward, pre-
cisely when economic destabilization and political uncertainty became the pre-
vailing nature of Indian social life. Thus we may rely equally on evidence and
inference to afﬁrm that the sociopolitical events of the time propelled the voic-
es of Buddhist self-skepticism and non-Buddhist intellectual self-promotion to
emerge into the normative discourse of Buddhist institutions. The two voices
worked well in concert, skepticism eroding conﬁdence in a speciﬁcally Buddhist
intellectual language, and epistemology developing a language acceptable to the
mundane world. These voices took control of the normative discourse and
erected widely approved standards of viability whereby Buddhist doctrines ei-
ther were clothed in epistemological language or were simply unacceptable. 
  
   
By the seventh century, the grand vessels of the Buddhist monasteries found
themselves in narrow straits and shallow waters. Their most reliable tradi-
tional sources of support—the merchant guilds and minority kings—were ex-
periencing extraordinary distress. While the North Indian guilds were being
depleted, tribal and other minorities were being vigorously proselytized. Bud-
dhist strongholds, the great urban centers of North India, were simultane-
ously experiencing population loss as they increasingly became the targets for
Deccan based raids and internecine strife. These large urban environments
were being replaced with a relocation of population into rapidly appearing
smaller centers that were not located on the traditional trade routes, and op-
erated as market centers rather than the sources for goods traded by guilds
with national and international connections. %aiva kings were displacing
Buddhists in the Deccan, and the greater Buddhist dynasties of the P alas,
Bhaumakaras, or Khadgas had yet to coalesce or to declare their Buddhist
afﬁnities in the east. In the west, the forays of Islamic armies were the har-
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 127 ---
bingers of future unhappiness, and Buddhist promoters like the Maitrikas
were in dire straits. 
As they experienced the retrenchment of their populations into the nar-
rower ranges of Northeast, West, and South India, Buddhist monasteries be-
gan to emulate the very political forms that caused them their distressing de-
cline in the subcontinent—the s amanta feudal system. From the seventh
century until the complete collapse of Buddhist monasteries in the fourteenth
century, Buddhist institutions became feuda for the abbots and the monks.
They administered their estates and established loyalties in a manner closely
analogous to members of the circle of vassals (samantamandala) of an overlord
(rajadhiraja). Monasteries relied on these great kings for their land grants and
the maintenance of law beyond the borders of their grants. Nationally, the new
“Great Monasteries” (mahavihara) managed to establish branch institutions,
which appeared to act as their extensions in other areas, much as samantas act-
ed as their lord’s representatives. The primary difference was easy to under-
stand and represented the central service of the new monasteries: their retain-
ers were monks and laymen being educated by these feudal cloisters, rather
than military retainers in service of the state. The simultaneous process of the
growth of institutions, the decline of their absolute numbers, and the close re-
lationships established between them all had consequences for the Vinaya and
for the architecture of the monastic buildings. 
In Vinaya terms, I-ching’s testimony seems clear: he interpreted the four
more popular Vinayas—Mahasamghika, Sthaviravada, Mulasarvastivada, and
Sammitiya—as having been original and the others as having evolved as their
branches.118 With the increased connections between parts of the country, se-
lected Vinaya schools thus successfully established hegemony in areas of great-
est patronage. The net result was that these traditions, with their increased au-
thority and prestige, displaced less popular schools through the hermeneutic
that smaller groups were but subsets of the “older” systems and therefore less
authentic. This displacement process is well attested to in the more complete
historical record of the Mah avihara Sthaviravada of %ri LaNka, and our in-
complete Indian data support that model as well. In particular, I-ching saw the
increasingly popular Mulasarvastivada Vinaya as the source of the Dhar-
maguptaka, the Mah i$asaka, and the K a$yapiya, despite the probability that
these latter were actually earlier in development and codiﬁcation than the Mu-
lasarvastivada.119 The result of this evolution was the slow eclipse of the other
Vinayas, so that none but the M ulasarvastivada was introduced into Tibet
from the eighth to the thirteenth centuries, probably because of its successful
adaptation to the life of large institutions. 120
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 128 ---
In architectural terms, Buddhist monasteries in North India during the ear-
ly medieval period began to resemble one another much more closely than be-
fore. The differences of layout seen between N agarjunakonda, Sañci, Taxila,
and Ellora (representing multiple Vinaya schools) are seldom encountered.
From the vantage of the later megamonasteries, the variety observable in these
earlier communities seems to be struggling toward the grand synthesis of the
monumental ediﬁces of Somapura or Nalanda. However, the earlier buildings
demonstrate a wider spectrum of local forms, a creative investiture in the or-
ganic process of development rather than the uniformity of large institutions.
In one sense, the mahaviharas of the medieval world appear curiously like Bud-
dhist versions of neoclassical ofﬁce buildings or an Indian version of university
gothic architecture in its repetitive systematization. Such systematization also
shows up in the formalization of monastic sealings; during this period virtually
all monastic sealings represent their monasteries as “Dharmacakras” and have a
gloriﬁed wheel of the Dharma—frequently set between two deer—immediate-
ly above the institution’s name.121
We are still in the dark on almost all facets of these large monasteries,
which are sometimes misleadingly referred to as universities, as if the circum-
stances of their establishment and curriculum were analogous to the universi-
ties of Italy and France begun some centuries later. Their daily operations, the
composition of the monks and laity engaged in study and practice, the man-
ner of teaching and instruction, and, especially, the changes of curricula or
texts used for the various examinations—almost all internal practices are ob-
scure to us. The number of monastic sites known to us are slowly increasing as
the Archaeological Survey of India and other archaeological bodies in state
and university departments are forced to contend with site destruction due to
severe population pressures. To date, however, we have no thorough survey of
the extant sites and their locations. My discussions with Indian archaeologists
lead me to believe that many, perhaps a majority, of medium-size medieval
monasteries remain unexcavated and unstudied, and—even if excavated—the
results remain unpublished. Thus we have no good estimation of the total
monastic population of India at any point in the early medieval period, since
we do not know the absolute number of monasteries. 
Concerning the size of the great monasteries, our best evidence is from the
written legacies of Hsüan-tsang and I-ching, both of whom have been accused
of inﬂating their estimates. Hsüan-tsang’s statement is simple: N alanda has
“several thousand” monks, hundreds of whom are known in other countries.122
I-ching is more speciﬁc, evaluating the number of monks in Nalanda as “more
than three thousand” in his Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan, and “three thousand
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 129 ---
figure 1 Nalanda: District Patna, excavated remains. Site plan courtesy of the Archaelogical Survey of India

--- PAGE 130 ---
ﬁve hundred” in his Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan. 123 How realistic are
these estimates? The surviving site (Figure 1) has eight large monasteries
(monasteries 1–11, in the eccentric numbering of the site) and two smaller ones
(monasteries 1a and 1b); these latter are most probably the oldest monasteries
built in association with the old “Original Perfumed Chamber” (mulagandha-
kuti: Stupa 3).124 I-ching twice indicates that the principal buildings numbered
eight, but it is not clear whether the other two, earlier monasteries were func-
tioning as well. 125 The published plans indicate that each of the eight large
monasteries has between thirty-two and thirty-seven potential “cells,” al-
though it is not clear that all of them were used as such. I-ching speaks of nine
cells to each of the four walls, leading to thirty-six for the four sides of each
ﬂoor in each building. 126 It would be safe to say that, at its maximum, ap-
proximately thirty-ﬁve of the cells on each of the lower ﬂoors were occupied at
any one time. Monasteries 1b and 1a, by contrast, have thirteen and twenty-six
cells, respectively. 
The Mulasarvastivada Vinaya—probably the dominant Vinaya during the
ninth-century Devapala period that the current site represents—allows for ei-
ther a three-story or a ﬁve-story construction. 127 I-ching seems to describe
construction of three stories “or more,” which is not as clear as we might
like.128 Because the walls of Monastery 1 b were excessively narrow, it is un-
likely that it could have been ﬁve stories, but that does not apply to the other
nine monasteries. Given the inscriptional panegyrics to the “lofty spires” of
Nalanda’s famous cloisters, so that they resemble the snowy peaks of Mount
Sumeru, it would be difﬁcult to argue that they were short in height.129 If each
cell was occupied by two monks (I have witnessed three modern monks living
in rooms this size, but not happily), then we would end up with approximate-
ly seventy monks on each ﬂoor of the eight large monasteries. Thus the height
becomes the crucial variable; there would be about 210 monks per monastery
if the monasteries had three stories, 280 monks if four stories, and 350 if they
had ﬁve stories. The individual administrators—abbots, etc.—traditionally
have occupied the penthouses of these centers, so we might consider that the
top ﬂoor was not fully used in this manner. If we take the approximate total of
the eight large monasteries with three ﬂoors (210 times 8 = 1,680) and add the
two smaller centers (Monastery 1 b, perhaps 70 monks; Monastery 1 a perhaps
150 monks), we arrive at a ﬁgure of 1,900 monks, give or take an abbot or a fa-
mous guest. However, if we use the ﬁve-story model (350 times 8 = 2,800 +
Monastery 1b + Monastery 1 a), we still end up with a ﬁgure of about three
thousand, and it is difﬁcult to see in either case how the total of 3,500 monks
could be ascertained. We must consider, for example, that any model would
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 131 ---
have to allow for surges during pilgrimage or great lecture/ritual times, when
monks might have to triple-up, and speciﬁc areas of monasteries could be
closed when not needed. In a pinch, monks could also occupy the large tem-
ples outside the walls, clearly placed for lay use. There was likely a class of
monks specializing in devotional activity who lived in these sites as well, but it
is not clear that they would be counted among the N alanda monks. 
We are better informed of the relations between these domains of Buddhist
praxis and the immediate environment, primarily because of the combination
of the written legacy and the excavated clay sealings. Among the several hun-
dred sealings, and beyond those of undistinguished individuals, the clay im-
pressions left in the rubble of this ediﬁce indicate an elaborate series of rela-
tions with attached villages, ofﬁcers of the courts in the area, and other
monasteries.130 Monasteries of this variety would frequently be given jurisdic-
tion over the proximate area as an extension of their endowments and part of
the feuda assigned to them. The consequence was that monasteries had the re-
sponsibility for the maintenance of law and the settling of litigation, not sim-
ply over their own clergy, but over the villagers under their aegis as well. Thus
the extraordinary number of sealings from village ofﬁces (gramikajanapada),
royal agents (adhikarana) attached to this or that village, and the occasional
police station (sthana) must be connected with more than economic functions.
Collectively they represent the detritus of documents, bundles, various war-
rants and writs of the courts all under the authority of the monasteries. 
Similarly, the remarkable number of sealings from other monasteries indi-
cates close relations and occasional formal ties. For example, we ﬁnd con-
struction in honor of the martyrdom of the eminent monk Karu na$rimitra,
who went to the Buddha’s heaven after having been burned to death by a BaN-
gala army while he was trying to save his monastery of Somapura. A disciple
in his line constructed statues and monasteries in several locales around North
India, including a monastery speciﬁcally dedicated to his Vinaya lineage, the
Mitras.131 The interesting part, though, is the inscription celebrating this in
the proximity of the Nalanda grounds, where it was set up so that its message
might gain greater response and achieve the public appreciation that was its
due. These records indicate that monks of speciﬁc monasteries became associ-
ated with other speciﬁc monasteries, either because they established them as
extensions of the Vinaya and curricular systems of the home cloisters or be-
cause the areas were naturally afﬁliated. 
The personal relations, dedication, and loyalty that represent the glue of me-
dieval social and political systems clearly played as important a part in the great
Buddhist monasteries as it did elsewhere. Sharma recognized this in his classic
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 132 ---
work on Indian feudalism, and any discussion of the early medieval period cer-
tainly should take into account that political and land-tenure relations some-
times worked on a continuum—particularly in the cases of religious emolu-
ments—rather than being utterly disparate.132 Certainly, Buddhist monasteries
were not required to provide troops to the granting dynasty, but they provided
other labor services—ritual, educative, cultural, and so on. These were consid-
ered of such value that the securing of scholars, religious statuary, or learned
priests was recognized as a valid cause for military belligerence.133
Likewise, the consequences of being involved with the wrong faction meant
that monasteries were set aﬂame with some frequency. This became an issue in
discussions of retrieving and preserving Indian literature during the construc-
tion of libraries for Royal Dynastic Tibetan monasteries, and the record indi-
cates that N alanda library had been burned down at least once in the mid-
eighth century.134 Allegiance was maintained by the services monks performed
for the lord of the area. One received text of the sBa-bzhed (Testament of the
Ba Clan) indicates that the Buddhist clergy of Magadha set up a special reli-
quary (caitya) named “Dharatu-camda” (apparently Prakrit for “moon of sup-
port”) in front of the Pala king’s palace. Inside it contained “bones and relics of
the Tathagata,” as well as “the fortune of enemies of the king who had yet to
be born.”135 If true, the strategy must have been simple and convincing—if the
enemies of the king were kept paciﬁed with the relics of the Tath agata, then
they would harm neither the kingdom nor the clergy. At a time when clerics
took seriously their duty to curse offenders of the Dharma, the agonistic ritual
response by virtuous monks was held as the potential threat to those seeking to
overthrow the monarch or harm the order. Thus the relationship between
monastery and state was based both on a system of mutual identity and on an
ideology of magical performance. As we examine the development of esoteric
Buddhism, we see that this metaphor is carried to the extreme. 
:    
The medieval experience for Buddhists in India represented a dramatic
change from their position of centrality in Indian life during the Gupta. Pre-
vious sources of support and prior areas of strength became eroded and, occa-
sionally, eclipsed. As the great trading guilds became crippled in the internal
military situation and hobbled in the external geopolitical events, donations to
the monasteries began to evaporate. The search for new kinds of patronage
placed monasteries in the position of assuming many of the characteristics of
    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 133 ---
the society around them. They gained stature as landed feudal lords, collect-
ing rents and taxes and exercising judicial powers in their domains. As a re-
sult, the monasteries began to internalize many of the same value systems that
the external society reﬂected. They afﬁrmed a greater esteem for political
power and began to see power as an avenue for the advancement of their agen-
da. They furthered the weakening of support for women’s religious expres-
sion, withdrawing resources from nuns and dissuading women from donning
the red robe. They became enamored of the new authority of non-Buddhist
epistemological discourse and placed it in a position of prominence in the cur-
riculum of the large teaching monasteries. 
In sum, early medieval Buddhist institutions assumed the dynamics of the
Indian life around them. While monks and monasteries had always claimed a
separate judicial and religious space from the Indian town and village, in real-
ity no monastery had ever been hermetically sealed from the events around it.
At times, the interval between the world at the monastic gate and the temple
inside appeared distant indeed, but this was continually (re)negotiated in the
strategies of monastic decorum and religious requirements. As the world
changed, the relationships between monks and their families, between the pre-
ceptors and the novices, between the bursars and the suppliers, and between
the abbot and the feudal lord all changed as well. The esoteric system became
an internalization of many of these factors and clearly evolves out of the me-
dieval experience.
 ⁄    

--- PAGE 134 ---
The Buddha, together with Vajradhara, 
Indeed, all the Buddhas have consecrated you. 
So you will be, from this day forward, 
Great Kings of the triple world, 
Lords among the Victors [jinadhipati]. 
From this day on, you are victorious over M ara; 
You have entered the most excellent city;
And you will, from this day on,
Obtain Buddhahood, of that there is no doubt.
—Mañju$rimitra’s Namasamgitimandalavidhyaka$avimala1
ur survey of the background vicissitudes of India and the somewhat
reduced frame of reference for aspects of medieval Buddhism have
so far set aside a speciﬁc discussion of esoterism and its develop-
ment, but we now turn fully to this issue. As the most ritually evolved form of
Buddhism, esoteric Buddhism had its genesis in the Buddhist experience of
the medieval Indian horizon. The emergence of the esoteric dispensation is
both a response and a strategy on the part of facets within Buddhist commu-
nities: it was a response to the difﬁcult medieval environment and a strategy
for religious reafﬁrmation in the face of unprecedented challenges to the Bud-
dhist social horizon. Central to my investigation is the proposal that esoteric
Buddhism was not generated exclusively from the many sources traditionally
depicted. In deference to humanistic criteria, I cannot presume that the eso-
teric system is the direct message of a/the cosmic Buddha—whether Vairo-
cana, Vajradhara, Samantabhadra, Nairatmya, or some other ﬁgure—which is
the orthodox Vajray ana position. Nor does the evidence support the model
that Buddhist esoterism is the pale imitation of %aivism, as it has sometimes
been described. Finally, it is clearly not the result of narrowly internal forces in
Indian Buddhism. 2 All three positions have been embedded in the various
models proposed to date.3

-
/Tswashhe /Vswashictory of Esoterism
and the /Iswashmperial Metapho/rswash
/Oswash

--- PAGE 135 ---
Rather, the evidence suggests that the rise and development of the esoteric
form of Buddhism is the result of a complex matrix of medieval forces, both
those dynamics generated within the Samgha communities and other factors
over which the communities had no control. The evidence supports a position
that is curiously both astonishing and reassuring: the Mantray ana is simulta-
neously the most politically involved of Buddhist forms and the variety of
Buddhism most acculturated to the medieval Indian landscape. Brieﬂy, the
mature synthesis of esoteric Buddhism—the form deﬁned as a separate meth-
od or vehicle employing mantras—is that which embodies the metaphor of the
practitioner becoming the overlord (rajadhiraja). In this endeavor, the candi-
date is coronated and provided with ritual and metaphorical access to all the
various systems that an overlord controls: surrounded by professors of mantras,
he performs activities to ensure the success of his spiritual “state.” The process
represents the sacralization of the sociopolitical environment, as it was seen on
the ground in seventh- to eighth-century India.
The analysis presented here distinguishes between two different Bud-
dhist sociologies of knowledge. On one hand are monks practicing these
forms in the great Buddhist monastic institutions; their parameters and
horizons of expectations are assessed in this chapter. This variety of Man-
trayana arose in support of, and provided maintenance to, the monastic es-
tate, allowing it to interact with the warlords and princes, the military gen-
erals and the emerging tribal leaders. In view of its primary focus and
generative nexus, this can be called “institutional esoterism.” Institutional
esoterism was the form that succeeded wherever esoteric Buddhism pros-
pered. This form was principally the domain of monks, who wrote and
preached in a hermeneutical method that emphasized the development and
integration of esoteric ideas and models into institutional requirements. In
this guise, esoterism became part of the socialization system that turned lay-
men from disparate backgrounds into members of a culture unified by mo-
nastic rule, ritual, cosmology, and doctrine. 
On the other hand was the somewhat anarchical domain of the Perfected
(siddha), those sometimes scruffy, long-haired denizens of the margins of the
Indian social institutions. Siddhas are examined in the succeeding chapters, but
it sufﬁces to note here that they and the monks represent symbiotic estates in
the politicization of Buddhism. Although the siddha tradition seemed in some
ways a logical conclusion to the Vajrayana, neither did it exist in a vacuum (re-
ligious, intellectual, ritual, or social), nor did it arise without a necessary tension
between it and other facets of the Buddhist path embodied in disparate Bud-
dhist institutions. While the siddhas are portrayed as noninstitutional or even
anti-institutional, they actually played an important position in the lives of
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 136 ---
Buddhist and non-Buddhist social forms. Yet the conundrum was that siddhas,
in all likelihood, were far fewer in number than monks, even if the Perfected
had a higher visibility. Both monks and siddhas cultivated political patronage
and authored apologia, so they are equally essential to a discussion of the mat-
uration of the Mantrayana.
Esoteric Buddhism may thus seem astonishing, in that it directly reflects
the internalization of the medieval conceptual and social environment, rather
than being the revealed system that orthodoxy portrays. By the same token,
the sociopolitical nature of esoteric Buddhism appears reassuring, thanks to
evidence from the introduction of this form of Buddhism into other cultures,
such as China from the time of %ubhakarasimha, Vajrabodhi, and Amogha-
vajra. In this context, Mantray ana is both highly political and culturally sen-
sitive, having become a favorite of the court during the T’ang dynasty and es-
pecially during the reign of the Tai-tsung emperor (762–779) in the aftermath
of the An Lu-shan rebellion. 4 Likewise in Japan, with the rapid acceptance
of the esoteric tradition during the Heian under the advocacy of Kukai
(774–835) and Saicho (767–822), the position of the Shingon and Tendai sects
at court became proverbial. It has been said that the former was the special
provenance of the imperial family and the latter the particular interest of the
aristocratic clans, both patronage sources demonstrating the strength of their
political associations. Closer to India, similar circumstances are encountered
during the Royal Dynastic period in Tibet, particularly during and after the
reign of Trisong Detsen (755–797). 5 Likewise, the rulers of the Ta-li kingdom
in the aftermath of Nan-chao were noted patrons of the Mantray ana.6 The
finds of bronzes of esoteric divinities in Thailand, the importance of similar
representations in the kingdom of Pagan in Burma and in Cambodian
Angkor all reinforce this conclusion. 7 There appears no exception to the rule
that, when the Mantray ana becomes culturally important outside India, it is
principally through the agency of official patronage, either aristocratic or im-
perial.8 Given these circumstances, it would be extraordinary if the military
and political culture of early medieval India had not shaped esoteric institu-
tions, doctrines, literature, rituals, and iconography, at least to some degree. 
In fact, the degree is compelling, and central aspects of esoteric Buddhism
came to embody directly and unequivocally the structure, aesthetics, and ideol-
ogy of medieval Indian feudalism. In short, esoteric Buddhism is the form of
medieval Buddhism that internalized, appropriated, reafﬁrmed, and rearranged
the structures most closely associated with the systems of power relations, ritual
authentication, aesthetics, gift-giving, clan associations, and sense of dominion
that deﬁned post-Gupta Indian polities. However, by no means should we be
seduced into believing that these changes came directly from a single caste or
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 137 ---
strata of society, either high caste or low, as has been sometimes afﬁrmed. 9
Rather, esoteric Buddhism was generated by groups that were constituted in a
variety of discrete social levels and tended to deﬁne the esoteric system based on
the relationship between the needs of the institution or small group and the
models of authority developed in the society at large. In this regard, Buddhist
monasteries evolved regional institutional cultures, analogous to the speciﬁc cul-
tures seen in large corporations or educational institutions in the modern peri-
od. Individuals became socialized into these cultures and began to reﬂect the val-
ues developed by the consensus and history of the institution. 
While Indian Buddhism had a change of direction that appears radical in
many respects, it also exhibits aspects of a synthetic and, even at times, syncret-
ic approach. However, opportunistic syncretism is seldom as unprincipled,
destabilizing, or symptomatic of incompetence as it sometimes has been depict-
ed. Frequently, the opportunistic appropriation of a behavioral facet, ideology,
or aesthetics of a proximate culture becomes the key for renewal and dynamic re-
vitalization. Certainly, one could not accuse neo-Confucians, like Su Shih
(1037–1101), of either a lack of principle or debilitating lassitude in their articula-
tion of Confucian syntheses of Buddhist and Taoist doctrinal or meditative par-
adigms. Indeed, the neo-Confucian model became the vehicle for the complete
victory of a renewed Confucianism in East Asia, even if it surreptitiously emu-
lated very un-Confucian ideas, whose central procedures were nevertheless in-
terpreted in a compelling Confucian manner. Accordingly, syncretic systems are
often indicative of an ideological mesne—a stratum of potential occupation that
is not exclusively the purview of any one religious tradition. Yet the dynamic
properties of opportunistic syncretism appear to require a perceived duress with-
in the parent tradition, in this case, Mahayana Buddhism. Thus the Mahayana
moved toward multifaceted development after the fall of the Guptas, being
pressed on by a sense of urgency and of crises within and without. Many of the
directions taken were consistent with fundamental Buddhist principles, but in
the rapidly changing environment of the new political and military realities, they
took on forms of signiﬁcation unforeseen by their progenitors. 
:
 - 
In our examination of its birth, we should differentiate between the employ-
ment of mantras, ma ndalas, ﬁre sacriﬁce, and other speciﬁc ritual items, on
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 138 ---
one hand, and the mature esoteric system, on the other. Such a rationale is
useful, for the expression of powerful phrases in Indian culture, the arrange-
ment of altars, the references to scepters (vajra) are older than Buddhism it-
self. Even within the Buddhist sphere, as has already been pointed out, most
Buddhist traditions employ sacred phrases for various purposes, especially in
protection and healing rituals. 10 For their part, many Mahayanists deﬁned
other kinds of phrases as expressive of “supports” (dharani) in the contempla-
tion or propagation of the Dharma and even defended their use.11 Yet the em-
ployment of these speciﬁc rituals within monastic environments was not set
apart from other avenues, if the available literature is any indication. Until it
matured, such esoteric materials were individual aids, not a uniﬁed system.
They were not considered constituents of a self-contained path and did not
contribute a sense of identity within the community, either to set the individ-
ual apart or to bring others into the fold. The ritual secrecy, the transmission
of separate precepts, the intimate connection between master and disciple—
these had not come together in a self-aware manner.
The mature esoteric synthesis that arose then was emblematic of the new
formulation: it insisted on an immutable master-disciple bond, employed roy-
al acts of consecration, and used elaborate ma ndalas in which the meditator
was to envision himself as the Buddha in a ﬁeld of subordinate Buddhas. Pro-
ponents of the system composed a new class of scriptures that taught the trans-
mission and recitation of secret mantras. Calling themselves “possessors of
mantras or scepters” (mantrin / vajrin), they developed rituals (particularly ﬁre
sacriﬁce) for the purpose of a codiﬁed series of soteriological and nonsoterio-
logical acts and ultimately institutionalized this material in Buddhist monas-
teries where texts were copied, art produced, and rituals performed. In this re-
gard, the self-description of mature esoteric Buddhism as the way of secret
mantras (guhyamantrayana) is analogous to the Mahayana’s self-description as
the way of the bodhisattva (bodhisattvayana). The nomenclature and ideology
of bodhisattvas (Siddhartha, Maitreya) had been around long before it became
embedded in a different ritualized “way,” with new vows and a new path to-
pography. In a similar manner, the identiﬁcation and use of mantras (or dha-
rani or vidya) had existed for centuries before there arose a new ritualized syn-
thesis of different factors.
It is only in the second half of the seventh century that the deﬁnitive eso-
teric system emerges, and we have several veriﬁcations of this dating. Litera-
ture designated “proto-tantric” (a term I believe to be somewhat misleading)
was still the exclusive form of Buddhist esoterism through the middle of the
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 139 ---
seventh century.12 Examples of this are the Gilgit manuscript of the Karan-
davyuha-sutra, which was written sometime around or before 630 c.e. and the
653/54 composition and translation of the Dharanisamgraha of Atikuta.13 In
addition, the Ch’an monk Wu-hsing remarked around 680c.e. that the pop-
ularity of the esoteric path was a new and exceptional event in India, observ-
able even while he was in residence.14 He reputedly brought back with him the
earliest version of the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-tantra, although he did not
translate it.15 Then there is the difference in attitude evident between Hsüan-
tsang’s dismissal of ignorant users of spells in 646 c.e. and I-ching’s personal
involvement with esoterism during his Indian sojourn between 671–692 c.e.16
Finally, we note Bodhiruci’s career, perhaps the most neglected of the early es-
oteric translators. His early translations into Chinese from 693 to around 700
were almost exclusively normative Mahayana materials ( Maharatnakuta, etc.),
but the period from around 700 to 710 was taken up with the emerging eso-
teric corpus of texts.17
The new system came into being quite swiftly, a demonstration that incre-
mentalist presumptions on the emergence of new Indian systems are prob-
lematic. It is evident that the synthesis was effected in decades, not centuries,
although it eventually took centuries to work through all the consequential de-
velopments. Even then, it appears that the overwhelming majority of esoteric
Buddhist literature was written in the space of about four hundred years, from
the mid-seventh to the mid-eleventh centuries. This is true of the siddha doc-
uments as well, for they appear on the scene only a few decades after the ma-
ture synthesis is clearly evident. As shown below, Buddhist siddha presence
was already attested in both Buddhist and non-Buddhist literature by 720–730
c.e., and in the third quarter of the eighth century extraordinary evidence
emerges for authority being granted to the most radical of the new forms of
literature—the yogini tantras.18 To understand these developments, it is help-
ful to set aside the traditional explanations for eventual reconsideration and in-
stead ponder whether the esoteric development is not better represented as an
extension of the medieval milieu. 
   ¯ ¯  ¯ 
   ¯  
One of the long-lived points of controversy on the nature of the Mantray ana
is its deﬁnition. Modern efforts have been sometimes either sectarian or na-
tionalistic, such as the attempts of occasional East Asian scholars to discredit
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 140 ---
later Vajrayana as corrupt and to portray their own tradition as pure. 19 Ideo-
logical deﬁnitions have lasted for some centuries. Some deﬁnitions of esoter-
ism—or, more broadly, tantra—include the presence or absence of mantras, of
the yogins’ self-visualization as a divinity, of the presence or absence of man-
dalas, and so forth. The problem with these traditional efforts is that they tend
to rely on monothetic appraisals, such as Tsongkhapa’s very popular deﬁnition
that everything identiﬁed as “tantra” must involve the visualization of oneself
as the Buddha. 20 This particular formula was questioned almost as soon as it
was voiced. Already in 1420 c.e., Ngorchen Kunga Sangpo (1389–1456) chal-
lenged this model in two works dedicated to the examination of texts classi-
ﬁed as kriya- or carya-tantra.21 Ngorchen was able to show that a great many
works, both simple and complex, do not mention such a visualization yet still
must be included in the esoteric canon. Also somewhat misleading are ety-
mologies of tantra as derived from the root √tan (to stretch or weave). Al-
though the word certainly can mean this, other semantic values are more ap-
plicable to the period and matrix of activity. 
It should be clear from developments in cognitive science that polythetic
category constructions (or analogous models) are the primary vehicle for hu-
man decision systems. Thus we should ﬁnd a set of variables that both meets
tests of the evidence and ﬁts the historical context for the rise and development
of tantric Buddhism. 22 Polythetic categories may be used to describe a single
genus, but they are constructed to identify prototypical examples that operate
as cognitive reference points. They provide an interrelated web of parameters
that serve in aggregate to deﬁne speciﬁc kinds of category. So, the category
“bird” is deﬁned by prototypical birds—perhaps jays, robins, or cardinals—and
observes the variables of feathers, beaks, ﬂight, warm-blooded, clawed feet,
laying eggs, and so on. The important contribution of polythetic category con-
struction is that the presence or absence of a single variable does not defeat the
inclusion of an item into the category. Thus we have ﬂightless birds (pen-
guins), nonprototypical birds (emu), and so forth. In addition, other animals
lay eggs (snakes, platypus) or have beaks (octopi), but their dissatisfactory re-
lationship to the prototype or their possession of insufﬁcient variables pre-
cludes their inclusion in the category. 
Sometimes such categories are constructed around a speciﬁc metaphor,
such as the articulation of airplanes imitating the function of the bird. Thus
there are prototypical airplanes (perhaps, Spirit of St. Louis, Douglas DC-3,
Spitﬁre), but the category is elastic enough to include early types (biplanes/
triplanes) or atypical examples (B-2). Interestingly, these patterns demon-
strate that the early instances of the category (archaeopteryx, Wright Flyer) are
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 141 ---
overtaken by later examples that come to constitute the prototypical forms in
cognitive category formation and linguistic expression. Moreover, in this
analysis we must be careful not to confuse the metaphor with the entity em-
ulated, as the unsophisticated have sometimes, upon seeing an airplane at a
distance, referred to it as a funny bird. Nor should we extrapolate on the so-
cial base that generated and developed such a metaphor, for ornithologists do
not build airplanes nor do aeronautical engineers discuss the mating behavior
of birds. Within the metaphor, other models or functions may also be implied
or included in a shifting series of negotiations, as in the case of passenger jets
or reconnaissance aircraft. An airline passenger may never reﬂect on the aviary
inspiration of aircraft and see herself simply as a tourist on a bus or a ship that
ﬂies. These do not negate the metaphor, but they do compromise its purity
and obscure its basic themes, even when there is no question of its inspiration.
Finally, metaphor development can occur incrementally or quickly, depending
on the social circumstances. The technological and ideological distances be-
tween Leonardo da Vinci’s ﬂying machine (1498) and the Wright Flyer (1903)
were slight, despite the lengthy chronological span of over four hundred years.
The reverse is the case for the distances between the Flyer and the Me 262
(1942), the ﬁrst production jet aircraft; ideologically they are quite distant but
chronologically they are less than forty years apart. Yet the subsequent devel-
opment of airplanes following the Me 262 resumed its incremental pace. 
Prototype theories have been challenged by alternative models of category
formation.23 Wittgenstein, for example, in discussing the formulation of uni-
versals, ﬁelded the analogy of “family resemblances,” in which the members of
a family collectively share characteristics that are identiﬁable despite the indi-
viduals involved.24 In a different direction, cognitive psychologists have artic-
ulated the manner in which features might be bundled together into cate-
gories. Developmental psychologists, for their part, have indicated that the
causal relationships between the features of a category play an overwhelming
role in child development. In an interesting series of experiments, Keil was
able to show that children tend to build categories by examining causal rela-
tionships that are domain speciﬁc and understand that the difference between
a category and its metaphorical representation is a difference of causal do-
mains.25 Just as important, as a child matures, the features associated with a
concept increase as well, so that a rich relational association develops. The net
result of these theoretical and experimental positions is that esoteric Buddhism
could be examined for a conceptual framework that invokes a rich web of
causal and relational associations, one that grows and becomes increasingly re-
ﬁned and complex as time passes. 26
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 142 ---
Fortunately we only need read the texts and examine the rituals to deter-
mine that Mantray ana has built into it a sustaining metaphor, one that has
been somewhat neglected by both traditional and modern scholars outside In-
dia. Yet it appears that the central and deﬁning metaphor for mature esoteric
Buddhism is that of an individual assuming kingship and exercising dominion.
Thus the understanding of such terms as tantra in Buddhist India would in-
voke, ﬁrst and foremost, the idea of hierarchical power acquired and exercised
through a combination of ritual and metaphysical means. Based on this pow-
er, the varieties of understanding and of personal relationships become sub-
sumed to the purposes of the person metaphorically becoming the overlord
(rajadhiraja) or the universal ruler (cakravartin). It is the Buddhist version of
the early medieval feudalization of divinity seen in the Puranas and elsewhere,
applied to the Buddhist path by its ritual enactment in which either monks or
laity may participate. 
As the central forms are explored in some depth—consecration, self-visu-
alization, mandalas, the esoteric acts—we will see that many had their origins
elsewhere. In its coalescence around the metaphor, though, esoteric authors
drew from and redeﬁned many ritual and meditative structures. The conse-
quence is that the different practices were synthesized into a nexus whose
overarching narrative was that of divine kingship in the early medieval feudal
world of India. This nexus and narrative as a deﬁning metaphor satisﬁes poly-
thetic (or feature bundle) category construction, since the elements of assum-
ing kingship work in coordination, while no one of them is essential to the
deﬁnition. Thus neither self-visualization nor the use of mantras nor the coro-
nation ritual nor the actions of the initiate nor any of the other attributes of
the esoteric path have in and of themselves the capacity to sustain or defeat the
category. Such a deﬁnition is necessary, for many texts or rituals lack one or
another of these attributes, but are decidedly esoteric in tone and performance.
Conversely, almost every attribute occurs in some way in texts and rituals that
are not esoteric, but that in retrospect may be understood to have contributed
to its formulation.
It is astonishing to realize that so many signiﬁcant terms found in the stan-
dard esoteric ritual manuals and the Buddhist tantras have political and military
signiﬁcance as well as religious, and the bivalence or paronomasia of these terms
in aggregate is extraordinary. Indians of the era certainly must have understood
this fact. We should recall that this is the period in which poets like Da ndin
would demonstrate their skill by composing such double-entendre works as the
Dvisandhana. This work was so paronomasic that it supposedly embodied the
storyline of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata simultaneously.27 Likewise,
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 143 ---
Raja$ekhara and his early tenth-century contemporaries valued paronomasic
words (dvyarthapada) to the point that they were exempt from faults of poetic
use applying to other kinds of words.28 Thus the metaphor of the esoteric med-
itator becoming the Rajadhiraja is sustained through the multiple forms of rit-
ualization that are equally applicable to kings and tantrikas. Let us for a moment
juxtapose the operative terminology in both the act of securing kingship and the
esoteric metaphor:29
Before we continue to explore this metaphor, a word of caution may be
expressed. It appears to me that, especially in the case of the siddhas, other
metaphors come into play as well. Even in the monks’ cases, though, the im-
perial model is associated with other metaphors: cleansing the body, the in-
spiration of celestial goddesses, the Buddhist soteriological path, life in the
monastery, the creation of art, and so forth. After all, the monks retained
their status as monks, with the requirement that they adhere to the vows of
the Vinaya, the recitation of rules every fortnight, ordination, and so on. As
Mahayanists, they also took the vows of the bodhisattva, received bodhisatt-
va ordination, and envisioned themselves as saving all beings through their
practices. The esoteric system acts as a third level to the monastic life, in
 ⁄        
The monk obtains consecration
[abhiseka] from his preceptor
[vajracarya] so that he takes
pride in himself as a divinity [de-
vatabhimana] and will be given
dominion over a circle of divini-
ties [mandala], of different fami-
lies [kula]. He comes into the
company of yogins with spells
[mantrin] so that he can employ
their secret spells [guhyamantra].
He is protected by Vajrapani,
the general of secrets [guhyakad-
hipati]. He becomes authorized
to engage in ritual behavior [kar-
ma] that varies from paciﬁc [$an-
tika] to destructive [abhicaraka].
The prince obtains coronation
[abhiseka] from his priest [puro-
hita] so that he is recognized as
composed of fragments of divin-
ity [devam$a] and will be given
dominion over a circle of vassals
[mandala] of different lineages
[kula]. He comes into the com-
pany of his counselors [mantrin]
so that he can make use of their
conﬁdential counsel [guhyaman-
tra]. He is protected by the head
of the army [tantradhipati]. He
becomes authorized to engage in
royal behavior [rajakarma] that
varies from paciﬁc [$antika] to
ritually destructive [abhicaraka]. 

--- PAGE 144 ---
which the others are not discarded, but all are somehow integrated into
the regimen. 
In my reading of the material, however, I have been consistently impressed
by how these other issues are subordinated to the paradigm of dominance, hi-
erarchy, and regal power. They are placed in a relationship to a paradigm of
power, most fundamentally expressed in medieval feudal form. It is not so
much that other models are not brought into play from time to time but,
rather, that the point of reference for the different themes continues to be the
feudal monarch. In some ways, this is similar to the manner in which other
events and groups within medieval society were required incessantly to nego-
tiate with the king in his domain and become subsumed under his aegis. As a
Buddhist form of the s amantization (or feudalization) of divinities exhibited
in Puranic literature, so we may recall that the divinities remained gods even
while they became represented as kings, just as kings remained rulers even
while they were declared divine. 
 (ABHIS. EKA )
The relationship between the initiatory ritual of the abhiseka and the corona-
tion ritual of kingship is explicit and, in many ways, determinative of the im-
plicit political model of the Mantrayana, although neither ritual system has re-
ceived the attention it merits. In the Buddhist case, part of the problem has
been the nature of the sources, which survive principally in manuscript form
or in published Tibetan and Chinese texts.30 In the case of secular coronations,
the few documents from the early medieval period have been generally neg-
lected in favor of Vedic materials, with notable exceptions.31 Law’s survey, for
example, indicates that the Agni-purana breaks coronation into rituals per-
formed the day before the actual coronation (aindri-$anti) and the coronation
day itself. The latter rituals include (a) homa; (b) bathing of the prince with
earth from places in the kingdom (mrttika-snana); (c) sprinkling by ministers;
(d) sprinkling liquids by Rg-veda and Sama-veda Brahmans and the rajapuro-
hita; (e) sprinkling of water from a pitcher by the rajapurohita; (f) rites by Ya-
jur-veda and Atharva-Veda Brahmans; (g) being shown auspicious items; (h)
crowning; (i) presentation of ofﬁcials to the prince; (j) payment of fees to the
Brahmans and a coronation feast; (k) the royal procession through the capital;
and (l) the return to the palace and distribution of gifts to the people. 32
Substantially the same ritual is presented by Bhatta Laksmidhara, the chief
minister of the Gahadvala monarch Govindacandra, in the Rajadharmakanda
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 145 ---
volume of his Krtyakalpataru, a legal digest composed in the second quarter of
the twelfth century. There, the old Kashmiri *Adipurana is taken as the pri-
mary source, with an alternative version using R ama’s coronation in the Ra-
mayana as the model.33 A similar structure is also exhibited in the Visnudhar-
mottara-purana, studied by Inden, as this text provides the most lengthy
treatment of abhiseka in Puranic literature.34 Inden’s analysis is especially clear
in showing the appropriation of sections of the old Vedic Rajyasuya rite, their
transformation and integration into the larger Puranic cosmos, so that the king
is the centerpiece of the ceremony. He is not the passive patron of a Brah-
manocentric performance of a lengthy Soma ﬁre ceremony, as the Vedic sys-
tem had emphasized.35
Not all Buddhist abhiseka rituals, however, are indicative of the coronation
paradigm. It appears that the earliest use of abhiseka as a meditative ritual is in
the visualized form of a puriﬁcatory baptism. The ﬁfth–sixth century “Yoga
Treatise from Qïzïl,” as it has been called for lack of a surviving title, indicates
in many places that a meditator (yogacarabhiksu) visualizes or receives visions
of various seated and standing Buddhas sending out light rays. These are of-
ten mediated through a woman formed of the various elements, such as space
(aka$adhatumaya stri). The light rays return to strike the fontanel of the yogin’s
head, pass through his body, and reemerge to encounter the world. 36 This
brings pleasure and puriﬁcation to the meditator and cleanses the world. Like-
wise, a text reputedly translated by the famous Kuchean translator Kum araji-
va between 402 and 412 c.e., but probably composed in China, the Ch’an mi
yao fa ching (Scripture Teaching the Secret Essence of Meditation), discusses
an analogous visualization. Here the meditator sees the Buddha’s mysterious
“true body” of the thirty-two marks and eighty characteristics, holding a vase
ﬁlled with water that looks like nectar in ﬁve colors. The water is poured on
the head of the meditator, ﬁlling his body, purifying it of afﬂictions, and lead-
ing his mind to liberation.37 Similarly, the apocryphal Kuan fo san mei hai ching
(Scripture on Contemplating the Ocean of Buddhas) has meditators visualize
the entry of medicine into their bodies, so that they are puriﬁed of afﬂictions
and physical difﬁculties.38 None of these fourth–sixth century texts so much as
mentions the analogy of the prince’s receiving his coronation from a king.
Rather, like the bathing (also termed abhiseka) of the Buddha’s statue during
the celebration of the Buddha’s birthday in the month of Vai$aka, the bathing
of the disciple during abhiseka demonstrates the cleansing of adventitious im-
purities from a form inherently pure. Even in the context of proto-tantric texts
like Atikuta’s 653/54 Dharanisamgraha, the model employed for consecration is
either puriﬁcatory or mythic, rather than secular. 39
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 146 ---
About the same time as these cleansing rituals, if not before, the corona-
tion ritual became part of Buddhist discourse but in the mythic context of a
bodhisattva’s becoming the successor to a Buddha. The Lokottaravadins in the
Mahavastu understood Maitreya to be the crown prince (yuvaraja), following
in the footsteps of %akyamuni, who is the Dharmar aja. With the early Ma-
hayana scriptures—particularly the LaNkavatara and Da$abhumika-sutra—the
mythic coronation ritual became ﬁrmly embedded in the narrative of a bod-
hisattva’s assuming the tenth stage. There, he becomes “one who has obtained
his coronation” after a truly cosmic event, in which all the Buddhas of the ten
directions shower him with light.40 The myth builds on the idea that a crown
prince exercises power even while waiting to become the ruler of the kingdom,
but the myth is also completely embedded in the cosmological time periods
that the Mahayana saw as the era of maturation for such a bodhisattva. The
metaphor, however, remains incomplete in Buddhist praxis, since it was en-
tirely relegated to the bodhisattvas at the tenth level. There was no actual rit-
ual that recreated the narrative relation of the Buddhas to the bodhisattvas.
Curiously, it was the late ﬁfth-century Consecration Scripture, as Strickmann
called the Kuan ting ching, that is our earliest source for the Buddhist employ-
ment of this myth in the lives of real masters and disciples, even though this
text is clearly a Chinese apocryphon. 41 We can surmise, based on the mythic
precedents and the form of the coronation ritual, that Indians had employed a
similar form at some point, but the ﬁnding of a Chinese ﬁrst instance is in-
triguing. Here there can be no doubt about the metaphor involved, for the text
is explicit that the ritual is performed for the disciple in exactly a manner anal-
ogous to the investiture of a prince into the affairs of state. 
Within the esoteric texts of the late seventh and early eighth centuries, the
coronation ritual is articulated in short chapters that frequently appear as sup-
plementary to the larger ritual agenda. The texts tend to emphasize the use of
mantras and the elaboration of ﬁre ceremonies (homa) for the purposes of the
four esoteric activities. For example, one of the earliest—if not the earliest—
description of the consecration ritual in a ma ndala is found in the I tsu fo ting
lun wang ching (? *Ek aksarabuddhosnisacakravarti-sutra), reputedly translated
by Bodhiruci in 709 c.e.42 The consecration contains elements normative to
the later ritual systems—throwing the ﬂower in the ma ndala, obtaining the
mantra and image of a divinity, and so on—but much of the ritual parapher-
nalia and explicit metaphorical identity is missing. Indeed, the consecration is
but a member of the list of essential rituals for the transfer of spirituality be-
tween master and disciple.43 Closely analogous is the entry for the abhiseka in
the Susiddhikara, said to be translated by %ubhakarasimha in 726 c.e.44 The
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 147 ---
primary purpose is association with the homa, so that the rituals that will over-
come the various obstacles to ritual action can be performed, especially the fe-
rocious ritual of the magical murder of enemies (abhicaraka). Again, the ex-
plicit metaphors associated with kingship are missing, as well as the items that
this metaphor requires. 
By the early eighth century, however, we gain a sense of the increasing im-
portance of the consecration and a relatively systematic development of the
metaphor it holds. Perhaps most indicative is the naming of an entire scrip-
ture in honor of the relatively brief mythic and ritual associations of a conse-
cration episode related below. The Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra is a text
mentioned by Haribhadra (who lived during the reign of Dharmap ala, c. 775–
812), by Buddhaguhya, and entered into the surviving Tibetan imperial regis-
ter of the library at the Denkar palace.45 The work is far more developed in its
articulation of the importance of the consecration ritual and explicit in the
metaphor involved and why:
Now, O possessor of the vajra, this Dharma of vajra has been explained
[for] you, and the vajra arisen from meditation has been actually placed in
your hand by all the Buddhas. So, from today, all the magical ability of Vaj-
rapani in the world is just yours. It is yours to tame those insufferable be-
ings harming the Dharma and to kill those afﬂicted with anger—that is why
the guides of the world have given you the vajra. In the way a Universal
Conqueror [cakravartin] is coronated that he might achieve dominion, in
this same sense it is said that you have been consecrated Adamantine Intel-
lect so as to be King of the Dharma. 46
Other early esoteric works, such as Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra, also
supported the explicitly imperial significance of the abhiseka, and mid-
eighth-century commentators like Buddhaguhya interpreted the text accord-
ingly.47 The panoply of imperial coronation was eventually to find its way
into the ritual process as its metaphorical matrix became increasingly em-
phasized. Buddhaguhya’s approximate contemporary, Mañju $rimitra, articu-
lated a number of consecratory moments in the larger coronation ritual: con-
secration with water (jala), with a crown (mukuta), with a vajra, with a bell
(ghanta), with the adamantine discipline of Mañju $ri (mañju$rivajravrata),
with the mantra, to become a teacher (acarya), through the elimination of
defilement, with gnosis (jñana), in body/speech/mind, and through the con-
ferral of a new adamantine name (vajranama). Thus the successful candidate
emerged as the Buddha himself and became the King of the World, as seen
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 148 ---
in the statement at the beginning of this chapter. 48 Even the standard ad-
monition that those having secured abhiseka should continue to receive this
ritual often—either physically or in meditation—also has its roots in norma-
tive Puranic strategies. The Visnudharmottara indicates that the king is to re-
ceive a shortened version of the coronation ritual daily before holding court
and seasonally before battle. 49
The initiate’s (mantrin) accouterments were fundamentally royal as well,
and it will come as something of a surprise to those familiar with the modern
Shingon and Tibetan ritual equipment that at least some medieval Indian eso-
teric masters employed medieval-sized implements in the performance of
these ceremonies. In the most lengthy discussion I have seen, the early eighth-
century Subahupariprccha indicated that vajras were to be between ten and
twenty inches in length (about 25–50 cm.), and made of heavy metals (gold,
silver, copper, iron), stone, human bone, and so on. 50 These “thunderbolt
scepters” were therefore formidable weapons (kuli$a), as vajras were consis-
tently termed in esoteric literature, and they closely resembled the size of vaj-
ras depicted both in the Gandharan sculptures of Vajrapani and in an eighth-
century Vajrapani statue from Kashmir (Figure 2).51 In these venues, weapons
the length of the forearm are frequently depicted, and the musculature of the
Herakles/Vajrapani iconography leaves little question but that he was to rep-
resent the foremost of heroes in Gandh aran Hellenistic representations. One
statue, the Hadda Herakles/Vajrapani, has even been shown to reﬂect Alexan-
der’s imperially sponsored school of Lysippos. 52 The subsequent episode of
Vajrapani’s abhiseka in later esoteric literature is one of the most widely rec-
ognized mythic events in the esoteric corpus, and the Vajrapanyabhiseka-tantra
builds on this recognition. All these isolated instances suggest a wider ritual
understanding of vajras as representing the staff of martial ofﬁce (danda) for
Vajrapani and for those who follow in his footsteps in their own coronations.
While we must defer examination of the subsequent development of abhiseka
in the noninstitutional texts, it is clear that in the consecration ritual of insti-
tutional esoterism, the imperial paradigm was supreme.
With the abhiseka, many of the esoteric scriptures—particularly those
designated as yogatantra—maintain that the disciple is to envision himself as
the Buddha. Again, we see a practice whose early form was protective rather
than royal, and again the search leads to Chinese apocryphal literature. The
seventh chapter of the fifth-century Consecration Scripture is apparently the
earliest text that explicitly asks a meditator to envision himself as the Bud-
dha, with all the thirty-two marks and eighty characteristics; this teaching is
there called the “Mah arsidharma,” the teaching of the Great Sages. 53 The
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 149 ---
figure 2 Vajrapani with the Ritual Vajra of Royal Ofﬁce.
Kashmir, c. eighth century. Brass with silver inlay,8 3/4 × 5 in.
© The Cleveland Museum of Art, 2001, Gift of George Bickford, 1971.
Reproduced by permission.

--- PAGE 150 ---
practice, however, was a subterfuge to get the five great spirit kings of the
different directions to protect the monk, rather than constituting an empha-
sis on the spiritual identity of monk and Buddha. Unfortunately, there seems
to be some discontinuity between the system articulated in the Consecration
Scripture and that found later, in terms of both content and time, as Indic
materials on self-visualization do not reemerge for another two hundred
years. With respect to content, the balance of our normative descriptions of
self-visualization indicate that the individual conceives of himself as the
sacramental person (samayasattva) while the gnostic person (jñanasattva) is
drawn from the realm of space; the two persons generally have the same
form, particularly in the later materials. 54
Where did this system of self-visualization come from and why is it not
present in all forms of esoteric ritual? I initially had considered that self-visu-
alization might be a particularly civilized form of spirit possession, especially
since siddhas had close connections with both tribal and lower caste peoples
where possessive behaviors are frequently encountered. However, none of the
practices associated with spirit possession—ecstatic behavior, shaking of
limbs, loss of consciousness, self-mutilation—are encountered in descriptions
of self-visualization within the tantras or other esoteric texts. Despite the rec-
ords of spirit possession (ave$a) by young children employed in Buddhist ritu-
als, there can be no doubt that these practices were strongly distinguished from
the formal meditation of the Mantrayana (utpattikrama).55 Moreover, the de-
scriptions of self-visualization as the Buddha or other tantric divinity are en-
countered in esoteric texts before the rise of siddha literature, by two or so dec-
ades (c. 700 c.e.). We conclude here that a connection with marginalized
populations or tribal peoples cannot be afﬁrmed on the evidence. 
Instead, the introduction and employment of self-visualization in the tan-
tras appear to stem from the consequences of the imperial model: a king be-
comes divine when he is coronated and given dominion over a circle of vassals
(samantamandala). According to Manu, for example, a king is made of “parts”
(am$a) of the various divinities: “Since a king is magically emanated from the
various bits of the lords of the gods, he thus has dominion over all beings,
through his brilliance.”56 During the early medieval period, India and South-
east Asia saw the rise of the “devaraja” cult, in which the king claimed to be a
form of %iva whose “subtle inner self” (suksmantaratman) was found in a divin-
ity housed in the royal temple, established in the center of the capital. Kulke,
who has done the most extensive work on this royal cult, maintained that kings
ruled in the name of %iva as the Lord of the World (loke$vara) to establish le-
gitimacy, particularly necessary in the case of kings who had usurped the throne
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 151 ---
and could rely only on the “charisma of ofﬁce,” in Max Weber’s terminology.
Once the relation of being a part of the deity through coronation had been ac-
cepted, the mythos of divinity extended to the king, so that an “attack on the
king would be tantamount to an attack on the rule of %iva.”57 In his critique of
Kulke’s theoretical structure, however, Pollock pointed out that multiple levels
of culture are implicated. The spread and development of divine identity ritu-
als might be understood as a central moment in the larger process of investment
in the aesthetics, literature, art, and other aspects of a cultural model of em-
bodied divinity in the form of a king.58
Although Kulke’s data are primarily drawn from the eleventh century, evi-
dence for this extension is at least as old as the Manava Dharma %astra and is
visible in inscriptions from the seventh century, such as in Ravikirtti’s 634–635
c.e. panegyric to Pulike$in II’s Chalukya lineage. There, divine attributes are
accorded the Chalukyas: they are beyond human (amanusatva) and equal to In-
dra (%akrakalpa), and they do not die but, instead, desire the riches and power
of the lord of the gods (sure$vara-vibhuti-gatabhilasa).59 Likewise, seventh–
eighth-century Kamandaka describes the king as “divinity on this good earth.”60
Twelfth-century Laksmikara justiﬁes all this to his lord Govindacandra with a
quotation from the Naradapurana, “How could he not be divine—for with his
speech a king turns an impure man pure, and each day he is with both the pure
and impure?”61
If divinity of the king was placed and veriﬁed through his coronation ritu-
al at the hands of his priest, so too the apotheosis of the monk came about
through his consecration at the discretion of the esoteric master. Some of the
esoteric scriptures neglected to afﬁrm this apotheosis—as diligently noted by
Ngorchen Kunga Sangbo—but not for ideological reasons in the construction
of esoteric categories about the tantras and their meditative manuals. Rather,
the neglect was a simple consequence of the rapid development of the litera-
ture (and their attendant practices), as well as the high degree of regional and
personal variation in their evolution. Not all of the consequences of the ap-
propriation of the coronation ritual were understood with the ﬁrst perform-
ance of the ritual, and we still observe ambivalence in some literary materials,
which vacillate between a system of regal empowerment and a hermeneutic of
cleansing the candidate’s deﬁlements. 
Whoever should but see this ma ndala, the nature of Dharma, he is re-
leased from all fault, even if he has committed the five heinous crimes of
immediate retribution, even if he is of bad character or weak-minded. 
Mañju$rimulakalpa62
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 152 ---
Puriﬁcation of these faults neither required nor suggested the divinity within
coronation, and Buddhist monks’ skepticism about the ostensibly “divine” be-
havior of real monarchs may have been a factor in these texts as well. How-
ever, even in Pur anic coronation manuals the themes of the king’s liberation
from fetters and his puriﬁcation from deﬁlements are expressed. 63
 . .      
If the critical investigation of esoteric Buddhism has been hampered by an ex-
cessive emphasis placed on the postenlightenment doctrine of spiritual/tempo-
ral duality, perhaps this is most evident in the study of mandalas. The idealiza-
tion of the ma ndala has become part of popular cultural parlance in Europe
since the time of Carl Gustav Jung’s absorption of early medieval Indian and
related Tibetan or Japanese forms of religious iconography. Yet Jung, even
though so afﬁrmative on these visual representations, warned of the actual study
of Asia. Since Jung, many scholars have been seduced by his explicit gnosticism,
which maintained that the spiritual plane inﬂuences mundane reality, and not
the reverse. While we may be sympathetic with one raised in the atmosphere of
religious strife in and around nineteenth-century Switzerland, we cannot afford
to emulate Jung’s disinterest in the historical development, form, and employ-
ment of mandalas since the second half of the seventh century.
Institutional Buddhist esoterism, in particular, can both accept the credit
and bear the responsibility for the development of the meditative ma ndala
form. Mandalas are implicitly and explicitly articulations of a political horizon
in which the central Buddha acts as the Rajadhiraja in relationship to the oth-
er ﬁgures of the ma ndala.64 In their origin and evolution, religious ma ndalas
represent a Buddhist attempt to sanctify existing public life and recreate the
meditator as the controlling personage in the disturbing world of Indic feudal
practice. The other Buddhas and bodhisattvas live within or in proximity to his
palace (kutagara). They assume their positions based on his will and through
the agency of his bestowing coronation on them. They reﬂect his entourage in
their own segmentary entourages, and they are ultimately dissolved into him,
demonstrating their subordination to the veracity of his existence. At the bor-
ders of some ma ndalas live the demons, snakes, and other beings of marginal
existence in the great charnel grounds. When a monk receives his coronation
into the ma ndala, therefore, he receives explicit authority to engage and ma-
nipulate phenomenal existence. His action represents the Buddhist institution
placing an agent into the idiom and metaphor of public life, embodying the
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 153 ---
monastic institution’s reaction to a predatory feudal system by emulating its
form while subverting its goals. Thus the mandala represents a spiritual “state,”
a word that exhibits the paronomasia of both a mystical condition and a polit-
ical reality in English as mandala does in Sanskrit.
Previous scholars have observed that the idea of the ma ndala was in some
sense already implied in the mythology of the pure land in which Buddhas and
bodhisattvas reside. The Susiddhikara mandala, for example, depicts the rela-
tionship between three Buddha families (kula) (Tathagata, Vajra, and Padma)
in a manner that mirrors the Mahayana scriptures’ assignment of direction to
the Buddhas and their ﬁelds—%akyamuni in the center, Aksobhya in the east,
and Amitabha in the west.65 The earliest mandalas provide a schematic synthe-
sis and formalization of their respective Buddha ﬁelds. Moreover, Yamada has
demonstrated that the language in the Mahayana scriptures discussing the pure
lands of the Buddhas has been developed based on prior statements of heaven-
ly paradises (svarga) found in some of the older Upanisads, like the %veta$vatara,
Katha, and Mundaka Upanisads.66 Schopen has also determined that the pure
Buddha ﬁelds—especially Sukhavati of Amitabha in the west—may function as
a generalized religious goal (or result), somewhat independent of a cult of de-
votion normally associated with these Buddha ﬁelds in East Asia.67
However excellent their Buddhological discussions may be, most scholars
have avoided the meaning of ksetra, the “ﬁeld” in Buddha ﬁeld. Contrary to the
neutral and sanctiﬁed sense offered to date by the designation ﬁeld or land, the
term ksetra clearly indicates a domain in which political power and inﬂuence
are wielded. Perhaps the most widely distributed discussion of a ﬁeld (ksetra)
in Buddhist works is found in a passage, incorporated into different scriptures
in both Sanskrit and Pali, that discusses the origin of kingship in the forma-
tion of the world. The myth depicts beings from the Abhasvara heavens grad-
ually becoming dissatisﬁed with their ethereal existence, becoming attracted to
food and clothing, and ultimately ending up born on earth. However, they lack
order. They then elect a king, Mahasammata, so as to avoid chaos, and devote
a portion of their produce for his maintenance. At this point. the etymology of
“noble” (ksatriya) and “king” (raja) are offered, since Mah asammata was the
ﬁrst of each; it was said that a ksatriya is one who is the lord of the ﬁelds, since
he protects them from harm.68
The etymology is a play on the words “noble” (ksatriya), “ﬁeld” (ksetra), and
“protect from harm” (ksatac trayate), and at ﬁrst seems specious, as do so many
of the Indian hermeneutical etymologies. Yet this is different, for the terms
ksatriya and ksetra are linked to another term, ksatra. Ksatra is the universal
potential for political or military power invested in ksatriyas, much as the cos-
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 154 ---
mic power behind mantras (brahman) is invested in Brahmans. Ksatra is that
which authorizes the warrior class to rule and legitimizes their exercise of pow-
er. It is the reason that the nobles may accept a portion of the goods and serv-
ices of other castes; ksatra also bears with it the responsibility for the mainte-
nance of law and order in a speciﬁc domain. Edgerton has already noted, in
fact, that the association of ksatra and ksetra is so close that one is frequently
interchanged with the other in Buddhist texts. 69 So ksetra should be under-
stood in the sense of the “domain” (rather than ﬁeld) over which the Bud-
dha—as the preeminent ksatriya and lord of that domain—presides with the
dominion (ksatra) of his Dharma. The utopian world of the “pure Buddha do-
main” is accordingly articulated, not through the values of liberal modernity
but, rather, through a model already invested in feudal systems and in which
all domains require dominance. The Buddhist pure domain is actually much
more similar to the autocracy of Plato’s Republic than to the blithe anarchy of
Marx’s utopia. 
The relationship of pure lands to the esoteric ma ndala, therefore, supports
the identity of mandalas as articulations of the Buddhist response to the early
medieval military and political situation. Even in its external form, a ma ndala
expresses a much modiﬁed form of the ancient Indian theory of polity: the
proper relationship between a would-be conqueror (vijigisu) and his proximate
states. Our earliest surviving document on state ma ndalas is the Artha$astra,
ascribed to the Mauryan theoretician Kautiliya, but most probably composed
in the ﬁrst or second centuries of the common era (Figure 3). 70 In that work,
the prospective conqueror is admonished to consider the states in immediate
relationship to him: those in front alternate between those that are his enemies
or their allies (ari, arimitra, arimitramitra) and those that are the conqueror’s
allies (mitra, mitramitra).71 Behind is a similar situation with enemies (parsn-
igraha, parsnigrahasava) and allies (akranda, akrandasava) alternating. To one
side (which is not speciﬁed in the text) is the middle (madhyama) state, which
can be inﬂuenced in one or another direction, and the neutral state (udasina),
which can also either stand aside at times of belligerence or be brought into
the equation by procedures extending from diplomacy to sedition. Beyond the
rather transparent afﬁrmation that the Artha$astra depicts somewhat paranoid
kings ruling states continually struggling with one another, it is excessively
theoretical in that it fundamentally conceives of state relations among border-
ing states as solely antagonistic. 
In distinction to this early model, actual medieval Indian political practice
rewarded states that erected relations with vassals (samanta, raja,m andale$a)
who governed client buffer states between the powerful patron state and its
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 155 ---
real antagonists. As a standard of comparison, the Imperial Guptas had a more
centralized bureaucracy, where governors of the various provinces (kumara-
matya) were appointed, served for a term, and were reappointed from the cap-
ital, although this system was not always applied through the entire domain.
They were attempting to move in the direction of the modern nation-state,
with its civil apparatus, chain of command, and loyalty to the centralized na-
tional purpose, as had the Mauryas before them. 
However, in contrast to conditions under the Gupta, regionalization and
decentralization were hallmarks of early medieval polity, wherein a powerful
 ⁄        
figure 3 The Mandala of States According to Indian Political Theory.
Courtesy Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto

--- PAGE 156 ---
nation was equipped with a surrounding mandala of vassal states.72 For exam-
ple, the Bhaumakaras in Orissa surrounded themselves in the eighth century
with the vassal states of the %ulkis, TuNgas, Nandobhavas, Bhañjas, and per-
haps the Nalas (Map 3). This group of vassals was both subordinate to the
Bhaumakaras and dependent on them for support and protection. Similarly,
the defeat of Har sa by Pulake $in II in about 632 c.e. was proclaimed a great
Chalukya victory. Har sa’s “lotuslike feet were touched by the light emitting
from the jewels in the crowns of his armies of vassals, rich in unlimited power,”
and when Har sa was defeated, so was his ma ndala of vassals. 73 Thus the
supreme ruler or overlord was bounded not by enemies, as depicted in the In-
dian theoretical system, but by a supporting network of polities that fan out and
are tied to the principal state and one another through systems of loyalty, ex-
change, services, and so forth. Not all vassals were the recipients of territory—
except perhaps in a ritual sense—and some seem to have allied themselves with
superior powers as a means of self-preservation.74 In this way, the most power-
ful states are buffered from direct contact with one another; it is the subordi-
nate princes that must suffer the continual low-level conﬂicts at their borders. 
The problem of the early theoretical description of state relations has be-
come mirrored in modern ideas contested in the past few decades. Sharma ar-
ticulated a model in which the early medieval period is described as feudal, a
description that has been disputed ever since.75 Because of the difﬁculties with
the terminology of feudalism, Fox proposed the application of Southall’s mod-
el of a “segmentary state” to cover state organization and relations during the
medieval era. A segmentary state is a political system with numerous centers,
each of which has separate administrative systems, frequently clan-based;
power is wielded by a single overlord whose subordinates in the lesser centers
recognize his authority through ritual means. 76 Perhaps the principal contri-
bution of the segmentary model is the demonstration that subsidiary centers
of political authority each have their own executive apparatus, so that the gov-
ernmental functions are individually administered by these centers, with no di-
rect control by the overlord’s own administration. Because of their relative au-
tonomy, these subsidiary centers may segment off and form new alliances with
related states or may even reverse the relationship, becoming the overlord to
its former ruler. The recognition of this reality has motivated political histori-
ans like Stein to discuss the difference between “core” or “nuclear” areas and
“periphery” vassals. Thus, the samantas’ allegiance to a speciﬁc overlord in any
direction is purely opportunistic and subject to subversion by another power.
Indeed, the Artha$astra describes as desirable the separation of a ma ndala of
vassals and allies from a king, to be seized by the conqueror. 77 The paradigm
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 157 ---
occasionally functioned in real life, with various twists. For example, the Can-
dellas had been vassals (samantas) of the Pratiharas, yet turned their lords into
their own vassals when the opportune moment arose. 
The segmentary representation has certain advantages and disadvantages.
In some respects the segmentary state appears to be internally analogous to
the model of the administrative circle (prakrtimandala), as found in the Artha-
$astra, the Manava Dharma %astra, the Nitisara, and elsewhere. Authors like
 ⁄        
map 3 Early Medieval Orissa.
Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto

--- PAGE 158 ---
Kamandaka maintained that every country possessed seven essential elements:
the king, ministers, kingdom, forts, treasury, military forces, and allies.78 The-
oreticians declared that each country had all seven of these, and the relation-
ships between superordinate and subordinate states were based as much on
their similarity as on anything else. However, like the segmentary model, the
administrative circle is an essentialist paradigm, which does not recognize dif-
ferentiation, modiﬁcation, development, decline, or division. The historical
insularity of both representations should not be surprising. The segmentary
explanation derives from anthropological literature, where historical aware-
ness is secondary, while the administrative circle is a product of Indian tradi-
tional culture, which understands itself as embodying eternal legal structures.
Beyond that, the segmentary model has the theoretical difﬁculty, already rec-
ognized by Chattopadhyaya, that it is a better tool to explain the fragmenta-
tion of relations between states than their enduring associations throughout
difﬁcult periods.79
One of the distinct advantages of the term feudal, as it turns out, is that it is
a legal term and identiﬁes not simply political arrangements but land tenure and
authority as well, something the segmentary model was not designed to do. Yet
the term feudalism carries such historiographical baggage that it seems to re-
quire some qualiﬁcation, and Chattopadhyaya has brilliantly suggested the term
“samanta-feudalism” to indicate the political structure of early medieval society.
The term samanta is standard nomenclature within the epigraphs and literature
of this period, and Chattopadhyaya’s suggestion certainly has the merit of inte-
grating indigenous terminology into our historiographical lexicon. In reality, the
designation samanta is only one of many employed—also including hierarchical
levels—such as mahasamanta, mahamandale$vara, mandale$vara, maharaja, and
raja.80 These were all used to indicate various levels of subordination to a lord,
who was often given the title Great King of Kings (maharajadhiraja) or Over-
lord (paramabhattaraka), and who maintained a circle of subordinate quasi-
states (samantacakra, samantamandala). As a hybrid term, moreover, s amanta-
feudalism has the further merit of extending beyond simple polity and of
embracing the larger cultural horizon, where guilds and priests were invested
with both land and legal authority on their territory, further indicating the
process of regionalization or localization of power. 
When we turn from these developments to Buddhist mandalas, the similar-
ity is obvious (Figure 4). Buddhist mandalas involve a central or nuclear system,
yet the subsidiary sets in the various directions (four, eight, or more) each con-
tains its own internal order and each is capable of becoming the center item if
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 159 ---
the need should arise, sending the previous center to the periphery.81 Thus if the
candidate during the coronation ceremony throws his ﬂower onto Ak sobhya,
then he would become a member of the adamantine family (vajrakula) and
Aksobhya would assume the central place in the mandala for the practice of that
individual. The Sarvatathaga-tatattvasamgraha, as well, describes the produc-
tion of the ﬁrst ma ndala shortly after Vairocana had become Buddha, that is,
 ⁄        
figure 4 Trailokyavijaya Mandala, showing the arrangement of
Buddha families. Courtesy of Loskesh Chandra and the International Academy
of Indian Culture.

--- PAGE 160 ---
almost immediately after he himself had been consecrated. Vairocana then at-
tracts a number of personages, beginning with Samantabhadra, who is coronat-
ed with a crown whose jewels are the bodies of all the Buddhas and is subse-
quently consecrated with the name “Vajrapani” (scepter-holder). After this, all
the other thirty-six ﬁgures of the mandala are consecrated with names conferred
on them by Vairocana, before they are placed in their position in the mandala.82
A closely similar process is related in the Sarvadurgatipari$odhana-tantra.83
This is precisely the method observed by an overlord towards his well-re-
spected vassal: the coronation ceremony for the samanta is performed with the
Rajadhiraja in the position of patron (yajamana) while the vassal is the one be-
ing coronated. By this means, the vassal is ritually installed and secured in a
locale under the authority of the R ajadhiraja. Such a pattern is quite different
from that observed when a prince assumes the position of R ajadhiraja, for
then the overlord is both patron and central performer of the coronation rite.
Examples of exactly this ritual relationship are found widely in the early me-
dieval period. The sixth-century Maitrika king Dronasimha, for example, was
consecrated as the vassal of his overlord, who was probably one of the latest of
the Imperial Guptas. 84 Likewise, Cakr ayudha was installed as the king of
Kanyakubja by Dharmap ala in the late eighth century, as a symbol of the
Pala’s supremacy over North India. In both instances, the Rajadhiraja acted as
the patron while the samanta was coronated at his pleasure and under his au-
thority. The subordinate vassal sometimes operated under the direction of the
crown prince (yuvaraja), who was also coronated with his father as patron—
this is analogous to the position played by various ﬁgures in Buddhist ma n-
dalas, such as Vajrap ani or Mañju $ri with respect to the Buddhas Ak sobhya
or Vairocana. 
Accordingly, Buddhists derived their mandala forms and functions, not so
much from the theoretical treatises of Indian polity as from their immediate
observation at the disposition and execution of realpolitik in their environ-
ment. They did not take direct recourse to the ideology of the Artha$astra and
analogous literature. Instead they obtained this vision of reality by observing
the actual relationship of the overlords and their peripheral states, which in-
cited this vision of reality. Indeed, the Buddhist mandala is a classic analysis of
the system of s amanta feudalism in early medieval India, all sufﬁciently sanc-
tiﬁed for the monastic community. The application of this model at the inter-
section between the political and religious domains is well illustrated in the
629 c.e. Botad copperplate grant of Dhruvasena of the Valabh i Maitrikas.85
There, Queen Du dda’s penchant for the construction of monasteries is de-
scribed in terms of her having constructed a “ma ndala of monasteries.” The
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 161 ---
application of this term indicates that the political diction of a circle of vassals
in the seventh century was coming to be applied to a circle of religious struc-
tures. Queen Du dda occupied the center of the circle, while the monasteries
protected her periphery and were sustained by her authority. 
Construction details and vocabulary for the mandala are directly connected
to the architectural heritage of palace construction as well. Indeed, the term for
the residence of the divinities of the mandala is exactly that employed for pal-
aces and pavilions in medieval architectural manuals, with the architectural ter-
minology for them almost identical. The central Buddha resides in a pavilion
(kutagara), which has entrances in the four directions and ornamented corners
in the intermediate directions. The entrances are dominated by arched gate-
ways (torana), in the shape of scepters (vajra), and guarded by an adamantine
wall—a fortress of religiosity. Internally, there is an adamantine redoubt (vajra-
pañjara) protecting the lord and his families. Although the term vajrapañjara
came to be interpreted by Tibetans as an impenetrable canopy (rdo rje gur), the
term initially indicated a cage or citadel that could not be penetrated, and the
Harsacarita uses the term as a metaphor in its identiﬁcation of Har sa’s body
with speciﬁc parts of the citadel. 86 The clear association of Buddhist ma ndala
terminology with palace architecture is equally evident when we compare man-
dala ground plans with those depicted in such medieval treatises as the Maya-
mata. Here, the arrangement of the palaces, pavilions, and halls closely resem-
bles the Buddhist ma ndala idealization. Their similarity is obvious when set
against the structure and terminology of temples (mandira) dedicated to Brah-
manical divinities or monasteries (vihara) for Buddhist monks.87 Not only are
these latter designs dissimilar to ma ndalas, but the terminology could not be
more distinct. Meister’s review of medieval North Indian temple architecture
establishes a lexical base for dissociating these temple plans from the Buddhist
mandala architecture.88 Nowhere in mandala discussions are found descriptions
of a sanctum sanctorum (garbhagrha), a single entrance through an assembly
hall (jaNgha), or other speciﬁcs evident both in the literature for the period or
in surviving temples from the seventh to eleventh centuries. 
We might wonder whether sufﬁcient attention has been given to the value
of some of the terms associated with a mandala as well. For example, the des-
ignation “family”—observed in the Buddha families in the center and cardinal
directions of the ma ndala—is not a precise rendering of the Sanskrit word
kula. Although there is some variation according to locale, in the Gangetic val-
ley a kula indicates not just a clan (gotra) or a speciﬁc lineage (vam$a) but a clan
or lineage situated in a speciﬁc residence. In the medieval period, the term kula
speciﬁcally had the value of direction and locality attached to it, to the point
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 162 ---
that the term was extended even earlier in the Manava Dharma %astra to iden-
tify the plot of land a kula could cultivate.89 Similarly, Brahmanas of the same
gotra belong to different kula, depending on where they have their residence—
indicating a determinative sense of place-speciﬁcity. 90 Seventh-century Bud-
dhist usage may even have applied this designation to small funerary st upas
where lay supporters located the ashes of their deceased, which would indicate
their postmortem residence according to familial association. 91
In the Buddhist ma ndala, a kula is not just a family with speciﬁc charac-
teristics but one located in a certain area and in a speciﬁc direction. That area
occupies a section of the great “palace” (kutagara) of the king of the domain,
and the king provides consecration to others so that they might be placed in
a speciﬁc area of the domain, with their own entourages, identities, and so
forth. One statement on the relationship of family to place is found in a chap-
ter expressing a ritual of time and domain of activity (ksetrakalavidhi) in the
Mañju$rimulakalpa:
Thus, the mantras appropriate to the eight families are situated in the eight
directions. Indeed, mantras from the Buddha family are accomplished in
the north. 
Mantras from the Lotus family ﬁnd their accomplishment in the east.
Based on the southern direction, mantras from the Vajra family succeed. 
There is a treasury in the west, so that the Jewel family is in the inter-
mediate direction. Success is considered among the places in the northwest. 
Moreover, there is the yaksa family in the southwest. In the southeast is
seen the family of the heroic %ravakas, for accomplishment (of their
mantras) is achieved in those places there. 
In the northeast direction, the highly esteemed family of the Pratyeka-
buddhas is located, for accomplishment is achieved for them in the places
there. 
In the lower direction, all the worldly mantras achieve success. And
these mantras enter the earth’s plane among the eight families (bringing
success to them). 
Above are broadcast the supermundane mantras of Usnisa. Those mantras
there come to accomplishment spoken by the Cakravartin Buddha.92
This array contains many curiosities, such as the nonstandard assignment of
families and directions, when compared with materials achieving popularity in
lineages of greater currency in Tibet and Japan. However, the importance of
these kinds of statements is clear: speciﬁc mantras bestow success on deﬁnite
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 163 ---
populations principally in special locales. Thus, kula are families indelibly as-
sociated with spatial arrangements and their placement in certain areas. 
The localization of qualities and behavior is an important way to view the
world, and in India it is aligned with ritualized conduct. This relationship be-
tween direction and conduct is frequently voiced in the tantras and schema-
tized in terms of both positive and negative qualities. Thus persons falling into
the Vajra family tend to have an especially violent nature, as opposed to the
greater benevolence in the Padma family, and so forth. Even the directional
associations are open to a shift in perspective, and the discussion changes from
scripture to scripture. The Vajra family is normally placed in the east, for ex-
ample, but in this quotation the Mañju$rimulakalpa speciﬁcally locates it in the
south. The author of this section did not care for those southerners, evident-
ly, and elsewhere in the chapter the author speciﬁcally locates the sinful
brethren (papakarmin) in the southern direction.93 All the qualities associated
with the directions may be altered and transmuted as well, but the method of
change is entirely determined by the assignment of family and direction. 
Going beyond the normative family designations, at the periphery of the
mandala we ﬁnd those on the margins of society, often depicted in the pollut-
ed zones of the cremation grounds that are considered in detail below. Here,
though, the worldly beings and the cemeteries represent those in early me-
dieval India on the periphery of caste life—those without a noble family. 94
They were condemned to live beyond the borders of the encampment or of the
city, near the cremation ground or even beyond it. 95 Accordingly, these pol-
luted zones of potential chaos deﬁned the borders of the spiritual state of the
mandala, even as they deﬁned the boundaries of regional cities or polities. And
just beyond the polluted borders, the entire mandala is surrounded by a wall of
ﬂaming vajra. This protective and impenetrable wall of vajra is the extension
of the scepter wielded by the king to demonstrate dominion against those de-
monic beings who would disrupt the law (Dharma) of the lord. The vajra wall
is the limit of order, which extends outward from the lord in the center and
ensures the correct conduct of those in family congregations, and the worldly
beings included in the circle of protection.
In service of this kingdom, the lord has recourse to the various activities of
a king: the four tantric karmas or ritual events—the paciﬁcation of problems
($antika), the augmentation of supporters’ wealth (paustika), the subjugation
and control of enemies (va$ikarana), and the execution of criminals by magic
(abhicaraka).96 Normally, these are effected by the ﬁre sacriﬁce (homa) ritual,
and in the esoteric canon the homa rite establishes a ritual bond between the
ofﬁcient, the divinities propitiated, and the beings affected by the ceremony.97
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 164 ---
Some authors consider these four tantric karmas the lesser of mystical accom-
plishments, strongly differentiated from the great accomplishments examined
below.98 As time progressed, certainly, virtually all the esoteric ceremonies be-
came described as really soteriological in essential nature, and the homa was no
exception. Like the transformation of wood into ash, this interpretation em-
phasized the simultaneous transmutation of the personality afﬂictions into
forms of awakened being, by means of their puriﬁcation in the ﬁre of gnosis.99
Another direction, however, was to internalize the ﬁre sacriﬁce, so that it be-
came an inner visualization in which the yogic practices associated with psy-
chic heat or sexual yoga were described in a manner invoking the terminology
and associations of the homa.100 This latter direction was seen very early, but
apparently became especially valued by siddha exegetes in their discussions of
yogic meditation and breathing. 
Ferocious activity, such as that implicated in the rituals of magical execu-
tion, are in particular delegated to Vajrapani. In his description, the use of mil-
itary metaphors is explicit and sustained: he had always been called the “gen-
eral of yaksas” (yaksasenadhipati), those ambivalent tree spirits that continually
vacillate between specter and aide. 101 He also assumed the title Lord of the
Mysterious (guhyakadhipati). This title initially indicated that Vajrap ani was
the leader of a class of yaksas that were mysterious (guhyaka), although later it
came to denote that he was the lord of the secret mysteries.102 In some works,
the title is taken to indicate his activity in collection, recitation and protection
of the Sorcerers’ Basket of esoteric scriptures (tantra, vidy adharapitaka). He
guards against those inimical to the Buddhadharma, and his designations
clearly resonate with the medieval inscriptional Sanskrit use of the term “lord
of the tantra” (= master of deployment, tantradhipati) for a general ofﬁcer of
the military.103
Vajrapani is also the guardian of the vehicle of secret spells, so he protects
those possessing secret spells (mantrin). In this role, the yaksa general uses his
secret spells as a king employs secret counsel (mantra), and it is noteworthy
that the king’s counselors are identiﬁed as mantrins in Indian political nomen-
clature. Thus the secretaries associated with peace and war, the counselors of
state, and many of the royal inner circle were designated mantrins. The topic
was important enough for Lak smidhara to devote a chapter to secret counsel
in his compendium of Kingly Duty (Rajadharma), where he assembled quota-
tions from the legal and epic literature on the importance of the security of
state secrets, including Yajñavalkya’s afﬁrmation that the kingdom has its ba-
sis in secret state policy (mantramulam rajyam).104 Indeed, most medieval trea-
tises on statecraft, for example, the policy section from Bhulokamalla’s 1131c.e.
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 165 ---
Manasollasa, include discussions of the qualities required of the king’s
mantrins.105 This pun on the paronomasia of the term “mantra”—indicating
both the spells of the priest and internal decisions of a court—was sufﬁciently
signiﬁcant to be repeated by the early medieval Nitisara at least twice for its
(possibly humorous) simultaneous applicability to both the religious and po-
litical domains.106
  
This analysis of ritual remains incomplete without a consideration of the issues
of scriptural composition and institutionalization. The question of composition
is discussed elsewhere, but it is fair to say that the nature of Buddhist institu-
tional life inhibited composition in some individualistic form. Some of the
models proposed for Mahayana to date, such as that by Ray, have emphasized
visionary individuals in forests propounding new scriptures.107 In the case of es-
oteric literature, it is unlikely that isolated scriptures were developed outside a
social world, with monks—and eventually siddhas—composing works autono-
mously. Virtually all our materials on esoteric composition emphasize the social
environment, even in the cases of visionary revelation and inspiration. Unfor-
tunately, the majority of these references come in the form of siddha hagiogra-
phies, so we must put off for now consideration of the manner of composition
of the new scriptures. Instead, we turn to the quintessential monkish endeavor:
canonical compilation and exegesis. 
The monks who were creating institutional esoterism evidently considered
their scriptures central to the longevity of their institutions and needed to ar-
ticulate the values of authority and duty that could ensure scriptural transmis-
sion. This latter implies the issue of a canon of sacred authenticity, a body of
the holy law that guards against the negation of propriety and defends the
palace of the Dharmar aja against the attacks of those dedicated to its defeat.
The Mantrayana was the last version of Indian Buddhism to develop and sus-
tain a canon of scripture, long after the canons of the early schools or of the
Mahayana were veriﬁed as received authority by a larger or smaller segment of
the Indian community. Consequently, esoteric monks were required to build
on the previous models to the extent that they could, but the foundations of
their new categories of scripture required them and others representing the in-
stitution to formulate a new mythology of revelation. 
The ﬁrst esoteric canons were apparently little more than collections of
spells (mantra- or dharani-pitaka), and both the Mah asamghikas and the
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 166 ---
Dharmaguptakas among the early schools have had such collections attributed
to them.108 It is further clear that the early canon of spells was strongly asso-
ciated with the areas between Kashmir and Swat—the latter being the land of
Uddiyana or O diyana. Even the language of the surviving early literature af-
ﬁrms its association with places employing birchbark for manuscripts, notably
employed in these areas. 109 The Abhidharmako$abhasya contributes to this
sense of locality, mentioning two kinds of spells, one from the area of Gand-
hara (gandhari vidya) and one bringing visions of the future (iksanika vidya).110
We have no indication that any other area of the subcontinent managed to
represent its ritual phrases so effectively at such an early period. 
These mantra or ritual collections were doubtlessly put together somewhere
between the ﬁfth and seventh centuries, although collections of spells continue
to be gathered down until the present.111 This is the material that will come to
be designated as “proto-tantric” in critical literature, although it provides us
with a misleading sense that somehow these collections understood that they
were anticipating the later, mature system, which was certainly not the case. Be
that as it may, the nature of the early collections may be inferred from surviv-
ing works entitled the Dharanisamgraha (Collection of Spells), and the intro-
duction to *Atikuta’s *Dharanisamgraha indicates that is was considered a frac-
tion of a much larger Dharani-pitaka.112 *Atikuta’s work is an interesting
accumulation of rituals of protection, rituals relating to Amit abha’s pure land,
the consecration of disciples, and so forth. One or another of these compendia
may have been alternatively titled the Vidyadhara-pitaka (Sorcerers’ Basket), for
a spell from this latter work is quoted in %antideva’s %iksasamuccaya.113 A Sor-
cerers’ Basket seems to have been the source or inspiration for other surviving
collections, like the Vidyottama, although several of these texts, again like the
Vidyottama, show afﬁnities with siddha literature.114
By the mid-eighth century, some conception of an esoteric canon with
eighteen titles had evolved, although the precise nature of the earliest version
of this ostensible collection remains obscure. 115 Contained in the Chinese
Tripitaka is a work attributed to Amoghavajra, a work that purports to iden-
tify eighteen works of an esoteric compendium ( Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh
shih pa hui chih kue, T. 869). The list declares that they are from the V ajra-
$ekhara (or V ajrosnisa, Tip of the Vajra Scripture), indicating that the complete
text had eighteen subsidiary texts or sections within it. Apparently, the collec-
tion was conceived along the lines of the great Mahayanist collections, like the
Prajñaparamita (Perfection of Insight), which also contains multiple works.
Many of the items from the earliest list of eighteen remain obscure, but it is
evident that the list was supposed to include a few works that are relatively well
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 167 ---
known. Among these are the Sarvatathagata-tattvasamgraha, the Sarvabud-
dhasamayoga, some form of the V ajra$ekhara itself, the Ardha$atikaprajñapara-
mitasutra, some form of the Guhyasamaja, and the %riparamadya. 
Many questions arise as to the relationship of these works to the ones cur-
rently represented by the canonical translations or in surviving Sanskrit man-
uscripts. The descriptions given by Amoghavajra between 746 and 774 c.e.
leave much uncertainty about their correspondence to texts of the same or sim-
ilar titles. Most of the existing translations of these titles are from the eleventh
century or later, and few examples have survived from Amoghavajra’s list that
are actually rendered into Chinese during the T’ang dynasty. Amoghavajra’s
descriptions, for example, often indicate the number of mandalas in each text,
but the uncomfortable reality of many esoteric scriptures is that the ma ndalas
are described only partly or merely suggested in the received works. We are of-
ten left relying on the ritual manuals of later authors to assist us in under-
standing the ma ndalas, but most of these works were written long after
Amoghavajra’s life. Thus many of the entries by Amoghavajra simply do not
provide sufﬁcient information to ascertain the extent of the scriptures they
purport to describe or the texts closest to the sources he was representing. 
Beyond the nature of the available scripture lists, we can see the Indian
construction of scriptural categories, for our lists do not completely agree, ex-
cept on the magical number eighteen. The esoteric ideology of a version of a
canon in eighteen scriptures was an interesting and an instructive development
of the Indian fascination with organizing numerology, for the number eigh-
teen is seen in epic and Pur anic literature as well. 116 However, we should not
be seduced into believing that the various lists of the eighteen actually repre-
sented any universal esoteric canon that may have been collected, recited, rit-
ualized, and transmitted as a whole. Rather, each of the lists identiﬁes an es-
oteric canon according to representative proponents of the system in speciﬁc
locales or at selected times and operates as an ideology of canon, working off
the earlier Buddhist ideal. 
Embedded in the idea of a canon in Buddhism is the mythology of the
Buddha’s realization, scriptural preaching, its collection after his death, and
continued recitation by succeeding generations. Earlier Buddhist movements
had conceived of a scripture on the model of the Buddha realizing the truth
at the moment of awakening, following his defeat of M ara, the tempter. He
then took this awakening and preached a scripture to an audience at a spe-
cific time in a specific place; the story of each preaching was attentively at-
tached to the preface of each scripture. Immediately after the demise of the
Buddha, we are assured, the community recited the scriptures at R ajagrha,
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 168 ---
with Ananda responsible for the S utras, Up ali reciting the Vinaya, and (in
some versions) Mah aka$yapa relating the Abhidharma.117 Mahayanists build
on this model, so that the Buddha realized the truth of the Mahayana in a
different world system and generally in a different lifetime far earlier than the
historical %akyamuni’s time. New circumstances for the preaching of the
scriptures were articulated as well, so that the word of the Buddha was re-
ceived by an appropriate audience composed of the great bodhisattvas, like
Mañju$ri or Avalokite $vara. Mahayanists also fashioned various alternatives
to the standard scriptural recitation. One popular version depicts the convo-
cation of a million bodhisattvas at the cave Vimalasvabh ava, where Mañju $ri
recited the Mahayanist Abhidharma, Maitreya recited the Mahayana Vinaya,
and our old friend Vajrap ani recited the Mahayana Sutra. 
Perhaps the greatest problem with these competing mythologies was that
they were, at their roots, ﬁctive. While most scholars agree that there was a
rough body of sacred literature (disputed) that a relatively early community (dis-
puted) maintained and transmitted, we have little conﬁdence that much, if any,
of surviving Buddhist scripture is actually the word of the historical Buddha.
More persuasively, the Buddhist order in India might be considered the great-
est scriptural composition community in human history. Given the extraordi-
nary extent of the material passing at any one time under rubric of the “word of
the Buddha,” we might simply pause and acknowledge that Indian Buddhists
were extraordinarily facile litterateurs. Indeed, perhaps the interesting character-
istic of Indian Buddhism is its ability to develop and sustain a culture of scrip-
tural composition. This is no easy task, for it requires that the standards of au-
thentic scripture be ﬂexible enough to be met throughout the changing history
of the subcontinent. Yet these same standards must be sufﬁciently conservative
as to provide a sense of institutional continuity. We should acknowledge the
ability of Indian Buddhists to provide a balance between these incommensurate
requirements over the course of two millennia, producing in the process what is
arguably the world’s most extensive scriptural corpus. Institutional creativity of
this order, at this level, over this length of time, is sheer inspired genius. 
In the case of esoteric Buddhism, however, the institution ran into some
difﬁculties. For reasons that are now obscure, masters of the new revelation
did not elect to delineate a single myth for the authentication of the esoteric
scriptures. Instead, competing myths, often tied to individual scriptures, were
put forward. In fact, this may have been the strategy of the earlier Mahayanist
and Abhidharmika communities. If true, though, the process has become
clouded by the ﬁltering device of a coalescence of the stories into a greater nar-
rative, perhaps representing the manner in which consensus is eventually de-
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 169 ---
veloped between monastic communities in India. In any event, two esoteric
mythologies were eventually to succeed beyond most others, although we still
have many individual scriptures claiming an independent origin. One of the
myths of preaching involved King Indrabh uti of Odiyana (an early version of
this story is examined in chapter 6, as it is also an early siddha hagiography).
The story of the tantras’ preaching that was to have greatest resonance in in-
stitutional literature, however, was the myth of Mahe$vara’s subjugation by the
most important esoteric bodhisattva, Vajrapani.
Because it is an esoteric myth, it was appropriate for it to begin with a rite
of authentication, in this case the consecration of Vajrapani into his position as
protector of the Dharma and the forceful converter of recalcitrant foes. As a
mark of the esoteric method, the consecration of Vajrap ani as protector and
collector became a literary event, closely tied to the preaching of the esoteric
scriptures. It occurred in an episode celebrated in several scriptures, most no-
tably the Sarvatath agatatattvasamgraha and the Vajrapany-abhiseka-ma-
hatantra. Moreover, while Vajrap ani had a lengthy literary history in Indian
Buddhism since the time of his conversion by the Buddha in the area of Gand-
hara, for the esoteric system, an entirely new story is revealed.118 In the changed
narrative, Vajrapani is in fact the transformation of the bodhisattva Samanta-
bhadra, so well known in Mahayanist literature for his vows and aspirations on
behalf of all beings. Soon after the cosmic Buddha Vairocana (Figure 5)
achieved his awakening, he issued from his heart the “heart mantra” of all the
Buddhas: vajrasattva. Then, impelled by the benediction and miracles of all the
Buddhas, there formed a new bodhisattva in the form of Samantabhadra:
Out of the vajrasattva concentration, because it is exceedingly ﬁrm and en-
tirely good, formed a uniquely hard body in the form of Samantabhadra.
Then, having assumed its place in the heart of Lord Vairocana, it disclosed
this pithy verse,
Aho! I am Samantabhadra, the hard being of those self-originated. 
For, even though bodiless from my hard nature, 
I have attained the body of a being. 
So now the body of Samantabhadra, the great bodhisattva, descends
from the heart of Vairocana and appears seated on a lunar disk in front of
all the Tathagatas, requesting their command. 
Then, the lord Vairocana entered into the concentration called “the
pledge scepter of all the Tath agatas.” He acted so that every experience of
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 170 ---
figure 5 Sarvavid Mahavairocana from Nalanda.
Eighth to ninth centuries. Guilded bronze. National Museum, no. 47.48.
Photo courtesy of the American Institute of Indian Studies.

--- PAGE 171 ---
happiness and ease and all sovereignty would occur to protect those in the
realm of beings without exception or exclusion. He even acted so that they
would gain the fruit of attainment of the highest accomplishment in the un-
surpassed Mahayanist comprehension, which leads to the supernormal cog-
nition of the gnosis of equanimity of all Tath agatas. He did this with a va-
jra leading to the accomplishment of all those Tath agatas, a vajra that was
the pledge of all Tathagatas’ great means, power, heroism, and great gnosis
so that, for the welfare of beings, there would be the turning the Dharma
wheel of virtue, concentration, insight, liberation, and the vision of libera-
tion’s gnosis. Having consecrated that Samantabhadra with the coronation
of the turban and the jeweled crown composed of the bodies of all the
Tathagatas, Vairocana coronated him into the state of being the
Cakravartin of all Tathagatas and placed that vajra in his two hands. 
Thus, all the Tath agatas consecrated him with the name consecration,
by exclaiming, “Vajrapani, Vajrapani!” 
Then, the bodhisattva, the great bodhisattva Vajrap ani, proudly bran-
dishing the vajra in his left hand, carried the vajra at his heart with the yoga
of elevation, and disclosed this pithy verse:
This is the unexcelled vajra of accomplishment of all those Buddhas. 
It is I. It is the vajra consecrated into this vajra in my hand. 119
Vajrapani’s consecration was most particularly a prelude to his subjugation
of the preeminent of evil beings, Mahe $vara (%iva), whom he kills in combat
any number of times in any number of scriptures. 120 The most important
source of the myth, the section in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, has been
translated several times, so a simple summary here may sufﬁce. The story
opens with the cosmic Buddha, Vairocana, requesting that Vajrapani generate
or emit his adamantine family (vajrakula). Normally, this would be the begin-
ning of the establishment of a ma ndala, wherein the perfection of the Bud-
dha’s law can be understood. This time, however, Vajrap ani refuses the re-
quest. Different versions of the story provide variations on the rationale, but
the basic line is that Mahe $vara (= %iva) is deluding beings with his deceitful
religious doctrines and engaging in all kinds of violent criminal conduct. So,
Vairocana asks Vajrap ani to bring this evil character and his entourage into
compliance. He utters a mantra that drags them to his palace at the summit of
Mount Sumeru. Vajrapani orders them to comply with the Buddha’s doctrine,
and all but Mahe$vara submit. Mahe$vara replies that he is the lord of the uni-
verse and Vajrapani is but a pathetic tree spirit. The two challenge each other
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 172 ---
to acquiesce, and they engage in magical combat. After successive battles,
eventually Vajrapani is successful by means of his superior mantras and right-
eousness. Mahe $vara and his wife, Um a, are tread on by Vajrap ani’s feet,
which is the greatest insult in India as the feet are the most polluted limb. As
a result of his victory, all of Mahe $vara’s retinue, including his wife, agree to
become part of Vairocana’s mandala, and they are given back their names but
with the word “vajra” placed before each to denote their new Buddhist status.
They are bound by new vows and accept the pledge to quit their evil ways and
become good Buddhists. Mahe $vara is the sole exception, for he will not re-
lent. Accordingly he is killed, and his life transferred to another realm, where
he becomes a Buddha named Bhasme $vara-nirghosa, the Soundless Lord of
Ashes. In honor of the great victory over the demonic Mahe$vara, a new man-
dala is created of the gods and goddesses formerly in %iva’s service. The new
mandala is entitled Trailokyavijaya, the Victory over the Triple World, with
Vajrapani appearing in the center as the divinity Trailokyavijaya. 
The popularity and longevity of this myth of %iva’s humiliation and assassi-
nation is extraordinary and must be related to its context. An Indian Buddhist
of the eighth century would certainly have recognized this kind of episode, in
which the defeat of a demonic ﬁgure by a divinity occurs, for it is the stuff of
epic and Puranic literature. Whether the defeat of the buffalo demon Mah i$a
by the goddess Durg a or the destruction of the ten-headed ogre R avana by
Rama, the active defeat of a violent opponent is normative in Indian narratives.
This is, in fact, quite different from the passive defeat of Mara by the Buddha,
for %akyamuni is depicted in Buddhist hagiography as overcoming his nemesis
by equanimity, not through force. The snappiness of the dialogue employed in
the scriptures suggests that the Mahe$vara subjugation myth has been much in-
ﬂuenced by Indian storytellers who continue to travel around, alone or in small
troupes, and describe mythic combat using painted pictures on cloth hung be-
hind them.121 The fact that the story is sometimes explicitly associated with the
painting of its mandala reinforces this possibility.122
Indians, then, would read or hear the narrative with similar narratives in
mind. They would also have received the story with many of the terms sug-
gesting the structure of the ritualized combat in their world, with its chal-
lenges, self-aggrandizement, and disparagement of the opponent’s virtue. Af-
ter the conclusion of the combat, the ma ndala of one lord is captured and
subsumed into the mandala of the victorious lord by the activity of his gener-
al. Then, the new prince of the expanded ma ndala establishes the law (Dhar-
ma) within the new territory, much as Vairocana teaches the tantras at the end
of the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, once the territory is safe for Buddhists.
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 173 ---
After hearing the story, disciples would be consecrated into this new spiritual
state, in which they could meditate on themselves as identical to Trailokyavi-
jaya, with their feet treading on %iva’s deceased head and Um a’s breasts.123
This meditation recreates the total victory of the prince on the ﬁeld of battle,
dishonoring his slain enemy and taking the queen for his own. 
For our purposes, the most important factor in the consideration of these
myths is the recognition that they articulate a form of belligerence that is quin-
tessentially early medieval Indian. The narrative use of violence in the context
of Buddhist institutions allowed institutional esoterism to compete with
%aivism, to appeal to the worst instincts of the warlords of the medieval peri-
od and yet to delimit the nature of approved violence, in some ways ap-
proaching the description of a “just war” found within Aquinas. Buddhaguhya
is adamantly positive about the nature of violence perpetrated on the difﬁcult
to tame by the members of the scepter family (vajrakula), but the good va-
jracarya took myth as veridical and ritual as its reenactment. 124 The result of
the narrative is the reemergence of Dharma, after all—the release of obstruc-
tions to the pronouncement of the scriptures and the reafﬁrmation of univer-
sal salvation.
If the myth of the preaching of the esoteric canon was relatively well es-
tablished, its actual canonical parameters were not. The different lists of eight-
een (sometimes thirty-six) tantras remain artifacts of numerology and provide
only a moderate sense of the esoteric scriptural horizon. Perhaps another av-
enue to understanding, though, would be through a simple examination of
texts as they were invoked in literary or ritual appeals to authority. In fact,
whatever the ideology of canon articulated in the various lists, the canon as it
was actually employed in eighth-century institutions might best be termed the
canon in use. That is, there was a body of texts that were identiﬁed by acknowl-
edged bearers of the culture at discrete points in the hermeneutic process—
based on reference, commentary, and translation. Although each of these
works eventually found its way into some canon, they do not appear as a group
in any speciﬁc list. However, they certainly are individually identiﬁed as im-
portant in reference by some of the more inﬂuential monks of the eighth or
early ninth centuries. Such an esoteric canon in use in the eighth century doubt-
less included the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi,
the Vajrapanyabhiseka, the Subahupariprccha, the Amoghapa$a, the V ajravidarana,
the Susiddhikara, the *Ekaksarabuddhosni$acakravarti-sutra, the Sarvadurgati-
pari$odhana, the V ajra$ekhara, the Ardha$atikaprajñaparamitasutra, the Prajña-
paramitanaya-$atapañca$atika, the %riparamadya, and others.125 Most of these
were to be classed as kriya, carya, or yoga tantras by the tenth century, but such
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 174 ---
classiﬁcations are part of the selection process and remain ex post facto, seldom
demonstrated in the texts and rarely apparent in the composition of any one of
them. Each, in its own terms, proclaims its own importance and unequivocal
status as supreme within the esoteric dispensation. 
   
It should be emphasized that the scriptures and rituals of institutional esoter-
ism were supported, performed, interpreted, and transmitted by Buddhist
monks. Although the obvious success of these scriptures (and their propo-
nents) must be acknowledged, the scriptural classiﬁcations often applied to the
canon in use can inhibit our understanding of the process of composition and
are valuable primarily to determine later reception and employment. Thus the
problematic issue of how these texts came to be propounded remains obscure,
especially as it is apparent that the fountainhead for many of the practices and
doctrines of institutional esoteric Buddhism was outside the purview of the in-
stitutions themselves. Indeed, the afﬁrmation of purity sometimes taken by
East Asian esoteric representatives is belied by some of the content of their
own canonical scriptures, which reﬂect the siddha proclivity to cemetery ritu-
als, seduction rites, virginal spirit possession, and other varieties of antinomi-
an behavior. Rather, institutional esoterism both acted as a part of the com-
position process and deﬁned the hermeneutic of selection while the other
sources (siddha, tribal, lay, political) often lacked the sacred authority to pro-
nounce on behalf of a potential scripture. 
If the sources for many ritual systems were external to the monastic insti-
tutions, it is also obvious that monastic techniques were employed to make the
aggregate of the statements palatable. The above scriptures are frequently
framed or introduced with speciﬁcally elite monastic philosophical materials,
and the doctrinal or ethical statements certainly must have been composed in-
side the hallowed walls of Buddhist monasteries.126 Indeed, esoteric scriptures
and related treatises became some of the few places where speciﬁcally Bud-
dhist terminology and the development of new doctrines can be seen in the
eighth and ninth centuries. Yet, despite their continued proclamation of eth-
ical purity and condemnation of lapses of morality within the community,
monks also became increasingly attracted by the structures of Indian medieval
life. The texts themselves introduce to monks the themes of power, person-
ality, eroticism, violence in defense of the Dharma, spells, and the mythology
of absolute supremacy. 
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 175 ---
Perhaps the greatest curiosity in all of institutional esoterism is the monks’
utter disinterest in themselves as literary personas. Almost all of our hagio-
graphical literature is about and by siddhas (some of this literature is explored
in detail below). But this literary direction did not extend to the Buddhist
monks. By and large, we know their names, and, in a few instances, we know
where they lived. Almost none of our resources, though, indicate the em-
ployment of an esoteric ritual program at a speciﬁc monastery. We do not
know, for example, whether the great monasteries of N alanda or Vikrama$ila
employed esoteric literature and rituals in community-wide celebrations or in
the postmortem ceremonies of their abbots or muniﬁcent patrons. It is clear
that some reliquaries of selected individuals at Ratnagiri, for example, display
images of Heruka, M arici, or some other esoteric ﬁgure. 127 Some temples
were dedicated to esoteric divinities, such as the Sa mvara temple in N alan-
da.128 But we know neither how early such rituals were exercised nor the ag-
gregate involvement of the samgha. At most, we can determine that certain
monks, wherever they were, favored speciﬁc scriptures and inscribed these
tantras into commentaries. 
Probably the best exemplar of the new, emergent institutional esoterism is
Buddhaguhya. He not only became the preeminent exegete during the second
half of the eighth century but also, more than any other single individual, rep-
resented the conﬂuence of spirituality, esoterism, political insight, and promo-
tional skill. His ability both to attract and to decline an invitation from the
most powerful Buddhist ruler of the eighth century, Trisong Detsen of Tibet,
is a testament to his institutional aura.129 We do have some hagiographical ac-
counts of Buddhaguhya retained by Tibetans, the earliest probably being the
mention in versions of the sBa-bzhed (Testament of the Ba Clan). 130 In fact,
the text opens with the very brief mention that there was a failed mission to
get two scholars, Buddhaguhya and Buddha$anti, but that they were meditat-
ing on Kailasa and could not be brought. Certainly, we know that the attempt
to lure the good monks was sincere. A letter, purportedly the reply of Buddh-
aguhya to Trisong Detsen, has been preserved in the Tibetan canon. At the
beginning, the famous scholar relates his apologies for being unable to accept
the august invitation: 
You have sent [the religious envoys] Era Aro, Mañju $ri, and retinue, with
the best of wealth—silver and gold—to seek the Holy Dharma of India, so
that they might open a window to illuminate the deep darkness of Tibet.
As the veritable Buddhaguhya (one whose secret is the Buddha), it glad-
dens my heart that the Meridian of Royal Authority in the world, the one
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 176 ---
who has straightened the crooked ways of power within his administration,
the Supreme Lord in an unbroken stream of divine manifestations, the
Lord Trisong Detsen should order thus:
“Ride the high plain of Dharma, human and divine!” So he informed
Mañju$ri and Murita not to regard the great diseases forming through the
concentration of wind, bile, and phlegm in this heap of the blazing bejew-
eled body, or through the obstructions of 80,000 demons.
They have persevered, coming from such a high place to invite me there,
but I am powerless to go. The Bodhisattva, Arya Mañju$ri himself admon-
ished me, “If you go to Tibet, you will lose your life!” Even though I can-
not make the journey, I am sending the meditative instruction, my Yoga-
vatara, in response to the King’s presents.
Bhotasvamidasalekha, 1.6–9131
Both this letter and the content of Buddhaguhya’s works in the catalogue
of the Denkar Palace Library indicate that the scriptures he preferred were ex-
actly those supporting Buddhist institutional life. 132 Moreover, the received
hagiography of Buddhaguhya is maintained in the annals literature of the Ny-
ingma sect, this group having the strongest claim to the esoteric systems trans-
lated into Tibetan in the eighth to ninth centuries. Buddhaguhya’s hagiogra-
phy is employed to secure the legitimacy of one of their eight esoteric lineages,
designated the eight streams of early translations. The story works around the
importance attached to the eighth-century Tibetan king’s petition and his at-
tempt to lure the great scholar to the halls of his palace. As it is encountered
in a mid-fourteenth-century history, the hagiography promotes this Nyingma
version of the Royal Dynastic agenda:
The Third Stream of Nyingma Translations
The Dharma taught when Acarya Buddhaguhya went to Kailasa. As to the
chronicle of this great person:
There was an important kingly [ksatriya] lineage in West India. At one
time there was born to the king of this lineage a son. But the king thought,
“This son of mine is not a person worthy of acting in the world as the
teacher [Acarya] of men. Therefore, he should be put to the propitiation of
Arya Mañju$ri, who is the Lord of Knowledge. He must beseech Mañju $ri
to make him an Acarya.”
The prince was accordingly given a physical support in the form of a cast
statue about a cubit in height. He was given a vocal support of a lotus ﬂower,
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 177 ---
and a mental support of a container ﬁlled with milk. The king then impart-
ed to him the text of Mañju$ri’s meditation and sent him on to practice. Be-
cause the king had accumulated great merit, and because the boy was of the
ksatriya lineage, the prince accomplished his goal in only six days. The cast
image of Mañju$ri smiled and laughed, and so forth. The lotus ﬂower kept
fresh as if newly sprouted, and the milk seeped as if it were boiling. 
The prince thought, “I’ve been here propitiating Mañju$ri, but is it better
if I take this as some sort of accomplishment [siddhi]?” So he had his doubts.
Finally he said, “This god is nothing more than the Mara named Kalodayin!”
Just then, a large black bird emanated from the statue. It dipped one wind in
water, mixed it with earth and threw the mud next to where the teacher
[prince] was sitting. The boy then lost consciousness for a while. When he
regained his awareness, and took a look, the statue had faded to black, the lo-
tus had become old, and the container of milk seemed all dried out. 
[The prince thought,] “Now, this is the result of not accepting siddhi at
the appropriate time for it to be accepted. So, what was the fault? It was the
experience of doubt. From what was this the result? It was the result of hav-
ing learned too little. If there is too little learning, then it should be under-
stood as the action of M ara!” Aloud he said to himself, “This is I or some-
one like me.” So he asked permission of his father, and went to East India,
where he studied with ﬁve hundred scholars. Because his family was good
(being ksatriya) and as he had already propitiated Mañju $ri, he absorbed
without impediment all the learning of these ﬁve hundred Pa nditas. 
Now, because his family was good and by virtue of his learning, he col-
lected many goods and a great entourage, so that the distractions became
overwhelming. 
In response, he felt a feeling of renunciation. “If there is too much learn-
ing (so that all manner of people are attracted), then that should also be
known as the work of Mara. And that is I or someone like me.” In Kailasa,
there is the rookery in the golden cliff of the Raven Headed [God]. He
went there to practice meditation. 
At this same time, in Tibet there resided the Dharma protector, the
Lord Trisong Detsen. He heard that there was a learned Pa ndita from In-
dia in residence at Kail asa. So he sent about three liters of gold dust with
four messengers with an invitation: Lots aba Wa Mañju $rivarman, Chim
Shakya Prabha, Drenkara Mukhendra, and Tsangte Lektra. 
Buddhaguhya, however, replied, “I’ve made a vow to practice, and so
will not go to Tibet with you.” Still, they asked if they could receive the
Dharma, as he would not go back. “I’ll have to ask my chosen divinity if the
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 178 ---
time has come for me to teach or not,” Buddhaguhya replied. So he prayed
to his chosen divinity for three days and asked his question. The divinity
prophesied that the time had come and he may preach the Dharma. 
Buddhaguhya told his four Tibetan disciples, “Before the explanation of
the Dharma of the secret mantras, one requires the consecration.” So the
Acarya, by simply striking a few lines on the surface of Lake Manasarovar
that was laid out like a turquoise ma ndala, all of a sudden there was the
peaceful Vajradhatu mandala of the forty-two divinities clearly radiant, ap-
pearing in the sky before them. All the great disciples personally saw it.
Then the Acarya asked, “Do you want to ask the divinity for the consecra-
tion or me?” In their minds, they thought, “Since the god can disappear,
perhaps we should ask the god ﬁrst?” But then the Acarya snapped his ﬁn-
gers, and the entire group of divinities merged into his heart. 
“You red-faced demons from Tibet! You have such little interest in the
pledge between master and disciple! Only because there is something of a
connection leading to the teaching of Dharma that I will explain it to you.”
Having said this, he taught the V airocanabhisambodhi-tantra, the Sar-
vadurgatipari$odhana together with its practical manuals, his own Yoga-
vatara, along with the teachings of yoga. Furthermore, he transmitted the
internal esoteric works of the Net of Illusion , especially the Guhyagarbha
with its commentary. He also bestowed the Stages of the Path with their In-
structions, and his own Stages of the V ajra Path with Instructions. He also con-
ferred on many speciﬁc lesser instructions, such as the Great and Smaller
Nets of Peace , The Medium, etc. He also gave them the Dhyanottara along
with his commentary. In short, many of the teachings of the inner and out-
er secret mantras were translated. 
All the great disciples taught these to the king Trisong Detsen, and he
in turn taught them to Ma [Rinchenchok] and Nyak Jñ aanakumara. After
this, the lineage is said to be basically the same as the Düpado. 133
This very interesting hagiography is reﬂective of both Indian and Tibetan
themes, and it is difﬁcult to separate them from time to time. Some differen-
tiation between the two can be seen in the contrast between this fourteenth-
century version and the 1608 version of Taranatha, which is less historically re-
liable and more emphatic on the miraculous. 134 There can be no question,
though, that the description of his early life is a later addition, whether written
in India or Tibet. Moreover, some of the titles mentioned at the conclusion of
the story play no part in the normative materials by and about Buddhaguhya.
The names of the Tibetans sent to obtain his services are somewhat different
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 179 ---
from those mentioned in the letter, but the letter itself has some difﬁculties.
Even the identity of Kailasa as his residence cannot be veriﬁed. One colophon
mentions that he stayed in the Him alayas, but we do not know when Indian
Buddhists began making pilgrimage to that speciﬁc sacred mountain. 135 We
know that seventh-century sites, such as Jagre $war, outside Almora, were
erected before Buddhaguhya, and one of these may have been his goal. 136
The special accord given to Buddhaguhya’s family status in the work is
more difﬁcult, because we do not know the level to which caste played a part
in Indian monasteries. I know of no work or inscription that supports the idea
that caste invaded monasteries sufﬁciently to segregate monastic orders, as it
has done in Southeast Asia. We also do not know whether a proprietary cus-
tody of esoteric rituals was secured by caste, as has occurred in Nepal. How-
ever, the presence of Tibetans, Chinese, Nepalese, Burmese, and Indonesians
at the ﬂagship monasteries of later Indian Buddhism suggests that the im-
portance attached to caste, whatever it may have been, was not yet over-
whelming. In all likelihood, Indians offered those of high caste greater access
to education, rituals, and authority, as much because they came to the monas-
teries with a better background in all these skills and connections through
their caste afﬁliation as for any other reason. 
Most important for our purposes, though, is the recognition that Buddh-
aguhya’s syllabus was (even in the voice of later Nyingma apologists) associat-
ed primarily with the texts that are represented in his surviving corpus. Al-
though the Yogavatara does not appear to be extant, the other materials by and
large survive. It is unlikely, though, that he had much to do with the works of
the Mayajala, including the Guhyagarbha. These works were around—as were
other, more radical scriptures—but the selectivity of authoritative works en-
dorsed by Buddhaguhya is part of the dynamic that made monastic institutions
so strong, for his writing by and large afﬁrms monastic identity. Buddhaguhya
is attributed authorship of works on the Sarvadurgatipari$odhana, on the V airo-
canabhisambodhi, on the Subahupariprccha, on the Dhyanottara, on the Sarva-
tathagatatattvasamgraha, as well as others of the same focus. Beyond the works
he had commented upon, the texts he cites are as central to this facet of the
esoteric movement as those receiving the beneﬁt of his exegesis. 137
In fact, Buddhaguhya’s pattern of commentarial elaboration and textual
citation appears to deﬁne in some very basic way the category of institutional
esoterism. It was the process of scriptural appropriation, afﬁrmation, and com-
mentary that made the works acceptable to the larger monastic community.
He assiduously ties ritual elements to the standard nomenclature of the Bud-
dhist path, elaborating performative patterns in light of Buddhist philosophi-
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 180 ---
cal systems. 138 Furthermore, his ritual texts, based on these same scriptures,
ensured them a place in the menu of rites that stabilized the social relations in
the grand ediﬁces of later Buddhism. These ritual systems established perfor-
mative tracks that the monks could follow and, if the testimony of eleventh-
to twelfth-century Tibetan translators is reliable, increasingly occupied an im-
portant position in the monastic life.139 By that time, monasteries were to ad-
mit of smaller units—temples, really—in which the performance of speciﬁc
ritual systems were maintained: Samvara at Nalanda, Heruka at Ratnagiri, and
so forth. The beginning of this movement can be seen in the rites to Mahakala
as the kitchen protector, as reported by I-ching in the late seventh century. 140
Another major ﬁgure for whom some sense of identity is available was cer-
tainly %akyamitra. Assuming that it is the same author, the end of the com-
mentary to the classic Mahayana expression of aspiration, the Bhadracariprani-
dhanaraja, provides a hint as to his identity. The verse of benediction indicates
that the commentary was written by the intelligent %akyamitra for the purpose
of augmenting the %akya lineage.141 It is not clear from this reference whether
he is simply doing this transfer of merit as an act of piety to the lineage of the
historical Buddha or he himself was actually born into that family. I am in-
clined to the latter interpretation, for the %akyas were given a privileged posi-
tion through much of Indian Buddhist history and medieval monks certainly
had no compunction about identifying themselves as from that clan ( %akya-
bhiksu) from time to time. 142
The other data available on %akyamitra are from the beginning of his enor-
mous commentary on the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha. It is entitled the Kos-
alalamkara (Ornament of Kosala), perhaps indicating the country of his origin.
Assuming that he and the Bhadracarya-pranidhanaraja-tika author were the
same, then he must have been from the late eighth or early ninth century. He
was deﬁnitely one of the more important ﬁgures of that period who connect
several different personalities and their lineages. At the beginning of the Kos-
alalamkara is a most unusual autobiographical statement. 
At the good city [? Bhadranagara], with great faith I ﬁrst pleased the high-
est guru, Buddhasena, who has obtained great fame. I received his permis-
sion [to practice] and obtained the rituals and vows. From him, I learned
much and reﬂected on many teachings.
At KoNkana, Dramida, I$vara$risamaja [dbang phyug dpal ‘dus] I happily
served Dharmasena, and Dharmakara. 
At Sahya [Western Ghats], I prayed to Dharmavajra, of most excellent
name, and gave much service to U snisavajra.
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 181 ---
I then went to the source of qualities, O diyana in the north. There I
served King Indrabhuti, holder of the reality of the tantras’ meaning.
At Tagkye City [?] I happily relied on the Ko $alacara *Sthiramatibud-
dhyakara-$ilajña. But a fraction of method of the scripture that I realized
directly from the teacher’s own mouth, I have contemplated so that the
gradual worldly ritual of yoga, in accordance with the teacher’s [instruc-
tions] will remain for a long time. 143
In this instance, our conﬁdence about its authenticity is greater, simply because
it is from the scholar’s personal statement. Not only is his general exegetical
method quite conservative, but the above record accords well with what is
known from the few other surviving personal accounts. The activity in KoNkana,
the importance of Odiyana and the Western Ghats, and the foray into the south
all resonate with other late eighth- and early ninth-century sources. 
The net result of these and the other few indications of monks investigat-
ing the esoteric tradition are simple. First, the few exegetical personalities are
important exemplars of a much larger population of seminal ﬁgures from the
seventh to tenth centuries, all too few of whose names survive. We will con-
tinue to encounter important monks and siddhas about whom we know noth-
ing other than that their disciples were extraordinarily inﬂuential in the spread
of the new esoteric doctrine. Second, it is highly likely that some of these
names represent the actual identities of the authors of the Buddhist tantras, for
they were clearly central personalities in exactly the right places at the right
times. If we are seeking prototypes for those composing the new esoteric scrip-
tures as the Word of the Buddha, we need to begin with the teachers of the
ﬁrst commentators. Finally, the aggregate information on all of these individ-
uals is so meager as to be pathetic. In contrast to the more extensive hagio-
graphical works on the siddhas, our esoteric monks were disinterested in self-
promotion and certainly never captured the imagination of either monastic or
lay storytellers. This latter point is important, for if there were many more es-
oterically inclined monks than siddhas, then the public personas of the rela-
tively few radical siddha ﬁgures became overwhelmingly important in the pop-
ular presentation and proclamation of the esoteric dispensation. 
    
In our assessment of esoteric Buddhism as internalizing the political models of
medieval India, we should be wary of being seduced into a comfortable reduc-
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 182 ---
tionism, concluding that the esoteric movement diminished the Buddhist
leaders into sycophantic actors imitating the domain of mere politics. Instead,
we might observe the great litterateurs and teachers of North Indian monas-
teries trying to sanctify the world as they received and accepted it. This is not
to diminish the importance of patronage issues or the inﬂuence of the saman-
ta culture, but simply to afﬁrm that the mission of Buddhist cloisters was a
consensual effort at sanctifying society, much as the esoteric ritual system
sacralized the political metaphor. These monks tried to take, in another trope
of esoterism, the poison of belligerence and transmute it into the nectar of wel-
fare. They attempted to transform power and hierarchy into community and
congregation. Swimming in the sea of s amanta feudalism, they tried to see it
as an ocean of gnosis and to engage it in the creation of merit for all beings.
At least three factors were important in the sacralized esoteric formulation—
the Buddhist ideology of skillful means, the Indian understanding of meta-
phor, and the Mahayanist conception of radical transformation. Esoteric Bud-
dhists extended these items far past the previous Mahayanist parameters, and
this extension marks some of the difference between the exoteric and esoteric
directions. At the same time, esoteric monks brought the feudal rituals into a
world already governed by monastic rules and bodhisattva vows, so that the
initial development of esoteric precepts was not dramatic or crucial, but in-
stead a modest supplement to the existing pledges. 
When we look at Buddhist notices of skillful means, two things are strik-
ing. First, the appropriation of popular forms was driven by sociological reali-
ties. So, as informed Indian laymen become important in the religious life of
Buddhist India, contravening the earlier exclusive reliance on monks, Bud-
dhist scriptures are being written to reﬂect these realities. Thus, at about the
same time as Fa-hsien observed the authority and learning of the lay teachers
Radhasvamin and Mañju $ri in fourth-century P ataliputra, personalities like
them became embodied in the literary personas of Vimalakirti and %rimala.144
These ﬁgures could become learned, and ultimately accepted as Buddhist
teachers, for they were the end-product of the many changes in Indian eco-
nomic and political life over the preceding centuries. In this end, they stand in
contrast to previous virtuous laymen, from whom monks would never have
studied the Buddhadharma. However, the process of the Buddhist appropria-
tion and reformulation of phenomena emerging in the Indian sociopolitical
world appears to take at least some decades, even a century or more. 
Second, the doctrines of skillful means are posed as the recovery of what
had always been or the rectiﬁcation of a straying from the authentic reality. 145
Frequently, this is done with the idea that the authentic reality is eternal, as in
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 183 ---
the modern deﬁnition of Hinduism as the “eternal Dharma.” Moreover, we
also ﬁnd the idea that the straying from the norm has been accomplished by
the sequestering of the clergy from the larger movement; such is the supposi-
tion behind the “unique vehicle” of the Lotus Sutra. There the %ravakas are de-
picted as separating themselves from the great congregation, as they cannot
stand to hear the doctrine of this great Buddha Vehicle. Informing many of
these concepts is the fact that India did not really develop a model of the dis-
affected intellectual as the cultural critic, as happened in Europe since the time
of the Renaissance. What we know of Indian Buddhist monks is that they
tended to afﬁrm aspects of popular culture, whether in the early Buddhist ac-
ceptance of the doctrine of karma or the appropriation of homa as a viable av-
enue of religion. Monks not valorizing popular culture and secluding them-
selves from the Indian cultural horizon were understood as unskillful in
technique and inattentive to their missionary duty. Buddhaguhya himself
spent some of his exegetical capital demonstrating that the preaching of the
tantras had everything to do with attracting people of different temperament: 
“Most excellent work for the beneﬁt of others” means that the Buddhas
taught the various means by the entryways of the hand gestures, the
mantras, and the ma ndalas, all of which had been blessed by their inex-
haustible emanations.146
Nor was there a concomitant rejection of intellectuals by the Indian popular
culture, as has occurred in Europe and the United States since the Enlighten-
ment. Rather, our evidence suggests that there was a closer connection be-
tween Indian popular and elite culture, and this extended to the acceptance of
cultural cues from the political as well as the religious domains. We see this
even in the formation of the early Samgha, and it is well established that the
organization of the community was based in some part on the rules of order
already employed by the smaller republics, like the Licchavis and the %akyas. 
And many of these same ideas were also institutionalized as ritual meta-
phors. Certainly, in the above instance, emulating the constitution of a small
republic did not give the Buddhists political authority. Yet the special rela-
tionship of the Buddha to his %akya clan spilled over into the organization of
the order and privileged the position of that clan in the ensuing history of In-
dian Buddhism. Just as true, the visualizations and meditations of esoteric
Buddhism did not make a monk the overlord, but the developing relationship
between the great monasteries where feudal law was exercised and the lords of
the land made the metaphor all the more resonant. Monks found this image
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 184 ---
or ritual trope of power, authority, and freedom irresistible. They took it,
though, and ﬁlled it with the content of the Buddhist path. Thus the monk
still progressed on the path, but he did so as a hero, he did it like a king, he
did it like an elephant in procession, for the road to awakening was like an in-
exhaustible treasury, and the path lead to the impenetrable citadel of Vairo-
cana. All these metaphors were speciﬁcally employed by Buddhaguhya to ex-
plain the esoteric turn.147
Indeed, throughout Indian Buddhist life, ﬁgures of speech, similes and
metaphors, metonymy and synecdoche, and all the other aspects of the so-
phisticated Indian literary world have played a part. 148 Especially in the Ma-
hayanist literature, where such ﬁgures or examples are rife, Buddhists were at-
tentive to their use. Whether with respect to the nine metaphors for the
embryo of the Tath agata embedded in the mundane or the dozens of images
on the empty nature of phenomenal reality, Mahayanists have employed
metaphors or similes frequently to illustrate their messages.149 Often they used
poetic principles to explain questions of doctrine or its understanding, and just
as often these ﬁgures of speech were subject to rather subtle analysis. Sthira-
mati, for example, engages in a rather abstruse discussion on the exact appli-
cability of a poetic fancy in identifying two dissimilar items (a boy and ﬁre)
into a single image (an irascible [ﬁery] boy). The purpose is not to discuss or
demonstrate poetic sensibility but, instead, to vindicate the relationship be-
tween the underlying consciousness (alayavijñana) and the misconception of
self in either the individual person or the elements of reality, for the imper-
ceptible continuum must somehow resemble the falsely imagined soul. 150
For esoteric Buddhists, though, the difference is the ritualization of their
metaphors. They have viewed the external obsession with military prowess and
the manipulation of vassals whose loyalty might be justiﬁably questioned in the
shifting sands of medieval alliances. They have seen how princes decimated the
guilds, moved much of the population to the countryside, erected castles and
fortiﬁcations, and brought in %aiva ascetic orders to legitimize their self-ob-
sessed actions. Monks understood that others in the religious landscape sup-
ported in ritual and literature the apotheosis of the king and the samantization
of the gods. For them, the Buddhist path was still the content—and most of
the institutional tantras are explicit in this—but its ritualization put that con-
tent in a new vessel, with the accoutrements of power and a new, self-conﬁdent
authority. And because it was much the same content, and since it was con-
structed using building blocks largely present in advance (mantras, ma ndalas,
homas, etc.), the transition was relatively smooth, with a remarkable lack of
protest from others in the Buddhist community about the new turn to ritual.151
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 185 ---
A cynic might point to the appropriation of these models by monks as
a validation of his worst opinions about religious degradation over time.
However, it appears that the actual lesson is different. If one is to bring a
conscience to the system, then an engagement with the lethal forces of self-
aggrandizement is the only possible avenue. In his commentary to the V airo-
canabhisambodhitantra , for example, Buddhaguhya expounds on the virtue of
the practice:
The fruit for some, in their virtuous action in propitiating the mantras, is
that they perfect the world into something other than it was. For others, by
the power of their reﬂection and application, they are ripened [to Buddha-
hood] in this very life. 152
Therefore the ritualization of the public persona of the overlord is, among
other things, an attempt to impress it with a consensual sense of responsibili-
ty, replacing the license previously accorded. So Buddhaguhya could discuss
the blessing of the Buddhas in the same breath as validating the hierarchy of
the medieval world. 
Thus, for the monks—and, I would argue, for all Buddhists—the funda-
mental reason they could engage the world in this way is that they believed in
the transformation of personality. This ideal, called “fundamental transfor-
mation” (a$rayaparivrtti) in Yog acara nomenclature, was expressed philo-
sophically and doctrinally long before the advent of the esoteric system.
However, with the accelerated engagement of monks in the ideology of the
feudal universe came an equivalent acceleration of the employment of this or
similar terminology in meditative ritual. 153 Whereas a total of perhaps two
dozen important statements on the idea exist in Yog acara and related litera-
ture, I have not been able to count the number of esoteric scriptures and com-
mentaries that employ the notion—certainly many times the Yog acara to-
tal.154 We must keep in mind that the reason for such a distribution is that
the idea is displayed widely through the manuals of practice. Each time, for
example, a meditator is asked to visualize himself as a Buddhist divinity, the
stages of generation include a movement from a seed-syllable (bijamajtra) to
a divine symbol to the fully formed deity. At each moment of transformation,
the idea is that this represents a fundamental transformation, so reality—even
at the most exalted level—is subject to manipulation by the mind of the med-
itator. For example, %akyaraksita, in his Pithadinirnaya, describes the phe-
nomenon in the transmutation of internal veins into internalized forms of the
external pilgrimage zones:
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 186 ---
From the transformation of the letters like pum. , etc., we are to envision the
places—the pilgrimage seats [pitha], etc.—inside the empty spokes of the
cakras located in the head, etc. We should furthermore meditate that both
the pilgrimage seats and the veins inside them are fundamentally trans-
formed by the form of the divinity. This is similar to the way that pilgrim-
age seats in the external world are revived (and therefore transformed) by
the waters of rivers in their proximity. And in the same way the veins revive
the ﬁngernails, and so forth. 155
Here we ﬁnd a convenient association of many of the elements needed in the
emergence of esoteric Buddhism: the ritualization of external circumstances,
the identity of internal and external, the employment of metaphors in the
process, and transformation as the procedure for sanctiﬁcation. 
The last method for the sacralization of the feudal world was the simple act
of bringing its rituals into the monastic compound, where the rules of the
Vinaya and the vows of the Bodhisattva provided a sense of formal authority,
to which the new rite must be accommodated. Because monastic esoterism
was already based in an institution, dramatic new rules and legal procedures
were not required for the culmination of the new rites. For example, the
Mañju$rimulakalpa provides a rather lackluster statement of guidance to can-
didates after their consecration:
So! The secrecy of the pledge of the Great Bodhisattva, the True Prince
Mañju$ri, is never to be transgressed. You are never to produce great de-
merit. Nor are any of his mantras to be repudiated. No Buddha or Bod-
hisattva is to be contradicted and your master is to be propitiated. Other-
wise, there will be a transgression against the pledge, and the mantras will
not lead to accomplishment, where there may be found great merit. 156
This kind of modest list of commitments is found reinforced elsewhere, as
in the esoteric instruction on the bodhisattva’s virtue by %ubhakarasimha,
and they share a broad range of values that support and promote the monas-
tic path. 157
When such modest lists of requirements are contrasted with the highly for-
malized and well-deﬁned series of vows articulated in siddha communities—
examined in chapter 7—some of the differences in their organizations are ev-
ident. Because the siddhas had no overarching institutional culture in which to
become socialized, they appeared to need a much more structured agenda of
vows and restrictions. Not so the monks. The very act of moving the conse-
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 187 ---
cration and related rituals from the regal court to the monastic courtyard did
not absolve the monks of their monastic vows, even if they may sometimes
have been little more than a public posture. Nonetheless, Buddhist monastic
culture had erected an institutional dynamic that spoke of the need for re-
straint from erotic behavior and aggression, and all the monks would have re-
ceived instruction to that effect. 
Yet there is no denying that modeling the new meditative practices after
systems of political power was a perilous enterprise. Both the monastic en-
gagement of the feudal world and the meditative engagement of its ideal were
invitations to corruption by complicity. Most especially, the problem was that
of capture. How often can a monk visualize himself as King of the World,
erotic and powerful, without being captured by the fantasy of his own vision?
When the new scriptures explicitly proclaim that the individual can become
all-powerful in this one life, what perspective can be expected of a semiliterate
monk from a small village that has just been burned and had its wells poisoned
by the local warlord in a dispute over tribute? Faced with the burning of the
library at N alanda, would not the monks have wished for dominion and au-
thority in their world? 158 What would the newer disciples of Karu na$rimitra,
the martyr of Somapura, have said after their master was burned to death and
the monastery destroyed by the invading Ba Ngala army?159 They would surely
ask whether there were not some way to harness the power of Vajrap ani, the
General of Secrets, to overcome these armies and to rectify the barbaric dis-
plays of inhumanity. In the process they would, as the Mahakalatantra teach-
es, try to use magic and visualization to engage in battle with the forces of evil
and obtain success to rule the state. 160 Perhaps some Buddhists engaged the
practice of mandala and deity visualization in order to tame the ﬁres burning
in the time of the Kaliyuga, and some of them just as evidently became
scorched in the heat of their own imagined realm.
:  
   ¯   
Esoteric Buddhism coalesced in the special circumstances of the rise of saman-
ta feudalism in the seventh century c.e., a rise that was eventually reﬂected in
the new Buddhist terminology and ritual systems. The fact that the political
environment providing the basic model for esoterism did not itself emerge un-
til the late sixth to early seventh centuries assists the chronology of the mature
esoteric movement. Reinforcing our temporal parameters are the appearances
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 188 ---
of Buddhists in non-Buddhist literature, the translation of esoteric works into
Chinese, the testimony of Chinese monks, and the lack of any prior notice of
the mature esoteric system before the seventh century. Thus the Buddhist
tantric movement is a consequence of the new culture of military adventurism,
which brought the apotheosis of kings and their ma ndalas of vassals, with the
concomitant feudalization of all forms of Hindu divinities.
Esoteric Buddhism, though, was not simply a reaction to the new environ-
ment, but stemmed from the palpable sense of institutional duress. The de-
cline of guilds and international trade relations, the rise of militant %aivism
and its capacity to appropriate patronage, the decline of women’s involvement
in Buddhist praxis, and the loss of a speciﬁcally Buddhist intellectual center all
set the institutions adrift. Institutional Buddhism responded by contracting
into regions of strength and into ediﬁces mimicking feudally grounded
fortresses, which mirrored in legal behavior the activities of the kings they cul-
tivated. Little wonder that the esoteric tradition should emulate in ritual form
and ideological substance the most potent narrative of the period—becoming
the Supreme Ruler of a circumscribed spiritual state. They imitated the struc-
tures and rites of those who were the ﬁrst Lords of the Ma ndalas, the petty
lords and regional rulers of the newly empowered ﬁefdoms that gained power
and authority as the old order eroded in the former centers of culture. 
In this process, the decision systems had shifted along with the cultural
landscape. Unlike the durable message evident in the introduction of Bud-
dhism into such places as Gandh ara, early medieval Buddhists elected to
substantially modify their message. 161 Among their reasons was a search for
patronage by new class of rulers, a shift in perspective that paradoxically had
more benefits in proselytization outside the borders of India than within it.
Employing the hermeneutics of skillful means, to survive they must adapt,
but in adapting they flirted with the forces that rendered them subordinate
in the first place. Yet, as institutions with specific socialization goals and a
highly structured corporate existence, these new grand monasteries had few
alternatives. Once fully institutionalized, Indian esoteric Buddhist traditions
appropriated the socialization process that brought a specific Buddhist va-
lence and uniformity to the monastic personas. Their training conveyed a
commonality to their experiences so that, irrespective of their backgrounds,
the monks comfortably assumed the demeanor of the monastic regimen.
From this point forward, North Indian monks envisioned themselves as
rulers in the grand domains of their metaphorical spiritual states, embedded
in a community with ritual systems that ensured their integration into their
own society. 
        ⁄ 

--- PAGE 189 ---
Thus institutional esoterism sought to sacralize observable reality, em-
ploying the techniques that had always been successful. Here, the Buddha
was depicted as a king with a crown, clothed in all the ornaments of royalty.
Here, the monks received the ritual of coronation and became divine in the
process. Here, they envisioned the spiritual state ﬁlled with Buddhas and
bodhisattvas, with worldly beings and families of divinities. Here, they acted
as agents for the Dharma, for the law. They performed the ceremonies that—
in their minds—would bring peace where there was war, wealth where there
was poverty, control where there was chaos, and destruction to the enemies
of religion. Yet, ironically, because Buddhist monks became enmeshed in the
same web of relationships that deﬁned the world of s amanta feudalism, they
came to be perceived as a weak imitation of the authentic imperial tradition,
a system that had successfully subverted most forms of religion to its own
naked purposes. In all these dynamics of medieval Indian culture, institu-
tional esoterism played a part, even when marginalized by the structure of its
own ethical ideals. Throughout the era, esoteric institutions continued to de-
velop, stimulated by both a need for survival and a sustaining belief in their
new self-representations. 
We know little of the reception these texts found outside the monasteries
in India. It is evident, however, that the ma ndalas found in the institutional
works were accepted and supported by the monarchs on the Indian border-
lands, for they understood that Buddhist institutions had provided them with
exactly the right combination of political and religious authority. 162 Coming
from outside India, they and their representatives received from institutional
esoterism some of its many virtues: access to the great intellectuals of the tra-
dition, elaborate ritual systems, training in Indian monasteries, spells of un-
doubted power and potency, astrology, and medicine. All these topics found
in the scriptures might be used in service to the authenticity of the monarch
and his state. Buddhist monks were only too glad to initiate these non-Indian
lords into the ma ndalas of their scriptures, and the magic of Buddhist social
symbiosis once again guaranteed monks a place at the table, even if so many
of the tables were foreign.
 ⁄        

--- PAGE 190 ---
Riding on the best of buffaloes within the domains of the great forest
tribes, he is ornamented with snakes and carries an iron vajra.
His hair colored ocher with bezoar and tied upwards in just the right way,
with skulls around his head, let him apply ocher to his beard.
He exclaims the mantras hri ¯h. s.t.ri¯, etc., brandishing his iron vajra.
This lion’s roar should be done that way because it is the vajra practice
of Yamari. 
And if he has developed the ability, let him enter a city playfully. In an
auspicious dance, he sings “sweet confection” and other kinds of songs.
—Krsnayamari-tantra, XI.9–121
/Iswash
t might seem that the “Great Perfected” (mahasiddha) of esoteric Bud-
dhism collectively defeat the proposal that the Vajray ana is the most feu-
dalized form of Buddhism. Based on siddha images, it is questionable
whether the Mantrayana is actually constituted by those responding to the in-
creasing importance of political systems and authority in the period around the
death of Harsa in 647 c.e. The siddhas, one may suppose, were unconcerned
with allegiance of any variety, preferring the untrammeled existence of a psy-
chic world in which ritual systems, social rules, lineage concerns, scriptural
continuity, and the other paraphernalia of institutional Buddhism were simply
jettisoned for personal liberation. Going naked along their own paths, devot-
ed solely to their own subjective experiences, the siddhas—in this argument—
represented a purity of religious expression devoid of scholastic hairsplitting or
legalistic wrangling, which was so much the obsession of the great monaster-
ies of the medieval period. The new variety of saint cannot have been on a con-
tinuum of sacrality with the rigidly observant arhat, the self-sacriﬁcial bodhi-

-
/Sswashiddhas and the /Rswasheligious /Lswashandscap/eswash

--- PAGE 191 ---
sattva, or even the monk employed in the mythology of institutional esoterism:
he must have been above them. With their ornaments of human bone, carry-
ing skullcaps and tridents, conquering demons, ﬂying to the land of the daki-
nis, copulating in graveyards, these personalities could only be associated with
the heterodox %aiva ﬁgures, like the Kapalikas, the Pa$upatas, or analogous an-
tinomian personalities. 
Although the romanticism of these images—to some degree generated by
and sustained within siddha hagiographical literature—might be briefly en-
joyable, there can be no question that siddhas were not exclusively or even
principally the self-absorbed saints represented in some materials. The en-
gagement of these sources to date has been somewhat limited, with a tenden-
cy toward excessive reliance on the text of the Catura$itisiddhapravrtti (Lives
of the Eighty-four Siddhas) ascribed to Abhayadatta $ri. Curiously, this em-
phasis has sometimes been accompanied by a concomitant denial that the
behaviors described in that text or in the tantras closely associated with the
siddhas could be taken literally. Such narratives must be symbolic and inter-
preted through the use of coded or “twilight” language (sandhyabhasa). The
overwhelming conclusion of these contradictory and confusing assessments is
that the Buddhist siddhas were indeterminate saints occupying some indefi-
nite space at some vague time. 
Such depictions are most often the result of inattention to the available his-
torical and archaeological records. Our sources indicate that, among other as-
pects, the siddhas were the form of Buddhist saint demonstrating the greatest
diversity, occupying an extraordinary spectrum of activities and attitudes, even
if their absolute numbers were probably rather modest at any one time.
Though relatively few in number, they captured the imagination of Buddhist
India and managed to generate a vast and sustaining literature. 
This chapter examines the rise of noninstitutional Buddhist esoterism,
which emerged by the early eighth centuryc.e. The focus here is the landscape
of siddhas, by which is meant the ideological topography that these personal-
ities inhabited in the fractious world of medieval India. They derived from the
older model of siddhas found in political and romantic literature, at least be-
ginning in the ﬁrst few centuries of the common era. In their public personas,
siddhas occupied a space between institutional esoterism and the larger world
of %aiva and %akta personalities, especially the %aiva movements of the Kapa-
likas and the Pa$upatas. However, the ﬁrst evidence for Buddhist siddhas oc-
curs in the ﬁrst decades of the eighth century, and it has strong continuities
with the archetype of a sorcerer (vidyadhara). For siddhas, the fundamental is-
sue was the manner in which they may succeed to the powers accorded the sor-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 192 ---
cerers and, in the process, overcome the gods themselves. Because they drew
from a very broad background, and as they did not rely on a speciﬁc educa-
tional and socializing institution, siddhas exhibited far greater variations in be-
havior than did either esoteric monks or Buddhist laymen adhering to the old-
er bodhisattva model. Yet they had clear involvement with kings and courts,
both personally (some were aristocrats) and mythically (as rulers of the sorcer-
ers). This investigation includes an examination of the geography of the move-
ment—both the imaginary geography of the “seats of power” and the real
landscape of actual pilgrimage sites. Moreover, because they are so frequently
referenced in siddha literature, siddha relationships with tribal and outcaste
peoples are also considered.
   
The question of the origins and relations of both siddhas in general and
Buddhist siddhas in particular has been taken up by many authors, but with
less than satisfactory models proposed, primarily because their sociocultural
matrices have not been sufficiently taken into account. Because siddhas ex-
hibit a distinct continuity with non-Buddhist behaviors, they might be
viewed as part of a larger field of Buddhist/non-Buddhist reciprocity, yet
this has been a contested topic. In his general discussion of the appearance
of non-Buddhist divinities in Buddhist ma ndalas, for example, Ruegg has
suggested that Buddhist esoterism generally employed certain elements of
Indian religion. According to Ruegg, these are not taken from specific sys-
tems, but from the “pan-Indian religious substrate” of lore, from which all
Indic religions draw their images. 2 This pan-Indic substrate is represented as
a common store of identical formal structures that were employed for differ-
ent functions in the various traditions, and Buddhists tended to include di-
vine personalities from this religious substrate into their narratives or ma n-
dalas as “worldly deities.” So, although %iva has a specific iconography,
which may be employed in several different traditions, his function pro-
foundly changes from one tradition to another. According to this model, the
deities are not identified as specifically %aiva or Vai snava but were taken
without reference to their affiliation, and Ruegg is particularly doubtful
about articulating a system of borrowing from one religion to another.
However, Sanderson, reviewing the origin of the Vajrayana, was not entire-
ly convinced by Ruegg’s argument.3 He takes some pains to point out that ev-
idence is absent for a nonafﬁliated religious system—all the personalities, both
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 193 ---
human and divine, are associated with speciﬁc institutionalized lineages and
not simply free-ﬂoating forms. Whether the topic is the gods or the saints of
the systems, they are represented within speciﬁc lineages and traditions. When
Buddhist texts are concerned with theological objects, these come into view at
speciﬁc locales and under sometimes peculiar circumstances, as shown below in
the case of Heruka. Thus Sanderson properly moves the discussion from a
proposition about religious icons to the analysis of speciﬁc religious agents. 
Unhappily, Ruegg’s model cannot entirely account for the spectrum of
speciﬁcs, based on caste, gender, locale, afﬁliation, and other variables. It ap-
pears not entirely applicable, especially because of its postulation of a Platonic
plane wherein resides the forms iterated in speciﬁc religious systems. His posi-
tion seems analogous to Saussure’s langue/parole model, wherein the entire po-
tential of a language (langue) is never expressed in the particular speech of a per-
son (parole).4 Because of their structuralist formulations, neither Saussure’s nor
Ruegg’s models—and this is part of Sanderson’s criticism—can easily take into
account regional variation, incomprehensible idioms, place-speciﬁc identity,
and the sudden emergence of a new prototype that overwhelms some parts of a
religious system but not others.5 Yet Sanderson’s observation of the speciﬁcity
of lineages seems also excessively reiﬁed, for it would be difﬁcult from his mod-
el to determine whether there were unique local personalities or speciﬁc move-
ments even within these broad heterodox groups. 
In an entirely different direction, White postulated that human siddhas ap-
propriated the designation “siddha” in order to emulate the behavior and to
obtain the powers of their celestial heroes. 6 According to this line of reason-
ing, the celestial band lived on mountain peaks, and the earthly siddhas at-
tempted to secure their services, their females, and—ultimately—their powers.
Again we might wonder if this is not excessively reiﬁed. Whatever its applica-
bility to other traditions, White’s position does not accord well with the pri-
mary data on the Buddhist goal, which seem to speak of supremacy over the
Vidyadharas (sorcerers, human or divine) rather than celestial siddhas. Cer-
tainly for Buddhists, human siddha behavior was not in imitation of the celes-
tial Perfected, but sought to gain power through decidedly different means. 
Since the term does not apply to Buddhist saints until the medieval period,
we might look to non-Buddhist sources for some degree of inspiration, espe-
cially in view of the astonishing variation and vitality of Indian religion during
the ancient and medieval eras.7 For the present purposes, though, this discus-
sion is limited to those non-Buddhist systems with an observable clergy or
group identity, rather than unfocused popular movements. Buddhist docu-
ments consistently specify the interaction between Buddhists and others at this
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 194 ---
level—especially their involvement with Brahmans or %aiva/%akta ascetics. It
has frequently been an object of scholarly consternation, for example, that
Hsüan-tsang did not utter a word about the rise of the devotional (bhakti)
movements, despite his travel around 642c.e. through South India, where they
clearly were the most vital force.8 The probable answer to this anomaly is that
Buddhist monks have seldom considered non-Buddhist popular religion a mat-
ter of concern: its doctrinal content is limited; it is noncontemplative; and it has
no speciﬁc behavioral agenda, but predominantly relies on affective states, gen-
erally combined with song and dance. Devotees (bhakta) who ﬁt into estab-
lished patterns, viz. %aiva bhaktas, the Buddhists tended simply to see as repre-
senting an older tradition. Hsüan-tsang and others were probably unaware that
they were dealing with a new phenomenon developing in South India. 
In distinction to popular devotional movements, the available evidence
suggests that a contribution to siddha ideology derived from local, tribal, and
outcaste groups existing in a ﬂuid state outside the formal institutions of reli-
gious authority. At the beginning of the medieval period, India was only start-
ing to encounter the full range of tribal cultures, local groups, autochthonous
cults, site-speciﬁc divinities, and other phenomena. Indeed, the data available
suggest that much of the prehistory of noninstitutional yogins dedicated to
full-time praxis is messy, is not easily classiﬁed, and probably includes a
plethora of lost systems, either group-based or totally personal (svatantra). In
the case of the designation “siddha,” the title seems to progress through India
by two primary means. First, the designation is appropriated by one group
from another unrelated group, although their discontinuity is by no means cer-
tain. Second, related behaviors and identities develop between two or more
closely patterned groups. 
    
Apparently the earliest Indian use of the term “siddha” to specify a successful
group of saints is found in Jaina quarters and evinces only partial continuity
with the Buddhist or %aiva application. In terms of ﬁrm chronology, this is
perhaps the easiest to specify, for the term is used in the homage at the be-
ginning of the Hathigumpha cave inscription of Kharavela, who is post-Mau-
ryan and generally assigned to the second or ﬁrst century b.c.e.9 Inscribed in a
cave on the Udayagiri hill north of Bhubaneswar in Orissa, the inscription
simply begins with the homage to the arahants and the siddhas (namo arahan-
tanam namo savasidhanam). The nature of these siddhas is not speciﬁed, yet
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 195 ---
we have little reason to doubt that it indicates Jaina saints who became suc-
cessful in their practices, but who were not identiﬁed with the other Jaina des-
ignations: arahant and T irthaNkara.10 The inscription does not appear to ref-
erence a classiﬁcation of saints concerned with the accomplishments of
magical powers (siddhi), and we might recall that names from the early period
included marks of success (such as Siddh artha) without the supernatural con-
notation implied in the powers claimed by the medieval siddhas. 
A different direction is found in the Mandasor stone inscription of Ban-
dhuvarman, composed by the local poet Vatsabha tti and dated February–
March of 474 c.e.11 There, siddhas are described as among those who worship
the sun and, speciﬁcally, those who propose to obtain magical powers (siddhy-
arthin). The old solar cult was at one point quite widespread, and its associa-
tion with power is noticeable even in the southern recension of the Rama-
yana, where Rama is instructed by the Rsi Agastya in a hymn to the sun, so
as to gain its assistance in his contest with his archnemesis, the ten-headed
demon king R avana.12 Various similar references to siddhas have caused
Fleet and others—both ancient and modern—to identify a class of demigods
or quasi-divine beings designated as “siddhas,” and these were understood to
be different from humans carrying the same name. Celestial siddhas became
the stock in trade for many episodes in poetry, and such figures have become
notorious for the amorous behavior exhibited between siddhas and their fe-
male companions. 13
However, we need to acknowledge that the application of “siddha” to hu-
mans is well developed in early Indic political literature, an employment that
suggests both the environment in which siddhas received patronage and the
group to which the name may be legitimately applied. These many references
call into question White’s proposal that human siddhas modeled themselves af-
ter the celestial archetype. In particular, the ﬁrst- to second-century Artha$astra
speciﬁes almost a dozen situations in which an individual might masquerade as
a siddha using their speciﬁc practices to accomplish the ends of realpolitik.
Some of the ﬁgures are called siddhatapasa, the accomplished ascetic, and many
of the citations depict them as skilled in magic (mayayogavid).14 Agents of the
state might be employed to impersonate such siddhas, using various devices to
entrap criminals through the criminals’ own spells, or to entice tribals to rebel
against an adjacent state.15 These agents could formulate real or bogus rituals—
especially rites concerned with love, power, or money—and assassinate the
king’s enemies by infusing their magical concoctions with poison. 16 The
Artha$astra proposes many deceptive activities to be employed exclusively in the
destabilization of neighboring states, and these actions frequently involve
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 196 ---
agents posing as siddhas or other religious characters to lure monarchs to se-
cluded spots while promising them wealth, horses, or sex, not necessarily in that
order.17 Those suspected of treason could be enticed into criminal complicity in
the death of an adult or infant by a “siddha” (agent), who would lead that per-
son to a burial site where money is found on a corpse. This money (placed be-
forehand on the corpse) would then be entrusted to the suspect, only to have
him apprehended by the king’s police ofﬁcers later.18 The king’s revenue agents
might also make use of the “siddha” subterfuge, by faking miraculous appear-
ances of divinities and asking for donations to increase the king’s revenues and,
we suspect, to line their own pockets.19
Such activities are on a continuum with the behavior of other personali-
ties claiming to obtain siddha status in Indian literature, most notably Vi $va-
mitra in the V almiki Ramayana. We may recall that Vi $vamitra becomes a
siddha by performing sacrifice (yajña) at Siddh a$rama on the banks of the
Kau$iki River, close to the Him alayas.20 The Ramayana is explicit that the
name of Vi $vamitra’s residence comes from the identity of siddhas as “those
who perform great ascetic practice.” 21 Unfortunately, Vi $vamitra cannot
complete the sacrifice because, each time he tries, demons of every descrip-
tion and of extraordinary strength displace the sages who assist him in the
rite. Accordingly, he requests that the brothers R ama and Lak smana assist
him in their protection of the ritual environment. Ultimately, Vi $vamitra ac-
complishes his goal—invincibility—and, having made the retreat title “resi-
dence of siddhas” (siddha$rama) true in fact rather than in name only, he can
go forth a siddha (Ramayana, I.30.14: gamisyami siddhah siddha$ramad aham).
This successful career is in accordance with images of siddhas in the approx-
imately contemporary Milindapañha (Questions of the Indo-Greek King
Menander). In this work, siddhas are noted for their capacity to “sing truth”
(siddha saccam anugayanti)—that is, perform acts of truth (saccakiriya). By the
power of their truth statements, siddhas make the rain fall, cause fire (the
god Agni) to be turned back in its course, and even transform the dreadful
Halahala poison—which stained blue the throat of %iva himself—into a me-
dicinal antidote. 22
Later literature expresses a continuity with the Ramayana’s symbiosis be-
tween king and ascetic. Its most famous literary expressions are revealed in
episodes about the ferocious ghoul (vetala) rites conducted by evidently %aiva
ﬁgures, like those seen in such masterpieces as the Harsacarita and the Katha-
saritsagara. In the earliest of these, the mid-seventh-century Harsacarita, the
pattern is already well established.23 The terrifying Bhairavacarya, with the as-
sistance of Har sa’s legendary ancestor Puspabhuti, seeks to obtain success in
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 197 ---
the magical powers of the sorcerers/vidyadharas. He needs the king’s strength
and, to seduce him into assistance, equips the monarch with a charismatic
sword named A ttahasa ( %iva’s laugh) to overcome the demonic personality
who will ultimately appear—the N aga %rikantha. The ascetic, dressed in
black, builds a ﬁre in the mouth of a corpse on the cremation ground and sum-
mons the undead. After an epic struggle, the king defeats the demon with his
bare hands, only to have the ﬁend disappear and the goddess Fortune (%ri) ap-
pear on the blade of his sword. She bestows on Bhairav acarya the ornaments
of the sorcerer/vidy adhara—special hair lock, diadem, pearl necklace, armlet,
belt, hammer, and sword.24 She also confers on Puspabhuti the magical prop-
erty of a strong line of royal descendants, which eventually leads to the poet’s
own patron, the Emperor Harsavardhana. 
Literature from the eighth to the eleventh century, for example, the Brhat-
katha$lokasamgraha, the Malatimadhava, and the Kathasaritsagara, also men-
tion cemetery rites to gain control over a ghoul or vetala, who is the peculiar
source for access to the divine realm of the Vidy adharas. All these works de-
scribe situations in which rituals are performed by ascetics of various stripes to
gain power. Each ascetic apparently requires the extraordinary protection ex-
tended by a king or great warrior. In most of the stories the warriors guard the
various directions, while in some of them the heroes are both the guardians
and the intended victims. The kings protecting speciﬁcally evil siddhas are to
be ultimately offered to the demon or divinity that will come out of the sacred
circle. This latter plot twist was to become so popular that the story literature
of the “twenty-ﬁve vetala legends” (vetalapañcavim$ati) was eventually to sep-
arate, so that the stories could be further elaborated using the king/siddha/ve-
tala interaction as a frame for the narratives. 
In other literature, the evil siddha’s cemetery rites are interrupted in their
course. The earliest version of which I am aware is in the seventh-century
Avantisundarikatha, wherein the young prince Mantragupta intervenes on be-
half of a damsel in distress, about to be sacriﬁced by a corrupt ascetic (dagdha-
siddha).25 The clear expression of many of these romance novels is that the
realm of the divine sorcerers (vidyadhara), whose spells empower their thau-
maturgical ability, is directly approached through the cremation and charnel
grounds at the margins of civilization, wherein are found outcastes (mataNga)
and tribal peoples. 26 The ethical nature of the siddhas attempting to secure
these supernormal abilities is at best dubious, however, and at worst consti-
tutes the most excessive form of criminal. Thus it takes a king or great warrior
to ensure the stability of the law (dharma) in the face of such powerful and
self-absorbed individuals.
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 198 ---
´  ´¯   
For Buddhists, the single most inﬂuential clerical development during the ear-
ly medieval period was the rise of %aiva/%akta ascetic orders, an extension of
the inﬂuence of South Indian patronage of %aiva traditions and South India’s
intrusion into the north from the sixth century forward. This is not to say that
all the %aiva/%akta orders were southern in origin or even that they experi-
enced their greatest inﬂuence in the south. It is important to note, though,
that even the northern denominations enjoyed heightened power and prestige
because of the systematic preference for %aivas in the courts of the Chalukyas,
the Pallavas, and the Colas, among others. In part, their popularity stems from
the capacity of %aiva teachers to sacralize the behavior of the most bloodthirsty
warlord—he was acting in the manner of Mah akala (Great Death), a form of
%iva. Thus the vindication of military adventurism worked best with the %aiva
orders that came with a discourse of the legitimization of otherwise illegiti-
mate conduct. Brahmanical authors of most of the Dharma$astras were not
themselves enthusiastic about belligerence, and adventuristic monarchs fre-
quently employed Brahmans for the development and authentication of or-
thodox activities while their self-indulgent behavior was left to the approval of
%aiva/%akta ascetics.27
As compensation, these kings would build temples and monasteries (matha)
for their ascetics and promote %aiva/%akta interests in the kingdom. Conse-
quently, the early medieval period became the great era of Hindu temple build-
ing, and the majority of the temple complexes still standing—Bhubaneswar,
Khajuraho, Jagre$war, Aihole, Brahmaur, Ba tesara, Alampur, to mention a
few—had their foundations between the sixth and the ninth century. Many ver-
iﬁable %aiva/%akta denominations became heavily patronized during this time,
and we might wonder whether there was some coming and going of allegiance.
It is probable that, while an ascetic might be concerned with %akta cults at some
times, he would be absorbed in speciﬁcally %aiva rituals at others, for these two
were not seen so entirely separate at the ascetic level as they appear in stable tem-
ple ritual venues. The discussion below concerns the K apalika, Kaula, and
Lakuli$a Pa$upata denominations, for these are the three most observable in me-
dieval literature, epigraphy, and archaeology, with the correspondingly greatest
inﬂuence on Buddhist siddha practice. 
The Kapalikas were clearly the most notorious of the ascetic systems, hav-
ing been roundly rebuked in much of dramatic literature and poetry for ex-
cesses of conduct, which included ritual intercourse and the sacramental in-
gestion of substances running the gamut from intoxicating to lethal. 28 They
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 199 ---
were continually accused—probably with intermittent correctness—of the rit-
ualized slaughter of victims offered to goddesses such as Ca ndika, the deity
Bhairava, or even local demons like the Vet alas. It is their sanguinary behav-
ior that has reaped the greatest of opprobrium for the Kapalikas, and their ear-
ly mythology celebrates the mythic killing of the god Brahm a by %iva in a ﬁt
of pique. Because Brahma’s skull attached itself to %iva, the lord of the ceme-
tery was required to engage in extensive penance to be freed of the adhesive
cranium. Kapalikas celebrated the penance of their deity by displaying several
(Ramanuja lists six) primary signs and two secondary indicators. R amanuja’s
six consist of a necklace (kanthika), a neck ornament (rucaka), a large earring
(kundala), a jewel in their hair ($ikhamani), ashes, and a sacred thread. 29 The
two “secondary” indicators actually came to represent their deﬁning character-
istics: the possession of a skull (ostensibly a cranial cap for eating) and a type
of slender staff called a khatvaNga. This latter might be topped with a skull and
hung with their small, double-headed drum (damaruka). Kapalikas were also
known to carry a trident (tri$ula) in place of a khatvaNga.
Part of the problem in identifying a Kapalika is that none of these items by
themselves authenticated an individual as a Kapalika. Jewelry of various varieties,
especially large, round earrings pierced through the cartilage of the ear, are not-
ed for many of the ascetic traditions and were associated in literature with sor-
cerers (vidyadhara). Smearing oneself with ashes is ubiquitous among %aivas and
is certainly not even an exclusively ascetic practice. The use of staffs of various
kinds—in association with types of begging bowls—is noted with most ascetic
traditions. Sanderson has indicated that various varieties of %aiva traditions also
carried staffs with skulls on them.30 Indeed, the carrying of staffs was not par-
ticularly %aiva, since it is enjoined in the Samnyasa Upanisads and found among
other groups as well. Even the Buddhist clergy have used their own version of
mendicants’ staffs (khakharaka).31 Although carrying a skull bowl might seem to
be the deﬁning characteristic of a Kapalika, its entire mythology comes from the
literature of penance in the Dharma $astras. Manu, for example, indicates that
the use of a skull bowl or a corpse’s head as a ﬂag is not simply enjoined for killers
of Brahmans, but might be given as a twelve-year penance (praya$cita) for those
who had killed a fetus, a sacriﬁcer, or a woman who is newly puriﬁed after ces-
sation of her menstrual period. It might even be given as a penance for one who
has perjured himself in court or opposed his teacher, or who has killed a woman
or a friend.32 The legal tradition speaks of the practice’s temporary nature—that
is, it was done for a speciﬁed length of time in response to a speciﬁc act. Indeed,
the difﬁculty of tracing Kapalika traditions outside of a few texts could be in-
herent in the ephemeral nature of their behavior. 
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 200 ---
Given these concerns, it is unsurprising that medieval Indians expressed
bafﬂement in separating K apalika from Kaula systems, as seen in a commen-
tary to Krsnami$ra’s farce/allegory, the Prabodhacandrodaya.33 Both traditions
have a heavy %akta component, and both have proved difﬁcult to differentiate
in their practices, being primarily distinguished by internal self-deﬁnition
rather than any categorical distinction of behavior. Sanderson has identiﬁed,
for example, the Jayadrathayamala as a lengthy K apalika scripture, but it is
clear that the greatest of the Kaulas, Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1050 c.e.), accepts
the authority of this work as well. 34 Perhaps the best indication of the public
parameters of the Kaula ideal is summed up by a well-known, scurrilous piece
of Prakrit poetry from Raja$ekhara’s Karpura Mañjari. There, the Kaula anti-
hero of the play, Bhairavananda, delivers a half-parody of his own practice:
I don’t know mantra from tantra, 
Nor meditation or anything about a teacher’s grace.
Instead, I drink cheap booze and enjoy some woman. 
But I sure am going on to liberation, since I got the Kula path. 
What’s more,
I took some horny slut and consecrated her my “holy wife.” 
Sucking up booze and wolﬁng down red meat,
My “holy alms” are whatever I like to eat,
My bed is but a piece of human skin.
Say, who wouldn’t declare this Kaula Religion 
Just about the most fun you can have? 35
If the Kaula system has given trouble to those wishing to differentiate it from
the Kapalikas, the entire ediﬁce of “tantrism” has been difﬁcult to separate from
tribal religions, for several reasons. First, tribal systems represented the histori-
cal “Other” for much of Indian religion, orthodox and heterodox alike. Second,
tribal systems engaged in blood sacriﬁces, including human sacriﬁce, so those
denominations relieving ennui with the beheading of their fellow man (Kapa-
likas) were poorly distinguished from the tribal systems. For example, Vakpati-
raja’s Gaüdavaho, written 730–750c.e., describes as a Kaula the tribal woman en-
gaged in human sacriﬁce to the goddess.36 Although this may have indicated a
local usage or may have meant that they belong to the family of that place, most
likely these were identiﬁed in the poet’s (and public’s) mind with all other san-
guinary %akta practitioners, irrespective of ethnicity or religious afﬁliation. 
Archaeological ﬁndings may assist here, and Dehejia has studied temples
to the cult of the yogin is, groups of feminine goddesses—traditionally sixty-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 201 ---
four in number—to which unique circular and rectangular temples have been
erected.37 Dehejia has located the remains of fourteen of these intriguing sites
(see Table 5.1) and has proposed that several more are capable of being ad-
duced from the literature and probable ﬁnds, but in the face of a paucity of ev-
idence they must remain conjectural. 38 All of these are medieval (ninth- to
fourteenth-century) sites. Dehejia contends that all these temples were gov-
erned under the Kaula system. Thus she maintains that they represented the
systematic practice of sexual congress at the sites as offerings to the yoginis and
that such practices did not implicate human sacriﬁce. 
table 5.1 Yogini Temples
Kañcipuram
Khajuraho
Dudahi (by Lalitpur, Madhya Pradesh)
Naresar (by Gwalior)
Badoh (by Lalitpur, Madhya Pradesh)
Bheraghat (by Japalpur)
Mitauli (by Gwalior)
Ranipur-Jharial (Orissa)
Rikhiyan (Banda District, Uttar Pradesh)
Lokhari (Banda District, Uttar Pradesh)
Shahdol #1 (Shahdol District, Madhya Pradesh)
Shahdol #2
Hinglajgadh (Gandhi Sagar)
Hirapur (by Bhubaneswar) 
It is difﬁcult to follow Dehejia on her Kaula connections, even if she has
done great service in identifying and illustrating these sites. Kaula manuscripts
certainly discuss the cultus of the sixty-four (or eighty-one) yogin is, but we
have not found any Kaula text that mentions these kinds of sites in their pil-
grimage guides (pithanirnaya) or that discusses their use. Beyond the fact that
most Kaula works appear composed after the sites were constructed, there are
problems in assuming that the smallest of these, Hirapur, could physically ac-
commodate the Kaula cultic activity. There is certainly little enough room in
this tiny hypaethral temple (Figure 6), which measures only about twenty-ﬁve
feet in inside diameter, and group sexual congress in the manner described
would appear difﬁcult because of its physical limitations.39 Furthermore, there
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 202 ---
is no sexual representation at all in any of the sculptural programs associated
with the sites, although erotic motifs have been seen on contemporary temples
from the same geographical area. 40 In reality, the primary activity depicted at
these sites—beyond the ﬁgures of the yoginis—is the display of severed heads
(Figure 7), indicating that the sanguinary rites were probably the principal ac-
tivity practiced. The location of these temples in areas dominated by tribal
peoples that were involved in sanguinary rituals suggests that they were con-
structed with a similar ritual in mind. The major problem is a lack of evidence
for undomesticated tribal peoples building in stone, even if the yogin i temple
at Khajuraho was identiﬁably the product of a branch of the Gond tribe. 
We also have evidence of other temples in which the representation of yo-
ginis has continued: the Causathyayogin i mandirs in Banaras and Ujjain, the
Siddhbhadra mandir in Ma ndi (Himachal Pradesh), the B aba kot Mandir in
the Damdama Palace in Mandi. In addition, yoginis are interpreted as part of
the sculptural program in the %aktidevi Mandir at Chattrarhi (Himachal
Pradesh) by those in the village. With the exception of the %aktidevi Mandir,
which is not clearly yogin i in execution, the others are from the seventeenth
century or later. In the two Mandi temples, the yoginis are represented by sim-
     ⁄ 
figure 6 Interior of Hirapur Yogini Pitha in Orissa.
Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 203 ---
figure 7 Yogini from Hirapur displaying human sacriﬁce.
Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 204 ---
ple slabs of stone with sixty-four pairs of footprints. Because of their simplic-
ity, there are doubtless many others in North India and the Deccan that I have
not noted. These sites are not evidently Kaula, and Dehejia maintains that the
yogini cult became separated from the Kaula practice because of Muslim in-
ﬂuence, a curiously modern hermeneutic of foreign pollution. Early medieval
inscriptions about the construction of temples associated with yoginis, such as
the Siy an inscription of Nayap ala or Uday aditya’s Mominabad inscription,
seem to have escaped Dehejia’s notice.41 In tone and content they are similar
to the much earlier (424–425 c.e.) Ga Ngdhar Stone Inscription of Vi $vavar-
man, which declared the construction of a “ferocious dwelling, ﬁlled with da-
kinis” (dakinisamprakirnam | ve$matyugram).42
Perhaps the most widespread and important development in early medieval
ascetic orders, however, has been understudied and underemphasized. 43 The
rise and spread of the Lakul i$a Pa$upata system of %aivism appears to be the
earliest organized Hindu ascetic response to the $ramana systems of Bud-
dhism, Jainism, and cognate traditions. While modern historians have focused
on the Da $anami organization of %aNkaracarya and his followers—with its
four leaders in the four directions of India—there can be little doubt that the
Pa$upatas were far more successful and widely distributed during the sixth to
the tenth centuries. Regardless of whether they were founded by an individual
of disputed dates (perhaps second to ﬁfth centuries c.e.) named Lakuli$a, the
Pa$upatas followed a form of religious behavior attributed to him as the pur-
ported author of the Pa$upata-sutra. 
There, the Pa$upata is enjoined to follow ﬁve levels of practice (sadhana): In
the ﬁrst, he emulates the distinguished state (with normative %aiva appearance,
vyaktavastha), wherein the normative ascetic practice of a %aiva in a monastery
is expected; thus they were to inhabit temples and conform to rules. In the sec-
ond, the yogin conforms to the undistinguished state (without a %aiva appear-
ance, avyaktavastha), in which the follower acts in a manner calculated to reap
ridicule; here they were to act insane in public and court dishonor. In the third,
the P a$upata cultivates the stage of victory (jayavastha), during which he
achieves victory over the senses; here they were to dwell in empty caves and
contemplate Pa $upati through muttering mantras. In the fourth, the yogin
achieves the stage of severing (chedavastha), in which he severs the root of de-
ﬁlement in the world; here they were to dwell in cemeteries while recollecting
Rudra. In the ﬁfth and ﬁnal stage (nisthavastha), Pa$upatas were to dwell in
Rudra while enjoying his grace, concluding the process of ending suffering. 44
Of these, the second is exceptional and distinctly P a$upata, since it involves
seeking unmerited social disapproval, so that those in the immediate environ-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 205 ---
ment are tricked into their vocalization of their moral outrage by the Pa$upata
yogin. Since the Pa$upata is only imitating disreputable behavior—for example,
behaving like a dog—the castigation is unmerited and the yogin accordingly is
relieved of previous negative karma, which now passes onto the unwary critic.
The entire system is a response to the marked proclivity of high-caste India to
favor public confrontation and censorious remarks. 
In fact, possibly the earliest %aiva mention of the stage of “siddha” as a goal
is found in the Pa$upatasutra—perhaps a second- to third-century text—as-
cribed to Lakuli$a. There a siddhayogin is described as one who is not touched
(literally smeared) by either ethical action or guilt.45 This refers to the result of
the practice of temporarily courting disfavor, for which the siddha was not
considered at fault in passing his negative karma to his critics. Like so many
other similar adjectives in Sanskrit (e.g., Buddha), siddha here is used as an
adjective (accomplished) but moving toward becoming a title (Perfected), sim-
ilar to the early employment of siddhatapasa in the Artha$astra, and these texts
apparently were composed within a few centuries of each other. Just as evi-
dently, the Pa$upatasutra simply justiﬁes the behavior of siddhas with a herme-
neutic of “higher purpose,” which is very familiar to esoteric exegesis, whether
%aiva or Buddhist.
There can be little doubt that the Pa$upatas were extraordinarily successful
in associating themselves with powerful patrons. The appendix contains a list
of the probable sites I have been able to identify from published materials by
archaeologists, architectural and art historians, based on the presence of Laku-
li$a images (Figure 8) or of inscriptions. Certainly there are more sites that
have not been so identiﬁed, and the list is more representative than exhaustive,
but as yet there is no systemic survey of P a$upata sites in India. Earlier sites
have been claimed, especially the third-century Caturmukha-li Nga at Nand
and the Mathura pillar of Candragupta II. Both of these, like all the other ear-
lier images and possible sites, are problematic and dubious. In the latter case,
the 380 c.e. Mathura pillar is the record of a dedication to a teacher of
Mahe$varas, a certain Uditacarya who is descended from a Ku$ika, and depicts
a ﬁgure holding a club. Some historians have jumped to the conclusion that
this depicts Lakuli$a and that Ku $ika is the famous disciple of his mentioned
in later inscriptions. Unfortunately, the pillar mentions neither Lakul i$a nor
Pa$upatas, and the iconography of the club-wielding ﬁgure is fairly different
from known Lakuli$a representations. 
However, I cannot conﬁdently declare that every site in the appendix actu-
ally represents an ediﬁce of P a$upata afﬁliation. It is clear, for example, that
temples from Bhubaneswar to Narayanapura, including Mukhalingam and
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 206 ---
figure 8 Lakuli$a from Para$urame$vara Temple. Bhubaneshwar,
Orissa, seventh century. Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 207 ---
Jayati, have been subject to broadly similar canons of iconography in the se-
lection of Lakuli$a for one of the standard ﬁgures placed in niches. This activ-
ity carries over into decidedly non-P a$upata temples in some areas, and it
might be noted that the M aladevi temple in Gyaraspur (Vidisha District,
Madhya Pradesh) is a Jaina institution sporting a Lakul i$a sculpture. For our
purposes, though, it is sufﬁcient to see that such representations are unlikely
in the absence of P a$upata activity in the immediate neighborhood, and—
short of an epigraph—there is as yet no way to determine the relationship be-
tween the presence of Lakul i$a on a temple and P a$upatas in the courtyard.
Yet some measure of their zealous missionary activity does exist since, even be-
yond India, the P a$upatas were the ﬁrst non- $ramana ascetic system to chal-
lenge Buddhist proselytism of non-Indian peoples. By the seventh century,
Pa$upata teachers had been able to secure a place for themselves in the court
of Bhavavarma II, and Sanskrit epigraphs for the next two centuries note the
importance of this form of %aivism in Cambodia.46
We might reﬂect on the contrast between sites associated with Lakul i$a
and, presumably, the P a$upatas, on one hand, and those associated with K a-
palikas or Kaulas, on the other. Whereas we have many representations of
Lakuli$a—often associated with his disciples—we have very few of K apalika
teachers, and these are found mostly in Bhubaneswar or Khajuraho. Even
then, as in the case of the K apalika depicted on the T ale$vara mandir in
Bhubaneswar, they might be represented as in attendance to the Lakul i$a im-
age. It is possible that the image of %iva as the prototypical penitent begging
with a skull bowl (bhiksatanamurti) represents the presence of K apalikas, but
it is difﬁcult to say, since this legend is so strongly associated with Puranic lit-
erature that has no direct relationship to the most extreme sect of %aivism. If
anything, the Puranas have come to represent much of Pa$upata teaching, and
it is clear that many of the great Pur anas associated with %iva have espoused
the Pa$upata dualistic perspective on the nature of the god of yogins. Thus,
while the K apalikas became well distributed in dramatic literature as the vil-
lain of choice, the P a$upatas certainly became the most widely spread Hindu
ascetic tradition. They offered a celibate challenge to the missionary Buddhists
and supported Brahmanical traditions of caste and the subordination of wo-
men. Pa$upatas, moreover, appeared to have introduced dramatic conventions
into temple cultus, and P a$upata teachers were noted for their virtuosity in
both vocal music and dance. The espousal of their perspective in the great lit-
erary productions of early medieval Hinduism, the Pur anas, served to solidify
their popular position as the most important and best organized of the %aiva
ascetic lineages. 
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 208 ---
  
Thus the literary and epigraphic evidence suggest that the term “siddha” indi-
cated a spectrum of religious practices and related behaviors in premedieval
and medieval India. Much of the conduct may be ascetic (tapas) in pursuit of
personal dominion, either over karmic impediments (as the Jaina) or over oth-
er groups (as in most traditions). None of these narratives necessarily involve
cults to quasi-divine siddha ﬁgures who enjoy residence in a realm beyond the
senses and above the clouds, although divine goals appear from time to time
primarily under the rubric of Vidy adhara, rather than siddha. Instead the
sources reveal a subculture of individuals whose apparent purpose is to gain
power or authority and to provide services of a dubious ethical nature to kings,
generals, and councilors in search of dominion, gifts, lucre, or women of easy
virtue. The services include prophecy, spirit possession, demonic control, love
potions, wealth generation, magical killing or actual murder, and a host of
other practices that do not entail the supermundane culture of liberation. We
get no sense that they are necessarily involved in any speciﬁc cultus to %iva,
Buddha, Visnu, Devi, Surya, or any other single transcendent or pan-Indic di-
vinity, although any of these may appear associated with them. Rather, their
chosen objects of ritual propitiation are the demons (raksasa), ghosts (pi$aca),
[un]dead (preta), tree spirits (yaksa/yaksi), and ghouls (vetala) of the charnel
grounds, the forest, and the periphery of the kingdom. Beyond their exotic ap-
pearances before their patrons in the court, the siddhas are commonly associ-
ated with criminals (manava), tribal peoples (atavi), alchemists (dhatuvadin),
dramatic troupes (nartikas), and spies. In this sense, the category of “siddha”
is the logical consequence of a civilization whose medieval expression is a con-
cern for (and sometimes obsession with) status, hierarchy, political power, re-
ligious authority, and personal indulgence. Accordingly, the goal of turning
into a siddha frequently becomes the aspiration of those excluded from status
and hierarchy, either by birth or by accident. 
This is not to say that these siddhas did not have an idea about their own
religious afﬁliations, and no data support the model that siddhas represented a
modern, nonsectarian, quasi-Unitarian idea of religion as extrapersonal and
transcultural. Such ﬁgures, even if they occasionally change their religious iden-
tities, often support a vociferous allegiance while they are members of one
group or another. If we were to draw similarities (which I believe we might),
siddhas were often contentiously in support of their respective factions of the
moment—%aiva, Bauddha, Vaisnava, Kaula, Jaina, Saura, tribal, or caste-based.
Their individual allegiances should not be underestimated, and the tantras con-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 209 ---
tain much strong and potentially lethal polemics. Even when tolerance of oth-
er traditions is espoused, the evidence suggests that personal validation comes
through ﬁdelity to the religious lineage, and the (most often male) yogin attains
his accomplishment by virtue of his dedication to the opportunistic use of oth-
ers for his own beneﬁt. 
That opportunism also makes the siddha in turn the object of devotion and
the source of protection, since the power of the siddha (unencumbered by im-
personal ethical standards) might be turned to the beneﬁt and protection of oth-
ers, particularly those sharing a local or ethnic afﬁliation. Because of their spe-
cial capacity over ghosts and other spirits, siddhas have become the protectors of
choice against the diseases inﬂicted by all the ghoulish phenomena of Indian
folklore. Both current and historical practice have emphasized the relationship
of saints, amulets, and the protection from disease, as well as bringing general
auspiciousness to locales. In many places in North India, the association of sev-
eral diseases—particularly malaria, understood as a disease of “fever”—with
ghostly phenomena makes the protection of siddhas especially compelling. 47
Historically, siddhas have assisted the diagnosis of diseases and provided solu-
tions to local difﬁculties by means of using young children (especially virgin girls:
kumari) as subjects in spirit possession(ave$a), practices already described in texts
attributed to Amoghavajra in the eighth century.48 Siddhas thus used children
as mediums for the control, direction, and subjugation of disease-bearing ghosts. 
Especially during the early medieval era, “siddha” became an element in
personal names. Such a use reﬂects the proclivity of Indians to appropriate
powerful and sacred designations for personal protection, beneﬁt, or emula-
tion. These names are particularly evident for patrons, workmen, or scribes
featured in epigraphs. Moreover, they reverse the earlier use of “siddha” as an
adjective (e.g., Siddh artha) to a noun in names like Sanasiddha—perhaps
meaning Primal Siddha—the husband of the Buddhist laywoman who en-
dowed a series of offerings in 450–451c.e. in a Sañchi stone inscription.49 Sim-
ilarly, a 1204 c.e. inscription from the Kangra Valley temple of Baijnath indi-
cates that one of the members of the family was a certain merchant Manyuka,
the son of Siddha (siddhaputra).50 Other names reﬂect the disposition of me-
dieval Prakrit to contract an honoriﬁc sufﬁx, -p ada to -pa/pa, a usage seen in
Buddhist rendering as well. Thus the 946 c.e. Partabgarh Inscription, which
records the gifts of various ﬁelds and endowments to the use of one or more
temples, is inscribed by Siddhapa, the son of Satya. 51 Likewise, the %ujunide-
vi Bust (mohra) of the Nirmand temple of Para $urama in Himachal Pradesh
records its manufacture in 1026 c.e. by Siddhapa, evidently a skilled brass- and
bronzesmith.52 It is interesting to note the social reality of these individuals
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 210 ---
figure 9 Siddh %ri Baba Balak Nath of Himachal Pradesh.
New Delhi street shrine, c. 1985. Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 211 ---
bearing the designation siddha; apparently, they were not driven by the nor-
mative Brahmanical aesthetic, which abhors physical labor. Their name desig-
nations evidently seek to attribute to the bearer an authenticity derivative from
the saints, before whose power and sanctity they stand in awe. 
The eventual disposition of the siddha paradigm is found in various areas
of modern India, and I am particularly familiar with the cultus of the “sidhs”
of Himachal Pradesh. Sidhs—the modern, North Indian vernacular render-
ing of siddhas—are unexceptionally understood to be saints who have mas-
tered the great powers, although a great many of these “saints” are entirely
mythic.53 More to the point, however, is the use to which Sidhs are put in Hi-
machal Pradesh, such as the important ﬁgures of B aba Balak N ath or B aba
Deot Sidh. While the former is illustrated ﬁguratively in Figure 9, the latter
primarily “is represented throughout Kangra by a square stone upon which the
image of two feet has been carved,” according to Campbell, although I have
seen such footprints elsewhere in North India. Campbell indicates that “his
domain is particularly human fertility, cow’s milk, and general health, i.e.,
protection from attacks by ghosts and evil spirits. For this last purpose there
are special amulets (called asinghi) which are worn by devotees and put on
children, often containing an appropriately blessed and dedicated written
mantra.”54 Other sidhs’ footprints are ubiquitously observable in Himachal
Pradesh, the Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Uttar Pradesh. Sidhs may also
be called Birs (hero: Sanskrit, vira) as well and alternatively celebrated with
conical vermilion mounds that were one to two meters high; sometimes a
mask or bust (mohra) representing the sidh is placed on the mound during fes-
tivals.55 Both the footprints and masks have become the reference markers for
the intersection of folk art, sedentary tribal communities, saint’s cults, amulet
forms, and oral literature. 
Some sidhs, however, are represented with a well-developed iconography,
and elaborate hagiographical or mythic cycles of literature coalesce around
their frequently humorous activity.56 One of my favorite is Baba Kot, the sidh
of the Damdama palace in the old kingdom of Ma ndi in Himachal Pradesh
and the protector of the quasi-nomadic Gaddi tribal peoples who form much
of the demographic base of the area. 57 Baba Kot, whose name means “Father
Fort,” appears to be an entirely mythic synthesis of real siddhas and has be-
come the god/saint mediating between the people of the region and their fu-
ture fortune or luck. His oral literature represents him as habitually traveling
with his comic sidekick Narsingh, and their statues currently reside in the
temple on the upper story of the Damdama palace, which was built in the sev-
enteenth century by Suraj Sen, king of Mandi. The two have become the pro-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 212 ---
tagonists for an entire series of Gaddi tribal legends and ballads, in which the
valor and bravery of Baba Kot is set against the comic antics of his friend. Baba
Kot is depicted as a divine Gaddi %aiva saint (birbaba), with a crown on his
head, a trident on one arm, and a skull in his hand; a snake hangs around his
neck, along with a garland of skulls. In immediate proximity is a circular stone
with sixty-four tiny pairs of footprints representing the yogin is. He smokes a
hookah while not on errantry, can be placated by offerings of marijuana or
liquor, and may be visited on selected days of the week. In return, B aba Kot
guides people who have lost their path (literally and ﬁguratively) and keeps
ghosts at bay, ensuring the health of the retinue of the palace. 
 :
  
The clear Buddhist appropriation of non-Buddhist designations and practices
appears to reﬂect the adventurism of the medieval Indian world, rather than
the ecumenical atmosphere of recent Euro-American discourse. Our evidence
suggests that all the religious traditions—Buddhist siddhas not the least—ar-
rogated others’ religious activities when they appeared popular in court or on
the street. This sometimes surreptitious appropriation was born not from re-
spect for the religious competitors but, rather, from a sense of urgency in the
face of potential extinction in the ﬂuid medieval environment. Yet our inves-
tigation of such practices is somewhat hampered by the conﬂicting claims of
modern authors writing about the medieval dynamic. Some historians have
proposed that India was always a land of religious toleration, as seen in the
proclivity of kings and counselors to patronize multiple religious traditions. 58
As evidence of this, we are informed that this broad liberal toleration is to be
found in Bhagavadgita, IX.23, which proclaims: 
Even all those devoted to other divinities, making their offerings, ﬁlled
with faith—
They are all worshiping only me, Kaunteya, but just not in exactly the
right way.59
Perhaps somewhat occluded in the discussion is an alternate reading. This
verse is actually a recipe for ignoring the content of other religious traditions
(since the correct way of worship is Vai snava) and seizing their sites of wor-
ship (since the real god is Krsna). Instead of being an afﬁrmation of liberal val-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 213 ---
ues, statements like this raise a question as to whether models proposing a be-
nign syncretism in fact account for the opportunistic and agonistic appropria-
tion of rituals, organization, sites, and doctrines from other religious systems.
Such acts would be done for the purpose of success in the face of religious
competition for status, patronage, and resources. Fortunately, developments in
historical writing in the past few decades have made the unsupportable ecu-
menical position much rarer, with a gratifying increase in the understanding
of actual religious relations.60
In fact, our documents about the religious traditions from this period, like
many of our epigraphs, reﬂect a range of attitudes toward other religious sys-
tems, with mutual antagonism the most frequent posture. Relations in South
India, with its afﬂuence and position as the source of many religious move-
ments, appear to have set the stage. As Stein observes: 
During the seventh and eighth centuries, the tolerant relations among reli-
gious sects in South India had clearly come to an end. Mahendravarman I
persecuted Saivites until his conversion; then he turned on Jainas. Later, the
Saivite saint Sambandar who converted the Pandyan ruler, is celebrated in
an annual festival at Minaksi temple of Madurai which commemorates the
impalement of 8,000 Jaina heads at the young saint’s urging. Still later, in the
eighth century, Nandivarman II Pallavamalla, an ardent Vaisnavite, carried
out persecution of Jains and Buddhists, and his contemporary, the Vaisnavite
hymnist Tirumangai is said to have plundered the Buddhist vihara at the
town of Nagapattinam using the golden image to ﬁnance the construction of
walls around the principal shrine in Srirangam and other beneﬁces.61
Instances of mutual suspicion and hostility could be multiplied ad inﬁni-
tum, although most did not appear to result in such lethal outcomes. Yet Bud-
dhists were sometimes themselves the recipients of homicidal action. Oriya lit-
erature reports one instance of the slaughter of more than six hundred
Buddhists during the time of the Somavamsis and the murder of others under
the reign of ChodagaNgadeva.62 Just as clearly, not all felt such great antipathy
toward other systems of devotion, and we do ﬁnd glimmerings of a consider-
ation of others’ traditions from time to time, although they are decidedly a mi-
nority voice in the period. 63 Political involvement may have been a factor as
well, for the patronage of many kings toward multiple religious traditions
could be viewed in part as an attempt to keep them all beholden to the ruler—
and divided from one another—rather than a dedicated catholicity among In-
dian monarchs. 
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 214 ---
Buddhists generally were not much better at ecumenical graciousness than
others. Granoff has pointed to references that appear generous to others’ ritu-
als, but in the same manner as in the Bhagavadgita: others’ rituals are true be-
cause they were really pronounced by the/a Buddha or bodhisattvas. 64 There
are several instances of lesser acceptance, usually along the lines that even a
Tirthika’s mantras can be acceptable, so long as they are done in a Buddhist
manner or before Mañju $ri or some other Buddha/bodhisattva. Allowance is
made for the otherwise morally challenged, as well. Some siddha materials
state that success will come even to those without consecration or to murder-
ers, to those committing the ﬁve sins without expiation, to eaters of meat and
ﬁsh, to those attached to liquor and sex, to those with “vows of denial” (nas-
tikavratin), and so on, if only they will follow some speciﬁc path. 65 We also
ﬁnd various admonitions not to disparage either one’s own or another’s tradi-
tion, expressed as the standard esoteric vow to avoid such behavior.66 Howev-
er, the tone of such expressions is frequently guarded and indicative that rela-
tions with other traditions were often difﬁcult.
Conversely, Buddhist siddha literature is replete with castigations of those
outside the Buddhist fold (tirthika). For example, the V ajrapañjaraincludes
the following statement.
The Lord replied, “We cultivate in the mind the indivisibility of emptiness
and compassion. This is called the doctrine of the Buddha, the Dharma and
the Samgha. Concentration is known as disputing with T irthikas, rooting
out those who dispute with you, and ﬁrmly announcing the texts of one’s
own school.67
We also ﬁnd the denial that the gods are correct objects of worship. As Tilopa
sings in his doha.
Brahma, Visnu, Mahe$vara. Hey, bodhisattva! bodhisattva! Do not
worship these gods! 
Don’t make offerings to the gods, or go to the external places of
pilgrimage!
There’s no liberation in offertories to these deities.68
Even more aggressive are statements about the use of magic to restrain or de-
stroy those of other paths. For example, the Guhyasamaja tantra states,
Now, as to the concentration named the “vajra that paralyzes all the
non-Buddhist teachers”:
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 215 ---
One meditates on [Vajradhara] with the visage of the Wrathful, and all
[his retinue] at the point of a three pronged vajra, like the King of Moun-
tains, on the head of the enemy. 
Even if this enemy could paralyze the Army of the Buddha, he will die,
have no doubt.69
These kinds of statements are found in several places in the literature, includ-
ing in the V ajramahabhairava-tantra.70 Consistently, we see a perceived need to
formulate a defense of the Dharma that takes into account the aggressive action
of the opponents, whoever they might be. One of the more interesting—not to
say disturbing—aspects of this defense is the aggressive afﬁrmation of the Bud-
dha’s Army (buddhasainya) as a rather consistent theme. Whatever this means,
and the commentators are not very forthcoming, the Buddhist siddha literature
begins to include the conception of an organized militant response on behalf of
the Buddhadharma.71 Visible in the hagiographic literature are several stories,
such as those about the siddhas Virupa or Kanha, relating accounts of the de-
struction of non-Buddhist religious sites, ostensibly in response to the well-au-
thenticated attacks on Buddhist institutions. 72 Archaeology occasionally veri-
ﬁes such records with discoveries of the Buddhist appropriation of others’
sacred ediﬁces—such as the Soro li Ngam inscribed with the classic Buddhist
statement of “those elements . . . “ (ye dharmah. . . ). 73 Such examples are far
less obvious than the reverse, however, and the destruction or appropriation of
Buddhist statuary and sites are encountered more frequently.
     ¯ 
As discussed above, medieval literature, such as the Harsacarita, declares the goal
of many non-Buddhist siddhas to be ascension to the realm of the Vidyadharas
(Sorcerers). This is done through cemetery rituals said to confer the powers and
signs of this class of beings—the special hair lock, diadem, pearl necklace, arm-
let, belt, hammer, and sword (Figure 10). Curiously, though, Buddhist literature
is arguably the earliest to discuss the Vidyadharas at all, and this designation is
applied to those who manipulate incantations (vidya) for the purposes of per-
sonal power and gratiﬁcation.74 For example, in the %ardulakarnavadana, a text
composed in the early centuries of the common era, an outcaste or tribal woman
(mataNgi) is described as a great sorceress (mahavidyadhari) when she casts a love
spell to cause the Buddha’s cousin, Ananda, to fall hopelessly in love with her
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 216 ---
daughter.75 The Ratnagunasañcaya-gatha, the early, versiﬁed form of the Praj-
ñaparamita (Perfection of Insight) literature, relates that a bodhisattva is like a
sorcerer (vidyadhara), for both of them can do what others cannot. Whereas the
bodhisattva situates himself in the realm of emptiness beyond existence and
nonexistence, the sorcerer may ﬂy up into the empty sky like a bird or cause blos-
soms to appear out of season.76 Elsewhere, Mahayanist literature describes yo-
gins or bodhisattvas who may be Vidyadharas and places them in the company
of siddhas and physicians. 77 Thus siddhas—like sages ( rsi), Vidyadharas and
other saintly individuals—became located in both mythic celestial and mundane
human realms: in the sky, on mountains, in caves and forests, in cemeteries, and
at the margins of civilization.78
Traces of these issues appear in the earliest Buddhist use I have encountered
that identiﬁes the Buddha himself as one who is perfected and a sorcerer, as
well as a physician. In the Va rnarhavarnastotra of the early second-century poet
Matrceta, who employed a wide ﬁeld of metaphors for his paeans to the Bud-
dha, the poet appropriates these terms:
     ⁄ 
figure 10 Vidyadhara from Nalanda, ﬂying with emblematic sword in hand.
Vedibandha of north face of temple site 2, seventh century. Granite.
Photo courtesy of the American Institute of Indian Studies

--- PAGE 217 ---
Homage to you,
Who have eliminated the disease of every deﬁlement,
Who have removed every arrow [of ignorance],
Who is a perfected sorcerer [siddhavidyadhara],
Who is the greatest of physicians.
Va rnarhavarnastotra, II.3379
Here, I have translated siddha-vidyadhara as an adjective and a noun, as I
believe was the usage of M atrceta’s period. However, the late tenth–early
eleventh-century Tibetan translator Rinchen Sangbo and his Indian Pa ndita
Padmakara understood the compound as two nouns, indicating that the Bud-
dha was both siddha and sorcerer (rigs sngags ‘chang ba grub pa po). Their inter-
pretation reveals the evolution of the category siddha from adjective to noun.
Perhaps most interesting, however, is that this early invocation demonstrates
the durable association of terms for siddhas, sorcerers, magicians, and physi-
cians throughout Buddhist literature. This association is evident from the ha-
giography of the Kuchean Fo T’u-teng (active 310–349 c.e.), through the late
fourth-century Bodhisattvabhumi, and into the rise of esoteric Buddhism.80 Yet
we should by no means be lured into believing that this constitutes a textual
veriﬁcation of early noninstitutional Buddhist esoterism. Indeed, we would be
hard-pressed to ﬁnd a monk more supportive of normative early Buddhist in-
stitutions than M atrceta, whose poetry became standard liturgy in the great
Buddhist monasteries of the early medieval period. 
If institutional Buddhist esoterism was sociologically and historically deﬁned
by the person of the scepter-carrying monk, though, the siddha represents a new
form in Indian Buddhism, one that ultimately came to mark a movement that
began on the periphery and eventually worked its way into the heart of Buddhist
institutions. I have chosen to designate it as noninstitutional only with respect
to its sources and period of formation, although it continually represented a haz-
ard for the structures of the monasteries and their surrounding communities.81
Buddhist siddhas’ language and literature were inherently destabilizing, for they
challenged the ideological bond of Buddhist institutions—lay merit-making by
donating to celibate monks who were ﬁelds of merit by virtue of their adherence
to the elaborate codes of the Vinaya. Although institutional esoterism had al-
ready formulated a hermeneutic of violence and defense, of political order and
hierarchical status, siddhas brought to the table images of sexuality and eroti-
cism, of charnel grounds and ghost rituals. These were the erotic means where-
by siddhas achieved the status of the Vidyadhara monarch, for the erotic senti-
ment was for them the vehicle to the highest realization. 
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 218 ---
Esoteric monks, for example, tended to represent the vajra in the Vajrayana
as a thunderbolt-scepter: this was the adamantine vehicle, which could pene-
trate anywhere and destroy all its enemies. The eighth-century V ajra$ekhara-
tantra is the locus classicus for the standard deﬁnition: a vajra is “that which is
ﬁrm, hard, and non-empty, its character is impenetrable and unsplittable;
since it is thus unburnable, indestructible and emptiness, it is called vajra.” 82
In this avenue, the vajra represented the king’s right to force—the metaphor-
ical legal “staff” (danda), which legal literature claimed as the essence of king-
ship—and therefore the symbol of the Buddha’s Law (Dharma). The enforce-
ment of the law was left to Vajrap ani (Vajra in Hand), who ensured that
criminal elements (mythically represented by either Mara or [%iva] Mahe$vara
in the esoteric system) would not overwhelm the monasteries. The Mahe$varas
of the world were stubborn, and Vajrap ani was represented as the “best of
those subduing the difﬁcult to tame” (durdantadamakah parah).83 This deﬁni-
tion may be compared to the erotized one found within some siddha literature:
the vajra is now frequently described as the male member, and Vajrasattva (re-
cast Vajrapani) is eros embodied. Accordingly, the Vajrayana becomes the ve-
hicle for ritualization of the erotic sentiment.84 As the Guhyasamaja proclaims,
“[We speak of] ignorance, anger and desire; but desire always is found in the
vajra [penis]. Thus the skillful means of the Buddhas is understood as Va-
jrayana.”85 This erotic aspect of the siddha culture reframed so much of the es-
oteric movement and extended the erotic sentiment ($rNgararasa) of medieval
poetry into the domain of Buddhist ritual. The aestheticization of the esoteric
scriptures—their description in terms of poetic sentiments—was marked by
Amoghavajra with his early notice of the ﬁrst yogini-tantra. There, the Sarv-
abuddhasamayoga is described as employing the nine aesthetic sentiments
(rasa) of Sanskrit literature as part of its message. 86
In this light, the distinction between the consecration (abhiseka) rituals (ex-
amined in chapter 4) and those of the new system become all the more impor-
tant. Two erotized and one interpretive consecration rituals were added to the
others in an unwieldy fusion of ﬁssiparous rites. While the entire wealth of in-
stitutional rituals were collectively categorized under the rubric of the pot con-
secration (kala$abhiseka), the other three consisted of the secret consecration
(guhyabhiseka), the gnosis relying on “insight” consecration (prajñajñanabhiseka),
and the fourth consecration (caturthabhiseka). The secret consecration involved
the disciple bringing a female sexual partner (prajña/mudra/vidya) to the mas-
ter, who copulated with her; the combination of ejaculated ﬂuids, termed the
“thought of awakening” (bodhicitta), was then ingested by the disciple as nec-
tar. This qualiﬁed the disciple to practice the internal yogic system of “self-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 219 ---
consecration” (svadhisthanakrama). This latter denotes a complex series of phys-
ical and mental exercises in which the body is visualized as having a series of in-
ternal mandalas, which are consumed in a psychic ﬁre. With the insight/gnosis
consecration, the disciple copulated with the female partner under the master’s
tutelage. This sexual act is for the purpose of obtaining the proper method of the
“centers of the internal mandala” (mandalacakra) to realize the four joys (anan-
da) during the four moments of the ritual orgasm.87 Finally, the fourth conse-
cration varied considerably, involving either a symbolic revelation in a highly
charged charismatic environment or, more frequently, lengthy instruction about
the nature of reality in which the experiences of the previous twosexual conse-
crations were to be integrated into a larger Buddhist philosophical context.
However, the new consecrations embody an association of ritual behavior
and yogic meditation that is a later fusion. The earliest siddha literature sim-
ply speaks of a sexual ritual that is sacramental rather than yogic. It is found in
such scriptures as the Guhyasamaja, the Sarvabuddhasamayoga, the Laghusam-
vara, and others that became understood as proposing the path of “highest
yoga” (anuttarayoga). These materials are unassailably from the eighth century,
with references to them by well-known eighth- and early ninth-century ﬁgures
like Amoghavajra, Vilasavajra, Jñanamitra, and %akyamitra.88 Although not al-
ways separately titled, the name of this rite, when identiﬁed, is variously giv-
en—sometimes “seal rite” (mudravidhi), sometimes mandalacakra-rite. How-
ever, the descriptions are sacramental, without the yogic associations of later
mandalacakra instructions that specify internal psychophysical centers, letters,
and the manipulation of winds. 89 The earliest notice appears in the Subahu-
pariprccha Tantra, which speciﬁes that the monk or yogin will attract a “non-
human” (generally a yaksi) in the forest or other secluded spot, and their cop-
ulation yields worldly beneﬁts, especially magical ﬂight.90 Buddhaguhya, in his
earliest of the surviving commentaries on this work, is straightforward that this
rite is done by one (such as a monk) who might desire a non-Buddhist woman
for sexual pleasure but cannot be self-indulgent toward humans. 91 However,
any female attracted by mantras to a secluded place, we are assured, can only
be a nonhuman like a yaksi.
The net result meant that, in association with other sacraments (samaya)
and in a secluded site, the purpose of the ritual was for the adept to experience
sexuality while in relationship to a divinity, often visualizing himself and his
partner as the divinity and its consort. The consequent ejaculate was taken,
then, to have the mystical properties of the divinity, so that it was, quite liter-
ally, the seed of divinity. Since the divinities most frequently represented, such
as Heruka, had their iconology taken from rural, tribal, or %aiva contexts, the
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 220 ---
point was the recreation of divine attributes ( siddhi, jñana, moksa, etc.) in the
ritualist by reenactment of the divine behavior. Thus the goal was the ritual ex-
perience of sanctiﬁed copulation, with partners either human or nonhuman al-
most equally acceptable, so long as the sacramental structure of the event was
maintained. Some early esoteric literature, such as the Dhyanottarapatalakrama,
certainly taught yogic breathing and other practices, but there was nary a hint
of sexual rituals associated with its psychophysical yoga, and the two do not
come together until the late eighth or early ninth century.92 Even then, the sex-
ual sacrament, by that time called the “consort vow” (vidyavrata), continued to
be practiced separately. The ninth-century author Padmavajra dedicates two
chapters of his classic, the Guhyasiddhi (Secret Accomplishment), to the de-
scription of this activity. 93 Certainly, solid monastic ﬁgures like Mañju $rikirti
supported the consort vow as an important phase in the mantrin’s spiritual de-
velopment, to be undertaken for six months or so.94
These new consecratory systems were sufﬁciently alarming that attempts
were made by Buddhist monks—abbots and exegetes—to frame their ritual
narrative, deny their necessity, or extract their physicality. The ﬁrst was ac-
complished by the requirement that they be understood as extensions of the
imperial metaphor of the institutional consecration rites. Although the impe-
rial metaphor is not as applicable—and not frequently applied—to the three
later consecrations, some authors at least continue this line of thought. 95 Im-
plied in this application (although I have not seen it explicitly worked out), the
disciple becomes the master because he inherits (ingests, uses) the genetic po-
tency of the thought of awakening (semen) from his parents (his own master
and partner). They share the same partner and therefore interact with the seal
(mudra) of ofﬁce or the insight ( prajña) of kingship or its potent knowledge
(vidya). It is obvious, though, that the new rites represent a difﬁcult synthesis
of disparate models. As a consequence, our several theoretical consecration
texts generally emphasize the ﬁrst and fourth consecrations, being the most
Buddhist, while the second and third are given very short shrift. 96
Thus the domestication of erotic rituals required that they be framed with
the imperial rituals at the beginning and Buddhist philosophical thought at
the end. One major exception to an abbreviated treatment of the second and
third consecrations is found in Ratnakara$anti’s Abhisekanirukti. However, the
esteemed commentator applies his hermeneutics to a fourth consecration-style
(Buddhist) discourse on the logical and epistemological implications of these
two, rather than on their speciﬁc ritual praxis. Beyond this, he teaches that the
goal is the attainment of the citadel of Vajradhara, using an older Mahayanist
image to extend the imperial metaphor into the goal of the new path. 97 This
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 221 ---
renewed emphasis on the imperial metaphor as the ritual framework allowed
Ati$a simply to deny that the three subsequent initiations were appropriate for
Buddhist monasteries—they were to be performed by the laity and no one
else.98 Alternatively, the entire process could be internally visualized, rather
than physically enacted, and this was the path eventually chosen by most Ti-
betan traditions. 
The immediate goal of the erotic and other rites was the obtainment of
psychic powers (siddhi), often understood as the mark of success as a sorcerer.
Again, the 726 c.e. translation of the Subahupariprccha Tantra provides the ear-
liest notice of these powers. The siddha was to obtain eight forms of power di-
vided into three levels.99
Superior Mantra Mantra siddhi means delighting both the super
Siddhis mundane and mundane divinities through one’s practice
of mantras.
*Asuraguha¯ Demigod’s Cave siddhi is of two kinds: one 
is able to achieve the treasures of the gods or one meets a 
daughter of the demigods, and goes to their palace to live 
for an aeon.
Rasa¯yana Elixir siddhi means ingesting medicines that 
arise from the elements, from the veins, from beings’
bodies, or from viscous liquids. One lives a long time  
without disease, remains young and with sharp faculties.
Middling Anardhyaratna Priceless gem siddhi means that there 
Siddhis will be a bestowing of gems continuously.
Nidhi Treasure siddhi is the ability to ﬁnd treasures in
the earth. The two kinds of treasure are human and divine.
Human treasure is simply caches of gold, silver or gems.
Divine treasure includes pills, malachite, magic boots, and 
books; these will allow one to ﬂy into the sky, become 
invisible, run swiftly, and immediately penetrate the 
content of any text.
A¯ kara Cornucopia siddhi means that one arrives at wells 
of gold and silver.
Mediocre Rasa Alchemical siddhi means that there is a kind of 
Siddhis mercury that looks like gold. One measure [phala] of it 
will transmute a thousand measures of iron into gold.
Others say not iron, but a drop of rasa that looks like
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 222 ---
ordinary mercury can transmute a thousand measures of 
copper into gold.
Dha¯tuva¯d a Lesser alchemy is the collection of drugs and 
using them to transform lead, etc., into gold.
The list is initially presented in a somewhat different order in the scripture
but is explained in both the scripture and its commentary in the above man-
ner. Although these siddhis represent the earliest list I have found, it was not
the enduring one. Perhaps by the mid- or late eighth century, another list of
the “great perfections” (mahasiddhi) was to become the standard. These are the
sword siddhi, ocular medicine (giving supernatural vision), ointment of fast
walking, invisibility, elixir, ﬂight, the ability to pass through earth and to have
dominion over the underworld.100 This latter list is still malleable, though, and
Abhayakaragupta (c. 1100 c.e.) provides an “et cetera” after the last item. 101
We get a sense that the self-imposed structure of eight “great perfections” is
an artiﬁcial limitation, for new accomplishments continue to be proposed as
new rituals are created to secure the desired powers. 102
This list, as elsewhere, shows an obsession with materia medica, with elixirs
and ﬁnding items lost or buried. This latter circumstance, certainly, may sim-
ply extend from the fact that in the sociopolitical dislocation of medieval In-
dia, those ﬂeeing a site will frequently bury their goods and fail to ﬁnd them
when (or if) they return. Coin and silver hoards from periods of unrest are one
of the most important archaeological and numismatic sources, and they pro-
vide the primary origin of “treasure” described in the scripture. Moreover,
many of the siddha scriptures discuss ointments and drugs, especially those ap-
plied to the eyes or feet. The use of the various species of datura (especially
datura fastuosa) is particularly evident. Sometimes termed the “crazy datura”
(unmattadhattura) or “%iva’s datura,” it was generally employed as a narcotic
paste or as wood in a ﬁre ceremony and could be easily absorbed through the
skin or the lungs. 103 The seeds of this powerful narcotic, termed “passion
seeds” (candabija), are the strongest elements and contain the alkaloids
hyoscine, hyoscyamine, and atropine in forms that survive burning or boiling.
In even moderate doses, datura can render a person virtually immobile with se-
vere belladonna-like hallucinations. The drug has been used by Indian crimi-
nal gangs like the Thugis to incapacitate unsuspecting travelers. This may have
something to do with the siddha fascination with ﬂying or perhaps inform
their iconography, for a common report from the use of datura is the sensation
of aerial transport or the feeling of being half-man and half-animal. 104
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 223 ---
  
´ 
Because of its thematic and textual continuity with some %aiva scriptures,
Sanderson has proposed that the more extreme branch of the new siddha lit-
erature, the yogini tantras, represented an appropriation of Kapalika tantric lit-
erature by Buddhists. Based on his examination of mostly unpublished San-
skrit manuscripts, he has concluded that this level of Buddhist scriptures was
entirely dependent on prior %aiva tantras:
The Yogini tantras have indeed drawn on the %aiva Tantras. Speciﬁcally,
there are extensive parallels between these texts and the group of Tantras
classiﬁed as the Vidyapitha of the Bhairava section of the %aiva canon. . . .
A comparison of the two groups of texts shows a general similarity in ritu-
al procedures, style of observance, deities, mantras, ma ndalas, ritual dress,
Kapalika accoutrements, specialized terminology, secret gestures and secret
jargons. . . . Dependence on the %aiva literature is also apparent in passages
in the Tantras of Samvara . . . that teach the sequences of the pithas or holy
places that ﬁgure prominently in the ritual and yoga of this system. . . . Ex-
amination of the texts reveals these similarities to be detailed and pervasive.
It also enables us to explain them as direct borrowings by redactors produc-
ing what was obviously intended to be a Buddhist system parallel to the
%aiva Kapalika cults but, of course, superior to them. 105
Certainly Sanderson is correct about many parts of the picture: the quick
and dramatic formation of the extreme practices of the Vajrayana is inexplica-
ble without taking into account the inﬂuence of the K apalikas. There can be
little doubt that items essential to the literature of the yogini tantras—such as
the use of skulls, the employment of the specialized club (khatvaNga), and the
later Cakrasamvara-based rhetoric of Heruka’s subjugation of Mahe $vara—
cannot have arisen without sustained K apalika inﬂuence. In the myth, Heru-
ka becomes the emanation of Vajrap ani, and Bhairava is the form Mahe $vara
takes. The twenty-four locales are sites where Bhairava and his consort, Bhai-
ravi, are situated causing trouble for everyone. Heruka destroys Mahe$vara, re-
deﬁnes the Bhairava/Bhairav i couples as Buddhists, and establishes his ma n-
dala by taking his place at the summit of Mount Meru. In some versions of the
myth, Heruka is said to take on the image of Mahe $vara—the wearing of
skulls, ashes, and other adornments—so as to attract to the noble Buddha-
dharma those of the lowest moral level. 106
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 224 ---
It is not surprising, therefore, that selected tantras of esoteric Buddhism
present an aspect of intertextuality with received K apalika scriptures. Yet it is
open to question whether the received Kapalika texts are actually the sole or pri-
mary sources for the yogini tantras. Although we must await the publication and
detailed consideration of the %aiva and Buddhist Sanskrit texts to which
Sanderson alludes, there are certain problems with his formulation that might
mitigate his rather extreme version of a unilateral appropriation, without alter-
native sources or mutual inﬂuence. These problems may be summarized as
chronological difﬁculties, a lack of examination of the sources of %aiva formu-
lations, and an excessively narrow deﬁnition of materials available to Buddhists. 
The earliest Buddhist siddha material comes into evidence around the
720s–730s c.e., give or take a decade. The Malatimadhava of Bhavabhuti pres-
ents us with the earliest Buddhist siddha personality—uncharacteristically a
woman, Saud amini—who is noticed in non-Buddhist literature. Saud amini
represents a Buddhist nun who had trained with one of the female protago-
nists of this unusual literary work, the nun K amandaki. However, Saudamini
is portrayed as one who had given up her robes to pursue the study of the K a-
palika path in the esoteric center of %riparvata; this may be the same locale re-
ferred to in %aiva literature as %ri$aila or Kaum araparvata.107 She has gained
the siddhis, most particularly that of ﬂight (khecari), and has come to assist the
Buddhists in their struggle with the evil K apalika siddha, Aghoraghanta, and
his female companion, Kapalakundala.108 As it turns out, the hero of the play
(Madhava) quickly dispatches Aghoraghanta, and the play turns into a contest
of wills between the nun K amandaki and her archenemy, Kap alakundala. If
Kamandaki represents the Buddhist antithesis of Kap alakundala’s Kapalika
propensity for violence, Saud amini indicates the redemption of its potential.
She moves its brute force away from an obsession on personal gratiﬁcation at
any price to an impulse for compassion toward all beings. Bhavabh uti is the
ﬁrst to chronicle one direction taken by Buddhists in the early medieval peri-
od and to acknowledge that one speciﬁcally Buddhist contribution to extreme
ascetic practice was restraint in service of a moral direction. 
Extraordinary siddha behavior is apparent in early eighth-century Buddhist
scriptures as well, even if its presence has been sometimes glossed over by
apologists. The Subahupariprccha, whose ﬁrst translation is attributed to %ub-
hakarasimha in 726 c.e., is the earliest example of this known to me; several
siddha or Kapalika rituals are found in this text.109 Sections of the scripture—
especially chapter 7—invoke the cemetery-based ghoul (vetala) practices, the
employment of corpses in the center of the ma ndala, the selling of human
ﬂesh, and its use in ferocious homa rituals. As seen above, it also speciﬁes the
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 225 ---
attraction of female tree-spirits ( yaksi) as sexual partners to confer siddhi and
speciﬁes which clothing is appropriate for the rite. 110 Since the well-dressed
mantrin wears blue to the ritual, we may suppose that this is the earliest data-
ble attestation of the notorious “blue-clad” ( nilambara) mob, whose sartorial
preferences became the insignia of their infamous behavior. 111 They are pos-
sibly connected to the extremely popular cult of N ilambara-Vajrapani (blue-
robed Vajrapani), a system enjoying a plethora of Buddhist texts and ritual
manuals. As we have seen above, the Subahupariprccha develops the ﬁrst lengthy
discussion of the source, nature, and number of siddhis.112 The use of bones is
also enjoined, speciﬁcally the use of a bone vajra when the mantrin engages in
rituals of magical murder.113
The evidence of the Subahupariprccha is chronologically reinforced by the
presence in the eighth century of two texts that eventually came to be classi-
ﬁed as yogini tantras: the Sarvabuddhasamayoga-dakinijala-samvara-tantra and
the Laghusamvara. A form of the name for the ﬁrst of these appears in the list
of eighteen V ajra$ekhara tantras that are said to constitute the earliest esoteric
canon.114 Although it is uncertain that the reference there is to the same scrip-
ture currently found in the Tibetan canon, the slightly later mention of this ti-
tle by Jñanamitra (c. 800) as a member of “the canon of eighteen” gives a meas-
ure of credence to a continuity with the text known to Amoghavajra (active
746–774).115 The sense of authenticity is reinforced by the presence of two re-
censions of the Sarvabuddhasamayoga, a longer one included in the normative
Tibetan canon and a shorter version found only in the rNying-ma rgyud ‘bum
(Old Tantric Canon) of the Nyingma tradition. 116 These two are related, and
their organization speaks of the possibility of a still earlier version, perhaps the
one known to Amoghavajra, although the two surviving commentaries address
the longer recension and neither of them know of the received shorter Sarva-
buddhasamayoga in eleven chapters. 117 The Tsamdrak (mTshams-brag) and
Tingkyé (gTing-skyes) manuscripts of the Old Tantric Canon contain both re-
censions and classify them as mahayoga-tantra—indicating its earlier place-
ment—while the editors of the standard canon included only the longer ver-
sion and identiﬁed it as a yogini-tantra.118 Probably, then, some Indic text used
as the basis for the Tibetan translation(s) was formalized during the eighth to
ninth centuries.119
Unfortunately for the proposal that K apalika scriptures are the exclusive
source of Buddhist works, the chronology of the Vidy apitha tantras is by no
means so well established. We may legitimately question the somewhat spec-
ulative chronology that has been proposed. 120 Most afﬁrmations of the earli-
ness of %aiva materials, for example, rely on the Sdok Kak Tho m inscription,
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 226 ---
an important Cambodian bilingual inscription in both Khmèr and Sanskrit.121
The inscription, broken at the end, records various dates, the last being 1052
c.e., probably close to the actual date of composition. Most important, for the
history of %aiva tantras, it maintains that, at the moment of independence of
Kambujade$a from Java, King Jayavarman II (now proclaimed an independent
cakravartin) had rituals performed by one Hira nyadama based on the text of
the Vina$ikha. He then had his favorite priest, %ivakaivalya, learn three texts—
the Vina$ikha, the Nayottara Sa mmoha, and the Sira$cheda—from the oral
recitation of Hira nyadama, that they would be passed down in that family.
%ivakaivalya and his family would be the only ones allowed to perform the rit-
ual according to the Vina$ikha. %ivakaivalya initiated all his relations into the
form of worship and died during the reign of Jayavarman II. The date given
for %ivakaivalya is in the early ninth century, and scholars of %aiva tantra have
taken this date as veridical, indicating that the texts included therein (at least
one of which has been maintained as also within the Vidy apitha) must have
been composed well before that time. 122
Yet what the Sdok Kak Tho m inscription really says is that three texts, of
sufﬁcient importance in the middle of the eleventh century to be included in a
Cambodian inscription, were part of a family’s representation about their po-
sition in the foundation of a state and proof of their religiopolitical stature. We
might have more conﬁdence in the inscription’s content if the texts were not
described as entirely oral, if the occasion were not concerned with the origin
myth of Khmèr independence or if these texts had shown up in any other in-
scriptions. This latter might be considered when we see that a certain %ivaso-
ma appears in the Sdok Kak Thom inscription as an inheritor of %ivakaivalya’s
position as the royal preceptor and the guru of %ivakaivalya’s grandnephew,
Vama$iva. %ivasoma is featured in at least one inscription earlier than 1052, the
Pràsàt Kantal Dom north inscription of Indravarman. We might expect that
his proximity to the throne (he was reputedly the grandson of Jayavarman II)
and position in %ivakaivalya’s family would afford him access to the same texts,
even if he did not have the prerogative in their ritual.123 However, not only are
all of the many Cambodian inscriptions before 1052 mute about these %aiva
tantras, but there is also no indication that K apalika behavior had ever been
employed by the principals, which would be expected if the works were as cen-
tral as the eleventh-century inscription claims. %ivasoma himself is described
as eternally of the “right” behavior (sada daksinacara), expected in a P a$upata
disciple but utterly foreign to Kapalika decorum.124 Beyond this, the eleventh-
century Sdok Kak Tho m inscription itself has problems in projecting later
events to the earliest period. As Chakravarti noted in his study,
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 227 ---
In the Sdok Kak Tho m inscription the people of Anre m LoN are said to
have belonged to the Karmantara caste even in 894 %aka (=a.d. 972) i.e. two
years before the alleged date of the creation of the caste by order of Jayavar-
man V as narrated in the Ko mpoN Thom inscription.125
In reality, the available evidence suggests that received %aiva tantras come
into evidence sometime in the ninth to tenth centuries with their afﬁrmation
by scholars like Abhinavagupta (c. 1000 c.e.); all chronologies afﬁrming their
extreme antiquity remain problematic.126 Other models of their historical for-
mation require sustained special pleading about single reference citations, a
questionable method of arguing history. Were there other, earlier tantras? We
certainly have indications that such was the case, and there were assuredly ear-
lier examples of %aiva heterodox practice. In his autocommentary to the Pra-
manavarttika, Dharmakirti in the mid-seventh century speciﬁes that he was
familiar with the Dakinibhaginitantras and others.127 No titles or speciﬁc con-
tents are given, beyond his mentioning them in a discussion of the decon-
struction of the exact relationship between ethical action and its result, de-
pending on the state of the mind of the individual. This is, of course, the
central argument of the esoteric method: a person with superior capabilities
can employ dangerous methods for transcendental ends. It is possible that the
term “tantra” there simply means ritual rather than text, for that is how the
Kalikapurana is seen using the term. 128 However, this remains to be demon-
strated, and the context appears to point to received texts, rather than simply
to known rituals. 
  
In all probability, the postulation of two and only two possible categories of
sources for the Buddhist yogini tantras—Buddhist and %aiva—will prove un-
sustainable and appears to suppose that all cemetery or antinomian rituals
must, by deﬁnition, be %aiva. Perhaps the greatest problem with the model is
that it closes discussion about other potential sources of esoteric Buddhism.
One need not postulate a pan-Indic religious substrate (as did Ruegg) in order
to acknowledge that Buddhist authors might have drawn on other sources.
The two instances cited by Sanderson, that of the secret signs (choma) for the
recognition of intimates in the esoteric gathering and the twenty-four sites of
praxis (pitha, upapitha, etc.) are, in reality, excellent examples of why the %aiva
scriptures are improbable as unique sources, although they were clearly con-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 228 ---
tributory. The issue of secret signs, understood as an alternative form of com-
munication, is explored in chapter 6. The present discussion concentrates on
the list of pilgrimage sites. 
The question about the ﬁliation of such sacred sites (as opposed to lists of
them) is their professional clientele. Based on his ﬁeldwork, Gross has shown
that modern Indian s adhus congregate and encounter one another at sites of
mythic importance, and it might be expected that such was formerly the case
as well.129 The twenty-four sites represented in the Cakrasamvara recasting of
the eighth-century legend of Vajrap ani’s conquest of Mahe$vara are certainly
not particularly Buddhist, nor are they uniquely Kapalika venues, despite their
presence in lists employed by both traditions. Brieﬂy, one list of the twenty-
four sites is arranged in the following manner: 130
Four pithas: uddiyana, jalandhara, pulliyamalaya, and arbuda. 
Four upapithas: godavari, rame$vara, devikota, and malava.
Two ksetras: kamarupa and odra; and two upaksetras: tri$akuni and
ko$ala. 
Two chandohas: kaliNga and lampaka; and the two upacchandohas:
kañci and himalaya. 
Two melapakas: pretapuri and grhadevata; and two upamelapaka:
saurastra and suvarnadvipa.
Two $ma$anas: nagara and sindhu; and the two upa $ma$anas: maru
and kulata. 
Although there are many variations in the items, in the received form and
by any standards, this list is quite peculiar. For example, none of the major
Buddhist pilgrimage areas are mentioned (Mahabodhi, Rajagrha, Kapilavastu,
etc.) even though these were of clear concern to esoteric Buddhists. Because
the Buddhists pretended that they were claiming the locales from %aivas, we
might expect that they would be %aiva, and speciﬁcally K apalika, pilgrimage
venues. A well-attested practice of the Kapalikas, however, is the Mahakalahr-
daya, which evidently focused on the Mah akalapitha in Avanti (Ujjain), a
known K apalika stronghold. 131 Yet neither Mah akala nor Avanti are listed
among the twenty-four sites, but only the broader area of M alava, and even
then it is not given a position of importance. Similarly, V aranasi, Tripur a,
Khajuraho, Bhuvane $vara (Figure 11), and %riparvata are all well attested as
strong Kapalika sites, but are not identiﬁed in the list. 132 This contrasts with
other %aiva tantras, which are much more pointed in listing speciﬁcally %aiva
sites as their sacred locales. 133
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 229 ---
figure 11 Vaitaldeul temple: probable Kapalika site. Bhubaneshwar,
Orissa, mid-eighth century. Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 230 ---
Among the four great pithas often found in this list, O diyana is now veri-
ﬁed as the Swat valley by the inscriptions published by Kuwayama, and it was
clearly a Buddhist site, with little in the way of %aiva representation and none
whatsoever of K apalika that we can determine. 134 Certainly, it was Buddhist
earlier than any other formalized Indian tradition, and similar problems arise
with many of the other sites in the list of twenty-four. Kamarupa, for example,
indicates the Kamakhya-pitha and its environs and is listed as a pitha in the al-
ternate Hevajra list.135 Yet its prior history as a tribal site of the Kiratas is fully
acknowledged by the Kalika-purana, which indicates that caste Hindus simply
took the expedient of driving out the tribal occupants and pursued the worship
of the goddess along the lines established before the Hindus arrived.136
Likewise, Jalandara-pitha, where the goddess Mahamaya (Vajre$vari) is wor-
shiped in the modern town of Kangra; it was probably a Gaddi tribal site before
Brahmans and %aiva sadhus took possession. We have yet to locate the exact po-
sition of another of the pithas, Pulliya-malaya (sometimes identiﬁed with Paur-
nagiri). However, its name (malaya) seems to indicate that it was located in
South India and was probably a Buddhist name for all or part of the Agastya
Malai, the southernmost mountain range of India and very close to the fabled
Buddhist pilgrimage site of Potalaka.137 This is in line with Raja$ekhara’s list of
four “malaya” mountainous areas in South India/%ri LaNka, with the sacred one
among them being made pure by Agastya’s proximate abode.138
Arbuda is also included in the Cakrasamvara lists and is the well-known
Mount Abu, approximately 100 kilometers west of Udaipur. While EkliNji, to
the north of Udaipur, was a P a$upata locale, the area around Mount Abu was
originally associated with the Bhilla and Abhira tribal peoples. 139 The lan-
guage spoken there was peculiar enough to warrant a mention of its imitation
by actors in Bharata’s Natya$astra.140 The Gurgi Stone Inscription of Kokalla-
deva II (end of the tenth century c.e.) identiﬁes Arbuda as a place name, and
no precise religious associations for the site are speciﬁed. 141 Even when it be-
came more closely associated with Sanskrit culture, it was apparently ﬁrst
Vaisnava and Jaina, rather than %aiva, and it remains today a predominantly
Jaina center. Its only mention in the twelfth-century Krtyakalpa-taru, for ex-
ample, was in a quotation from the Nrsimha-purana—where the site was rec-
ommended for all Vaisnavas—and Laksmidhara was seemingly unable to place
it in a %aiva context, despite his obvious interest in doing so.142 Since Laksmi-
dhara was familiar with the Skandapurana of his time, the eventual inclusion
of a pilgrimage guide to Arbuda-tirtha as the next to the last section of the ﬁ-
nal book (khanda) in some redactions of the Skandapurana is veriﬁed as being
exactly what it appears, a rather late medieval addition. 143
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 231 ---
As will be seen in chapter 6, the centerpiece of the Cakrasamvara recasting of
the eighth-century myth is the placement of Samvara on the pinnacle of Mount
Meru. With this in mind, it might be thought that this is actually the replace-
ment of %iva by Samvara on Mount Kailasa, the well-known %aiva pilgrimage
site just inside the Tibetan border. All the other pithas, upapithas, and so forth
were to be governed by the divinity from the Mount Meru vantage point, and
we might be tempted to see the Buddhist appropriation of the %aiva site as in-
dicated by the myth, especially since current Tibetan understanding is that
Kailasa is the home of Sa mvara. However, McKay has shown that the literary
sources are not so neat as this; Kubera—not %iva—was the original inhabitant
of Kailasa, and Kubera was “originally associated with outcasts and criminals.”144
How should we assess this record? Long ago, Sircar had already noted the
tribal afﬁliation of many of the sites, while for others, “Names of the tirtha,
Devi and Bhairava were often fabricated by the writers . . . [who] had only
vague ideas about some of the tirthas and often took resort to imagination.”145
This is particularly the case for U ddiyana/Odiyana, which was lost to Islam
precisely in the tenth to eleventh centuries, when it became a popular item in
pitha lists, a most curious phenomenon. Moreover, many different lists of sa-
cred sites were distributed throughout the yogini-tantras, and the good schol-
arly monk %akyaraksita is forced to go through elaborate hermeneutical gym-
nastics to try somehow to correlate them all with Buddhist doctrinal and
meditative categories in his Pithadinirnaya. 146 After trying to explain away the
profound inconsistencies in the various lists of pithas found in the yogini
tantras, he addresses the obvious question. 
So, are not these various lists mutually contradictory? In the establishment
of these places as a pitha or upaksetra, do we not have mutually incommen-
surate temperatures, properties or absences thereof? In answer—no, the lists
are not in contradiction. This is because for one place there may be many
identities. So we say here that this place may be called Nagara, or Patalipu-
ta or Malawa, yet they are the same place and it is an upaksetra.147
%akyaraksita is being both a good exegete and utterly disingenuous, for there
can be no question that there are far more places than twenty-four speciﬁed
even in the lists he employs, with very few points of commonality among
them. The major similarity is that they are uniﬁed by the number twenty-four,
another demonstration of the general Indian emphasis on numerical form over
actual content, as seen in the case of the “eighteen” tantras of the early esoteric
Buddhist canon.
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 232 ---
The %aiva Jayadrathayamala list generated to deﬁne one version of these sites
is as yet indeterminate in origin, even though it may prove to be a %aiva appro-
priation of an earlier Kaula or other Brahmanical list, or generated by either Ka-
palikas or Buddhists. Certainly Buddhists had long since shown their willing-
ness to pursue rigorous demonology by their elaborate schematism of various
and sundry nonhumans in the Mahamayurividyarajñi-sutra, but by this time
they were not the only ones doing so. 148 Buddhists, however, were among the
major proponents of specifying a site wherein was located a divinity with specif-
ic properties (such as his family) and speciﬁc mantras. The Mañju$rimulakalpa,
for example, also has a long list of places, beginning with Cina and Mahacina.149
In these two locales, the bodhisattva Mañju$ri’s mantras may be recited for suc-
cess (siddhi) to occur and the eighth-century text continues on through other
geographical areas, many of which appear on the Cakrasamvara roster. 
   
The site question is closely related to the issue of the deity Bhairava and his
Buddhist counterpart, Heruka. Bhairava is unattested in the early %aiva liter-
ature, such as the Pa$upatasutras, which mentions many other names for
%iva.150 Even in the seventh-century drama the Mattavilasa, which is sup-
posed to identify K apalikas, Bhairava is not mentioned. At the same time, in
the Harsacarita, the %aiva character of Bhairavacarya clearly has a relationship
to the divinity, even if he is not explicitly identiﬁed as a K apalika. The myth
of the twenty-four Bhairavas occupying sites attacked by Vajrap ani (or Heru-
ka) and his retinue appears simply to be an articulation that these pithas, and
so on, started as place-speciﬁc sacred areas, and Bhairava seems to have been
little more than a local ferocious divinity at one time. He was eventually ap-
propriated by %aivas, much as they aggressively appropriated so much other
tribal and outcaste lore for their own ends (Figure 12). By the time of the Ka-
lika-purana, a liNgam called Bhairava was identiﬁed on the side of Durjaya hill,
in K amarupa (here = the area around Guwahati), and the text provides two
birth stories for this ﬁgure. The ﬁrst is that Bhairavas (plural) are manifesta-
tions of the middle part of the %arabha body of %iva, the %arabha being a
mythic eight-legged beast.151 The other birth story provides a discussion of the
origin of the two brothers Bhairava and Vet ala, who are both monkey-faced
sons of %iva and are possessed of ghostly essence (vetalatva).152 Animal-head-
ed divinities are frequently indicative of tribal origins, perhaps again from the
Kiratas, who were among the original inhabitants of Assam and are identiﬁed
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 233 ---
figure 12 Bhairava holding khatvaNga club in his left hand and a damaruka
drum in his right. South India, thirteenth century. Stone, 113.36 × 49.23 cm.
© The Cleveland Museum of Art, 2001, John L. Severance Fund, 1964.369.
Reprinted with permission.

--- PAGE 234 ---
by Shafer as having been speakers of a Tibeto-Burman language. 153 They are
possibly ancestors of the Bodo-Kacharis of modern Assam.154
The use of Heruka to destroy Mahe $vara and Bhairava is similarly com-
prehensible. While Heruka is formed in imitation of Mahe $vara in the myth
contained in the Sarvatathagata-tattvasamgraha, the 726 c.e. translation of the
Subahupariprccha contains an apparently earlier reference to Heruka, there de-
picted as a local demon like a ghost (pi$aca).155 This is in close consonance
with the Kalika-purana, which identiﬁes Heruka as the divinity of a cremation
ground ($ma$ana). 
And there is a cemetery called Heruka, ferocious and red in color. He car-
ries a sword and human skin, angry, devouring human ﬂesh. Festooned
with three garlands of heads, all oozing blood from their severed necks, he
stands on a ghostlike corpse, its teeth falling out from the cremation ﬁre.
Ornamented with weapons and his vehicle, let him be worshiped only with
your mind.156
The description of Heruka as a cemetery is also consistent with the curi-
ous translation of his name into both Tibetan and Chinese: blood drinker
(khrag thung) . This is probably not derived from his iconography or from
some hermeneutical reading of his name; instead, it is an extension of the fact
that cemeteries absorb the blood of the deceased. In December 2001, I visit-
ed Kamakhya-pitha, to see if I could locate the Heruka cremation ground. It
appears that the Kalika-purana refers to the cremation area found approxi-
mately two hundred meters east of the current location of the main temple
and around three hundred meters from the oldest site on the N ilagiri hill,
where Kamakhya was located before the most recent temple was built. None
of the priests at the site knew of the name Heruka, but the cremation ground
is now called Mas an-Bhairo (%ma$ana-Bhairava), and a small temple there is
dedicated to the ferocious divinity of the site. The name change should not
surprise us, and by the time of the composition of the Yogini-tantra or the
Kamakhya-tantra—the other two Sanskrit texts closely associated with Guwa-
hati—the Heruka designation appears to have become occluded. Although
this cemetery may have migrated some, as did the parent Kamakhya site itself,
I feel conﬁdent that it is the lineal descendent of the $ma$ana that the Kalika
Purana describes as serving those who came with their deceased to the sacred
area of the goddess. 
In the Kalika-purana description, Heruka is clearly divine, yet is to be wor-
shiped only mentally, rather than with great physical offerings. Moreover, the
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 235 ---
Heruka origin myth, as recounted in the longer Sarvabuddhasamayoga, de-
scribes Heruka in the manner of a cemetery divinity, rather than speciﬁcally
either as the tamer of Mahe$vara or as his imitation. In this mythic beginning,
Mara and other criminal elements are more clearly speciﬁed as his oppo-
nents.157 Thus the Buddhists apparently appropriated a local term for a spe-
ciﬁc Assamese ghost or cemetery divinity and reconﬁgured it into the mythic
enemy of evil beings in general. Because %iva and Mara were at the head of the
very long list of criminal gods, they were included and subordinated to Heru-
ka’s establishment of his ma ndala. His local and possibly tribal background
suggests that there may have been a tribal afﬁliation as well. 
The analogous entity of %amvara—or Sa mvara/Sambara, often called
Heruka—further illustrates the complexity of the situation. %ambara, as the
name of a quasi-divinity, is well known in the Rgveda as the fundamental en-
emy of Indra and Agni; he was also a leader of the Dasyus and a demander of
ransom.158 In particular, he has many fortresses or castles—either ninety-nine
or a hundred—which are conquered by Indra in one of those mythic struggles
that make Vedic literature so interesting. 159 In the course of the struggle, In-
dra assaults %ambara from a high mountain. 160 Evidently, %ambara was still
alive enough by the ﬁrst to second century for him to be noticed in the
Artha$astra, where he is described as a divinity who possesses a hundred illu-
sions ($atamayam $amvaram).161 I have no intention of arguing that the Dasyu
leader in the Vedas,the divinity in the Artha$astra, the %aiva employment of the
designation as a name for %iva, and the Buddhist Vajrayana divinity are some-
how “the same.” It is remotely possible that a cult to a local god of this iden-
tity survived for two millennia; I know of no evidence for this, however. It is
probable, though, that the resonance of opposition to the Hindu Var na$ra-
madharma was sustained in this name, which was still available to the literate,
and that the designation was eventually used by Buddhists in the eighth cen-
tury, when the ﬁgure of %amvara was described. The earliest employment ap-
pears to be in the Sarvabuddhasamayoga, where the author discusses the term
as %amvara, the highest bliss. 162 At the same time, the author introduces the
name as the application or involvement of all illusion (maya), which works well
in the context, yet also resonates with the Artha$astra’s employment of the
name. So, although Buddhists clearly abstracted from %aiva sources certain
iconographic features for the composite %amvara, it is likely that other sources
were also tapped (Figure 13).
Finally, %aiva literature was heavily inﬂuenced by other forms of Hindu and
non-Hindu myth and ritual and was as involved in opportunistic appropriation
as the Buddhists. Indeed, the Buddhist emulation of %aiva principled oppor-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 236 ---
figure 13 Samvara from Ratnagiri, Orissa. Eleventh century.
Bihar State Museum. Arch no. 6505. Photo courtesy of the
American Institute of Indian Studies

--- PAGE 237 ---
tunism may prove to have been the most sustained contribution of the %aivas
to Buddhist ritual. Evidently village or tribal divinities like Tumburu have been
appropriated by both the %aiva tantras and esoteric Buddhist works. 163 Bud-
dhist practices are paralleled in such places as the end of the Vina$ikhatantra,
where we encounter the doctrine of a unique syllable (ekaksara) other than om;
in esoteric Buddhism the ideology and attendant practices of ekaksara devel-
oped around the ﬁgure of Mañju $ri at least since the 702–705 translations of
several dharani scriptures.164 In the middle of the %aiva tantra the Rudrayamala,
moreover, are four chapters on Vai snava worship—not the hallmark of a self-
contained %aiva corpus. 165 In addition, the Kalika-purana relies heavily on
Vaisnava forms and frequently references a Va isnavitantra.166
In the area of myth as well, Bhattacharya long ago pointed out that the
Taratantra, the Brahmayamala, and the Rudrayamala all depict discussions
about how Va $istha received instruction from the Buddha on esoteric ritual,
and the received texts of these demonstrate a concerted awareness of the Bud-
dhist contribution to %aiva practices. 167 It would be remarkable, indeed, if
some Vidyapitha literature were to prove the sole exception to this %aiva syn-
cretism, particularly since the practice of penance by carrying a skull precedes
the formation of the K apalika lineage, which must therefore be minimally
based on Dharma$astra decision systems. In reality, one of the Kalika-purana
myths of the origin of Bhairava—the result of %iva’s having split his %arabha
body—is shown as following a lengthy struggle with Vi snu. The Vai snava
connection is further emphasized in a later version of the twenty-four pil-
grimage sites’ origin as found in the GoraksasiddhantasaNgraha:
Why was the K apalika path proclaimed? To answer this question, it has
been said that the twenty-four enumerated incarnations of Visnu were born
and, at the completion of their tasks, they each went crazy. How is that?
Creatures born into the womb of animals end up playing around without
purpose, and the same happened to the incarnations—the boar incarnation,
the man-lion incarnation—who ended up creating fear of their habitats, the
earth, jungle, and forest. Some attacked cities and villages, while others fell
on the ocean. K rsna, especially, went around indulging in seduction.
Para$urama destroyed many K satriyas because of the fault of a single
Ksatriya. So, the Lord [ %iva] became angered by all this degenerate activi-
ty, and the twenty-four K apalika forms were sent onto the twenty-four in-
carnations of Visnu. They struggled together, and the Kapalikas cut off the
heads of all the incarnations and carried them around in their hands. Thus
the Kapalikas were born.168
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 238 ---
Like the other forms of the origin myths, this late one has no great claim
to an accurate record of the source of the K apalika tradition, even though
Vaisnava inﬂuence is occasionally quite visible. It simply demonstrates that
%aiva traditions—after all, this is a N athpanthi explanation of the K apalika
origins—engaged in the hermeneutics of superiority with the adversary of the
moment, not because it is an articulation of the actual foundations of the sys-
tem. We might expect that the Buddhists acted similarly in their description
of iconographic and ritual sources, which communicate a plethora of involve-
ments and interactions. Thus it is premature to jump to the conclusion that
the received %aiva tantras were formulated without appropriating any materi-
al from the Buddhist tantras (or tantric oral traditions). A more fruitful mod-
el would appear to be that both heavily inﬂuenced the ﬁnal formulation of the
agonistic other and that each had alternative sources as well. 
¯ ¯ - 
What evidence is there that Buddhists and %aivas exchanged materials? As in-
dicated above, Gross’ ﬁeldwork shows that ascetics meet (and discuss the rel-
ative merits of their paths) at speciﬁc pilgrimage sites. Some of the well-
known sites were locales where Buddhists and %aivas certainly met: Devikota,
Kamakhya, Bhubane$var, Varanasi, Jalandhara-pitha, and others, even though
many of these were places where Buddhists would also have met a wider vari-
ety of ascetic. More explicitly, there are occasional records of Buddhists be-
coming %aivas, for example, the nine N athas mentioned in the Kubjikamata
system, as noted by Schoterman.169 This would probably be the reason that the
Jayadrathayamala—one of the works claimed as the origin of Buddhist yogini-
tantras—possibly cites the Buddhist Guhyasamaja, suggesting both its de-
pendence on Buddhist tantras and its probable ﬁnal editing well after the mid-
dle of the eighth century, when the Guhyasamaja was composed.170 We also
have records of %aivas becoming Buddhists, reﬂecting the fact that the Bud-
dhist proselytization of ascetic traditions had been going on at least since the
mythic conversion of Urubilva Ka$yapa and his ﬁve hundred dreadlocked fol-
lowers by the Buddha. 171 What is different with the Buddhist siddha system
of the early medieval period is that these converts no longer necessarily gave
up their previous modes of behavior. Whereas Urubilva Ka$yapa and his com-
panions abandoned their defeated magical snake, shaved their heads, and
donned the yellow robe, the new method of conversion did not require this ex-
treme change of conduct or appearance. 
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 239 ---
In honor of the deconstruction of a speciﬁcally Buddhist relative truth by
the Madhyamikas, the siddhas could represent themselves as good Buddhists
who just happen to like skulls, tridents, and cremation ground ashes as a fash-
ion statement. They might even describe themselves as K apalikas of the Bud-
dhist ﬂavor, as has been frequently noted in the case of Kanhapa and in the case
of Saudamini in the Malati-madhava of Bhavabhuti. Another example of this
conduct is the self-description of the siddha Acinta in his *Tirthikacandalika.
The woman’s pitha is the Crest-Jeweled Mother; my family becomes the
Candali-kula. And the triple world is scorched—the tongue of ﬂame per-
vades the sky. Acinta $ri will dance; he will beat the damaru in the sky and
on the ground. (1) 
Let the vajra ﬁre desiccate the ocean, yet preserve both the sun and
moon. Acinta the Kapalika is a glorious dancer; he will beat the damaru in
the sky and on the ground. (2) 
Gods, demigods, and men, I$vara, Um a, and so forth; they are all
scorched by the ﬁre of gnosis. Acinta the K apalika is a glorious dancer; he
will beat the damaru in the sky and on the ground. (3)
I lead a yogini and I put her in the Lord’s pitha; I have sung this sort of
mandala in song. Acinta the K apalika is a glorious dancer; he will beat the
damaru in the sky and on the ground. (4) 172
This and other evidence suggests that the Buddhist-Kapalika connection is
more complex than a simple process of religious imitation and textual appro-
priation. There can be no question that the Buddhist tantras were heavily in-
ﬂuenced by K apalika and other %aiva movements, but the inﬂuence was ap-
parently mutual. Perhaps a more nuanced model would be that the various
lines of transmission were locally ﬂourishing and that in some areas they in-
teracted, while in others they maintained concerted hostility. Thus the inﬂu-
ence was both sustained and reciprocal, even in those places where Buddhist
and Kapalika siddhas were in extreme antagonism. 
  ´:   ¯ ´
Yet there were other %aiva inﬂuences beyond the K apalika system, a fact that
might be expected given that neither the political nor the economic patronage
of Kapalikas is well attested, and the archaeological record suggests that Kapa-
lika sites were actually somewhat rare. Evidence for other inﬂuence is found in
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 240 ---
the temporary practice of feigning madness—that is, possession by spirits or
ghosts—as espoused by the P a$upatas, whose social horizon was far better
known and whose attested sites are spread throughout Buddhist areas (see the
appendix). As noted above, the P a$upatas were to practice ﬁve stages in their
ascetic endeavors. In the ﬁrst, the distinguished state (vyaktavastha), they were
to inhabit temples and conform to rules. In the second, the undistinguished
state (avyaktavastha), they were to act insane in public and court dishonor. In
the third, they were to dwell in an empty cave; in the fourth, they were to dwell
in a cemetery; and in the ﬁfth, they were to dwell in Rudra.173 The second stage
is of particular interest here. Ingalls has studied this material in some detail
and has already noted that Pa$upatasutra III.11 requires that, for the purpose of
cultivating dishonor, the undistinguished yogin is to “act like a ghost” ( pre-
tavac caret).174 Kaundinya’s commentary elaborates:
Here, the verse indicates an expression about a person, not about someone
deceased. Why? Because it concerns instruction about correct conduct (to
which real ghosts do not adhere). The term “like” [vat] indicates that it is a
variety of metaphor, and it is to be understood that this conduct is to be cul-
tivated by a yogin acting like a homeless man, as if completely insane. His
body is smeared with ﬁlth and his beard, nails, and hair are completely
grown out, as if he had abandoned all the ritual impressions of life. Cut off
from all the castes and stages of life, he becomes powerful in renunciation
and perfects his purpose: reveling in the disgust exhibited toward him. 175
Pa$upatas considered that the founder of the most noted version of the sys-
tem, Lakuli$a, was in reality an incarnation of %iva, who came to the rescue of
Brahmans by entering into a corpse abandoned in the charnel ground, a story re-
peated in both the Vayu- and LiNgapurana and in the 971 c.e. EkliNgji inscrip-
tion.176 So, Lakuli$a was the form of %iva as a reanimated body. It is notewor-
thy that corpse revival was the provenance of another form of demon: the vetala
(ghoul). As already seen above, Bhairava had the essence of a ghost (vetalatva),
and apparently the Kapalika espousal of Bhairava’s ghostliness can be traced to
the inﬂuence of prior systems of religious madness. Accordingly, the literature
supports Pa$upata %aiva models of saints acting like ghosts and ghouls, speciﬁ-
cally in imitation of an incarnation of the great god. Again, this ascetic ($ramana)
practice probably preceded the Pa$upatas. In this vein, the ﬁfth-century Harwan
tiles from a Buddhist monastery in Kashmir (Figure 14) show an individual usu-
ally interpreted as a non-Buddhist $ramana, but could just as easily be a ghost—
its potential for ambivalence is indicative of ascetics’ ghostly masquerade.
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 241 ---
figure 14 Seated Ascetics. Kashmir, fourth century. Terracotta,
50.80 x 30.60 × 5.20 cm. © The Cleveland Museum of Art, 2001,
Edward L. Whittmore Fund, 1959.131. Reprinted with permission

--- PAGE 242 ---
Yet, even if the ascetic practice anticipates the P a$upatas, these %aivas
were the first to institutionalize it in a codified strategy that established a
rapprochement with normative Brahmanical values. Following them, this
form of behavior was appropriated by both radical and mainstream ascetic
(samnyasin) traditions. Crazy behavior is approved in the Svacchandatantra
and also becomes recommended in the late Naradaparivrajakopanisad, which
describes this life as “his behavior without evidence of caste, he goes as a
demon, as a madman, as a child.” 177 While Olivelle, who has studied and
translated this material, believes that it indicates a general approval of such
states, it is clear from the context that various opinions have arisen on how
to integrate the P a$upata’s form of conduct into the system of renuncia-
tion.178 The A$ramopanisad, for example, also allows this form of conduct,
but restricts it to one form of Forest Retiree (vanaprastha), the “Foam-
drinkers” (phenapa), and to the highest variety of Samny asin, the “Great
Geese” (paramahamsa).179
Thus, for %aiva yogins, this conduct is “like a ghost” (pretavat), “like a de-
mon” (pi$acavat), or “like a ghoul” (vetala) because the yogin has left behind
the ritual impressions that form a human being. This is done explicitly during
the ceremony of renunciation, called by Bharati the “sacriﬁce of dispassion”
(virajahoma), in which the renunciate celebrates his own death. 180 The force
of the metaphor, “like a ghost/demon,” then, is that the yogin is fundamen-
tally a ghost—a ghost without ritual impressions—that just refuses to go away.
He cannot be dead, since he still needs food and acts in the world; he cannot
be living, since he is utterly outside the structure of ritual obligations and gift
giving, which deﬁne one’s existence in Indian caste society. By his nonobser-
vation of food prohibitions, he is irretrievably polluted, all the more so because
ascetics court the very things people strive to avoid—proximity to corpses,
pain, and sexual continence. And in the P a$upata’s case, the yogin also courts
social disapproval. He is thus a contradiction in terms, a living paradox. In this
context, there is no great semantic difference between acting like a ghost and
acting like a demon. Frequently the terms have overlapping signiﬁcance in rit-
ual conduct, especially in places like Banaras, where the tank of Pi$acamochan
is a place to go to liberate the spirits of the dead. 
Buddhists were as obsessed as other Indians with ghost lore, even if most of
the available studies on Buddhist ghost rituals focus on East Asia. For Indian
monks, ghosts represented both problems and opportunities. They were prob-
lems because, before the nineteenth-century inﬂux of modern medicine, ghost-
ly inﬂuence was identiﬁed as the cause of many illnesses, especially malaria and
other causes of fever. Freed and Freed, who have provided us with a fascinat-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 243 ---
ing study of ghosts and medical lore in modern India, indicate that the realm
of the undead continues to play an extremely important place in the ideology of
illness and health throughout the subcontinent. 181 For their part, Buddhist
monks were concerned with the possibility that individual monks would be-
come ghosts after their cremation, and the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya considers
steps to be taken on their behalf.182 Ghosts were, however, also ritual opportu-
nities, for Buddhist meditators developed (and continue to develop) rituals for
the liberation of the newly departed (preta), who may be wandering the earth
confused and in need of compassionate assistance. Thus a ghost may represent
the chance to accumulate merit, and it is likely that the early Buddhist practice
of the transfer of merit to speciﬁc departed—a monk’s parents—became the
source for the Mahayanist practice of the transfer of merit to all sentient beings.
The widespread East Asian lore of Mahamaudgalyayana liberating his mother
from hell must be seen as an extension of Indic obsession with ghostly possi-
bilities, not solely or even principally as a Chinese indigenous development.183
Mahamaudgalyayana’s task in the story became a Buddhist specialty through-
out Asia, with ghost rituals in efﬂorescence everywhere Buddhist monks took
on the responsibility of beings’ liberation. 
After the development of the esoteric Buddhist siddha paradigm, the old-
er practices associated with ascetic ($ramana) traditions began to be included
in the spectrum of approved behavior. For example, the conduct of subduing
females for sexual favors, controlling demons and ghosts, and the performance
of cemetery rituals are noted from the mid-eighth century on, and allusions to
these behaviors appear in such diverse texts as the Vajrapanyabhiseka-tantra
and the Subahupariprccha.184 More developed practices arise as well, and much
of the ninth-century Guhyasiddhi, particularly chapter 6, is dedicated to the ex-
planation of how a successful Buddhist is to undertake the Insane Vow (un-
mattavrata). As summarized in the Subhasitasamgraha,
Assuming the image of insanity, he remains silent, in deep contemplation.
Thus he wanders around like a demon , through contemplation on his per-
sonal divinity. 
The vowtaker doesn’t carry a bowl when wandering in search of alms but
takes instead the remains of food already eaten in a plate or broken bowl on
the street. 
Wandering around, he strives for food, and consumes it. Having eaten,
he might be content—but this is also to be rejected. 
The loincloth might be worn, whether split or decayed. Or he may be
naked and wander as he likes. 185
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 244 ---
The language of this extract is almost exactly that of the P a$upata and re-
lated materials given above, including the vowtaker’s behavior being modeled
after that of a ghost/demon. The Pa$upatas were so inﬂuential on esoteric Bud-
dhists, in fact, that Avalokite$vara is depicted wearing the dress and attributes
of Pa $upati (%iva).186 By the late twelfth century in Tibet, Drakpa Gyeltsen
speciﬁcally cites the “insane practice” under the rubric “avadhutacarya” (kun ‘dar
spyod pa), recommending it in his Great Jeweled Tree of Tantric Practice. 187 This
latter text remains the classic arrangement of topics for the Sakya tradition and
the most complete indigenous Tibetan compendium of esoteric practice to that
time. Thus the practice was not simply peripheral to the system, but a form of
yogic behavior recommended to those well advanced along the path and con-
sidered integral to success in the esoteric method. 
Finally, the Pa$upatas are the probable source for the employment of song
and dance in the Buddhist forms of worship, which is ubiquitous in yogini-tantra
literature. Although others, particularly devotional movements (bhakti), used
singing and dancing in their ritual systems, theirs were primarily folk forms with
a minimum of structure to interfere with the experience of ecstasy. The P a$u-
patas, by contrast, particularly enjoined the use of song and dramatic forms in
the worship of %iva, and this emphasis occurs from the earliest documents right
through the life of the order. 188 These were not folk forms, for Kau ndinya’s
commentary to Pa$upatasutra I.8 indicates that when worship is performed us-
ing song, it should be done according to the Gandharva$astra; and when vener-
ation is by dance/drama, it should be accomplished in consonance with the
Natya$astra, the latter presumably Bharata’s classic text.189 Their virtuosity in vo-
cal song and structured forms of dance were perhaps an extension of their in-
volvement with court life and missionary activity. Indeed, inscriptions about one
of the Pa$upata successor movements, the Kalamukhas, are replete with refer-
ences to the musical and dramatic accomplishments of its representatives, in-
cluding the employment of temple girls (devadasi) for their performances.190
Likewise, Vajray ana siddhas were, for all appearances, the ﬁrst of Bud-
dhists to employ singing (not chanting) and dancing (not simple hand ges-
tures) in the acts of offering before images. Such acts were frequently enjoined
in the yogini-tantras, right from its earliest expression, and sometimes brought
with them the values espoused in %aiva/royal court afﬁliation, as seen in the
longer Sarvabuddhasamayoga.
Having subdued the great kingdom of the triple world by one’s own
courage, in order to conquer all the beings [in that triple world] one teach-
es with the horse dance. 191
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 245 ---
Similarly, speciﬁc forms of singing are enjoined in the same text.
The excellent song of the manifestations of the Buddha, for those knowing
these mudras, is the excellent cause of perfection, accomplishes all the eso-
teric acts, continually brings all the physical necessities, and thus all the
forms of increase of goods. So, having sung the songs with six varieties of
tunes, sing the divinity’s song.192
A dedicatory inscription from Gaya (not Bodhgaya) indicates that sophisti-
cated song and dance forms were eventually used in Buddhist temples as well,
albeit at a later date and in somewhat different circumstances. Around the
twelfth century, a local prince, Purusottamasimha, erected a “perfumed cham-
ber” (gandhakuti) to the Buddha, on behalf of his grandson, M anikyasimha.
Three times a day, formal offering was made “by means of instrumental music
in the highest key (pañcamagata) together with Rambh a-like Bh avinis and
Chetis dancing round wonderfully with mirth and singing and so on, in a way
appertaining to the unions of Ana Nga (K ama)—(worship) increased by hos-
pitable entertainments.”193 Although the exact nature of their participation in
other activities of the temple is unclear, the speciﬁcation of two types of
women—primarily bhavini (noble women) and secondarily ceti (attendants)—
making offerings through sophisticated forms of song and dance is suggestive.
Their activity seems to be a development from the earlier introduction of these
forms by siddhas and used in the singing of Apabhram$a songs in both earlier
and contemporary yogini-tantras. What was different about the early Buddhist
use, compared to the Pa$upata and Kalamukha employment of these forms, is
exactly this use of non-Sanskritic language systems in various circumstances.
However, our inscription, written in relatively good Sanskrit, does not specify
the language of offerings. Instead, its court relationship (it is, after all, a court-
sponsored temple in Gaya) appears to preclude the use of Apabhra m$a in this
instance, and the temple supervisor speciﬁed in the inscription was a monk,
Dharmaraksita. Accordingly, the institutionalization of initially siddha-related
practices, at least in this case, apparently involved the shift to Brahmanically ap-
proved language and (no doubt) vocal and dance systems. 
    
Understanding the relationship between heterodox systems—like the Kaulas
and Kapalikas—and the tribal rituals systems has been made even more prob-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 246 ---
lematic by the promiscuous use of the term “tantric” when some historians of
India discuss either these indigenous peoples or their practices. 194 The politi-
cal events and military adventurism of the post-Har sa period not only desta-
bilized the guilds and caused urban areas to experience a dramatic population
loss. These events also precipitated the intensive interaction of tribal groups
with those representing normative Indic civilization, as families became
refugees and would-be conquerors crossed tribal lands. However, the term
“tribal” has been applied to widely disparate ethnicities, including pastoralist
nomad groups, semiagrarian confederacies, and the indigenous (Adivasi) peo-
ple of Orissa, Assam, Madhya Pradesh and Maharastra, who have retained
hunter-gatherer practices down to the present. In the latter case, it is not easy
to see how an orally based, hunter-gatherer culture is directly related to reli-
gious scriptures (tantras) that are generated in an agrarian society. What is
clear from the ethnographic and historical record is that Hindus of every
stripe—%aiva, %akta, Vaisnava, and Smarta—have engaged in aggressive Hin-
duization of tribal peoples, beginning in the early medieval period. Hinduiza-
tion has normatively taken the form of the seizure of sacred sites by Brahmans,
the appropriation of tribal deities by %aivas, %aktas, and Vaisnavas, and the in-
vestiture of speciﬁc peoples with a caste identity, the supposedly “mixed” birth
groups (samkarajati).195 Sometimes, tribal rituals are also captured for contin-
uation at the site, with a degree of modiﬁcation, but with Brahmans or %aiva/
%akta ascetics now in charge. 196
The goals of these and other practices included the “paciﬁcation” of threat-
ening groups, control of their produce, identiﬁcation of their ignoble (anarya)
divinities with the great Hindu gods, and the subordination of their lifeways
to that of normative Hinduism. Rituals based on tribal usages were not the
same as the tribal rituals themselves but, instead, were imitative and exploita-
tive in nature. Indeed, Hinduization has most concretely resulted in the alien-
ation of tribal lands from these peoples, and the contest between tribal peoples
and caste Hindus over religion, land, and usage rights continues to this day.
The blanket representation of tribal peoples as “tantric” by certain modern In-
dian authors merely extends the process of appropriation into the early twen-
ty-ﬁrst century, much as the exploitation and subjugation of tribal peoples in
the United States has been capped by the imitative exploitation of their reli-
gious systems in New Age religion. 197
As Indians became increasingly scattered to forest tracts during the me-
dieval period, their representations of the indigenous inhabitants appeared to
change in some areas of literature. Earlier literature, such as the Mahabharata,
had not described the autochthonous foreigners (mleccha) in favorable terms,
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 247 ---
providing origin myths that showed them descended from such unsavory char-
acters as the wicked Vena. 198 The Artha$astra considers tribal peoples worse
than thieves, for they set themselves up as kings against correctly (Brahmani-
cally) coronated kings.199 Likewise, earlier Buddhist literature had not looked
favorably on Indian indigenous peoples, for they were notorious robbers of
caravans, and Buddhist sympathies (and patronage) were with the trading
guilds. Thus the Da$abhumika-sutra twice uses these people as a metaphor for
problems on the spiritual path: in same the way that either tribal depredations
or armed fortresses might impede the caravan leader from reaching the trad-
ing city, the bodhisattva’s progress is arrested by spiritual impediments.200 The
medieval change is striking, beginning with the favorable assessment of in-
digenous peoples in Bharavi’s sixth-century romance, the Kiratarjuniye, which
depicts help provided to the Pandava brothers by Kiratas and Yaksas.201 Like-
wise, around 730 c.e. Ya$ovarman wandered through a tribal sacriﬁcial site in
the military romance Gaüdavaho, and the poet depicts him commenting on
the beauty of the tribal couples.202 Such a change is in keeping with the rise of
tribal power and the feudalization of indigenous clans. 203 Not only did the
Candellas of Khajuraho come from Gond tribal stock, but the grandfather of
great Panduvam$i king Tivradeva (c. 800 c.e.)—ruler of Daksina Ko$ala king-
dom centered in Sirpur (Raipur District, Chhattisgarh State)—had been a
%abara tribal chieftain.204
In the case of esoterism there emerge several shifts of representation. This
might be expected, for in reality the geographical convergence of tribal peoples
and esoteric Buddhism—measured through the historical record and archaeo-
logical sites—is more pronounced than the convergence of the Vajray ana and
Kapalika %aivism. We ﬁnd not only esoteric sites like Malhar, Sirpur, and Rat-
nagiri in areas that are thoroughly tribal during this period but canonical and
exegetical references to tribal and their closely associated outcaste peoples al-
most at every turn.205 For example, the obscure words of coded language found
in the Hevajra-tantra and elsewhere are often designated “foreign speech”
(mleccha-bhasa) or “the language of Odiyana.”206 The afﬁliation of these words
and coded language is examined more closely in chapter 6, but it is important
to remember that “foreign” in early medieval India did not simply designate
“extraterritorial.” As a term, it also applied to the plethora of tribal peoples
found throughout the areas now known as Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Gujarat, Ko Nkana, Bengal, Assam, Kashmir, and Swat—
precisely in all the strongholds of esoteric Buddhism. 207
Beyond the geographical convergence and the possibility of indigenous
loan words, the esoteric tradition supported several formulae that valorized in-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 248 ---
digenous peoples as icons. For instance, there emerged a hermeneutic of prim-
itiveness, naturalness (sahaja, nija), or nonartiﬁciality (akrtrima).208 Since rit-
ually afﬁrmed virtue was no longer the sine qua non of the path—irrespective
of whether it was from a Buddhist ceremony or impressed by Brahmanical
rites of passage—the natural human condition was regarded as a symbol for
innate awakening. Moreover, individuals began appropriating the designation
“%abarapada/%abare$vara/%abaripa,” which may indicate their status as actual,
tribally born siddhas or (more likely) their assuming this designation by hav-
ing lived in tribal areas for a period. The ethnonym %abara designates a his-
torically important tribe, most frequently identiﬁed with the modern Saora
(%abara > Savara > Saora) in Orissa, Chhattisgarh, and Madhya Pradesh. 209
Together, these trajectories brought a strong sense of afﬁliation between eso-
teric Buddhist siddhas and the peoples of the forest, secured in part by the
Buddhist appropriation of divinities of supposed %abara origin. 
Evidence for the identiﬁcation with tribal peoples comes especially through
the Prakrit poetry generated by selective siddhas. Serendipitously, some of
these are preserved in the original language—or something very close to it—
and they are especially dramatic in the Caryagiti collection. 
Higher and higher, in the mountain the %abara girl lives. This %abara nymph
ﬂaunts a peacock’s feather; around her neck a garland of guñja berries. [1]
[She scolds her husband,] “You crazy %abara! You drunken %abara!
Don’t raise a ruckus or cause such a commotion! I am your own wife—Ms.
Naturally Beautiful!” [2]
Branches from the canopy of the diverse excellent trees stroke the sky.
Bearing earrings and a vajra, the %abara girl rambles around this forest. [3]
The %abara lays down his triplex bower—a bed thatched through with
great ecstasy. For this %abara is a real Casanova; with Lady Nonself as his
whore, love illuminates the night. [4] 
[Afterward] he chews his essential betel and camphor with great ecsta-
sy. Thus receiving empty Nonself in his throat, great ecstasy illuminates the
night. [5]
Hey, %abara! With the conclusion of the teacher’s direction, pierce your
mind with your arrow! Nocking one arrow, pierce, pierce highest nirvana! [6]
That crazy %abara! Because of anger he’s wandered into the ravine be-
tween high mountain peaks. How’s this %abara ever going to get out? [7]210
The signiﬁcance of the verse is clear enough, indicating a familiarity with
the degree of sexual freedom and the use of intoxicants continually reported of
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 249 ---
tribals in India. Moreover, the verse is a relatively transparent allegory, in
which the %abara stands for the esoteric yogin, engaging in promiscuous inti-
macy with emptiness. Yet the commentator Munidatta cannot leave it there,
for his tortuous explanation runs the spectrum from excessive to obsessive, in-
terpreting each item as if it must denote some aspect of the yogic process. The
point remains, however, that the %abara became a cipher of both tribal peoples
and the attainment of ultimate reality. Similar values are evident in one of
Kanhapa’s Apabhram$a dohas.
A sage at the summit of the best of mountains, the %abara makes his home.
As his position is inviolable by even the “ﬁve-faced” [lion], the aspiration
(to obtain the summit) of the best of elephants is very distant. 211
The surviving anonymous Sanskrit commentary is exceedingly blunt: the %abara
is Vajradhara himself on the top of Mount Meru, and the ﬁve-faced (which can
be either a lion or %iva) cannot begin to approach him.212 Thus the %abara be-
comes an icon for the Buddhist esoteric divinity Samvara and assumes the posi-
tion of a metaphor for the myth of Mahe$vara’s humiliation and death. 
Although Munidatta’s commentary views two Caryagiti verses (nos. 28 and
50) as the composition of one of the %abarapadas, there is little evidence for the
ascription beyond the content. However, at least three and perhaps more of the
Buddhist siddhas are said to have appropriated this name (or similar designa-
tions) for themselves; their hagiographies are found in disparate sources. Per-
haps the earliest use of this appellation is for the late tenth-/early eleventh-cen-
tury teacher of the siddha Maitripada, and the Sanskrit Sham Sher manuscript
published by both Lévi and Tucci indicates that, after Maitr ipada’s change of
identity into Advayavajra, he studied with a %abare$vara in the south. 213 It is
open to question whether this is the personality introduced in Abhayadatta$ri’s
Lives of the Eighty-four Siddhas, who is referred to as %abaripa and for whom no
connection to Maitripada is imputed, since neither the latter scholar’s name nor
his nom de plume Advayavajra occurs in Abhayadatta$ri’s work. The literature
also includes mention of a %awari who was of the Brahman caste and who
taught the early eleventh-century Shangpa Kagyüpa founder, Khyungpo
Neljor.214 There is furthermore a late eleventh-century %abare$vara identiﬁed as
both the teacher of Phadampa Sangyé Kamala$ila and the author of an intrigu-
ing and difﬁcult poem on the secret nature of the mind.215 In addition to these
individuals is a much later %avaripa acting as the esoteric preceptor for Vibhu-
ticandra, the late twelfth-/mid-thirteenth-century Indian scholar of the Kala-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 250 ---
cakra.216 The accepted explanation seems to be that %avaripa is immortal and
still wandering the world, a revival of the old “eternal sage” myth found applied
in Buddhism to saints as diverse as Mah aka$yapa and Vimalamitra. For our
purposes, however, it is instructive to consider that the tantric directives for sid-
dhas to practice in tribal areas no doubt fueled both a fascination with and the
appropriation of their identity, all with more than a dash of Rousseauean ro-
manticism of the noble savage thrown in. 
The poetry most closely associated with the %abare$vara/%avaripa persona
tends to play off the behaviors attributed to indigenous groups in the medieval
world. As seen above, medieval tribal peoples were depicted drinking, making
love, and sleeping frequently. One of the %avaripas employed these activities
as ambivalent tropes for the realization of emptiness.
The Vision of Emptiness
The reality of mind’s highest realization is declared as a seed in the realm
of space.
I embrace the nubile nonself by the throat and remain in the state of
awakening.
“Reject!” “Take!” — these delude the self. 
Hey! %avari plays with all the fetters within great bliss. I embrace the
Empty Lady.
Hey! Body, speech and mind are matured. 
By inspection throughout all times, %avari will become drunk.
In every form of joy, %avari falls asleep, 
Passes out in the realm of space. 
Hey! My reality is declared a seed in the realm of space.
The fruit shines like the Morning Star.
“Reject!” “Take!”—these delude the self. 
I kill the elephant of mundane fetters and make an offering cake of the
ﬁve senses.
I reject all of my suffering.
“Reject!” “Take!”—these delude the self. 
Not sleeping day or night, I act as the watchman of my own mind.
The woman born from it, stays alone, having gone to a secluded spot.
The chieftain is said to be Lokan atha. 
“Reject!” “Take!”—these delude the self. 
So I embrace the Empty Lady— %avari plays in great bliss. 217
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 251 ---
figure 15 %abara woman. Hoysala, Mysore, twelfth century.
National Museum no. 2/5/1249. Photo courtesy of
Katherine A. Schwab

--- PAGE 252 ---
Beyond their occasional mythic afﬁrmation of indigenous peoples, the
Buddhist record on ritual appropriation is also mixed. Associated with the
tantras are several rituals, with attendant iconography, that focus on two fem-
inine divinities: Parna$abari and JaNguli. The former clearly derives her name
from one standard reference to the %abaras—the “leaf clad” (parna) %abaras—
which was explained by an origin legend that lasted, according to Russell, well
into the nineteenth century for the Bundelkund Saora (Figure 15). 218 Similar-
ly, the JaNguli goddess is indicative of her origin in the jungle (jaNgala), a des-
ignation for “forest” that is in fact a loanword in English through Hindi. Both
of these goddesses enjoy well-distributed literature and are sometimes, as in
chapter 15 of the Krsnayamari-tantra, invoked in the same ritual. 219
So now, I will pronounce the ritual meditation on the Noble J aNguli. By
merely visualizing her, one could cross over water. (1)
Visualize her with three faces, and six arms. She is yellow, and forms
from the seed mantra Phuh. She holds a snake in her hands and is of enor-
mous form.220 She loves to ride on her peacock vehicle. (2)
To the east, paint May uri, with Bh rkuti to the south. To her west is
Parna$abari, and Vajra$rNkhala to the north. (3)
Peacock feathers, a gourd, a branch and a chain 221—visualize these (for
the other goddesses) and their colors: yellow, red, dark, and blue. (4) 
The intelligent one will visualize them thus, and recite the mantra:
om. phu¯h. jah. (5) 
Place (visualize) Mudgara, etc., at the doors (in the cardinal directions)
and Puspa, etc., in the intermediate directions. Then, by the Noble J aNguli
yoga, you can always cross over water. (6) 222
These rituals obviously invoke peacocks or peacock feathers, sometimes
ﬂowers, and other “jungle-like” ritual paraphernalia. The siddhis they convey
are principally overcoming poison, either from snakes or ﬂowers, and able
magically to cross over water. JaNguli’s capacity to cure poison was sufﬁciently
important for the Tibetan translators simply to render her name as Dug-sel
(ma) (the clariﬁer of poison). These jungle goddesses are described as two-,
four-, or six-armed, with one to three heads, and in different colors. Par na-
$abari’s mantra describes her as a pi$aci, in this case not necessarily a ghost,
since the name was from an early period applied to tribal peoples as well. 223
Although the extent of the Buddhist interest in seemingly tribal—especial-
ly %abara—goddesses is impressive, the process of appropriation and incorpo-
ration of these ﬁgures was by no means straightforward. Actually, the distance
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 253 ---
between these divinities and their putative origins needs to be assessed as well,
and one way to do that is to observe the difference between tribal and Bud-
dhist iconography. All the tribal gods/goddesses for which there is much evi-
dence indicate that they are depicted as wide-eyed ﬁgures of a decidedly rudi-
mentary character, either as barely recognizable anthropomorphic ﬁgurines or
as simple pieces of rock or wood. None of the tribal goddesses appear to em-
ploy the elaborate iconography described by our Buddhist rituals, and real trib-
al divinities are much more closely mirrored by such statues as the wooden Ja-
gannatha group, which is thought to be an actual %abara efﬁgy that has been
somewhat Hinduized in the process. 224
Even more important in the current instance is the question of gender,
since the contemporary Saora are one of the few tribal groups that have no
central goddess ﬁgures, calling into question either the accuracy of %abara =
Saora or the Buddhist capacity to understand the tribal source of its represen-
tations. This latter is the more likely conclusion, since other tribes in Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, and Bengal have a fundamental
mother goddess (e.g., the Kond earth goddess Tari). As Verrier Elwin ob-
served in his ﬁeldwork, “There is no Earth Mother in the Saora pantheon.
How extraordinary this is can only be appreciated when we reﬂect on the enor-
mous inﬂuence of this conception over the whole of eastern India, and partic-
ularly among the Saoras’ nearest neighbors, the Konds.” 225 Tari (and the
Gond equivalent) has been represented by a post or stump and serves as the
probable ritual source for the %akta cults of Khambe $vari, Subhadra, Dante-
$vari, and a host of other ﬁgures in the Orissa/Madhya Pradesh area.226 More-
over, if the esoteric Buddhist masters did not succeed in correctly identifying
the tribe, they were not alone in the early medieval period. V akpatiraja’s
eighth-century Gaüdavaho speciﬁes that a Candika ﬁgure—probably identify-
ing the site of the current Vindhy avasini in Mirzapur—was worshiped by
“%abara kaula” women, but the statue was doubtless built on a %akta appropri-
ation of a Gond site.227 Even though apparently in error, the ascription of san-
guinary goddesses to %abaras is well attested in early medieval literature in
both Sanskrit and Prakrit, and the literary convention is almost certainly be-
hind the Buddhist articulation of the same phenomenon. 
Even beyond tribal peoples, many Buddhist siddhas afﬁrmed a strong con-
tinuity with outcaste or lower-caste groups. As already seen, the earliest sur-
viving text assigning the use of mantras to the historical Buddha, the MataN-
gi-sutra section of the %ardulakarnavadana, depicts the Buddha’s ritual combat
with a woman who is of the M ataNga group. Similar to the phenomenon of
%abare$vara/%avaripa, several individuals employed outcaste ethnonyms for
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 254 ---
their personal names: Candalaja, Dombiheruka, Dombi, and so on. The pres-
ence of animals expressing outcaste aesthetics, especially dogs, is found in the
hagiographies of the various yogins appropriating the designation Kukuri-
pa/Kukuraja. Likewise, many of the goddesses of siddha ma ndalas, as seen in
chapter 7, indicate outcaste afﬁliation: Dombini, Candali, and so forth. Final-
ly, even the proper name for the ﬂame of psychic heat in esoteric Buddhist
yoga is given an outcaste identity. Perhaps the most frequently quoted verse
from the Hevajra Tantra describes the visualization.
Candali ignites in the navel. She burns the ﬁve Tath agatas. 
She scorches Locana and the other goddesses. 
When ham is burned, the moon melts. 228
All told, the Buddhist valorization of indigenous peoples and outcaste
groups is a theme well articulated in esoteric Buddhist works. Yet it should be
viewed as a piece of a larger picture, in which the rhetorical or actual presence
of these peoples is but one of the many social levels included in select com-
munities. They may include siddhas from princely houses, like Indrabh uti,
with merchants and Brahmans also represented. Although their hagiographi-
cal presence may sometimes be suspected as more ideological rather than
real—it is doubtful that many of the %abare$vara/%avaripa ﬁgures were born
tribal—the overall effect is that of a much broader afﬁrmation of ethnic iden-
tity than at any other time in Buddhist history. Some of our many questions
on the actual linguistic and community contributions of autochthonous peo-
ples are examined in the subsequent chapters. 
:   
In the period between their appearance in the early eighth century and their
demise some six to seven centuries later, Buddhist siddhas captured the imag-
ination of Buddhist communities in North India, Nepal, and elsewhere, even
while they were probably few in absolute numbers at any one time. The new
ideal arose both from the Buddhist appropriation of elements of the much old-
er siddha tradition and from the aggressive intrusion of non-Buddhist ele-
ments into the Buddhist milieu. Here, siddhas took as their primary goal the
acquisition of supernormal powers ( siddhi) and, ultimately, dominion over
both gods and sorcerers ( vidyadhara). The means to do so involved magical
rites in cemeteries or forests in conjunction with persons of authority, espe-
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 255 ---
cially kings, using their aid to subjugate various kinds of nonhuman beings.
Frequenting both cemeteries and the palaces of the new lords of the land, they
practiced every form of magic, from love potions to ritual slaughter. With a
political awareness as to the perquisites of royal patronage, siddhas acted as the
kings’ agents, engaged in secret signs and elaborate disguises, and provided
their royal patrons with sacred entertainment through sophisticated temple
song and dance. However, for siddhas the earthly political sphere was but a
pale imitation of the ultimate celestial political environment, even though they
made provisions for their appropriation of mundane political authority. In fact,
siddhas desired nothing less than power over the divinities themselves and the
underlying forces of reality. They represented the limitations of worldly ethics
and morality as applicable only to incompetents, for siddhas must be above
such concerns.
Accordingly, Buddhist siddhas have both continuities and discontinuities
with siddhas in other, especially %aiva, lineages. In some ways, Buddhist sid-
dhas demonstrated the appropriation of an older sociological form—the inde-
pendent sage/magician, who lived in a liminal zone on the borders between
ﬁelds and forests. Their rites involved the conjunction of sexual practices and
Buddhist mandala visualization with ritual accouterments made from parts of
the human body, so that control may be exercised over the forces hindering the
natural abilities of the siddha to manipulate the cosmos at will. At their most
extreme, siddhas also represented a defensive position within the Buddhist tra-
dition, adopted and sustained for the purpose of aggressive engagement with
the medieval culture of public violence. They reinforced their reputations for
personal sanctity with rumors of the magical manipulation of various ﬂavors of
demonic females (dakini, yak si, yogin i), cemetery ghouls (vetala), and other
things that go bump in the night. Operating on the margins of both monas-
teries and polite society, some adopted the behaviors associated with ghosts
(preta, pi$aca), not only as a religious praxis but also as an extension of their im-
plied threats. 
Thus Buddhist siddhas represented a new social prototype that provided
regional centers and disenfranchised groups with a model of autonomous
power outside the artiﬁce of caste Hinduism. They also offered sophisticated
religious approval that did not require the abandonment of regional identity,
in this way different from the depersonalization that Buddhist monks experi-
enced. Siddhas became the ﬁrst line of temporal involvement with tribal and
outcaste peoples, appropriated and imitated cult practices, objects, and sites,
and set up preferred siddha religious activities in distant provinces and foreign
lands. This is not to say that they were all of a piece, for many Buddhist sid-
 ⁄     

--- PAGE 256 ---
dhas were at the very least notoriously contentious, castigating other traditions
with ridicule and intimidation. Siddhas also argued and fought with one an-
other and with the powers that be, proving the most fractious group of Bud-
dhist ascetics to inhabit the subcontinent during the medieval period. In their
behavior, they consistently represented themselves as outside the normal eth-
ical strictures, for they were becoming kings of the Vidy adharas. The volumi-
nous literature they generated has only begun to be examined critically, and
many surprises about this new form of saint await us. It is to the issue of liter-
ature and language that we now turn.
     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 257 ---
Now, having clearly explained the succinct meaning of this introductory
statement of the Guhyasamaja-tantra, I will hereafter interpret it accord-
ing to the oral instruction of the Acaryas. So, the letter E means the
sacramental seal [samayamudra]. The letter vam indicates the great seal
[mahamudra]. As for ma, it is the Dharma seal, and ya is the action seal
[karmamudra]. %rutam provides the sense of commitment. Or again, the
letter E means . . .
—Vilasavajra, %ri Guhyasamajatantra-nidana-gurupade$ana-vyakhyana.1
/Cswash
reating their ideological ground between the grand, feudalized institu-
tions of orthodox esoterism and the emerging and sometimes agonistic
religious and political landscape of the early medieval period, Buddhist
siddhas formulated literature that reﬂected their own concerns. These issues,
however, were as diverse as the siddhas themselves. While some siddhas were
absorbed in scriptural composition, others were obsessed with its domestica-
tion and inclusion into the monastic syllabi, with selected individuals pursuing
both tasks. Yet the obstacles to curriculum inclusion were among the most for-
midable any emerging Buddhist system had ever faced. As the opening of the
Guhyasamaja above indicates, siddhas developed new forms of scripture that
depicted an erotized Buddha at the center of a retinue of beguiling damsels.
Siddhas also included in their pantheon tribal and local goddesses, murderous
blood-drinking gods, and a host of illicit characters, from ghosts to snakes.

-
/Sswashiddhas, Literature, and Language
Thus have I heard. At one time,
the Lord was residing in the 
vaginas of the women who are the
adamantine body, speech, mind,
and heart of all the Tathagatas.
Evam maya$ rutam | ekasmin
samaye bhagavan sarvatathagata-
kayavakcitta-hrdayavajrayosid-
bhagesu vijahara ||

--- PAGE 258 ---
They used erotic descriptions that framed in explicit language a series of ritu-
als extolling everything from group sex to ritual homicide to cannibalism.
Buddhist siddhas employed varieties of language that were inauthentic by any
aesthetic standards of the day: regional (some say barbaric) Sanskrit, Apa-
bhram$a, and Old Bengali. In their nonscriptural works, siddhas spoke in the
ﬁrst person and employed forms of versiﬁcation most closely allied with folk
theater, wandering poets, and images of the countryside. However, the sheer
outrageousness of their texts emphasized the humorous discontinuities of
Buddhist existence, providing an extreme version of literary play. It is no ex-
aggeration to state that the reader never really knows where the lines are drawn
in siddha literature. 
This chapter examines the development of the new siddha scriptures and
as much as possible of the sociology of their articulation, including the ofﬁce
of the wandering siddha storyteller. It looks at the two principal and some
subsidiary myths for the preaching of the mahayoga and yogini tantras, espe-
cially the important Indrabhuti myth as related in the earliest surviving docu-
ment on the propagation of the new scriptures. The chapter discusses the
hermeneutics of scriptural authentication and brieﬂy examines the questions
of coded language, ﬁnding the probability of a tribal or Dravidian component.
Based on coded language, it explores the overarching question of secret signs,
which included coded language under its aegis at one time. As an extension
of both coded language and secret signs, the rhetoric of naturalness is again
broached, and the sociolinguistics of the language forms that appear in the
new scriptures, especially the issues of regional Sanskrit and vernacular litera-
ture, is analyzed. In addition, the siddha sense of humor and play is discussed.
The chapter concludes with the idea of autobiographical voice in the doha
form of poetry. 
     
The historiography of Indian Buddhist scriptural production has tended to
suggest, as in the case of Ray, that Mahayanist scriptures were composed in
the conﬁnes of forest monasteries by an elite class of visionaries. 2 Their un-
derstanding of the scriptures, according to this model, was reﬁned after
decades of individual meditation and personal reﬂection. Inspired by the vi-
sions of various Buddhas and bodhisattvas, the revelation of a new doctrine or
idea extended from the collapse of cognitive categories and was precipitated by
a vision of truth. This experience resulted in a new synthetic, creative vision of
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 259 ---
reality, one that the forest meditators put into the voice of the Buddha as an
acknowledgment of its visionary source. Each individual rendered into an ap-
propriate language the content of his vision. These visions were collected and
compared, ﬁnally producing a canon. 
The applicability of this model to Mahayanist scriptures has yet to be de-
termined, but I believe that this could not be the case for Indian esoteric Bud-
dhism. Indeed, our evidence, both social and scriptural, supports the idea that
the esoteric (especially siddha) scriptures arose as preeminently social events.
Despite the evidence for a rhetoric of inspiration and isolation, as seen in the
instance of tribal deities in the forests, the context for the development of
scriptures appears to be the regional centers of social and political authority.
This is where analogues to the kind of Sanskrit employed in the siddha scrip-
tures are found; this is where vernacular languages are applied to literary styles;
this is where the kings in their regional courts talk to wandering siddhas or
take tribal and outcaste peoples into their discussions. Most of the place names
represented in siddha literature—with the exception of holy cities like
Varanasi—are well-known locales outside the large metropolitan zones, yet
not in the deep forest. 
If this social model is true, then it would explain the extraordinarily per-
formative nature of the new holy texts. The new scriptures of the siddhas, the
mahayoga- and the yogini-tantras, are overwhelmingly dominated by ritual,
song, dance, and storytelling—all blended together. Even when the forms of
yoga are observed, the emphasis is on the ﬂuidity of language and on the per-
formative functions of letters and groups of sounds. Thus one source of the
new scriptural authors might be sought from a social strata composed of, or at
least exposed to, singers, performers, players, street preachers, and touring
theater troupes. Although their narratives may invoke images of birds and
snakes in the deep forest, none of these groups dwell there or develop their
performances in solitude. This proposal is supported by the observation that
groups still employing siddha vocabulary, such as the Bauls, tend to live and
wander on the margins of the cities. In his study, Dimock traced the two old-
er centers of Vai snava-sahajiya activity to the relatively small towns of %ri-
khanda and Kuliy a, both in West Bengal. 3 Barrows’s observation on the
Aghoris in the nineteenth century is similar: their centers at that time were at
Mount Abu and Girnar. 4 Gross’s ﬁeldwork among the wider population of
sadhus indicated a pilgrimage path that went from regional center to region-
al center—Rishikesh, Pashpati, Kullu, Chitrakut, and so forth—although he
observed that many s adhus preferred the major holy cities of North India,
such as Ayodhya and Ujjain.5
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 260 ---
Chapter 7 pursues more extensively the questions of Buddhist siddha com-
munities. If our model is true, however, then their sociology suggests that me-
dieval siddha methods of composition would probably have been similar to
those forms employed by preachers of the Puranas and the Epics, even if their
religious identities were different. As such, siddhas specializing in scriptural
composition would have been like the sutas or the vyasas associated with the
Puranic and the Epic genres, and all of them would have engaged in compo-
sition as a social event, rather than an individually inspired system. 6 Thus in
the course of explaining a point or teaching a ritual, a new variation on the
form would occur in the instructional process. Collections of such instruction-
al variations attributed to India siddhas have been found preserved in Tibet. 7
These variations would be then collected into small scriptures, and the latter
would be further grouped into the larger tantras, which in turn might be sum-
marized or completed with a “conclusive tantra” (uttaratantra). We certainly
see collections of smaller scriptures, such as the very short tantras that Gay a-
dhara and Candramala brought to Tibet in the mid-eleventh century.8 More-
over, the majority of chapters found in the extreme yogini scriptures—like the
Hevajra, the Dakarnava, or the V ajradaka—are actually quite short and seldom
more than a few folia, even when ﬁfty or more chapters are aggregated into a
single work.9 Analogous observations could be made on the mahayoga-tantras,
such as the Guhyasamaja or the Krsnayamari, each of which is a mixture of
verse and prose and constituted by abbreviated rituals in rather short sections.
This is unlike works with a much greater sense of overarching composition,
and the Kalacakra is one work that stands aside from others in this regard. 10
  
The dangerous nature of the various practices performed by the Buddhist sid-
dhas—and their strong non-Buddhist ritual associations—meant that their
codiﬁcation into acceptable scriptural systems required extraordinary interpre-
tive devices. Even then, these strategies were not entirely successful in accom-
plishing either the smooth development of new varieties of esoteric literature
or their easy integration into institutional curricula. Their limited successes
should not be surprising, given the nature of the requirements. Buddhist
hermeneutics in service of the siddha-related literature had to accomplish sev-
eral arduous goals. First, under the rubric of secrecy, it had to explain why the
new literature diametrically contradicted the fundamental Buddhist values of
virtuous restraint, since restraint and discipline (vinaya, $ila) were the starting
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 261 ---
points to Buddhist institutional life. Second, siddha hermeneutics needed to
generate a systematic interpretation of difﬁcult passages, especially those tying
erotic behavior to the Buddha himself. Finally, the exegesis needed to be suf-
ﬁciently ﬂexible both to reassure the conservative monastic community, while
continuing to incorporate new developments in Indian religious life. These are
very demanding parameters, for they require an incredibly wide narrative and
doctrinal spectrum, all the while making it believable to at least some of the
greater Buddhist community. As a result of these and other obstacles, inter-
pretive strategies ultimately took some extraordinary twists and turns.
Because the siddha material was alternatively either toxic or erotic (or
both), the most persuasive hermeneutic developed was that the time had suf-
ﬁciently degenerated to the point that people needed these methods to attract
them to the path of awakening. An alternate explanation, however, was that
previous assemblies were simply not worthy of receiving the new formulae. 11
Whatever the justiﬁcation, no longer could the Buddha’s message be that pris-
tine virtue was rewarded with undeniable beneﬁt. Instead, disciplined eroti-
cism was now the means to liberation. At the same time, the siddhas success-
fully argued for the superiority of their teachings. They taught the “highest
yoga,” leading to awakening in a single lifetime; no other path could possibly
lead to this stage. 12 And, as the Hevajra Tantra points out, those who do not
believe it could be considered the real heretics among the Buddhists. 13
As seen above, institutional esoterism relied primarily on the narrative of
the subjugation and displacement of %iva as Mahe$vara to provide the precip-
itant moment for the preaching of its esoteric literature. The integration of
Mahe$vara’s retinue into a cosmic vision of reality provided a sense of the
sacralization of samanta feudalism, valorizing the very monasteries themselves
as powerful sacred zones. Although the earliest institutional works did not ex-
plicitly recognize the need to embody a new preaching occasion, later litera-
ture took up the story with a vengeance. In so many later scriptures, in so many
commentaries, Mahe $vara is always battling Vajrap ani, and the Lord of Se-
crets is always winning the day. It was to become one of the most important
and popular literary events in the developing system of the secret mantras. 
For the siddhas, though, the story was to some degree a conﬂicted or am-
biguous statement. Certainly, the Cakrasamvara system was eventually to ap-
propriate the narrative as a conversion scenario, turning the imaginary geogra-
phy of the twenty-four Bhairavas into Buddhist seats of power. Although they
may have approved of the suppression of the Destroyer of Three Cities, as %iva
was known, their own scriptures had evolved in ways that did not admit of the
grand synthetic visions of reality that the institutional systems erected. The
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 262 ---
multiplicity of esoteric Buddhas/divinities, each with his/her own retinue, sa-
cred zone, occasion of preaching, and ritual statement mitigated against the
single preaching model acceptable to institutions. In that sense, the siddha
tantras reﬂected their heterogeneity of source locales and lack of a unifying in-
stitutional culture. Instead, we ﬁnd a preference for the individual expressions
about the teaching of each tantra and a privileging of the local account of the
transmission of its consecrations and other rites. 
The problem with these individual narratives, however, is that they pushed
the boundaries of religious imagination. Most Indian Buddhist communities
were aware of the written record, even if many individuals could not actually
read it themselves. But others could read, and the stories of preaching, collec-
tion, and recitation of the Buddhist canon, as well as the standards invoked to
afﬁrm authentic scriptures, were relatively well known. There seemed little
room in that record to place the more ﬂagrant compositions. By the prior stan-
dards of scripture acceptable throughout Buddhist communities, new scrip-
tures were expected to “conform to the sutras, be reﬂected in the vinaya, and
not contradict reality.” 14 It is hard, for example, to reconcile the afﬁrmative
eroticism of the Sarvabuddhasamayoga’s opening statement—”The illusory seal
of all women is the highest non-dual vehicle for awakening”—with the rigor-
ous morality incumbent on ordained monks. 15 Thus another strategy for the
integration of this new material needed to be developed. The new avenue was
suggested by much earlier Indian Buddhist precedents. 
A legend of ﬁlial piety reproduced in several sources, such as the Divya-
vadana, shows the Buddha preaching to his mother, Mahamaya, in the Heav-
en of the Thirty-three. Abhidharma scholars employed this mythology for their
own purposes by imbuing it with some content. For them, the scholastic works
that constituted the new Abhidharma basket of their canon were proposed as
the message that the Buddha taught his mother in heaven. 16 Similar narrative
systems also became important for Mahayana monks, as they were seeking to
establish a broader understanding of the Buddhadharma than the conservative
elders of the various orders could admit. Among their other devices, a myth of
the preaching of the Prajñaparamita (Perfection of Insight) scriptures had
evolved, in which the Buddha had entrusted them to the subterranean snake
spirits, only to be retrieved by Nagarjuna at a later date.17 Other scriptures also
articulated a mythology of hidden caskets or the Buddha’s discourses buried in
the element of space itself. 18
These scenarios were informed by and supported an Indian indigenous
theme of suspicion that the truth or the real story is purposely being hidden by
those in positions of power. The best early medieval representation of this
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 263 ---
consistent mistrust of the received archive was found in the Mattavilasapra-
hasana (Farce of the Fool’s Play), by the mid-seventh-century Pallava king,
Mahendravikramavarman. There a Buddhist monk, identiﬁed simply as
%akyabhiksu Nagasena, begins his Prakrit monologue by expostulating on how
terrible it was that the elders where hiding the real scriptures wherein the
Buddha extolled the beneﬁts of drinking wine and making love to nubile
women.19 Certainly, the play expresses one perception of the clergy as discon-
tent with the received canon. However, if the seventh-century monk could not
ﬁnd the scriptures that he suspected his superiors had kept from him, by the
eighth century siddhas had successfully located the holy texts through the act
of composition. 
The narrative of Indrabh uti’s receiving the hidden scriptures became ar-
guably the most widely accepted of the siddha transmission stories. As shown
in its earliest surviving version, it is incorporated into an important commen-
tary on the Prajñaparamita-Naya$atapañca$atika (150 Line Perfection of In-
sight Sutra) that was included into the institutional esoteric canon. Jñ anami-
tra, the author of the commentary, provides an interesting mythology of the
preaching of the esoteric scriptures and their recovery and transmission in a
complex social and geographical world.
The Explanation of the Scriptural Annals
Previously, the Buddha lived eighty years in the human realm. However, at
that time there was in this Jambudv ipa no ﬁt human vessel worthy of con-
version to the path of the esoteric scriptures like the Sarvabuddhasamayoga
or the Guhyasamaja, etc. Therefore, the four Great Kings caused the scrip-
tures to reside in the realm of the Thirty-three, Tu sita, etc., or wherever
there were gods and bodhisattvas of the good aeon who were ﬁt vessels for
the teaching. 
Much later, after the Buddha passed into nirvana, the King of Zahor
and his entire retinue miraculously conceived of a pure faith in the Dhar-
ma. Thus they became vessels ﬁt for conversion to that esoteric vehicle. By
the grace of Vajrapani, the eighteen classes of esoteric scripture, the Sarva-
buddhasamayoga, etc., came to that country of Zahor. Then the king of Za-
hor, Indrabh uti, saw those scriptures and could not explain their sense.
However, by the power of previous virtuous action he had obtained super-
normal cognition, thinking, “In Madhyade $a, in the country of M alava,
there is the Acarya Kukura. During the day he teaches the Dharma to ap-
proximately a thousand dogs. During the night, he enjoys the sacraments
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 264 ---
with those dogs. Thus, he is the dog guru [kukkuracarya]. I wonder if I have
become ﬁt to be converted as a worthy vessel for that path?” So he sent an
ofﬁcial messenger to request the Acarya to come to Zahor.
Now the Acarya, by the power of previous virtuous action had obtained
all ﬁve forms of supernormal cognition. So [after receiving the messenger]
he thought, “Well, has that king become ﬁt for conversion or not? More-
over, have I become a vessel for those scriptures or not?” And [by virtue of
his supernormal cognition] Kukura concluded, “He has become ﬁt for con-
version and I am a worthy vessel for the scriptures. Now I will be able to
clarify the king’s doubts. However, if I am not able to see those scriptures
in advance, then in a hundred ways I will not be able to clarify the king’s
doubts and that will be very unfortunate.” 
So he sent a reply back with the ofﬁcial messenger, “I request that the
king allow me to see these scriptures in advance, so please send them here.”
When the scriptures arrived, Kukura took one look at them and he became
turned upside down, uncertain on where to look. Throwing himself down
in front of the books, he cried out, “I have no Lord! I have no Refuge!” 
Vajrasattva then physically appeared before him asked, “Just what do
you want?” 
Kukura replied, “I want to be able to understand these deep scriptures
merely by looking at them.” 
Then Vajrasattva pronounced his blessing, “So I give it to you!”
Then, without even opening the texts, all the meaning of the Sarvabud-
dhasamayoga and so forth directly became clear in his mind. So then, the
Acarya went to Zahor and preached the Dharma to the king and his ret-
inue. As Vajrasattva had prophesied, he set the king and his retinue to med-
itating in manner of the Vajradh atu mandala.20
The chronicle continues to discuss how Kukura divided up the queens and the
court, each placed at a physical direction in the mandala. They and the princes
and princesses all took their place on an enormous ma ndala board, in a phys-
ical enactment of the Vajradhatu mandala by the members of the court. Jñana-
mitra assures us that, at the end, not only did Indrabhuti become a Vidyadhara
but so did all the thousand members of the court. Even the heir apparent,
%akraputi, and his seven hundred courtiers, as well as his sister, with her hun-
dred ladies-in-waiting, all became Vidyadharas. 
Almost every aspect of this story is interesting and instructive. It is ex-
tremely early, for one thing, with Jñ anamitra’s commentary ﬁnding a place in
the imperial catalogue of the Denkar Library of c. 810 c.e.21 The language of
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 265 ---
the commentary veriﬁes its early date, for it uses syntax and expressions that
were not common translation Tibetan during the later period of translation
from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries. Moreover, it clearly represents an
orthodox attempt to integrate the newly evolving scriptures into the canon and
has a hermeneutical agenda. The conclusion of the story describes the physi-
cal arrangement of the court as members of the Vajradhatu mandala, which is
the ma ndala from the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, rather than from the
Sarvabuddhasamayoga. The sense of orthodoxy is further afﬁrmed by Jñ ana-
mitra observing that if the Perfection of Insight is the mother of all the Bud-
dhas, then the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha is the father. 22 This gender-
laden line of textual categories eventually matures into the classiﬁcation of
mahayoga-tantras as Father Tantras and the yogini-tantras as Mother Tantras.
I know of no other source so early, though, that applies gendered categories to
esoteric scriptures. 
The perennial importance of the Northwest, where Zahor has been some-
times located, is also evident. Other versions of the Indrabh uti mythology al-
most invariably attach him to Odiyana, and it appears that the two were at one
time considered either in proximity or actually identical. 23 In an example of
the siddha reiteration of a single name, Indrabh uti became a designation at-
tached to several ﬁgures, some of them proliﬁc authors. The Sakya order of
Tibetan Buddhism, for instance, retains a memory of three Indrabh utis—a
greater, middle, and lesser—all kings of O diyana.24 The other tension is be-
tween Malava and Zahor, between the Buddhist stronghold in the Northwest
and the new northern power of the Gurjara-Prat iharas, where the K apalikas
had their most important pitha of Mahakala in the city of Ujjain.
More to the point, the story is entirely about laymen, a king on one side
and an outcaste preacher on the other. Kukura’s living habits—and the bes-
tiality subtlely implied in his night time sacramental involvement with the
thousand dogs—make him as extreme in one social direction as the king is in
the other.25 In a sense, they are images of each other; Kukura has his dogs as
his retinue and Indrabhuti conducts himself with his queens, courtiers, prince,
and princess. Yet they meet in their mutual lack of comprehension on the
meaning of the new scriptures. It is only through the intervention of Va-
jrasattva (our eros embodied and an extension of Vajrapani) that Kukura is ca-
pable of understanding the signiﬁcance of the scriptures and able to teach
them to Indrabhuti and his court. Furthermore, the story also depicts laymen
teaching one another in the medieval Buddhist ritual system. This they do
without any basis other than divine inspiration, for neither is represented as
having other teachers. Yet the inspiration and understanding extends from
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 266 ---
their mutual contact. Indeed, themes of social context at the moment of in-
spiration continue to inform so many of the siddha narratives, as seen in the
cases of Vir upa’s inspiration by Nairatmya and other examples. 26 Social con-
text is also central in the sahaja-siddhi lineage story related by another Indrab-
huti, who was the receptor of a teaching on sahaja that began in O diyana.
There, a princess * %ri-Maha-Liladevi received the teaching on the perfection
of natural reality (sahaja-siddhi) through her encounter with an unnamed
black-haired Rsi in the forest monastery of *Ratn alamkara.27 In Jñanamitra’s
narrative, transmission of the siddha lineage is handed from Kukura to In-
drabhuti based on their mutual quandary over a poorly understood text, and
both protagonists become siddhas in the process. 
   
Our investigation of the initial transmission has actually led toward the cate-
gory of reception: the manner in which claims proposed or literature developed
by one group were received by the wider community. In such an investigation,
I do not speciﬁcally intend the question of literary aesthetics—as discussed by
Jauss, Iser, and the Universität Konstanz school of reception theorists—but,
rather, its application to the intellectual and social history of Buddhist India.28
All our evidence indicates that Buddhists were very aware that they lived in
highly ﬂuid historical circumstances. In these, they saw and anticipated the
continual emergence of claims to authority and power, especially spiritual au-
thority modeled in ways that challenged institutional fundamentals.
Most Buddhist Mahayanist and esoteric scriptures explicitly acknowledge
the question of reception with the introductory chapters (nidana) affording
scenarios in which different communities are assembled, followed by their
haggling over the meaning of the Buddha’s message. The hermeneutics of re-
ception, in fact, contributed to one of the great paradoxes of Indian esoteric
Buddhism: the employment of secrecy for the purpose of propagating exten-
sively the esoteric practices within multiple communities and subcultures. The
esoteric method is arguably the most successful Indian Buddhist ritual system
to market itself throughout both the traditional and modern worlds. Given the
extraordinary spread and viability of the esoteric persuasion, it appears that one
aspect of its popularity is exactly its claims to superiority by virtue of selectiv-
ity. Few themes fan the ﬂames of desire like restricted access and an aura of
incomparability. In their emphasis on secrecy, esoteric Buddhists shared sys-
tems of transmission with other institutions that required secrecy in the pur-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 267 ---
suit of hegemonic status: governments, trade societies, criminal conspiracies,
and ritual specialists. 
In recognition of these requirements, the rhetoric of esoterism directed that
new material typically be introduced through the agency of a scriptural pro-
nouncement that is presented as a challenge to the status quo. The language of
the introductory chapters (nidana), introductory sections of threatening chap-
ters, and sections on coded language (sandhyabhasa) often represent their con-
tent as causing grave doubts, sometimes about their referents, sometimes about
the nature of the Buddha’s message itself. Many of the literary techniques had
already been introduced in Mahayana sutras, especially the Saddharmapundari-
ka, but were used now to justify decidedly different content.29 For example, in
chapter 2 of the Saddharmapundarika, the chapter on Skillful Means, a new pro-
nouncement of the single vehicle is proposed for all those grasping after separate
vehicles. The monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen who cannot withstand the
new message are allowed to leave, for the new system would sow doubt and con-
fusion in their hearts, causing them to lose their conﬁdence in the Buddha’s dis-
pensation. The teacher’s real message is difﬁcult to understand (durbodhyam
tathagatasya saMdhabhasyam), but consists of the articulation of a single vehicle.
Because of the limitations of the various assemblies, though, he had to couch his
message in a skillfully coded series of graded ideas. Yet behind these statements
lurks a doctrine often alluded to in Buddhism: the intention of the teacher has
not been exhausted by the current understanding of the existing community. As
new events and conditions in the world unfold, the teacher’s intention becomes
clearer in some measure as well. New material, then, represents the liberation of
the teacher’s intention from literalness (samdhinirmocana). 
The rhetoric of degeneration in the early medieval period meant that the
new practices could be envisioned as both a sign of the times and an opportu-
nity to harness formerly inaccessible energies. For example, in an alternative
Indrabhuti narrative, the Odiyana monarch begs the Buddha for a set of scrip-
tures that embody the means to liberation for those who could not withstand
the requirements of monastic renunciation, but who wanted to use the senses
for the purpose of awakening.30 This story had the advantage of employing the
Mahayanist idea that liberation (or the embryo of the Tath agata) existed as a
speciﬁc element in the six senses of beings or that the fundamental purity of
consciousness was concomitant with gnosis. Using beings’ proclivities (even
sex and death), then, was another example of the Buddha’s skillful means of
leading them to awakening. Yet neither the Mahe$vara subjugation myths nor
the Indrabh uti preaching stories exhausted the inspired speech of Buddhist
preachers, who continued to develop new and exciting descriptions about the
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 268 ---
preaching of this or that tantra. Sometimes these were related in the intro-
ductory chapter of a tantra, as shown in the Buddhakapala-yogini-tantra-raja,
or in the commentarial materials dedicated to the interpretation and propaga-
tion of that work, as in the Kalacakra-tantra.
The other great strength of skillful means’ rhetoric lay in the Buddhist ex-
perience of teaching—monasteries understood the principle of graded instruc-
tion, so that novices would be led to knowledge by degrees. Indeed, the “grad-
ed ideas/audience quality” issue plays an important position in the tantras,
where the introduction of new material had to work that much harder because
of the quantum leap in erotic language. Recent apologists for the Buddhist
tantras have concentrated on linguistic deconstruction through the artiﬁce of
“coded language” (samdha/samdhya/samdhaya-bhasa), which had been used by
selected commentators to take some of the spice from the brew. According to
this idea, all the language of the tantras is ﬁgurative, not literal. Thus the eros
and thanatos of the esoteric scriptures are to be understood as indicative of a
secret coded form of language, referring to internal experiences. The key to
such language was revealed in the esoteric transmission from master to disci-
ple, and only uninformed outsiders considered that the statements might be
simple declarative pronouncements. 
Unfortunately, as shown below, the invocation of the various strategies of
textual hermeneutics—of which “coded language” is only one—is highly idio-
syncratic and lacks any uniform method of application. 31 Only in the modern
public presentation has there developed the myth of uniform tantric hermeneu-
tics, a single key or approved method of interpretation for passages involving
erotics or violence. Yet actual practice is dramatically different from this mod-
ern rhetorical position. A single section of a tantra may be taken as literal or
variously ﬁgurative by different commentators in India (or China, Tibet, or
Japan), even with the same commentator sometimes adopting different expla-
nations mid-stride. This disparity was acknowledged in traditional discourse.
Thus the argument against literalness appears to lose a degree of force in the
absence of hermeneutic unanimity. Moreover, there is even doubt that “coded
language” had a well-deﬁned semantic value, let alone a systematic application.
  ’    ,
 ,    
The single most outrageous opening scenario of any Buddhist text with which
I am familiar is found in the Buddhakapala-yogini-tantra-raja, a ninth-century
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 269 ---
or later work that self-consciously has included material in imitation of Kapa-
lika %aivism. It is classiﬁed as a yogini-tantra and in many ways represents an
excellent corrective to the rather limited consideration of yogini-tantra materi-
al to date. In view of the available archive, there has been an excessive empha-
sis on the Hevajra Tantraor the Cakrasamvara corpus, based in part on the Ti-
betan esteem for these lineages. The Buddhadkapala, though, continues to enjoy
a strong traditional reputation and popularity. Its exegetical and ritual visibility
signiﬁes that its status as an esoteric text was taken seriously by its Indian au-
thors and commentators as well as by the Tibetans who have preserved its
translation. The Buddhadkapala’s introductory scenario relates the narrative of
its own preaching and the spiritual source of its text. That inaugural direction
is not exceptional in itself, but the Buddhadkapala unfolds its story in a manner
virtually guaranteed to shock its listeners or readers. After the short, initial de-
scription of the Buddhas, their consorts, and their retinues in language familiar
to readers of the yogini-tantra literature, the text moves to the precipitating dra-
matic moment.
Then the Bhagav an—having correctly explained the mantras and all the
tantras by means of adamantine words in the great adamantine site—this
lord of all the Tathagatas placed his vajra in his consort’s lotus, and prompt-
ly entered ﬁnal nirvana [dying] in the lady’s vagina. Having seen the Lord
pass away in that manner, all the bodhisattvas and all the yogin is were as-
tonished. Looking to one another, they all exclaimed, “Oh, my! How is it
that the Bhagavan, the Lord of all the Tathagatas, should pass away in this
Great Jeweled Mandala?” 
So the bodhisattva mahasattva Vajrapani turned to the yogini Citrasena
and asked her the following question: “Dev i, is there some slight method
whereby those beings of lesser merit may ascend to power [*$aktyaro-
hanopaya]?”32
“For it is said that there are sixty million [methods] in the yogatantra.
There are 160 million in the yogini-tantra. There are 800 million in the var-
ious sutrantas. In the same way, there are 500,000 krores [(5 × 105) × 107]
within the perfection vehicle [paramitayana]. All of these methods have
been expounded by the Mun indra [%akyamuni]. If any are separated from
mantras, then the power of tantra [tantra$akti] will not appear.” 
“Now within some of the tantras, according to the mantra, recitation up
to ten million times is proposed. Those of medium merit, however, are said
to achieve siddhi quickly by reciting the mantra one hundred thousand
times. Likewise, those of great merit will become accomplished very quick-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 270 ---
ly in ten thousand recitations. In that way, the Great Vajrin, the Chief of
the Tantric Lords has spoken. Those of little merit, though, must recite ten
million times. Yet it is said that those of little application may recite the
mantra a hundred thousand times. Actually, ones attached to meditation
might recite only ten thousand mantras.” 
“So the question remains: How is the recitation of those beings mired in
desire? How many recitations for those who belong to families of morons
and idiots? How does one who has lost his goal recite the mantras? For it
would seem that mantras recited by those engaged in idle gossip will have
their accomplishment occur elsewhere. And if the recitation is done in ac-
cordance with the emotions of retarded troglodytes—well, they can recite
for as many tens of millions of aeons as there are stars in the sky and get no
powers at all.” 
Now the yogin i Citrasena, having heard this, looked at the face of the
[deceased] Lord, ogling him with desire and languorous sidelong glances
[sakataksa]. Then enraged and ferocious, with a mind full of compassion,
she destroyed M ara’s army. Consequently, ogled in that way by this Ma-
hadevi—the Lady and mistress of all the tantras 33— the head [of %akya-
muni] opens up and out pops a mantra: om buddhe siddhe susiddhe
amr.ita arje buddha kapa¯la sphot.anipa¯taya tra ¯saya hu¯m. ho phat |34
Resounding in this way, the supreme mantra goes forth and conquers the
nagas below the seventh level, reducing them to dust. The mantra then
comes back and enters the mouth of Citrasen a, only to emerge from her
vagina and returns to the Buddha’s skull. 
As all the nagas were being destroyed by the power of this mantra, they
became afraid and began to sweat heavily. So the great magical snakes, like
Vasuki, assembled, as did all the rest of the poisonous tribe: Karko taka,
%aNkhapala, Taksaka, Ananta, Padma, Mahapadma, and so forth. Turning
toward the yogin i Citrasena, they implored her, “Dev i, say what you want
and we will do it!” She replied, “Do whatever is in accordance with the Bud-
dha’s experience!” 
As soon as this was heard, in the middle of the Great Jeweled Mandala,
the Buddha’s skull opened its mouth wide and out of it emerged a text. The
skies resounded with the verse, 
“O Goddess Citrasena—take the book! It will beneﬁt all beings.
This tantra is a great king of tantras, for there is no yogin i [tantra]
superior to it.
It is called Buddhakapala. It will beneﬁt all beings.” 
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 271 ---
Having heard this, Citrasen a took up the text and entrusted it to
Vajrapani.35
This peculiar opening is an excellent vehicle to test to position that the
tantras embed within the secret scriptures a coded language accessible only to
the masters. If so, the surviving commentaries would be expected to provide
some degree of continuity between their positions and their language, for all
three Indian commentators are acknowledged masters. Conversely, if the com-
mentaries are actually independent moments in the domestication of the tantra,
then they will instead each display their author’s proclivities. According to this
latter model, the primary purposes of the commentaries will be to lessen the
force of the scripture’s extreme content and to move the text into a symbolic
realm approachable by normative Buddhist praxis. 
Three commentaries are available for the opening chapter of the Bud-
dhakapala: the %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati ascribed to Saraha, 36
the Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Tattvacandrika ascribed to Padmavajra, 37 and
the %ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrarajatika Abhayapaddhatih of Abhayakaragup-
ta.38 In reality, the commentaries are so different one from the other that it is
sometimes hard to believe that they comment on the same text or belong to
the same tradition. Collectively, they might act as a paradigm for the difﬁcul-
ties in the homogenization of Buddhist hermeneutical strategies, since they all
address this singular episode in quite different ways. 
The Saraha commentary is either the most creative or the least linear, de-
pending on whether any degree of consistency is desired. Having described the
teacher and retinue in a relatively standard fashion, Saraha declares the yogin i
Citrasena as an emanation of the Buddha, not too different from the kind of
grand solipsistic hermeneutics found in the Hevajra Tantra, wherein all the
elite members of his retinue are the Tath agata’s manifestations.39 However,
the balance of the retinue is described in standard terms, identifying Ananda
and Avalokite $vara as members of the Arhatsa Ngha and Bodhisattvasa Ngha,
respectively, all residing together in the ma ndala. When the Buddha sudden-
ly enters nirvana, though, the Bodhisattvas all become the faculties of vision,
hearing, and so on. 40 From this point on, most of the characters are simulta-
neously explained as internal components—especially the various yogic chan-
nels (nadi), forms of gnosis, or the Buddhas of the yogic “perfecting process”
(sampannakrama)—as well as being the external agents. The description leaves
the student with the queasy feeling that not only is the Buddha’s physical body
inhabited by the various “perfecting process” internal ma ndala ﬁgures, unex-
ceptional in itself, but that they are individually and collectively active charac-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 272 ---
ters in the drama of the tantra. Consequently, the reader courts the uncom-
fortable suspicion that the Buddha’s internal soteriological diagram will break
into song and dance at a moment’s notice, as scriptural personalities some-
times do in the yogini literature. 
Although the other two commentators are much more prosaic, all three
represent the instance of the Buddha’s passing (entrance into nirvana) in dif-
ferent ways. Saraha maintains that, since nirvana is utterly dissociated from
thought, and since this is the characteristic of the Buddha’s absolute body
(dharmakaya), all we have to do is understand that the Buddha is demonstrat-
ing the dharmakaya.41 This dharmakaya is somehow seen by the assembled ret-
inue, a possibility in the case of the dharmakaya deﬁned as the “corpus of in-
struction,” which clearly identiﬁes the issue of leading up to preaching
(emitting) the tantra about to be presented. However, the deﬁnition of dhar-
makaya given by Saraha is that it is cognitively nonconceptual, so his comment
appears a very curious explanation of a physical event. Padmavajra, converse-
ly, deﬁnes the process as the pattern of sexual yoga according to the practice
of sampannakrama. Thus the Buddha is merely demonstrating to the bod-
hisattvas of pure birth the way to reside in the essence of great bliss. Here,
Padmavajra glosses nirvana as the highest reality (tattva).42 His deﬁnition is
dependent on the speciﬁcally Vajrayana employment of the designation “tatt-
va” for the various elements of esoteric practice. Finally, Abhay akaragupta’s
text indicates that the form of nirvana is nonlocalized, a common deﬁnition of
nirvana within the Mahayana. The Buddha is nonlocalized in phenomenal ex-
istence through the presence of insight derived from the adamantine seat of
the Great Seal; he is nonlocalized in quiescent peace, as his great compassion
motivates him for the welfare of all beings. Empowered by prior accomplish-
ment and impelled by his nonadhesion to the extreme perspectives, the Bud-
dha is capable of assuming whatever form may be required by beings as long
as existence lasts, through his nonconceptual identity with the unlimited
Tathagatas, bodhisattvas, yoginis, and so on.43
Perhaps the most interesting fact of these hermeneutic gymnastics is that
all of them accomplish several things. First, the humorous non sequitur of the
episode is explained away or ignored altogether. The Buddhadkapala presents
the disquieting image of the Buddha dying in ﬂagrante delicto, surrounded by
the vast retinue of spiritual beings. In the midst of this cosmic catastrophe and
while the great concourse are afﬂicted with doubt and insecurity, Vajrap ani
turns to some available but otherwise obscure yogin i and asks how the termi-
nally incompetent might aspire to the awakened state? The commentators sys-
tematically dismantle the death of the Tathagata, so that the force of his act is
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 273 ---
lost in a blizzard of philosophical terminology. Yet there can be no other ex-
planation, for the skull of the Buddha is that which is required to release the
mantra and the text of the tantra. Moreover, the commentators explain away
the intriguing necrophilia of Citrasena by the same token—if the Buddha does
not really die, then the desire exhibited for the corpse of the Buddha by Cit-
rasena is really desire for the phenomenal body of the Buddha (nirmanakaya).
Finally, the immediately succeeding events—the survey of esoteric literature,
the ecstasy of Citrasena that results in overcoming Mara and the release of the
mantra, the attack on snakes, and the exposure of the text all lose their liter-
ary force in the interpretive process. In fact Abhay akaragupta successfully
turns the whole episode around and argues for the unlimited action of the
Buddha in the world as a result of this episode; he does not reveal how this ac-
tion would cause consternation in the assembly. 
    
The fact that there are few threads of common content should come as no sur-
prise. Instead, the commentators demonstrate a compulsion to escort the rad-
ical scriptures into a garden of safety and innocuousness. In reality, one of the
primary motivations for the above commentarial hermeneutic was as a subtle
form of criticism, taking the scriptural authors to task for real or imagined
transgressions of behavioral norms. The subculture of tantric composition (es-
pecially the yogini tantras) exhibited clearly different values from those of the
commentarial subculture: one is creative and outrageous while the other rep-
resents rapprochement with institutional norms. However, it is equally in-
triguing to consider that all three commentators were considered siddhas, and
two of them (Saraha and Padmavajra) had their names entered into standard
lists of mahasiddhas.44 Accordingly, we must be wary of attempts—tradition-
al or modern—to homogenize siddhas into a single Buddhist subculture and
should understand that they exhibited a wide variation of background, learn-
ing, orientation, and so forth. In the cases of Virupa, Naropa, and Maitripa, it
is clear that some siddhas had passed through or were at least partially social-
ized in the monastic regime. 45 Conversely, others were reputed to have fol-
lowed the siddha path without exposure to institutional expectations, as in the
case of Dombiheruka (a boatman) or Luhipa (a scribe).46 Thus, if even the in-
stitutionally oriented siddhas are discomﬁted at the content exhibited here, we
might wonder about its reception by others in the community, especially the
more conservative monks, who might be concerned about monastic stability. 
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 274 ---
Actually, the introductory materials are often the greatest challenge for the
exegetes, especially as the scriptural authors often preempt their discussion by
acknowledging the reception of these scenarios as disquieting, new, and per-
haps completely different from anything yet seen in the breadth of Buddhist
literature. The goal of the commentators in this process is to redeﬁne the
statements, so that they will lose their unprecedented status and have their
venom extracted. Consider, for example, the bald-faced declaration about the
nature of the Congress (samaja) gathered by the Adibuddha Bodhicittavajra in
chapter 1 of the Guhyasamajatantra.
Now all the Tathagatas, having come again to the Congress, made offerings
to the Lord Bodhicittavajra with clouds of jewels and elements of reality as-
sociated with the vows, so as to send forth the offerings to all the Tath a-
gatas. Having bowed down [to Bodhicittavajra], they declared,
“Lord, pronounce the element of reality that is the aggregate of
adamantine essence, that esoteric Congress of all Tath agatas, developed
in secrecy!”
Then the Lord Bodhicittavajra, the Tath agata, said to all of those Tath a-
gatas, “Excellent, excellent, Lord Tath agatas! But [articulating that Con-
gress] is a cause for doubt even for all the Tath agatas, let alone for the other bod-
hisattvas!”
But then all the Lord Tath agatas were amazed and astonished. So they
requested of the Lord, the Master of all the Tathagatas, the scalpel of doubts
for all the Tathagatas, “Lord, do not be indolent in teaching the secret of all
the Tathagatas’ physical, vocal, and mental continua in the assembly of all
the Tathagatas, an assembly so distinguished with excellence!”47
This strategy for introducing new practices by maintaining that they were
unknown even to the Buddhas is often seen in esoteric literature. Perhaps its
earliest expression is found in the early seventh-century Gilgit manuscript of
the Karandavyuha, where remarkably similar language is employed to intro-
duce the hitherto-unknown, secret, six-syllable mantra of Avalokite $vara:
om. man.i padme hu¯m. !48
But the commentators’ purpose is hermeneutic reﬁnement, and Candrakirti,
the author of the celebrated Pradipodyotana commentary on the Guhyasamaja-
tantra, clearly has a lot of explaining to do. 49 Having already appropriated the
name of one of the most famous curmudgeons of Buddhist philosophical
thought, the tantric Candrakirti certainly was not one to refuse a challenge. So,
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 275 ---
instead of blithely passing over the passage as some lesser commentator might,
he gamely encounters the section head on in the best apologetic style.
So Bodhicittavajra addresses all the Tathagatas, “Excellent, excellent” in the
sense of acceptance of the task, since the question served to illuminate the
idea he had in mind. But in the analysis of the literal text, “a cause for un-
certainty even for all the Tath agatas,” we must see that, here, the terms
“Tathagatas” and “bodhisattvas” have to indicate yogins who are still exert-
ing themselves [on the path]. There can be no question of “doubt” existing for
Buddhas and bodhisattvas who have eliminated the traces of deﬁlement. So
“Tathagatas” here really means those precious persons who have matured
their good roots, have completed their hearing of the doctrines, and have
well deﬁned pedigrees [niyatagotra] while they are in pursuit of Buddha-
hood. But even for them the signiﬁcance of “Congress” [samaja] will remain
obscure without the commencement [of discussion] by the Teacher, since
they will lack comprehension. How much more so for other bodhisattvas?
For even when persons of the Sandalwood strata, etc.—who have matured
their good roots but with little motivation—are taught this Congress, they
will respond with listlessness, since it is hard to grasp. 50
Thus, Candrakirti redeﬁnes Tathagatas and bodhisattvas in the text so that
these esteemed categories of saintly beings could never become subject to un-
certainty. Yet there can be no doubt that this is preciselythe meaning the authors
of the scriptures intended; the point is emphasized again later in the Guhyasama-
ja.51 The original Buddha (adibuddha), Bodhicittavajra, is about to discuss the
organization of reality, and the other Buddhas are as lost as freshmen in the Uni-
versity Registrar’s ofﬁce. They are afﬂicted with precisely the emotion least ap-
preciated by self-righteous Indian know-it-all monks: doubt. The creation of a
mandala in chapter 1 of the Guhyasamajatantra is meaningless unless the per-
sonality of Bodhicittavajra is surrounded by the other Buddhas and bodhisattvas
of the system, who are eventually to take their several places in this mandala. In
their brazen challenge to the received wisdom of Indian Buddhist communities,
the tantra authors have issued a full warning, much as the authors of the Lotus
Sutra had done so many centuries before: this material will offend their sense of
the authority of the Buddha and might divide the community. These offenses
clearly disturbed the deepest value systems of Indian Buddhists, for whom divi-
sion of the community was one of the most heinous crimes possible. 
Coming to our exegetical aid at this point is material drawn from sources
that are seldom considered in the discussion of esoteric value systems, but that
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 276 ---
have played a central role in organizing that material for medieval Indians and
Tibetans: namely, the theoretical treatises of the Vajrayana, those many mon-
uments to exegetical engineering that have conﬁgured, schematized, adjudi-
cated, packaged, and promoted the otherwise bewildering mass of the esoteric
scriptures. They are not exactly commentaries, although most comment on se-
lected quotations to the various tantras. Unfortunately, the original Indic trea-
tises have been largely ignored, and it is the ﬁfteenth-century work of the Ti-
betan author Kendrup Gelek Pelsangbo that has curiously garnered the most
attention, despite the publication of two of these Sanskrit works by Benoytosh
Bhattacharya in 1929.52
Attributed to Padmavajra—perhaps the same person as the commentator
on the Buddhakapala-tantra whose interest in the “perfecting process” of sex-
ual yoga was noted above—is the Guhyasiddhi (Secret Accomplishment). As a
ninth-century understanding of the Guhyasamajatantra, this was to prove one
of the most inﬂuential and widely quoted of the Vajray ana technical works.
Unlike Candrakirti, Padmavajra is unrepentant in his direct address of the un-
precedented statements in the Guhyasamajatantra. Indeed, the text begins by
taking the bull by the horns.
That condition of highest ease, released from the world’s ways, pervasive yet
essenceless, continually generated by the Lords of monks, it is praised by
the best bulls of sages as beyond contemplation. Unrealized even by the Bud-
dhas, utterly plundered of deﬁlements by its very reality—I revere that glo-
rious body of the Victors, so much more the excellent state, so pure by its
own agency.53
Thus the opening contains the most Buddhist of literary conventions—a
paradox. The highest state is the body of the Victors, but it is unrealized
even by the Buddhas. Its transcendence of contemplation is a reasonably
standard characteristic of esoteric literature and is normatively explained by
recourse to definitions of nonconceptualization: where there is no idea of
contemplative activity, then a self-conscious category of meditation is out of
the question. The putative affirmation of the body of the Buddhas without
their own realization, though, is another matter and is related to the esteem
that the Guhyasamajatantra enjoys in the Guhyasiddhi. Indeed, in chapter 2
of the Guhyasiddhi, Padmavajra moves to explain the difficult Guhyasama-
jatantra passage on how Bodhicittavajra might understand the esoteric Con-
gress (guhyasamaja) that is causing the other Buddhas in the ma ndala such
grave doubts.
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 277 ---
Therefore, I will now elucidate something of the ritual of accomplish-
ment—the secret occasion—by means of the path identiﬁed in the Samaja
but not by the stages of meditation found in other tantras. (1) 
Having rejected in extreme all the paths found in tantras instructing in
external rituals, [the ritual of accomplishment] is announced [in the Sama-
ja] exactly as it is, through the disciplined contemplation of those stages of
meditation following this tradition. (2)
Now many teachers claim that the collector and cantor of the Samaja is
the heroic leader Loke$a, of great splendor. (3)
But, based on devotion at the feet of the teacher, only we maintain that
in the %risamaja there is no other collector and canter (4)
Than the author of the tantra, Hrdvajra [= Bodhicittavajra]. He alone is
the speaker and the teacher. Thus there is none other if we were to elimi-
nate this [person of] Great Bliss. (5)
Accordingly, the statement beginning “Thus have I heard” up to the
word “resided,” has been pronounced by Cittavajrin himself among all the
Buddhas.54 (6)
Since this condition of residence has been declared pure and divine ex-
actly as it is by the glorious Lord of Great Bliss, I will speak a bit about its
nature. (7)
As the Master has revealed in that one highest place the true nature of
the Buddhas’ tantra to be simply his own great bliss, (8) 
Having heard that true nature of the tantra, all the Victors’ sons were
shaken and, ﬁlled with anxiety, addressed the Great Lord: (9)
“What is this teaching, O Hero, which is the expression of that difﬁcult
to express, O Master, which endlessly causes terror in every way, even with-
in the Buddhas? (10)
O Master, having unveiled the highest Vajray ana, boundlessly obscure,
you have expressed the essential unity of all phenomena!” (11)
Thus, the Champions of all Buddhas—frivolously chattering—trem-
bled, arrived at stupefaction, and placed their minds in the attitude of awak-
ening. (12) 
So! This is the teaching of the surpassingly secret Vajray ana, which has
no comparison in its pure and essenceless nature. (13)
But Vajrasattva, seeing all the Buddhas stupeﬁed in this way , entered the
divine concentration, consisting of the pleasure of great bliss. (14) 
As a consequence, he compelled all the Buddhas to employ the union of
the vajra and the lotus, and in the form of the highest bliss spoke to them
with the following sweet speech: (15) 55
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 278 ---
Unlike Candrakirti, Padmavajra has little problem expressing the idea that
the nature of the meditative system expounded in the Guhyasamajatantra con-
sists of qualities that are unprecedented. For Padmavajra, not only is the mes-
sage beyond the comprehension of all the Buddhas, but it is exceedingly dis-
turbing to them, and their disturbance is rectiﬁed only if they enter into sexual
congress with the female of the species. Indeed, Padmavajra ends up here with
a de facto deﬁnition of tantric scripture: the expression of Bodhicittavajra’s
personal great bliss, which is the essence of all the Buddhas’ tantras. Moreover,
his great bliss is clearly a result of the unity of complements, which has as its
physical expression and central technique the union of the sexual organs by
masters of the Vajrayana. 
  :
    
These hermeneutical themes circulate around the esoteric Buddhist docu-
ments in a variety of patterns, which collectively suggest that their representa-
tives were competing in the marketplace of Buddhist marginal institutions.
Many themes articulate the ideology that, compared to other scriptures, their
tantra of choice is without precedent. Occasionally, as seen above, this mes-
sage was combined with the doctrine that the new dispensation was outside
the prior comprehension of the Buddhas themselves, to be received from
sources hitherto untapped. Most often, the speciﬁed scriptural sources are
deeper levels of reality or more perfectly awakened Buddhas. In any event, we
should resist the conclusion that the ideology presented is one of doctrinal
progress in any modern sense. 
In certain environments, all or part of these messages are allied with the for-
mulae of coded language, alluded to above, but with a decided shift in valence.
Broido has already shown that coded language in esoteric exegesis became, in a
sense, bifurcated.56 On the one hand, it was employed as a hermeneutical strat-
egy to offer explanations to parts of texts that were socially or textually difﬁcult.
Here, coded language was a powerful interpretive tool, one that was often both
used and abused. On the other hand, coded language was taken to describe a
series of language acts whose exact meaning was either unknown or problem-
atic. The words and statements were required nonetheless for reasons of ritual
applications; this second form of coded language is examined below. 
In its hermeneutic application, the declaration by a commentator that “this
is coded” was an interpretive device sharing a commonality with the older Ma-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 279 ---
hayanist usage. Its purpose, to unpack an intentional layer of signiﬁcance be-
low the surface of the language structures, was very commonly used. In such
documents as the Pradipodyotana, and in Munidatta’s commentary to the
Caryagitiko$a, the terms sandhya-bhasa/sandhya-bhasita have stood as cate-
gories of exegesis, along with many others.57 The purpose of this process is to
take speciﬁc words and provide them with an alternative meaning, sometimes
well founded and sometimes an exercise in interpretive ballet. One example is
what Munidatta does with Vir upa’s drinking song, a humorous acknowledg-
ment that the famous saint preferred to spend time in a bar rather than in reli-
gious environments.
 ⁄ , ,  
Virupa’s Drinking Song
All alone this barmaid serves two at
her home, preparing the rot-gut
with neither yeast nor shredded
bark.
The booze is brewed naturally strong,
making my body tough—no old age
or death for me! 
I saw the sign at the tenth door, so I
came as a customer, to get myself
some.
There’re sixty-four jugs set out up on
the shelf. Once I make it in as a
consumer, I may not leave!
Hey! There’s one bottle with a real
thin neck—
Virupa says: pour me a strong one!58
Munidatta’s Interpretation
The unique Central Channel brings
together the two subsidiary channels
of the right and left above at the
nose, to produce ﬁrmness of self-
consecration. Below they are also
fused at the genital organ to bind
the relative thought of awakening
and to produce the highest bliss.
The absolute thought of awakening is
made ﬁrm through binding the rela-
tive thought of awakening with the
noose of the coemergent bliss.
The yogi, like a heavenly being, enters
the door of Vairocana at the tenth
level, having seen its sign. He is sat-
isﬁed with the drink from the lotus
of great bliss.
The Central Channel unites the rela-
tive and absolute truths and is subtle
in form, having destroyed duality’s
appearance.
Virupa calls on the Central Channel
to remain motionless.59

--- PAGE 280 ---
In his extraordinary reading of Vir upa’s drinking song, Munidatta accom-
plishes several hermeneutical goals. First, he uncouples Vir upa from the kind
of activity that would render him a siddha unpalatable to entire groups of
prospective followers. Within India in particular, drinking is a low-status form
of recreation, so Vir upa can be elevated on the social horizon by the exegeti-
cal process. Second, the poem can tie Vir upa’s hagiography to the practice of
various yogic meditations in the way that a simple reading of the poetry can-
not. This means that the individual ritual or poetic texts attributed to Vir upa
may be placed within the hagiographical continuum, so that the compositions
may be understood as an extension of his awakened condition, rather than the
ramblings of an alcoholic yogin. 
This last point is important, for Munidatta would have us believe that the
Virupa of the drinking song in fact does not drink. Yet Vir upa’s legendary al-
coholic proclivities are so important to the normative hagiography that his
iconography relies on a drinking episode.60 In it, Virupa and Kanha arrive at a
bar with no money. Quite understandably, the barmaid refuses to serve two
disreputable sadhus without some demonstration of an ability to pay. Vir upa
declares that when the line between the sunlight and the shadow cast by the
doorframe reaches a certain point, he will pay her. Satisﬁed, she serves them
(pours him a strong one, in the drinking song). However, Virupa takes a knife
and nails the sunbeam on the surface of the table, causing the sun to become
arrested in its path. As the sunbeam never reaches the point where they have
to pay, Virupa and Kanha drink up all the booze in the bar and all the liquor
in the eighteen regions of that area. All the waterclocks and sundials seem bro-
ken, and everyone seems themselves as if drunk from a lack of sleep. The king
eventually comes to the rescue by paying the bar tab, at which point Virupa re-
leases the sun and continues on his way.
This scenario was so important that it was taken as the basis for the norma-
tive iconography. In his representations, Vir upa is depicted holding onto the
sun by a ray of light that comes down to his hand. The episode, like others in
his hagiography, establishes that Virupa is a mah asiddha, one with great per-
fection of power. He drinks without getting drunk, all the while controlling the
sun and, later, the Ganges River. In both instances, he is able to do so because
he has received inspiration from Nairatmya, the divine consort of the Original
Buddha Vajradhara, in a series of revelations that brought Vir upa to the sixth
level of the bodhisattva (Figure 16). Thus, consecrated by ultimate reality her-
self, Virupa can overcome the gods of the natural world, which is exactly what
he does. He orders the Goddess Ganges back up her course, so the river dries
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 281 ---
figure 16 *Marga-phala lineage painting. Clockwise from upper left:
Vajradhara, Nairatmya, Kanha, Virupa. Tibet, second half of the
ﬁfteenth century. Color and gold paint on cloth, 57.5 × 50.2 cm.
© The Cleveland Museum of Art, 2001, Purchase from the J. H. Wade Fund, 1960.206.
Reprinted with permission.

--- PAGE 282 ---
up for a time and he can cross. In the drinking episode, he holds the god Surya
(Sun) from continuing on his path. These are the proofs of his mastery of psy-
chic power (siddhi), and without the narrative episodes he has no siddha status. 
Elsewhere we see that the interpretation of uncomfortable social realities,
particularly drinking, was done through religious metaphors to such an extent
that it became the source of farce. In the Mattavilasa-prahasana (Farce of the
Fool’s Play), a disreputable Kapalika named Satyasoma is shown rationalizing
a taste for powerful drink. He shares his vision of the toddy house as a reli-
gious sacriﬁce with his Kapalika consort, Devasoma.
Satyasoma to Devasoma: Hey, Baby—check it out! This saloon imitates the
riches of the sacriﬁcial site. It’s all here: the sign pole is the post of sacriﬁce;
the booze is the Soma; the barﬂies are the chief priests; the glasses are the
ritual vessels; the snacks, roast meat and the rest, are the special oblations;
the slurred speech of the crowd is the liturgy; their drunken songs are the
chants; the pitchers of white lightening are the offering ladles; the patrons’
thirsty need is the mouth of ﬁre; and the tavern-keep himself is the master
of ceremonies.61
The differences between this and Vir upa’s song are many, of course. Vir upa
seems to make no apology for his recreational preference, and his hagiogra-
phers positively revel in his ability to surpass all others in quantity. It is Mu-
nidatta who feels moved to explain away the great saint’s unfortunate prefer-
ence in dining establishments. Satyasoma, though, has no Munidatta to do
this for him and, instead, shows an alcoholic’s willingness to make any excuse
for his lapses. For the royal playwright, Mahendravikramavarman, the oppor-
tunity to use the widely condemned and surreptitiously practiced habit of im-
bibing is just too attractive to resist. The rationalization of excessive imbibing
by disreputable yogins was well known enough to become a comedic moment,
for the farce would have little resonance without a measure of conformity to
the observable world. 
In a sense, it is somewhat unfortunate that Munidatta has, in the modern
period, become the exegete of choice to demonstrate the hermeneutical tech-
nique of coded language. Although many of Munidatta’s readings of the
Caryagitiko$a poems appear forced and implausible, as seen above, more com-
monly the process is relatively clear. For example, Ana Nga Yogin, at the be-
ginning of his Dakinijalasamvararahasya, quotes two verses describing the
consecration. At one point, the verses mention three “mundane” forms of
bliss, contrasted with one imperishable accomplishment (aksara siddhih).
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 283 ---
AnaNga Yogin comments on this by saying, “The Lord spoke in code when
he declared that the fourth imperishable bliss, which occurs by following the
desire of the Great Seal, is thus the consecration for the perfection of the dis-
cipline [i.e., the fourth consecration].” 62 There is actually nothing particular-
ly esoteric about Ana Nga Yogin’s application of a perfectly standard exegeti-
cal device. Those familiar with the terminology of the system would arrive at
exactly the same conclusion, and Ana Nga Yogin is providing here a welcome
clariﬁcation of ritual language that has become a little too embedded in jar-
gon and technical nomenclature. 
Thus, at its most workmanlike level, coded language operates simply as a
basic tool of interpretation for commentators attempting to unpack the prac-
tices or implications of various scriptural statements. It is well to keep in mind,
however, that the many other categories of exegetical criticism—“direct mean-
ing” (nitartha), “indirect meaning” (ñeyartha), and so on—afforded the oppor-
tunity for institutional siddhas to construct a series of layered signiﬁcations. In
this manner, each statement implicated a spectrum of other meanings, so all
tantric words were polysemic by deﬁnition. Every term, however seemingly in-
signiﬁcant, thereby became implicated in a hierarchical web of symbol sys-
tems. The ensuing complexity turned many of the rather pedestrian ritual ex-
ercises found in the new scriptures into highly challenging intellectual
enterprises. Thus tantric hermeneutics heaped thick description on thick de-
scription (to invoke Geertz’s language), each embedded in the other. As a tool
in the process of domestication, coded language and its analogues became in-
valuable assets in the architecture of criteria of meaning. It allowed siddhas to
turn some of the more difﬁcult language events into soteriological descrip-
tions. If the forced interpretations of Munidatta are somewhat transparent, the
entire spectrum of hermeneutics should be kept in mind as a corrective to the
idiom of a single author. 
     
In distinction to the hermeneutical usage, the other employment of “coded
language” (sandhya-bhasa) in the tantras became separated from apologetics or
exegesis per se. It was divorced from previous attempts to explain the new doc-
trine as an elaboration of the prior message. Instead of justifying the new mes-
sage as the unfolding of the intentional abstruse nature of Buddhist scriptures,
both scriptural and exegetical authors deployed an entirely new kind of com-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 284 ---
munication, consisting of both words and gestures. It was not to be justiﬁed
by any of the previous literature, but stands apart from it by indicating that
there were lists of terms and gestures that required speciﬁc meanings to be rec-
ognized in them. 
Previous attempts to explain this kind of coded language in the esoteric
Buddhist scriptures have emphasized two sources: the twenty-two terms in the
sandhya-bhasa chapter of the Hevajra Tantra (HT, II.iii.56–61) and the com-
mentary to that list of coded words ascribed to N agarjunapada (Samdhibhasa-
tika). Certainly, these are essential sources for understanding the development
and application of coded language in esoteric Buddhism, yet it is not clear that
all the evidence has been taken into account. For example, the introductory
verses to the coded language section in the Hevajra Tantraemphasize that the
employment of coded communication in ritualized behavior—smiling, gazing,
embracing, and sexual union—is not found in the other four kinds of tantras
(II.iii.54). The Hevajra Tantra provides glosses to its list of twenty-two terms
so that their meanings may be understood by initiates who intend to engage in
the practices associated with the tantric feast. 
madhya = madana padmabh ajana = kapala
(wine = intoxication)63 (lotus vessel = skull)
mamsa = bala t rptikara = bhaksya
(ﬂesh = strength) (satisfying = food)
malayaja = milana m alatindhana = vyañjana
(sandlewood = meeting) (jasmine wood = herbs)
kheta = gati catu hsama = gutha
(phlegm = going) (a potion of four ingredients = dung)
$ava = $raya kasturik a = mutra
(corpse = resort) (musk = urine)
asthyabharana = niram$uka sihlaka = svaya mbhu
(bone ornament = naked) (frankincense = blood)
preNkhana = agati karp uraka = $ukra
(wandering = coming) (camphor = semen)
krpita = damaruka s alija = mahamamsa
(wood = drum) (rice product = human ﬂesh)
dundura = abhavya kunduru = dv indriyayoga
(emission = nonpotential) (resin = union of organs)
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 285 ---
Kaliñjara = bhavya vola = vajra
(name of a mountain = potential) (gum myrrh = thunderbolt)
dindima = aspar$a kakkolaka = padma
(small drum = untouchable) (perfume = lotus)
Beyond this list, the tantra indicates that yogins could make allusive references
to the ﬁve Buddha families by speaking the proper names of feminine ﬁgures
that could be taken as their families’ deﬁning representatives. Such an indirect
reference is possible, we are assured, because the yoginis are icons for the rites
employed by Hevajra yogins. The ritual contextualization is a further afﬁrma-
tion of the performative aspects of sandhya-bhasa, in that coded language was
considered a vocal extension of the much larger group of secret signs articu-
lated in the Hevajra Tantra and elsewhere. 
These secret signs are called choma in the text and are glossed as “foreign”
(miliccha) in the Yogaratnamala commentary; miliccha was translated into Ti-
betan as “a foreign language,” even though it clearly means “foreign (signs).”64
The Hevajra Tantra employs both the secret signs and coded language as a
means for the initiates of the tantric gathering (ganacakra) to identify one an-
other, so the signs operate as gateways for entrance into and participation
within the gathering. The Hevajra Tantraalso indicates that an individual not
employing these secret signs and coded language will be subject to the wrath
of the protecting yoginis of the four sacred sites (pitha), even if he is a Buddha
(HT,II.iii.66–67). Like others, Wayman has emphasized the material found in
the Hevajra Tantra and noted that the list of terms appearing there is identi-
cal to the list of words glossed in N agarjunapada’s Samdhi-bhasa-tika.65 He
concludes: “Nagarjuna’s commentary suggests that the Hevajra Tantrahas giv-
en the basic list of ‘twilight language.’”66
Unfortunately, the situation is somewhat more complex, and modern
scholarship appears to have understated the broader issue of secret signs, of
which coded language plays an essential part. Coded language materials are
seen especially in several of the yogini tantra scriptures, and lists of the funda-
mental texts are sometimes conveniently provided in commentarial materials.
In dedicated sections of those yogini tantras, the signs are divided into physi-
cal signs—including hand and facial gestures—and vocal signs, employing se-
cret meanings apart from natural language expressions, and are not limited to
the items listed above from the Hevajra Tantra. The scriptures convey the
semiotics of the “vocal seal” (vagmudra) or the vocal part of the “seal of secret
signs” (chomamudra).
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 286 ---
This term for secret sign, choma is a late Middle Indic word, the Prakrit
equivalent of the Sanskrit chadman and other late Middle Indic words, such as
chauma, chamdia, and so forth. 67 Like its other cognates, chadman is an inter-
esting term: it indicates disguise, deceit, counterfeit, and deception, and cer-
tainly signiﬁes that the appearance of an item or individual is intended to mis-
lead and mask a real purpose. Thus choma indicates not just secret codes or
signs, but also the subterfuges and disguises available to spies, gang members,
and adherents of secret societies. As early as the Artha$astra, secret agents were
encouraged to use disguises of heterodox monks as the means to escape from
difﬁcult situations. 68 Moreover, a delightful verse from the eighth-century
Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha provides the excellent advice offered to the hero Nara-
vahanadatta by his friend Gomukha,
Varanasi is entirely supported by superlative thieves—really, jackdaws on
holy ground—whose aegis is the secret signs [chadman] and who masquer-
ade as sages with triple staff and limbs daubed in tawny paste, just to men-
tion a few of their costumes. 69
As the verse suggests, secret signs in India are closely related to places of pil-
grimage, since the highly ﬂuid nature of sacred locales provides the best op-
portunity for thieves, secret agents, criminal conspiracies, and secret societies
using obscure signs to congregate and support themselves. For Buddhist sid-
dhas, the purpose of these is most often discussed as the recognition of partic-
ipants in the ganacakra, the weekly tantric feast explored below in the consid-
eration of siddha communities.
Perhaps the earliest yogini tantra movement in this direction may be found
in the longest section of all concerning the esoteric meaning of speciﬁc words in
the longer Sarvabuddhasamayoga. There, the extensive list of words is not intro-
duced with or identiﬁed by the term “coded language” but is simply included in
a larger list of the “secret communications” (*chomamudra : brda yi phya rgya) ,
which begins with physical signals yet also articulates dozens of word associa-
tions.70 Analogously, the Samputa devotes a section to coded language at the be-
ginning of a long chapter on lengthening life and generating omniscience.71 It
starts with the twenty-two pairs of the Hevajra Tantraand segues into another
series of twenty-eight terms with speciﬁc gestures or forms of ritual communi-
cation associated with them. The Samputa then returns to yet another series, this
time of sixty-seven other terms and their ritual equivalents, before going on to
discuss other esoteric rites. Many of the middle twenty-eight are shared with an
analogous section of the Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja, where twenty-three
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 287 ---
terms are identiﬁed with speciﬁc gestures or other forms of communication to
indicate an entire ritual system of signs.72
In the same vein as these other yogini tantras, chapter 5 of the Buddhakapala
is not devoted exclusively to coded language, even though its chapter title de-
clares this topic to be its purpose. This section begins with an announcement
that it will be the alchemy (rasayana) chapter and articulates an otherwise unex-
ceptional series of practices requiring the ingestion of a lengthy set of substances
running the gamut from repellent to lethal, all for the purpose of purifying the
body. Then the text engages the idea of sandhya-bhasa with the proclamation
that it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd and is hidden from the other tantras. In one sense, of
course, the Buddhakapala does take a page from the Hevajra Tantra(or perhaps
vice versa) since the section primarily lists terms that are glossed by other signi-
ﬁers. Its list of thirty-two or thirty-three (a few are unclear) is quite different
from the one in the Hevajra Tantra. The Buddhakapala’sis developed as if it were
a combination of the two movements in the Hevajra Tantra chapter: lexical
items in the world indicate personalities (divinities, yogins, yogin is) or other
proper references (sacred locales). The list completed, the Buddhakapala then
launches into a short exhortation on the use of coded language:
Buddhakapala-yogins should not agree that there is no coded language
[even if it is difﬁcult to locate], but should speak to each other in this great
language. It is hidden within all the tantras, but in this tantra it is clearly
expressed [a section identifying sites with plant parts follows]. . . . In that
way the coded language is actually unknown by the Sugatas , is not internal-
ized by the yoginis, Locana and the rest, but [is realized] by the yogin who
has faith in the teacher. 73
After this, the chapter concludes with a presentation of various relatively well
known principles, such as foregoing attachment to objects in the world and
speciﬁc views with reference to the absolute, all with the promise that if the
yogin practices for just a half month, accomplishment will surely come. 
The Jñanatilaka’s coded-language section is different from the others in
content, even though it also speciﬁes linguistic equivalents for terms to be em-
ployed in the tantric feast. 74 The chapter appears to contain forty-six pairs of
equivalents, although the Tibetan translation makes the ﬁrst two difﬁcult to
interpret. The pairs begin with gender-selected items and is curious in that the
male and female seminal ﬂuids are given twice as the equivalents for other
nouns. Beyond that, many of the terms are said to be codes for Buddhist tech-
nical terminology: meat is anger, cooked vegetables are ignorance, and so on. 
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 288 ---
A somewhat different direction is adopted by the Mahamudra-tilaka.
Chapter 13, devoted to coded language, is introduced with the comment: “This
is the secret speech in the language spoken by yogin is when they congregate
together in the Odiyana and the other p ithas.”75 The chapter self-consciously
begins with a list of sixteen of the twenty-two pairs taken from the Hevajra
Tantra, perhaps not surprising for a commentarial scripture, even though it
was not the direction taken by the Jñanatilaka, as seen above. This list of six-
teen is taken as merely a starting point, for it is expanded to a total of ninety-
seven pairs using a procedure similar to that found in the Hevajra Tantra and
the other yogini tantras.
Normally, these cursory explanations—here given a cursory treatment—
would ﬁnd a greater expression in the commentarial literature, but the exeget-
ical works are not as illuminating as we might wish. For example, the sandhya-
bhasa chapter of the Buddhakapala is not signiﬁcantly commented on by any of
the three commentators whose exegesis survives. Indeed, the only critic to note
anything about the chapter, Saraha, simply glosses this section with the quip:
“Of course, the section that articulates the idea of coded language is easy to
understand!” He says this despite the assurance in the scripture that the Bud-
dhas themselves have reputedly failed to achieve this comprehension! 76 In-
stead, Saraha invests his exegetical capital in explaining the identity of the ob-
vious lexical items. Conversely, Padmavajra’s commentary is incomplete; only
the ﬁrst two chapters of the tantra are covered, even with protestations by the
translators of its being complete. Finally, Abhayakaragupta does not comment
on the coded expressions at all but, instead, concentrates on the alchemical
section in the ﬁrst part of that chapter. 
While the Samputa commentaries of V iravajra and Abhay akaragupta are
more direct, they are not necessarily more enlightening. Abhay akaragupta
threatens that, if those who know the secret language were to employ this
communication in front of those not initiated into its use, then the transgres-
sors would be afﬂicted by contagion or misfortune for their revelation of se-
crets.77 Beyond this, Abhay akaragupta seems again primarily concerned with
issues of alchemy and the relationship of coded language to twenty-ﬁve rites
concerning longevity and the use of drugs. 78 Viravajra’s Samputa commentary
provides a useful catalogue of texts in which the issue of coded language is dis-
cussed, but is also more concerned with alchemy and other ritual use of ma-
terials than with linguistics. 79 Likewise, the surviving commentary on the
Jñanatilaka by Jñanaparama—said to be based on instructions from one of the
Indrabhutis—provides little useful direction. Jñanaparama simply afﬁrms that
this coded expression is to be used in various ritual environments, whether
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 289 ---
making offerings of food (bali) or other sensory objects. 80 Perhaps most in-
teresting is Gambhiravajra’s scholarly commentary on the Mahamudra-tilaka.
Although he does not even explain the lexical equivalents—as the Samputa
commentaries at least do—he does provide a sense of a wider ﬁeld of discus-
sion. He indicates, for example, that Vilasavajra thought coded language arose
from the taste of bliss, perhaps a Buddhist form of glossolalia or other spon-
taneous language. Other teachers, however, largely considered the language a
manner for determining who was qualiﬁed to come to the tantric feast and
who was not.81
Perhaps another approach to the coded language problem may be suggest-
ed. One observation about coded language expressions in the literature is that
both the gestures and the vocal secret signs were “foreign” (miliccha) in origin
and occasionally attributed to the secret congregation of yoginis in the myste-
rious land of O diyana.82 So, when the yogini tantras or their commentaries
claim that the secret signs and coded language are declared by the Buddha to
be foreign speech employed for the purpose of recognition in the ganacakra of
yoginis, it may relate to nonstandard language structures, whether tribal or
otherwise. Even then, as seen above, the tenuous nature of coded language
caused the author of the Buddhakapala-tantra to castigate those who doubted
its existence as a real language. 
However, certain of the code words appear to be ultimately derived from
Kui/Kawi/Gond or another of the Dravidian languages. Dravidian forms have
a phonology much closer to the words represented than do the Munda lan-
guages. Many of the coded words are implausibly based on Sanskrit. As
shown above, for example, vola is supposed to stand for the vajra (penis), and
kakkola is to represent the lotus (vagina) (HT, II.iii.60). The modern inter-
pretation is that vola is the word in Sanskrit that denotes the myrrh resin of
the commiphora tree, and kakkola is a word for perfume.83 However, the der-
ivation of vola from a Dravidian root for feathers, employed as a metaphor for
pubic hair (bula/bulus/bura), is much more straightforward; alternatively, it
may be derived from a common word for copulation (poru/pora/pori).84
Kakkola is likewise possibly a reﬂection of kakkulate, a Dravidian word for love
or to make love. 85 Similarly, kunduru indicates the coded word for sexual
union and is a variety of resin in the modern interpretation. Yet it is probably
derived from the Dravidian root √kund (to pierce, to prick, to prod). 86 While
there is no question that some of the words in their current spelling are ren-
dered into Sanskrit, it is just as likely that the vocalizations heard by siddhas
were changed into Sanskrit when they were unsure of its meaning. There is
even a factual testimonial of Dravidian inﬂuence in the Vidyottama-tantra,
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 290 ---
where Vajrap ani is depicted as acknowledging that some syllables of an im-
portant mantra are taken from Dravidian words. 87
This does not mean that esoteric Buddhism is necessarily from South In-
dia; if it were, there would be little point in calling attention to the Dravidian
component. Instead, the most plausible explanation is that these words and
the associated gestures were formulated based both on prior experience with
secret signs in pilgrimage sites as well as on the half-understood phrases of in-
digenous peoples or other obscure language speakers. The afﬁrmation of its
“foreign” nature would probably not have been encountered in normative Dra-
vidian locales anyway, for southerners were not understood as foreign. Texts
like the Mañju$rimulakalpa simply describes southerners as sinful, not incom-
prehensible.88 Instead, the Dravidian languages close to the north were those
spoken in Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and in many other
areas where tribal and village Dravidian speakers were found. 
  
Whether or not we accept that one contribution to coded language came
from aboriginal people’s native speech, the issue is associated with the clear
employment of vernacular-based literary languages, such as Apabhra m$a,
Old Bengali, and Prakrit. In addition, the question of the use of nonstan-
dard Sanskrit in the composition of many of the tantras themselves should
be considered. Actually, some of these forms of linguistic use came to define
the scriptural communities of the Buddhist siddha culture and in some sense
differentiated it from %aiva systems, which exhibited a weaker affirmation of
vernacular-based verses. Texts edited to date show that those given the des-
ignation yogini-tantra at one time or another include Apabhra m$a verses,
framed in a ritual narrative of nonstandard Sanskrit (frequently called barbar-
ic or bad Sanskrit), and sometimes include coded language. Indeed, it has
been observed that the coded language chapter of the Hevajra Tantra is im-
mediately followed by the most important section in Apabhra m$a in that
tantra.89 The only surviving Sanskrit sadhana in the Buddhakapala system is
also the locus of an important “adamantine song” (vajragiti) in Apabhram$a,
to be sung by the assembled yogin is.90 Likewise, the Khasama-tantra, the
Dakarnava-tantra, the Candamaharosana, and the Samvarodaya-tantra all in-
clude Apabhra m$a verses, and all of them represent yogini-tantra material.91
Although some Apabhra m$a verses are preserved in (Maha-) yoga-tantras
such as the Krsnayamari, they appear less frequently, and their position in the
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 291 ---
ritual life is not combined with an attempt at the systematic articulation of a
coded language, either as speciﬁc terms or as an hermeneutic principle. 92
Likewise, even though the exegetical works to the Guhyasamaja system de-
veloped procedures for the articulation of coded hermeneutics—mostly in the
environment of the “six points” (satkotika) of the commentarial tantra, the
Sandhivyakarana—this has not been done in the context of chapters on cod-
ed language or employing Apabhra m$a verses. Instead, it represents the her-
meneutical technique already considered above.
The clearest message is that some mahayoga- and many yogini-tantras were
concerned with alternative language systems. As a corollary, we might recog-
nize that we are dealing primarily with forms of language, recognized as such
by the principals, and not simply hermeneutical events employed by commen-
tators. While this proposition might seem unexceptional, it has been treated
differently by two authors. Ruegg has proposed that both the Buddhist and
non-Buddhist usage of Prakrit and Apabhra m$a result in some measure from
the design of those authors who sought the semantic indeterminacy of this
form of language: “Nevertheless, it does seem quite likely that the Siddhas
employed Apabhram$a at least partly with a view to achieving certain aesthet-
ic and semiotic qualities associated with Apabhra m$a, including polyvalence
and allusiveness.”93 Elsewhere, he speciﬁcally refutes Upadhye’s opinion—fre-
quently expressed by Indian specialists in Prakrit literature—that this language
was used for the purposes of popularity.94 If I understand Ruegg correctly, the
difﬁculty of differentiating between the precise referents of phonetically simi-
lar words is the/a key to comprehending its attraction to these poets. Yet it is
not clear that the difﬁculties we admittedly experience in reading these verses
is the consequence of their intention, as opposed to modern lexical limitations
in the face of the uncertain transmission of the documents. 
Similarly, Newman has quoted Pu ndarika, the author of the grand com-
mentary to the Kalacakra-tantra, to the effect that the forms of nonstandard
Sanskrit encountered there have been placed intentionally for the purpose of
relieving beings of their attachments to correct grammar. Thus, Pu ndarika
indicates, the irregular forms encountered are simply for educational purpos-
es, not because Buddhists did not know how to write correct Sanskrit. 95
Newman, pointing out that at least some Buddhists could write perfectly cor-
rect Sanskrit, has suggested taking this apologia seriously as stated, curious
as it seems. 
The language of the early Kalackara literature . . . is Sanskrit into which var-
ious types of nonstandard forms have been intentionally introduced. . . .
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 292 ---
While some of these solecisms have pedagogic purpose, for the most part
they are designed to counteract pedantic arrogance. 96
Although this may have been the case, I ﬁnd it an uncompelling proposi-
tion. Nonstandard Sanskrit is a problem more complex than either semiliter-
ates trying to pass off their work as classical Sanskrit or a highly cultivated class
intentionally writing below their audience level. As Newman has pointed out,
we must refrain from associating all esoteric Buddhist authorities with non-
standard Sanskrit, and, as Ruegg has allusively suggested, the Apabhram$a em-
ployed by the siddhas is not a true vernacular. Yet both scholars appear reticent
to acknowledge that language seems to require a linguistic community expect-
ing this register, and sometimes several communities may be involved. These
scholars’ models of language use are analogous to the models of scriptural in-
spiration in a way: both describe compositions informed by individual decisions
directed at the world. In distinction, the evidence of the texts suggests that so-
cial context—the intimate and sustained conversation between siddhas, their
peers and their communities—became the overwhelmingly important principle. 
In the tantric Buddhist case, at least four levels of language are employed
or implied throughout siddha-related literature, in descending order of social
status: good standard Sanskrit, nonstandard Sanskrit, Apabhra m$a, and the
unrecorded low-status vernacular languages of the Buddhist locales. Thus sid-
dhas were minimally bilingual, with diglossia evident in each language, so that
there is a language level associated with differing levels of status, much as
modern Bengali, Hindi, and Kannada are stratiﬁed according to the degree of
the background and education of the speaker. Even in the rough outline pre-
sented by our sources, sociolinguistically two languages exhibiting four major
levels of glossia are unexceptional for India, and siddha religion might more
proﬁtably be described as demonstrating diglossia within Sanskrit and within
the Apabhram$a-vernacular continuum. Thus D’souza’s statements concern-
ing the use of different glossia in modern India have resonance within our ear-
ly medieval period.
In a multilingual community the individual speaker’s several languages
function within a fairly well-deﬁned system just as the styles and varieties
of a single language serve the needs of the monolingual. Certain cultural
contexts demand the use of a certain language while other contexts call for
a different language or for silence. . . . It is clear, therefore, that in a multi-
lingual context one ﬁnds an interplay of languages which is governed by so-
ciocultural rules.97
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 293 ---
Moreover, our evidence from modern sociolinguistics is reinforced by authors
esteemed in the medieval period. In particular chapter XVII.1–63 of Bharata’s
Natya$astra articulates the expectation that different languages are presumed
from disparate linguistic communities, representing (in sociolinguistic terms)
disparate glossia.98 Not only has there developed a horizon of expectation that
Mleccha languages (= tribal or foreign languages) might be represented, but
Bharata also articulates the circumstances for the employment of different lan-
guages or glossia—Sanskrit, Prakrit, Mleccha-$abda, %auraseni, Magadhi, and
so forth.99
Therefore the siddha(s) contribution(s) should be examined in light of
what we know about India at large; indeed, such entities as nonstandard San-
skrit and Apabhra m$a are known elsewhere. In the latter instance, Schomer
has demonstrated that Apabhra m$a, related languages, and their use of the
doha verse form served a variety of community requirements during the me-
dieval period.100 The Buddhists were but the earliest of the various groups to
demonstrate the range of applications in literary vernacular compositions. In-
cluded as well were Sants of North India, Bauls, Sikhs, Nathpanthi yogins,
and a variety of other ﬁgures throughout medieval India. They used dohas to
communicate many of the same ideas as those seen among the Buddhist sid-
dhas: devotion to the guru, criticism of society, poetic expression of a religious
path, an expression of underclass sentiments, and so forth. Schomer also
shows that, while not exactly colloquial in language, their verses became part
of colloquial expression, so doha verses continue to be recited today by villagers
and rag-pickers. They evidently were easily understood, readily remembered,
sung frequently with instrumental accompaniment, and satisﬁed the aesthet-
ics of the broad population. It would be, in fact, difﬁcult to ﬁnd a similar,
Buddhist-inspired language and verse form that has become so very popular
and so widely imitated. Under these circumstances, siddhas employed these
languages, perhaps not for the expressed purpose of proselyzation, but because
they represented a ﬁrst moment in the Indian ﬂowering of vernacular language
use still extant today.
In the case of esoteric Buddhist Sanskrit, it is also on a continuum with
other community usages, especially those found in areas where the new early
medieval regional centers have obtained power. Although %aiva tantric San-
skrit is a well-known example, it is not the only other instance of such non-
standard usages, for inscriptions contain analogous examples. Kielhorn, in his
explanation of the Sanskrit in the Siyodoni Stone Inscription, could have been
speaking about the language of the Buddhist tantras.
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 294 ---
The author or authors, though intending to write Sanskrit, had a very
meagre knowledge of the grammar of that language; they were evidently
influenced by, and have freely employed works, phrases, and constructions
of, their vernacular. . . . The rules of saMdhi have been persistently neg-
lected. . . . As regards the treatment of nouns in general, case-terminations
have often been altogether omitted; sometimes wrong cases have been
employed, masculine words treated as if they were neuter, and masculine
or neuter forms of adjectives and pronouns used with reference to femi-
nine nouns, etc. . . . Moreover, the first part of the inscription contains a
considerable number of words which either do not occur in Sanskrit liter-
ature at all, or for which the dictionary furnishes no appropriate meaning;
and some of which undoubtedly were taken from the vernacular. 101
Similar statements have been made by philologists examining both Buddhist
and Hindu tantras, and it is not surprising to ﬁnd a dramatic change in scrip-
tural and exegetical language with a change in the sociopolitical system. 102
Thus, instead of “barbaric Sanskrit,” we are dealing with a glossia that extends
to political decrees and sectarian compositions and represents a clear statement
of linguistic distance from the prior centers of power and socialization. 
The linguistic situation is analogous to that represented by speakers of
Asian languages, especially immigrants, encountering the new transcultural
language of English. They must use English, for no other language will assist
them in the accomplishment of their goals. But they come from a wide vari-
ety of backgrounds and cannot be homogenized. Those who have passed
through the great language-reﬁning institutions of the colleges or universities
will speak standard English rather well and may have exceeded their primary-
language ability in the expression of sophisticated ideas. Others will not have
had the opportunity to become so well normalized in their language applica-
tion, so that the syntax, grammar, and use of such items as articles and sub-
ject/verb agreement in number will be evident. Although individual idiosyn-
crasies are legion, generally speakers with a similar background will render
English with similar forms of expressions: native Chinese speakers might ﬁnd
that their English is derided by elites as “Chinglish.” At the same time, Eng-
lish is developing indigenous forms in India and elsewhere, with an emerging
standard grammar and vocabulary in those locales, resulting in the develop-
ment of regional Englishes. If speakers have learned some form of English as
an adult, then their grasp of the primary language, even at sophisticated levels,
will probably remain superior to that of English, although they will frequent-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 295 ---
ly employ English loanwords in their speech and writing. But many of these
speakers will still look at their primary language with nostalgia and be required
to employ it in certain ritual environments—weddings, funerals, holiday greet-
ings, and other occasions. 
Likewise, siddha Sanskrit exhibits diglossia because those expressing them-
selves in Sanskrit may or may not have had the opportunity to pass through the
great language-reﬁning institutions of Buddhist monasteries, %aiva centers, or
Brahmanical schools. Those without the training bring with them the gram-
mar, syntax, and other peculiarities of their vernaculars, and their Sanskrit will
reﬂect it. Nevertheless, there will be times when they must use Sanskrit, for no
other language will carry the status, vocabulary, and expressive power that they
need. Broadly speaking, their Sanskrit will represent loose usages of great sim-
ilarity, and some will represent an emerging standard local form. Although it
may not be formalized on a par with Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, regional San-
skrit appeared a distinct glossia in the sense that it is a comprehensible medi-
um of communication carrying important social information.103 In a different
way, both those coming to the siddha career via the monastery and those com-
ing straight from the village will employ the mixed Apabhra m$a form seen in
Buddhist writing: it is appropriate to speciﬁc ritualized contexts (e.g., offerings
by yoginis) and might in turn integrate Sanskrit words in the form of single lex-
ical items.104 Other expressions, as seen below, may also be included, so that
both the Apabhra m$a and regional Sanskrit used in siddha writings will be
much more ﬂuid than the transculturally reﬁned Sanskrit employed by institu-
tionally trained siddha personalities in nonritualized commentarial or technical
applications. It is not necessary to agree with P undarika—that this regional
Sanskrit was composed exclusively to teach the audience a lesson in detach-
ment—to conclude that it was used intentionally as a language of composition.
Moreover, it was employed by at least some authors who could write the clas-
sical form (as seen in their exegetical works), but who felt liberated in the loose
construction and primitiveness of the new variety. 
Some traditional statements in Buddhist exegetical literature emphasize
the multiplicity of linguistic domains, although these have not been well ex-
plored to date. The most comprehensive statement of which I am aware is by
the Kashmiri scholar *Ya$askirtibhadra, in his relatively extensive commentary
on the Hevajra Tantra, the Vajrapadasarasamgrahapañjika.105 Although the
work once brieﬂy mentions the issue of eliminating clinging to good gram-
matical forms, *Ya $askirtibhadra’s primary hermeneutics are directed to ex-
plain why so many diverse place-related glossia have been included into the
esoteric canon. He explains that it has to do with the accumulated propensi-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 296 ---
ties of beings and that the Buddha was required to teach in multiple languages
simultaneously, or the entire corpus of the law in 84,000 sections never could
have been completed. *Ya $askirtibhadra emphasizes that this is in accordance
with the old “fourfold refuges” in canonical criticism: one follows the mean-
ing, not the letter; one follows gnosis, not consciousness; one follows the de-
ﬁnitive meaning, not the provisional meaning; and one follows Dharma, not
personalities.106 *Ya$askirtibhadra’s fundamental point—one that he reiterates
several times—is that the employment of diverse glossia according to the
places and vernaculars of India is simply good, skillful means, a position that
reception theorists and educators both might commend. For our purposes,
however, it is the straightforward acknowledgment that Buddhists composed
their scriptures in complex and multifaceted linguistic milieus. There, the af-
ﬁrmation of regional identity and local empowerment played as much a role as
the need to speak to high-status expectations. 107
Finally, Apabhram$a Buddhist literature represents the reemergence of an
autobiographical voice—the ﬁrst-person singular literary cry for liberation not
seen since the early canonical verse compendia of the Arhats and the
Thera/Theri poetic systems. The signature line (banita) “Saraha says . . . ,
Kanha observes . . . , Tillopa declares . . .” is frequently encountered. It is cu-
rious that the development of a vernacular-based literary glossia should free
authors to articulate feelings and attitudes in the literary ﬁrst person (here ac-
tually the third person acting in a ﬁrst-person capacity), but the otherwise dis-
connected languages of Pali and Apabhra m$a share this quality. Perhaps the
formalization of the bodhisattva path in the Mahayana eliminated an Indian
articulation of personal viewpoint or emotional frailty; perhaps it was simply
that bodhisattvas could neither do wrong nor have second thoughts. In any
event, the human sentiments of aspiration and longing, of success and failure,
that had been so long suppressed in Mahayanist literature had the opportuni-
ty to come to the fore once again. So, while the content of Saraha’s dohas and
the gathas ascribed to Upali render them connected only by distance, their po-
sitions as autobiographical voices in the Buddhist context bridge this seem-
ingly irreconcilable space. 
All things considered, we might understand this: the early medieval peri-
od gave rise to new forms of religious language, which included regional vari-
eties of Sanskrit, even though the grammarians’ variety of this latter contin-
ued to operate as the language of highest status. The subordinate status of
regional Sanskrit is recognized in the colophons to occasional Tibetan trans-
lations, which acknowledge the inferior position of their language. 108 The re-
gional usage, however, became an emblem of authenticity for those areas new-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 297 ---
ly emerging from tribal or rudimentary agrarian peripheral polities, and the
new sense of authority of regional centers relied heavily on their capacity to
produce literature that spoke to their concerns. After all, they were the areas
gaining control of the polity and economy of the post-Pu syabhuti world, and
upon their stability rested North India’s viability. While such literatures—
whether in regional Sanskrit or Apabhra m$a—required high Sanskrit inter-
pretive measures to be accepted in a pan-Indian religious milieu, that was of
little concern to the authors or their immediate patrons, who instead reveled
in the accelerating power of peripheral India’s emergence from its prior
netherworld. If the previous centers of inﬂuence were declining in power and
prestige, Tripura, Bhubane $war, and Sirpur, to mention a few, were becom-
ing the new centers of authority. Our understanding of the reasons for this
shift in language, therefore, must proceed into questions of the change of
group association and afﬁliation in parts of the Buddhist siddha subculture.
Accordingly, the afﬁrmations that coded language represent some modiﬁca-
tion of natural speech, the implications of the use of Apabhra m$a, and the
employment of nonstandard Sanskrit all indicate not only that the new sys-
tem appealed to levels of society largely excluded from standard Sanskrit but
that speciﬁc siddhas came from or were somehow associated with such low-
caste, outcaste, and tribal groups. 
Examples of Buddhist sites within early medieval kingdoms include the
sites of Sirpur and Malhar, both of which represented centers in the newly
emergent kingdom of Dak sina Ko$ala. The monastic presence at Sirpur—in
the Chhattisgarh state—is afﬁrmed by two monasteries (Figure 17), both of
which were excavated in the 1950s, but no complete excavation report was
ﬁled, and now the excavator is deceased. 109 Likewise the 1976–77 excavations
at Malhar, in Bastar, are also incompletely reported, with a single short mono-
graph.110 However, an examination of the meager reports in conjunction with
the inscriptions and modern demographics indicates that these centers were
swimming in a tribal sea. Both Chhattisgarh and Bastar still have a high con-
centration of tribal populations—Gond, Kond, Saora, Muria, and others—yet
also have artistic representations in the Buddhist sites closely reminiscent of
tribal art, including a Vajrasattva of a most peculiar variety. 111 Beyond that,
the Sirpur inscription of Buddhagho sa, paleographically from the seventh to
the eighth centuries, is the only Buddhist inscription I have found to mention
the actual employment of mantras (mantratattva).112 Space prohibits an ex-
tensive treatment of these two locales—which deserve to be considered in re-
lation to the more important monasteries of Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalita-
giri in Orissa—but the involvement of these areas with siddha traditions is
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 298 ---
reinforced by the occasional Indian claiming to have come from Dak sina Ko-
$ala, such as Vairocanavajra. 113
      
Not only do such regional communities bring their languages to the assembly,
they also inform the way in which each language is employed. If we set aside
a puritanical reading of the most outrageous scriptures for a moment, we
might see in them something of a playfulness and comedic expression based in
the Indian aesthetics found within village or regional audiences. While read-
ing through the extreme statements of the siddha literature, I have consistent-
ly been impressed by their level of grotesque humor. Sometimes this is quite
crude, as in scatological humor, but other times it appears embedded in the
simple outrageousness of the language. It has occurred to me, for example, that
there could be no possible parody of siddha literature. Parody requires that the
sociocultural register be reiﬁed and extended beyond the boundaries of the
consistent message of the genre, whether in the case of sacred literature or
poor ﬁction. However, there are simply no boundaries beyond which siddha
, ,   ⁄ 
figure 17 Anandaprabhu Vihara, Sirpur. Chhattisgarh, early eighth century.
Ronald M. Davidson.

--- PAGE 299 ---
literature does not go. Indeed, I have often heard a Tibetan teacher of esoteric
literature—layman or monk—read some extreme statement from a scripture,
burst into laughter, and exclaim that this obviously needs interpretation, for no
reasonable person could possibly take such items at face value. Yet it is equal-
ly clear that many of the extreme statements were taken at face value, as the
hagiographies of early Tibetan translators afﬁrm. Rwalo Dorjé Drak (b. 1016
c.e.), for example, is represented in his hagiography as having bragged that he
killed thirteen tantric scholars by black magic and had ﬁve tantric consorts, the
youngest of which was the eleven-year-old daughter of a local chieftain. 114
With such mixed messages by representatives of the system, we might be for-
given for wondering how seriously this literature was intended to be taken. 
Excessive language is displayed in a variety of ways. For example, the frame
story for the pronouncement of the Mahamayuri-vidyarajñi-dharani, an early
esoteric text, concerns an issue of protection, but is humorous in its timing.115
While the Lord was staying at %ravasti, one of his monks, Sv ati, resided
with him. Now Sv ati was a new monk, and he went out to collect firewood
in order to heat some bath water for the Samgha. Just as he was wrestling
with one piece, an enormous black snake slithered from out of a hole in an-
other branch and struck him on the big toe of his right foot. Sv ati crashed
to the ground, foaming at the gums and rolling his eyes up into his head, out
cold. Ananda, always a good man in a pinch, immediately ran to the Bud-
dha, paid his respects, stood to one side, and related to the Buddha that Sv ati
was just about dead. Never one to miss an opportunity to relate a story, the
Lord told Ananda that he should use the Kingly Spell of the Great Peacock.
Who was the Great Peacock? Well, it so happens a long time ago . . . and
he, the Buddha was that Great Peacock King named Suva rnabhasa . . .
(Svati’s still down) . . . and there are these kinds of tree spirits [yaksa] the
spell overcomes . . . (Sv ati’s still out) . . . and there are these kinds of ghosts
[preta] the spell overcomes . . . (Sv ati’s still dying) . . . and there are these
kinds of demons [raksasa] the spell overcomes . . . (Sv ati’s still frothing at the
mouth) . . . and, if you really want to do it right you set up a Buddha image
facing east in the middle of. . . . And, by heaven, sixty pages of demon
names, mantras, and instructions later, Ananda finally got around to dealing
with the very well prepared and almost entirely deceased Sv ati. 
In his study of the varieties of humor, Morrell has already noted that in-
appropriate long-windedness and a sudden excess of information may seem
humorous.116 Both circumstances apply in the interminable pronouncement
of the Peacock King spell. The humorous situation, though, could be taken
as unintentional. We can almost hear the thoroughly pedantic esoteric lec-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 300 ---
turer wanting to exhaust all the lists of all the demons in all the areas of the
continent of Jambudv ipa, before he is willing to lead the story back to the
young monk’s revival from his near-death experience. Yet I would argue that
the story must have struck his audience as hilarious both for the excessive ver-
bosity and cues in the language. For example, the term “foaming/frothing”
(phena), used to describe Sv ati’s psychophysical state, is a perennially humor-
ous word in Sanskrit. Its application to Sv ati indicates both his reduced con-
dition and his comedic representation, not to mention the great power of the
Buddha’s spells.
Similarly, many of the siddha hagiographical episodes are intentionally
humorous, and much of that sense of humor extends to the scriptures them-
selves. However, it is humor with an edge, a bite of reality, and the tooth of
a toxic antidote, as much good comedy in fact displays. Without the sense of
appropriate boundaries, it appears that tantric humor moves back and forth
between agonism and hilarity, often bringing both together at once. Humor,
like hagiography, is invariably tied to social models of propriety and consis-
tency; it frequently illuminates those models by its simultaneous acquiescence
to their tyranny and subversion of their solemnity. In the esoteric frame of
reference, the secret is often that the approved system of Indian Buddhist re-
ligiosity is a masquerade, a well-dressed imitation of spirituality, and the
tantras easily question whether the costume is supported by anything other
than air. 
All this would have been communicated in the regional modalities of oral
narratives, and this fact tends to become obscured in received texts. The oral
proclivity of India directs our attention toward performative parameters and
requires our acknowledgment that oral performances seldom can be repro-
duced effectively in print. Lutgendorf, who has studied the performative as-
pect of the Ramcaritmanas, lamented the transition from spoken nuance to
lifeless written materials.
The transcription of katha performances produces, to my mind, disappoint-
ing results. Performances that I experienced and described immediately af-
terward in my notes as brilliant and exciting appeared ﬂat and dull when
“reduced to writing.” Talks that seemed highly cohesive, in which ingenious
interpretations emerged one after another in sparkling strand, seemed ram-
bling and untidy in written form, lacking any principle of organization and
ﬁlled with incomplete sentences and gratuitous digressions. All oral art, of
course, has an inherently “emergent” quality, which results from its being
the product of a unique context. 117
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 301 ---
Our consideration of the humor in the Indian Buddhist context must likewise
rely on its “reduced” circumstances and on the historical reality of its oral
transmission to a variety of audiences. It is relevant, in this regard, that one of
the great lapses in the discipline of Buddhist studies is its relative neglect of
the dependence of Indian Buddhism on the communication of the preachers
(Dharmabhanakas) to both lay and monastic assemblies. Attention to the oral
form compels us to understand that the Indian expressions of all the various
emotions have been developed and sustained in the telling of the tales. 
The Dharmabhanakas, for their part, employed both formal and intuitive
(creative) sources for humor and comic representation. Although the capacity
for intuitive humor appears in every society, the formal sources for themes and
models of funny characters often derive from the dramatic tradition. Dramat-
ic comedy was invested in both its traveling troupes of players, which contin-
ue to proceed from village to village in modern India, as well as in formal
comedies, such as would have been played at royal command or in the private
halls of the wealthy. Unfortunately, folk comedies—such as the modern
Tamasha of Maharastra, the Bhavai of Gujarat, or the Jatra of Bengal—by
their very nature are subject to quick transformation, undercutting our ability
to rely on their modern expressions and composition in the assessment of me-
dieval materials.118 Thus it is in the theory and practice of classical theater that
an articulation of the medieval humorous environment may be somewhat un-
derstood, even while acknowledging the limitations of the written records. In
the examination of hagiography, in particular, we must concur with Gitomer’s
plea that students of religion should consider belletristic texts, so that they may
return to their own materials “with attention to literary or aesthetic values.”119
It is well known that the earliest representation of dramatic theory is in
Bharata’s Natya$astra, the lengthy pronouncement that is normatively ascribed
to the ﬁrst few centuries of the common era. 120 Likewise, the commentary on
the text by the Trika rhetorician Abhinavagupta (c. 1000 c.e.) is considered
deﬁnitive, though the editor has quipped that the received manuscripts of the
Abhivavabharati are so corrupt that even if the author himself came down
from heaven, he could not easily restore the original reading. 121 It is less fre-
quently understood that Bharata and Abhinavagupta disagreed on the theory
of the comic sentiment (hasya-rasa).122 Bharata believed that comedy depend-
ed on ridiculous fashions, features, persons, and situations. His analysis, in
other words, was based on laughing at individuals who represent the objects
and behaviors we consider inferior: buffoonery, crippled limbs, outrageous
clothing, and so on—the stuff of farce. Accordingly, comedy was assigned a
social position among the lower castes and women. In this regard, Bharata was
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 302 ---
Our consideration of the humor in the Indian Buddhist context must likewise
rely on its “reduced” circumstances and on the historical reality of its oral
transmission to a variety of audiences. It is relevant, in this regard, that one of
the great lapses in the discipline of Buddhist studies is its relative neglect of
the dependence of Indian Buddhism on the communication of the preachers
(Dharmabhanakas) to both lay and monastic assemblies. Attention to the oral
form compels us to understand that the Indian expressions of all the various
emotions have been developed and sustained in the telling of the tales. 
The Dharmabhanakas, for their part, employed both formal and intuitive
(creative) sources for humor and comic representation. Although the capacity
for intuitive humor appears in every society, the formal sources for themes and
models of funny characters often derive from the dramatic tradition. Dramat-
ic comedy was invested in both its traveling troupes of players, which contin-
ue to proceed from village to village in modern India, as well as in formal
comedies, such as would have been played at royal command or in the private
halls of the wealthy. Unfortunately, folk comedies—such as the modern
Tamasha of Maharastra, the Bhavai of Gujarat, or the Jatra of Bengal—by
their very nature are subject to quick transformation, undercutting our ability
to rely on their modern expressions and composition in the assessment of me-
dieval materials.118 Thus it is in the theory and practice of classical theater that
an articulation of the medieval humorous environment may be somewhat un-
derstood, even while acknowledging the limitations of the written records. In
the examination of hagiography, in particular, we must concur with Gitomer’s
plea that students of religion should consider belletristic texts, so that they may
return to their own materials “with attention to literary or aesthetic values.”119
It is well known that the earliest representation of dramatic theory is in
Bharata’s Natya$astra, the lengthy pronouncement that is normatively ascribed
to the ﬁrst few centuries of the common era. 120 Likewise, the commentary on
the text by the Trika rhetorician Abhinavagupta (c. 1000 c.e.) is considered
deﬁnitive, though the editor has quipped that the received manuscripts of the
Abhivavabharati are so corrupt that even if the author himself came down
from heaven, he could not easily restore the original reading. 121 It is less fre-
quently understood that Bharata and Abhinavagupta disagreed on the theory
of the comic sentiment (hasya-rasa).122 Bharata believed that comedy depend-
ed on ridiculous fashions, features, persons, and situations. His analysis, in
other words, was based on laughing at individuals who represent the objects
and behaviors we consider inferior: buffoonery, crippled limbs, outrageous
clothing, and so on—the stuff of farce. Accordingly, comedy was assigned a
social position among the lower castes and women. In this regard, Bharata was
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 303 ---
quite close to Aristotle in the Rhetoric and Poetics, where both the basis of
comedy (innate laughter— hasasthayibhava) and its circumstances received
similar treatment.123 Comedy simply boiled down to getting others to laugh at
the comedian (svastha) or at some third party (parastha). 
If Hephaistos, the crippled Olympian divinity of the smith’s ﬁres, served as
the Greek occasion for ridicule and buffoonery, the classic expression of Bhara-
ta’s theory was the person of the Vidusaka in Sanskrit drama.124 Here are found
all the various attributes of the subhuman—buck-toothed and ignorant—
laughingly referred to as the “great Brahman” (mahabrahmana), a term that has
an undertaker’s overtones. Vidusakas are ugly and deformed (virupa), hunch-
backs who consistently fail to do much more than feed their bellies in the nev-
er-ending quest for vittles. They also act as buffoons in their ludicrous attempts
at Brahmanical virtues, such as Santu sta in Bhasa’s Avimaraka, who protests,
“Unlearned? How could I be unlearned? O.K., O.K., just listen up—there’s
this work on acting called the Ramayana, and just last year I learned ﬁve whole
verses of it!” 125 Failing to identify even one of the two great epics of India,
Vidusakas are the great comic sidekicks of Sanskrit dramatic literature, who
befriend the hero (nayaka) for incidental plot purposes, but have extraordinary
effect in character construction and development. As Jefferds has noted:
He is, in his burlesque embodiment of appetite, an antic distortion of life,
a fun-house mirror that mocks but does not actually modify the original.
And unlike so many of the “boon companions” of world literature—Sancho
Panza and the rest—the Vidusaka is almost purely a ﬁgure of “fun,” impor-
tant not in that he qualiﬁes the “meaning” of the main action, but for his
modal impact on the whole. 126
Several siddhas exhibit literary personas formally similar to the Vidusaka or
other farcical characters in Indian literature. Perhaps preeminent among them
is the character of Virupa. The Virupa hagiographies transmitted primarily by
the Sakya and related systems in Tibet emphasize his comical nature. At one
point in the story, for example, Vir upa and his two disciples—K anha and
Dombiheruka—encounter %akta yogins who would like to offer our siddhas’
ﬂesh to the goddess Candika (Figure 18): 
In the East they found a self-originated trident, called Sahajadev i, and a
self-originated stone statue, called Dev i Candika. Non-Buddhist yogins
would lead men there and impale them through the throat with the trident,
killing them. 127 Then they would gather into a ritual circle [ganacakra],
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 304 ---
figure 18 Candika from Hirapur Yogini Pitha. Orissa, ninth century.
Ronald M. Davidson.

--- PAGE 305 ---
with the man’s ﬂesh as the sacrament. Virupa proceeded there with his two
disciples. The yogins wanted to eat them, so they called them into their as-
sembly hall. The Acarya [Virupa] said to his two disciples, “Don’t contin-
ue to release your breath—but stay here holding it inside!” The Acarya him-
self entered the hall, and the yogins asked, “Where did your two friends
go?” He replied, “They’re outside.” “Well, bring them in!” they exclaimed.
“Bring them in yourself,” the Acarya replied. One yogin called them but the
two did not answer. He poked them with his ﬁnger, but from the impres-
sion made by his poking, out came some foul breath—hiiissss. Then some
feces began to bubble out—bloop, bloop. “This comes from rotten ﬂesh!”
he said and returned inside. The trident began to quiver and shake and,
with a single clap of the Acarya’s palms, the trident was reduced to frag-
ments and dust. Then the statue of Dev i Candika began bouncing up and
down. Virupa placed the palm of one hand on top of the image and bound
up the statue between the head and the heart. 128 At that point he grabbed
it by one ear and afﬁxed a stupa [caitya] to its crown. With that, all the yo-
gins fainted. When they revived, they all asked, “If you Buddhists are great-
est in compassion, why have you done this to us?” Vir upa replied, “You
must cease making your offerings with warm ﬂesh and blood from mur-
dered beings!” They all paid homage to the feet of the Acarya and, having
taken refuge, became Buddhist yogins. 129
It would be hard to argue that this episode and the many others like it were
not understood as humorous. In the story we are presented with three Bud-
dhist yogins, their leader Vir upa having received direct transmission and au-
thentication from the embodiment of feminine wisdom, Nair atmya.130 Viru-
pa has performed miracles—turning the Ganges back in its path, holding the
sun at knifepoint—that demonstrate his superiority to the gods themselves, for
both the river and the sun are gods. And yet, when his two disciples are prod-
ded by the ﬂesh-hungry %akta yogins, out bubbles fecal matter and rotten
ﬂesh. Contrary to the doctrines of the Adamantine Body (vajrakaya) or anal-
ogous doctrines of yogic purity, in place of the divine inner form that is sup-
posed to be the property of the awakened siddha, here we ﬁnd bodies that are
walking bags of stinking ﬁlth. 131 At the heart of this episode is the inversion
of expectations, the discontinuity between juxtaposed images. Whereas the
non-Buddhists may be polluted from eating human ﬂesh, the Buddhist yogins
ooze and bubble. 
Buddhist esoteric humor thus ﬁnds additional expression in discontinuity
and incongruity, over and above its Indian emphasis on the humor of physical
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 306 ---
malformation and debased personality. This is validated in the theoretical do-
main as well, even though Bharata’s emphasis is on ridicule as a dysfunction-
al imitation of the erotic sentiment. Indeed, one primary theoretical difference
between Bharata and Aristotle is Bharata’s subordination of comedy to the
erotic sentiment,
Among these eight sentiments, four are the cause of the arising of the
other four—the erotic, the ferocious, the heroic, and the disgusting.
Thus:VI.43
Comic sentiment arises from the erotic, the pathetic from the fero-
cious, the marvelous from the heroic and the terrifying from the dis-
gusting. VI.44
The imitation of the erotic is the comic. VI.45ab 132
By contrast, in his commentary on Bharata’s Natya$astra, Abhinavagupta,
through all the tricks of the Sanskrit commentator, effectively manages to re-
deﬁne comedy. For Abhinavagupta, the comic sentiment is not strictly related
to an imitative version—and therefore dysfunctional form—of the erotic sen-
timent. On the contrary, it may either include or be generated from any of the
eight sentiments.133 This is the case because the nature of comedy is not, as
Bharata claims, the appearance of “defective” (vikrta) items, such as dress, or-
naments, expressions, or limbs—defects embodied in the Vid usaka. Rather,
Abhinavagupta declares, the nature of the comic sentiment is found in the in-
appropriateness of dress or facial expressions or inconsistent psychological
states. Since inappropriate elements may occur in conjunction with any of the
dramatic sentiments, the result may be laughter. 134
Abhinavagupta has admittedly articulated an incongruity theory of com-
edy. Morell has summed it up well.
The basic idea behind the incongruity theory is very general and quite sim-
ple. We live in an orderly world, where we have come to expect certain pat-
terns among things, their properties, events, etc. We laugh when we expe-
rience something that doesn’t ﬁt into these patterns. As Pascal put it,
“Nothing produces laughter more than a surprising disproportion between
that which one expects and that which one sees.” 135
Abhinavagupta’s genius was in seeing that any of the various dramatic experi-
ences can provoke laughter unless handled exactly, or, as Schopenhauer would
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 307 ---
have it, without indicating a paradoxical relationship between the idea and the
actuality.136 Bharata may have hinted at incongruity in his description of the
“imitation of the erotic,” and the Vidusaka clearly represents an imitation of a
Brahman—being a Brahman by birth but not by language or deportment. Yet
Abhinavagupta was explicitly identifying comedy as the distance between
metanarrative representation and the actuality encountered on the ground.
The ultimate incongruity, however, is that between the living and the dead,
between the beneﬁcial saint and the disaster-bearing ghost. Since siddhas in-
clude both functions in their public personas, this is exactly the paronomasic
position of these saints. 
In Virupa’s case, his similarity to the Vidusaka is primarily formal, rather
than functional, and moves toward the inversion of categories that expresses
the incongruity of expectations. Like Vidusakas, Virupa speaks in the ostensi-
ble vernacular (Apabhram$a and Old Bengali), not in the Sanskrit of elevated
discourse. His name (Virupa = deformed or ugly) is an apt descriptive applied
to the Vidusaka, as is his marginal status in society. Vir upa’s deformity, how-
ever, is ecclesiastical—he has abandoned his position as the abbot, has re-
turned the robes that were symbols of his status, and wanders forth naked.
Both his Pratimoksa and his Vajrayana vows are depicted as shattered, for he
has abandoned both the monastic estate and the recitation of mantras. Actu-
ally, though, we know that they have been rendered useless, because his depth
of realization supersedes any need for such vows. Like the Vid usaka’s imita-
tion of Brahmans, Virupa imitates %aiva practitioners, but the comedy that re-
sults comes directly from Virupa’s position as the protagonist of the story, not
a position that the Vid usaka has traditionally held, since every Vid usaka is
continually assigned a part in the supporting cast. 
Yet the mundane reality of Vir upa’s iconography is that he is rendered in
the image of a fat sadhu, holding the sun in place (Figure 19) and being served
wine by the barmaid, whom he just might take home after the king pays his
bill. Grossly obese, he follows the much more ancient iconography of the hu-
morous ﬁgure in India, such as the Vidusaka jester, and the typology of Viru-
pa in statues is similar to that of those prior funny followers of %iva—the ganas
who scramble for sweets offered the great god and generally resemble buffoons
in their antics. Even more directly, Virupa is foreshadowed in the image of the
tree spirit (yaksa), such as the magniﬁcent early Kubera from Mathura in the
National Museum (Figure 20).137 In the exaggerated anatomy of Kubera’s bel-
ly, his excessively large head on his shoulders with virtually no neck interven-
ing, his left leg under him and his right half-raised, he is almost identical to
our standard images of Virupa.138
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 308 ---
figure 19 Mahasiddha Virupa. Chinese, Ming dynasty,
Yung-lo mark and period, 1403–1424. Guilt bronze, 43.6 cm. high.
© The Cleveland Museum of Art, 2001, Gift of Mary B. Lee, C. Bingham Blossom,
Dudley S. Blossom III, Laurel B. Kovacik, and Elizabeth B. Blossom in memory of
Elizabeth B. Blossom, 1972.96. Reprinted with permission.

--- PAGE 309 ---
figure 20 Kubera. Ahichchhatra, second century.
National Museum Acc. no. 59.530/2. Photo courtesy of the
American Institute of Indian Studies.

--- PAGE 310 ---
Actually, placing ﬁgures like Vir upa in the larger ﬁeld of siddha represen-
tations leads us to a festival of the grotesque. Both Indians and Tibetans have
taken great glee in depicting Buddhist siddhas as deformed or irretrievably ec-
centric, so that they are given exaggerated hair, beards, eyebrows, noses, ears,
and other peculiarities as attributes of their spirituality. In their artistic repre-
sentations, they are on an esthetic continuum with the Chinese ﬂair for the
misproportioned iconology of the arhat, so that the halls of the ﬁve hundred
arhats in Chinese monasteries resemble nothing so much as medical museums
of physical deformities. A similar sentiment in modern Thailand allows the in-
sistence of Upagupta’s ugliness to be an attribute of the enlightened arhat’s
popularity and serves as a vehicle to critique the putative equation of physical
attractiveness and spiritual capacity.139 The humor behind these images is ex-
plicit and contagious, implicating extraordinary spirituality in the absence of
either normative esthetics or approved canons of beauty. Accordingly, both
Kagyüpa and Ch’an/Zen painting were eventually to excel in articulating new
contortions or bizarre excesses of the human frame in the saints’ portraits. 
They were not alone in such associations, and Bakhtin has shown that Ra-
belais’ love of the grotesque was grounded in part in the legends and stories of
“Indian wonders” that had been the stock in trade of descriptions of the East
since the time of Ctesias in the ﬁfth century b.c.e.140 Thus the afﬁrmation of
extreme forms of conduct and physicality—so much a part of the Indian sense
of spirituality—fueled the religious imagination of the Orient as well as the
Occident. For Bakhtin, Rabelais was giving a voice to the folk culture of car-
nival, which he strongly distinguished from the ofﬁcial culture and its ap-
proved festivals. In Vir upa and his like, Bakhtin would see the clowns and
fools who “celebrated temporary liberation from the prevailing truth and from
the established order.” 141 Thus Bakhtin believed that all folk celebrations in-
dulged in overthrowing the ofﬁcial ideology of the hierarchical system by
means of deﬁlement and the celebration of the grotesque body. 142
This social body of the grotesque was celebrated, according to Bakhtin, in
the medieval and renaissance carnivals, such as the “Dance of the Noses” or the
“Feast of Fools.” The overriding movement is the leveling of the social system,
invoked by the celebration of such acts as defecation, urination, abusive lan-
guage, comic dialogues, parodies of important ﬁgures, and mocking songs.
Carnival, for Bakhtin, represents the isolated victory of the oppressed classes
over the hegemonic dynamic of the dominant political culture. It invokes the
temporary suspension of hierarchy in an all-consuming egalitarian expression
of gross physical functions and the coarsest of humor. 
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 311 ---
Many of Bakhtin’s observations ring true in the conﬁnes of siddha litera-
ture in general, although it is clear that he seems not to recognize that social
inversion replaces the rules of one social strata with those of another. So, both
carnival and the siddha tradition employ established hierarchies, rather than
invoking Bakhtin’s ideology of egalitarian physicality. Yet it is also true that,
in siddha literature, the emphasis on exaggerated physical functions ﬁnds its
way into many aspects of its narratives, whether in the indulgence in liquor or
in the siddhas’ stated preference for brothels and bars. Siddhas’ employment
of the low-status glossia of Apabhra m$a resonates with their challenges to
Brahmanical religion, court-sponsored %aivism, and Buddhist monastic deco-
rum. Their actions almost invariably exceed the bounds of karma and good
taste, not to mention their hagiographical destruction of %aiva religious sites
and the violation of monastic rules with impunity. All these place them be-
yond the pale, acting as heroes (vira) in the farce of reality.
From another vantage point, van Buitenen has maintained that the stan-
dard pattern for the Indian hero is the Vidy adhara, the sorcerer or celestial
traveler, closely resonant with the siddha model of becoming the Vidy adhara
emperor.143 Certainly, heroic images abound in Vajray ana literature—invok-
ing the typology of “heroes and heroines” (viravira) as the paradigmatic Bud-
dhist esoteric adepts—but just as clearly these characters are not merely hero-
ic, but also comic and even ludic. Their activity is part-heroic, part-agonistic,
and part-playful, as is much of the behavior of the divinities in Pur anic litera-
ture or the other narratives of medieval India. Thus siddhas are often comic
heroes, whose activity is rhetorically for the welfare of beings, although there
are times when their behavior incongruously appears merely powerful self-in-
dulgence. In this way, siddhas as comic heroes seem to personify the ambiva-
lence felt by both Indian society and the Buddhist hierarchy toward powerful
personalities with a dubious ethical foundation. 
Incongruity might even be precisely the point of some esoteric Buddhist
literature. The clear and insistent discontinuity between the forms of virtue es-
poused by early Buddhist traditions and the antinomian behavior afﬁrmed in
the Vajrayana has caused some early British and European readers of this lit-
erature to take it as an imitative and exploitative form. The imitative theme
could have been humorous to these readers but for their Victorian aesthetics.
In his edition of the Subhasita-samgraha, Bendall expressed the sentiment well.
I have printed text, and even, where extant, also commentary on this ex-
traordinary phase of soi-disant Buddhism, thinking it well that scholars at
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 312 ---
least should know the worst. To me it all reads like an obscene caricature of
the teachings both of earlier Buddhism and of legitimate Yoga. 144
Yet caricature is also a form of comedy, even if Christian Europe of the day
(or any day) had difﬁculty accommodating the idea that the sacred could be
hilarious. These scholars did not learn the Indian message that, as in the ﬁg-
ure of Hanuman, laughter is not necessarily ridicule but the honest correction
of a distorted perception, a rectiﬁcation that can be afforded only by an ac-
knowledgement of truth. This seems to be part of the intimation about sid-
dhas in their early reference in the Milindapañha, that siddhas sing truth. 145
Thus esoteric scripture might convey the perception that, in all probability,
Buddhist monks and reverend laity were unlikely ever to have been as sancti-
ﬁed as their Mahayanist hagiographical representations depict them. Esoteric
literature is likely in some measure to be both shocking and compensatory: it
tells a story as extreme in the direction of unmeritorious conduct as the earlier
Buddhist ideal depicted on the positive side of the ledger. Certainly, neither
representation could have been entirely accurate. It is unlikely that siddhas
could have survived in India for half a dozen centuries acting in a wholly bar-
baric manner, and it is equally unlikely that Buddhist monks were, as a group,
as saintly as their literature represents them. The symbiotic relationship be-
tween esoteric advocates of both institutions appears to reinforce their actual
commonality, as shown in chapter 7, on community. 
:    
The development and elaboration of Buddhist scripture employed a new ap-
plication of language that had both continuities and discontinuities with ear-
lier Buddhist usage. These scriptures were revealed, as in earlier Buddhist
times, but the manner of their revelation was decidedly different, privileging
laity rather than monks or the celestial bodhisattvas of the Mahayana. The
tantras were probably composed in the social horizon of ritual instruction,
moving smoothly from supplemental instruction to the articulation of new
meditations, to full blown scriptural texts. Their language was challenging,
even hostile at times, and the tantras’ consistent representation of the Buddha
in erotic environments cannot have provided Buddhist Indian communities
with much conﬁdence in the new scriptures’ authenticity. 
Perhaps the answer to the issue of the new scriptures is that they repre-
sented new linguistic and aesthetic communities, ones that arose as a result of
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 313 ---
the sociopolitical events from the seventh century forward. Because of a con-
sistent pattern of population dislocation and the inﬂux of newly proselytized
tribal and village peoples, Buddhists developed new constituencies. In the
process they drew from a much broader spectrum of social backgrounds, lin-
guistic bases, and performative sensibilities. They sang in songs composed in
different languages or in idioms representative of the aesthetics and images
employed and expected by these new groups. Siddhas afﬁrmed the importance
of local culture with tribal-related rituals, the naturalness of the jungle, the
perimeter, the mountain, and the edge of the ﬁeld. They used images and told
stories that violated Brahmanical ideals and must have both shocked and de-
lighted their audiences. Their concern for storytelling became canonical in the
yogini-tantras, and they freely played with language as children play with toys,
sometimes irresponsibly, with potentially disastrous results. Many of their pa-
trons came to the Buddhist fold because it offered them the status and access
to intellectual services that Brahmanical allegiance could not. Yet, at the same
time, their commitment to the Buddhist community was but a way-station on
the path to legitimacy. In the process, however, the Buddhist scriptural syn-
theses were changed because of the inﬂux of new forms of Sanskrit, Apa-
bhram$a, Prakrit, and coded languages.
The institutionalization of some siddha literature by the more conservative
siddha and the monastic community relied heavily on the most developed
hermeneutical strategies that Buddhism has ever seen, with limited success. At
the same time, both the wide variation in interpretation and the broad appli-
cation of the principle of coded language resonated with the ideology that
makes esoteric Buddhism esoteric. Everything is obscure, hidden, and secret—
a mask or deception behind which the real meaning may be dimly perceived.
Initiates converse in the language of signs and use speech that is ﬁlled with
double entendres. Words are never what they seem and may even be beyond
the understanding of the Buddhas themselves. Under this strategy of exegesis,
virtually no text ever says what it means. And this attitude is extended to the
self-consciously outrageous language invoked by the tantra authors, through a
system of commentarial apologetics that seeks out the authentic meaning of
the scriptures “that seek out the real meaning,” a most tortuous search. Thus
the tantras self-consciously laugh at the prior experience of their audience—
showing the Buddha sowing doubt in the mind of his listeners and letting
them know that everything they know is wrong, since even the Buddhas them-
selves do not know this material. Conversely, the goal of many commentators
is to assure the institutional communities that everything they know is not
wrong. They are there to bring the extreme scriptures back into the fold, to re-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 314 ---
visit the standards of scriptural authenticity that had heretofore served the
Buddhist community so well. 
Even then, these two trajectories, in reality, represent symbiotic subcultures
in esoteric Buddhist India. Without the scriptures, the commentators have no
grist, while the grain served up by the scriptural authors remained unpalatable
until prepared by the exegetes. Between these two, the theoreticians of some
esoteric works, as seen in Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi, continually offer voices
that side with one, then with another, and occasionally propose multiple al-
ternatives just to keep life interesting. Thus the ﬁnal message of language is
that the culture of Buddhist scriptural composition was alive and well, even if
freshly sprouted in the new soil of regional centers and marginal peoples.
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 315 ---
There was one Candalaja [“born an outcaste”], who was a disciple of
Mahacarya Kukuripa and who meditated on the absolute mind. Because
he exclusively cultivated the perfecting process yoga, he developed an
obsession for the nonfoundational nature of all elements of reality. Then
he went to Jalandhara, and a plague erupted so that many people died.
The harvest was destroyed by hail. For ﬁve years, no rain fell. A Brahman
who knew secrets [mantrin] was asked about the disturbance. He replied,
“In this place there is a Buddhist residing who has turned surreptitiously
to expounding a non-Buddhist doctrine. Since he resides here, all of these
misfortunes have arisen. In this world, he will ruin others, but in the
future, he himself will be ruined.” %ri Kukuripa heard this and went to
Candalaja to teach him all over again.
—Nagabuddhi, *Ardhapañcamagatha1
/Nswash
agabuddhi’s *Ardhapañcamagatha is a delightful compendium of six-
teen late morality tales and warnings on incorrect Buddhist practice.
It attempts to perform some of the tasks served by the earlier Bud-
dhist story literature, but most of its narratives focus on the esoteric conun-
drum: the control of individuals at a time of collapsing boundaries, even while
Buddhist communities were under great duress. Many factors contributed to
the perception of threat experienced in both siddha and monastic centers at
this time. Yet Buddhist partisans did not yield the ﬁeld without serious and
protracted attempts to establish a network of communities and a list of rules
by which these were to be governed. This chapter examines the ideology of
communities in siddha literature, ﬁrst in terms of the idealized form of siddha
mandalas. Afterward, arrangements of siddhas in circular cemeteries and in
the various numbering systems, such as eighty-four, are also described, since
they exhibit a much greater range of variation and source than are generally

-
/Sswashiddhas, Monks, and Communities

--- PAGE 316 ---
understood. The chapter then turns to hagiographical communities, taking as
exemplary Vitap ada’s retelling of Buddhajñanapada’s travels and study. Sid-
dha communities in India are also ritually described. The discussion accord-
ingly turns to an examination of the sacramental gathering (ganacakra), us-
ing an early account by one Indrabh uti as an example. Since both these
gatherings and the larger communities operated by rules, different examples
of the siddha standards of conduct are considered. These standards also re-
quired implementation, mostly through the control systems of criticism of
transgression and social pressure; the chapter investigates perceptions of be-
havioral problems. Together, the standards and criticisms tend to give cre-
dence to hagiographical episodes depicting lapses, such as those in N aga-
buddhi’s text above. The chapter concludes with a reassessment of the
imperial model of esoteric Buddhism, finding that the siddha metaphor of
becoming the Emperor of Sorcerers (vidyadharacakravartin) was in constant
negotiation with other models of Buddhist practice. Throughout, this chap-
ter observes the differences between siddha and monastic institutions, along
with the reasons for their divergences. A consistent interchange occurred,
however, with monks and siddhas appropriating each other’s systems and
living together from time to time.
  . . ,   
Chapter 4 proposed that Buddhist mandalas be considered the sacralized form
of early medieval samanta feudalism. In this regard, the relationships between
the Buddhas and their families in the various sections of the institutional Bud-
dhist mandalas appear modeled on the political processes of the early medieval
period. So within each section of the mandala, the Buddha and his family have
an autonomous hierarchy that is capable of assuming the central position of
the mandala, should the need arise. Likewise, the hierarchy observed between
a superordinate center and the subordinate periphery is a ritualized relation-
ship of central to derivative authority. Entrance into the ritualized relationship
occurs through the rite of consecration (abhiseka), such that the central Bud-
dha consecrates his retinue, and the meditator becomes identiﬁed with the
central (or subsidiary Buddhas) through the act of consecration by his master.
Chapter 6 demonstrated that this was understood sufﬁciently to allow for the
hagiographical episode of Kukura to place physically the members of King In-
drabhuti’s retinue in the various positions of the Vajradh atu mandala. Thus
the literal enactment of the esoteric narrative as a mythic event (and, we may
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 317 ---
suspect, in physical reality) within royal circles reinforced the conformity be-
tween real and imagined communities. 
This conformity, however, depends on the actual form of the institution-
al mandalas and their descriptive language. Yet some ma ndalas found in the
siddha-related literature appear dissonant with the institutional arrangement.
Whereas many ma ndalas are very much in accordance with the fundamental
model, others are far more challenging, especially those ma ndalas from the
yogini tantras. Many of these latter move away from issues of family and the
formal political paradigms informing institutional esoterism. Instead they in-
voke village and even tribal ideals, some of which are visibly displayed in the
yogini pithas that still survive as early medieval archaeological sites in the
states of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, and Madhya Pradesh. Nevertheless this ﬁnd-
ing does not mean that the models are necessarily unpolitical, but it does in-
dicate that the clarity of the s amanta metaphor is minimally adumbrated by
competing paradigms.
Although it is not my goal to articulate a rigorous typology of sacred dia-
grams, siddha literature tends to employ three basic kinds of mandalas. Most in
conformity with the institutional arrangement are ma ndalas found in works
eventually to be classiﬁed as mahayoga tantras: the Guhyasamaja, the Krsnaya-
mari, the V ajramahabhairava, and so on. Their architectures are in a classical
ﬁvefold pattern, with central ﬁgures like Mañjuvajra surrounded by their imme-
diate family retinues and the four families in the four cardinal directions. Sub-
sidiary divinities, especially the Wrathful Kings (krodharaja), may be placed in
intermediate directions, but the political metaphor mostly holds true. These
mandalas are still found in palaces, and they still have walls of ﬂaming scepters
as globes surrounding their mandalas. They employ much of the same language
of consecration as seen in chapter 4. In spatial arrangement and information,
they appear on a continuum with the mandalas found in the great institutional
works: the Sarvadurgatipari$odhana, the Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra, and
so forth. Their siddha distinction appears to come through the accelerated eroti-
cism and violence found in their iconography and attendant ritual descriptions. 
In distinction to these are mandalas whose basic premise is that of a single
ﬁgure. A classic instance is the divinity Siddhaikavira (Perfect, Unique Hero),
identiﬁed in the tantra with a form of Mañjuvajra but probably adapted from
a non-Buddhist source. The extraordinary emphasis on magical rituals in the
tantra—weather, weapons, childbirth, and so on—suggests that Siddhaikavira
has been derived from a local divinity, analogous to Heruka.2 The designation
“unique hero” (ekavira) seemed to have become paradigmatic, and sometimes
the term is employed to describe how the meditator visualizes himself (some-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 318 ---
Ghasmari
Hevajra mandala 5
Cauri
Hevajra GauriVetali
Dombini Pukkasi
Candali Savari´
Buddhakapala mandala 6
Saubhadra
Kamini
Buddhakapala Citrasen aPatalavasini
Pitambara Saundini
CaturbhujaAkasavasini´

--- PAGE 319 ---
times with a consort) as he travels through the world while not actively in con-
templation (asamahita).3 Feminine divinities—Vajrayogini, Kurukulla, Vajra-
varahi, and so on—are also often found as single ﬁgures in their ritual de-
scriptions, again possibly a reﬂection of their origins as local goddesses.
Similarly, speciﬁc divinities are reduced from their more complex mandalas to
a single ﬁgure, based on the circumstances. Sahajasa mvara stands out in my
reading, for this divinity appears to be a decidedly secondary form of our old
friend Samvara, and it followed from the application of the “naturalness” (sa-
haja) discourse to the highest yoga practices. 4
More interesting is a third variety of mandala: those with a circle of divini-
ties surrounding the central ﬁgure. Normatively, the deities found in such cir-
cles number eight or multiples of eight and demonstrate an intriguing gender
selectivity. Several of these ma ndalas feature a male ﬁgure in the center, sur-
rounded by a group of eight goddesses. This pattern occurs frequently enough
to attract our attention as a mandala theme. The standard mandalas for Heva-
jra and Buddhakapala, for example, both reﬂect this arrangement (with north
placed at the top as in European maps).
There are others exhibiting this structure, as in the case of Heruka ma n-
dalas (Figure 21). 7 Many elements of this variety of ma ndala are worthy of
consideration. First is an all-feminine form, in which Nair atmya or Marici,
for example, is surrounded by other dakinis.8 These seem not to have been
as emphasized, even though M arici was clearly one principal divinity of
choice for post-mortem rites. 9 The circle of divinities is also replicated in all-
masculine forms as well, with a central figure surrounded by the masculine
dakas or krodhas.10 I know of no form, however, that features a feminine fig-
ure in the center surrounded by masculine divinities; they might exist but
must be rather rare.
The gender selectivity is important, particularly as it appears so similar to
the yogini temples of sixty-four or eighty-one feminine ﬁgures. Both the Bud-
dhist mandalas and the majority of yogini temples feature an arrangement that
seems to prefer groups of eight yoginis or multiples of eight (64). This also ap-
plies to circles of male ﬁgures, for the Samvara mandalas are predominantly of
that variety. In the center of this latter are Cakrasamvara and his feminine con-
sort, usually Vajravarahi; they are surrounded by concentric circles of gods, pro-
ceeding outward in radiating zones of mind, speech, and body. Each of these
circles has eight ﬁgures, making a fundamental mandala of twenty-four, repre-
senting the twenty-four divinities (or pairs of divinities) in the twenty-four
places of pilgrimage brieﬂy considered in chapter 5. The simple point is that
mandalas like these are iterations of the eight divinities or multiples thereof. 
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 320 ---
figure 21 Samvara with a mandala of Dakinis in the
background. Bengal, eleventh century. Indian Museum,
A25188/9210. Photo courtesy of the American Institute of Indian Studies

--- PAGE 321 ---
Certainly, earlier analogs may be found in mandalas featuring the eight Great
Bodhisattvas, but I believe that the architecture that these particular siddha
mandalas employ is informed instead by the old circular sites (pitha) dedicat-
ed to the yoginis or dakinis.
In this respect it seems that the preference for eight, and the distribution
of dakinis in a circle, problematized the fundamental ma ndala format, espe-
cially with respect to family (kula). The institutional ma ndalas indicated that
kula was an essential item identifying place and soteriological constituents,
so mantras and other practices were considered place- and family-specific. In
one sense, the problem of kula is a bit curious, since many of the yogini tantra
manuals show a definite concern for place and place-relationship. However,
this seems sometimes done alongside or even outside the kula category. In
the Hevajra Tantra, for example, kula is emphasized (e.g., I.v.5–7), but the
term is not introduced when the ma ndalas of Hevajra are discussed (I.iii;
II.v). Instead, at a different point, the question is broached, and the Buddhas
of the various families—Vairocana, Ak sobhya and the rest—are artificially
brought into the conversation (II.ii.52–61). At one point in the Hevajra
Tantra goddesses are definitively associated with families: Dombi–vajra fam-
ily, Nart i–lotus family, Ca ndali–gem family, Brahma ni–Tathagata family,
and Rajak i–karma family (II.iii.62–63). The strange nature of these equiva-
lents is demonstrated by the fact that only Dombi (or Dombini, if they are
the same) and Ca ndali are actually associated with the ma ndalas specified in
the text. Yet even there they do not occupy the positions normally accorded
to these families. As a member of the vajra family, Dombini should be in the
east instead of the northwest (as she is in the actual ma ndala), and as a mem-
, ,   ⁄ 
Arrangement of the Cakrasamvara mandala

--- PAGE 322 ---
ber of the gem family, Ca ndali should be in the south instead of the south-
west. 
These issues are not clariﬁed in some of the consecration texts, such as the
Hevajrasekaprakriya. When the disciple is to be assigned a family, it is usually
based on his throwing a ﬂower (or garland) into the ma ndala. However, it is
not clear how the text was actually interpreted at the moment of the ritual,
since the goddesses’ families are not speciﬁed in that ritual work either.11 This
may be the reason that other ma ndalas, such as the Pañcadaka mandala, elect
to proceed on the multiplication of the circles in a manner different from the
Samvara tradition. In the Pañcadaka system, the basic form of the male divin-
ity surrounded by eight female divinities is retained, but there are ﬁve such cir-
cles. Thus the entire ma ndala is an aggregate of ﬁve ma ndalas, each assigned
the normative value of a Buddha family. 12
How did this unwieldy synthesis of categories and representations come
about? If our later sources are obscure, the earlier Vidyottama provides a chapter
that I believe is as close as we can come to the process and is a bit less opaque.
It describes how the Seven Mothers (sapta matarah), those autochthonous vil-
lage or tribal goddesses frequently found in a group in North India, became as-
sociated as a circle surrounding the bodhisattva Vajrapani. Characteristically, the
Vidyottama associates together a mythic event, a mantra, a painting, a practice,
and several siddhis as results.
 ⁄ , ,  
Arrangement of the Pañcadaka mandala

--- PAGE 323 ---
Then, the Seven Mothers that move in the sky, all chattering and laughing,
came down to be included in that congregation. They made a triple cir-
cumambulation of the assembly and prostrated their heads at the feet of the
Lord Buddha.
They then said to the Lord, “Lord, we also would like to make an of-
fering of some mantras to the great bodhisattva Vajrap ani.” 
The Lord replied to those Mothers, “Hey, R aksasis! It is well that you
enter the assembly here for the beneﬁt of beings!” 
Then, those Mothers offered this mantra to Vajrap ani, just as they said
they would do:
namo buddha¯ya namo vajrapa¯n.aye maha¯yaks.asena¯pataye
tadyatha¯ hulu hulu lahu lahu haha tis.t.ha tis.t.ha bhrama bhrama
bandha bandha maca me ka´ scid vighna¯m. kari´syate mohani
mohani nayati naya ma ¯lini vi´sve´svare amoghe namas sva¯ha¯
“Now if this spell is simply remembered by a vidyadhara accomplished
in the best of spells [vidyottama], we Seven Mothers will protect that per-
son up to the distance of a yojana [~ 4 miles]. We will indeed correctly pro-
tect that person. 
“And the various activities associated with the spell will occur. On a
clean piece of cotton, paint Vajrap ani using paint without a glue binder.
Make him ornamented with all ornaments, light blue in color, and having
the visage and distemper of a sixteen-year-old. Paint the Seven Mothers
surrounding him in a circle. They will be ferocious in appearance. 
“Then fast for three days. On the fourteenth day of the bright half of the
month, make whatever offerings you can. Be sure to give them [the Moth-
ers] liquor and an offering of meat. Then the vidyadhara is to perform a
hundred thousand homa sacriﬁces, placing white mustard seeds covered
with blood in a ﬁre blazing with khadira wood. 
“If you see the painted form of Vajrap ani beginning to shake, then the
vidyadhara should recollect this most excellent of spells. At that time, a
woman baring her fangs will come to you. Do not be afraid! Instead say to
her, ‘Raksasi! It is good that you have come! Be sure to recollect that this
sacrament has been given to you by Vajradhara [=Vajrapani]!’ Having heard
that, she will give a cackle and reply, ‘It will be done thus!’ and she will dis-
appear. Then you continue to make offerings of Tinarare [?] for one day,
and all your goals will be accomplished. This will also bestow accomplish-
ment in the spells [vidyasiddhi].”13
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 324 ---
The scripture goes on to catalogue other rituals and their beneﬁts: overcom-
ing Vin ayaka demons and Graha spirits, ruining harvests, spoiling liquor,
making an enemy ugly and diseased (but then turning him back again), dis-
covering who one’s enemies are, and expelling them. These are all very useful
skills, no doubt, and the chapter concludes that these constitute the Mothers’
ritual (matrvidhi).14
Thus the Vidyottama depicts sorcerers making ﬂesh and liquor offerings
and performing homa before a painting of Vajrapani, surrounded by a circle of
seven mother goddesses. The fact that the number seven is odd leads to the
conclusion that the uncertainty concerning family afﬁliation of members of the
goddesses’ circles began with this kind of arrangement. Unlike normative
Buddhist (institutional) mandalas, there is no necessary privileging of one di-
rection or member over another—the seven Mothers are simply members of a
circle. This is closely analogous to the circular arrangements in the yogini tem-
ples, where the arrangements change from site to site, and in the yogini tantra
mandalas, which frequently rearrange the position of individual members in
circle to ﬁt different purposes. Finally, we have a commonality of nomencla-
ture. The Hevajra Tantraintroduces the eight goddesses surrounding Hevajra
as a Circle of Mothers (matrcakra), and Kanha’s commentary deﬁnes this sim-
ply as the mandala of the divinities (matrcakram devatanam mandalam).15
So are these new circle-type mandalas exhibited in the yogini tantras some-
how related to the political models of samanta feudalism that inform the other
variety of mandalas? I believe this is true only in a derivative sense, not in the pri-
mary manner contributing to the formative process of the other kind of ma n-
dala. The secondary nature of these is implicit in three ways. First is the emer-
gence of the s amantization of the gods or their “royalization,” as Kulke and
Rothermund have termed the process, examined earlier.16 This was an overall
pattern in the erosion of distinctions between kings and gods in medieval India.
It is reﬂected in the highly formal verse forms (pra$asti) employed in the pane-
gyrics to a king and his lineage, verses that embodied a discourse on the apoth-
eosis of the king. In an analogous manner, religious literature in the early me-
dieval period embodied a discourse on the kingship of the divinities, speciﬁcally
through the phenomenon of incarnation (avatara). Inasmuch as these circular
mandalas maintained this language—and it is found throughout them—they
supported this broader series of conversations in Indian towns and palaces. 
Second, as in the case of the new form of consecration, these ma ndalas are
still the object of royal consecration rituals that embody the voice of the court
and the accoutrements of royalty. The ma ndalas still occur in palaces, even if
sometimes the palaces are envisioned within the human body. Access is still
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 325 ---
granted or withheld based on a sacralized coronation with aspersion, a crown,
and a scepter. The yogini tantra mandalas, in particular, retain a sense of ter-
ritorial dominion over pilgrimage sites—whether the twenty-four of the Sam-
vara system or other arrangements—and over the gods that reside therein.
Thus the paradigms of palace, place, and power are resolutely applied in all the
yogini tantra mandalas, even if the metaphor is intertwined with other iconolo-
gies from Indian village or tribal sites and practices. As seen above, this hap-
pened with the siddha consecration ceremonies, so that the king’s aspersion
was modiﬁed to include the erotized consecration ceremonies of sacramental
sexuality. In a like manner, the goddess ma ndalas became embedded in a dis-
course that implicated regal power and authority, turning the sisterhood into
a courtly retinue. 
In this vein, there can be no question that the actual form implicates the
subordination of the Mothers to Vajrapani, the circle of goddesses to Hevajra
and Buddhakapala. They are his servants, make offerings to him, sing praises
in the vernacular literature languages, and become part of his entourage. Thus
the samantization of Vajrapani in this mandala is effected by his divine status
as a superior bodhisattva to the inferior soteriological status of the goddesses,
who are mundane (laukika) divinities. Ultimately, some (not all) of these im-
plications were carried over to the circles evident in the yogini tantras. In the
new Buddhist literature, however, the primary divinity in the center of the
mandala may become a goddess as well, apparently demonstrating that the fe-
rocious primacy of the village goddesses has not been entirely lost. 
   ,    ,   
Just as the world is not simply the residence of kings and queens, the mandala
is not only the residence of the gods and goddesses. At the margins of the
mandala diagram, well outside the palace grounds, are the cemeteries or cre-
mation sites, located at the cardinal and intermediate points of the compass.
Like the circle of goddesses, as seen above, they are generally eight in number,
each with their speciﬁc attributes. Each cemetery has a name, a shape and size,
a worldly guardian divinity, and speciﬁc trees. In each is found a territorial god
(ksetrapati), an elephant, a snake spirit, a Vajra daka, and a st upa. It is also,
supremely, the residence of siddhas attached to each of the eight cemeteries. 
It seems that the cremation grounds ﬁrst appear in the tantras as an after-
thought, providing a mundane (laukika) component to the entire ma ndala.
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 326 ---
Apparently, the positioning of the worldly gods and other characters in the
mandala required a separate series of locales. However, the cemeteries quickly
became an important aspect of the yogini tantras, and a genre of cemetery lit-
erature developed to describe their various attributes, sounds, meanings, and
so forth. Iconographically as well, cemeteries stood as important signposts in
the visual record, for, as mundane places, their collective representation be-
came an avenue for artists to blend the sacred and the humorous. 
For our purposes, the cemeteries describe idealized communities of sid-
dhas. Their position in tension with the central ma ndala provides a sense of
both contrast and similarity. It describes at once the distance and relationship
between siddhas as agents of the new proclamation and the theological objects
of their cultus. Without the siddhas, many of the ma ndalas simply would not
have existed, for the new saints constituted the creative impetus behind the
movement. Conversely, many of the divinities were simply available in some
sense. They were brought from the shadows into the harsh light of Buddhist
literature and had their rituals and representations altered in the process.
However, the ritual and visual representations of siddhas in cemeteries are not
an accurate description of what would be seen on the ground. Rather, it is a
new articulation of liminal communities acting as the promoters and providers
of a transgressive and polluted spirituality.
Perhaps the most interesting of the cemetery texts is rather late and anom-
alous in its assignment of names, positions, and so on. It is attributed to Bir-
wa, normally identiﬁed as the vernacular name for the mah asiddha Vir upa,
part of whose hagiography was examined for humorous episodes in chapter 6.
The text is interesting because it speciﬁes in some detail the attribution of both
speciﬁc siddhas and their lineages in speciﬁc cremation grounds. 
Cremation Ground 17 Blessed by Community
Candogra (E) N agabuddhi Aryadeva, *Sundari, and yogins and
yoginis of Nagarjuna’s Guhyasamaja
system.
*Yamajvala (S) Dombhiheruka Avadh uti, *Bhuja, and those following
the Guhyasamaja and Krsnayamari.
*Varunakapala (W) A $vaghosa Kukuripa, *H rdayalamkara, and
those following the Mahamaya-tantra.
*Kuberabhairava (N) Ac¯arya Bhadra, *Ku ttaka, and those following
*Padmaka the Hevajra system of Saroruhavajra.
*%rinayaka (SE) Saraha *Gu nakanaka, Padmavajra, and those
following Saraha’s system of Samvara.
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 327 ---
Attahasa (SW) K anhapa Suvar navarna, *Vaktrakrodha, and
those following the *Dvihrdaya
and Hayagriva.
Ghorandhakara (NW)Kukuripa Srota apanna, *Ksetra, and those
following Kukuripa’s Yogini tantra
system. 
Kilikilarava (NE) Vajrav arahi% riheruka, Nairatma, and those
following Mahamaya and Khasama
systems.
Here we have a sense of siddhas in lineages, transmitting their various es-
oteric systems in speciﬁc cremation grounds, surrounded by a vast company of
yogins and yoginis, with their favorite snakes, trees, gods, clouds, and whatnot
nearby. The arrangement provides a positive sense of the important lineages
according to Birwa as well as the impression that he simply ran out of poten-
tial assignees at the end. At Ghorandhakara, Kukuripa is repeated, and by the
last cemetery, Birwa has lapsed simply into divinities. The easy movement be-
tween saint and divinity surely has already begun (as with the god/saint sidhs
of Himachal Pradesh), and by the end of the text the categories are increas-
ingly open and ﬂuid. Yet the circle at the edge of the ma ndala also indicates
Birwa’s late blending of two other categories: a lineage of saints, on one hand,
and siddhas in a great group, on the other.
The organization of siddha names and identities into discrete lineages or
arrays came rather late in the maturation of esoteric Buddhist literature, per-
haps as much as a century after siddhas as a category are noticed in the tantras
themselves. Despite clear afﬁrmation that eighth-century individuals were
designated as siddhas, our earliest organizational texts were probably translat-
ed into Tibetan in the twelfth century and may be from the ninth to eleventh
centuries, although solid evidence is lacking for many of the works. The rea-
son for this is that their authors apparently relied on some idea of critical
mass—there were simply insufﬁcient siddhas to compound into these com-
pendia of songs, verses, behavior, ritual, and incidentals. 
Two types of texts were eventually developed, one describing the siddhas as
members of a lineage, the other articulating great groups of siddhas, sometimes
numbered and sometimes not. If the distinction between these two is clear in
most of the texts, it has not received attention in scholarly studies, which have
ﬁxated on a single one of these works, theCatura$itisiddhapravrtti (Lives of the
Eighty-four Siddhas), ascribed to Abhayadatta$ri. It is not immediately evident
which of these two types of texts—lineage or group—precedes the other. My in-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 328 ---
tuition, which might be faulty, tells me that the lineage works achieved curren-
cy before the other genre, principally because such lineage lists were well known
in earlier Indian Buddhism. They may have developed from stories of the
preaching of the tantras, and the late eighth- or early ninth-century version of
Indrabhuti’s receiving the Sarvabuddhasamayoga begins to move in the direction
of a lineage.18 However, the group texts are also well authenticated, with early
works focused on the sixteen arhats or the eight great bodhisattvas. There are
also texts fulﬁlling something of both functions, such as those concentrating on
the previous Buddhas or on the thousand Buddhas of the good eon, in some
ways analogous to Birwa’s layout of simultaneous lineages in cemeteries. For
their part, the group-related siddha works are somewhat chaotic and make curi-
ous reading (being a little thin on plot). Thus, other than Abhayadatta$ri’s con-
tribution, they have seldom received the attention they deserve.
Several examples exist of the lineal variety, most notably the lineages col-
lected into the only surviving Sanskrit Buddhist siddha hagiographical text,
which has been called the “Sham Sher manuscript.” 19 This work emphasizes
the “nonreferential cognition” (amanasikara) lineage, of which Maitr ipada is
the primary representative.20 The work is therefore an eleventh-century work
at the earliest, since it concentrates on the notable saint who was the contem-
porary of Ati$a (982–1054 c.e.). Beyond this text, several others are in the re-
ceived record. A movement in this direction is found in the list of his teachers
given at the beginning of Buddhajñana’s Dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama,
which has been commented on by Vitap ada in his Sukusuma-dvikramatattva-
bhavana-mukhagamavrtti; much of its hagiographical narrative is examined
below. In a somewhat different manner, the Sahajasiddhi ascribed to Indra-
bhuti includes a longer lineage list at its beginning, and we have to rely on the
Sahajasiddhipaddhati, by Lhacham Jetsun Pelmo—possibly a Tibetan—to
provide us with a narrative. 21 Unfortunately, Buddhajñana’s and Indrabhuti’s
texts survive only in Tibetan, and both focus on the land of O diyana and
maintain that their lineages began there. 
On the other hand, aﬁcionados of the Abhayadatta$ri text will be surprised
to learn that the number eighty-four is not universally represented in the sid-
dha group lists. A great spectrum is observed in siddha groupings, from six to
three hundred eighty-one names, although this last list is both anomalous and
probably Tibetan in composition; the longest authentically Indian list is that
of Vajrasana, which includes eighty-ﬁve names. Many of these lists contain ir-
regularities, speciﬁcally in the identiﬁcation of names more than once, and the
list of ﬁfty names also has had Marpa the Tibetan translator slipped in for a
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 329 ---
ﬁfty-ﬁrst designation. I have no intention of providing a tiresome comparison
of the names, but the respective texts are as follows.
Text To. Siddhas
Saddharmopade$a 2330 6 (N agarjuna and
Sukhasiddhi twice)
Nanasiddhopade$a noncanonical 13
dPal u rgyan du tshogs ‘khor byas pa’i 2449 43 (Tilopa twice)
dus su rnal ‘byor pa grub pa thob
pa bzhi bcus rdo rje’i mgur bzhengs
pa nyams kyi man ngag thig le gser
gyi phreng ba
Grub thob lnga bcu’i rtogs pa brjod pa 2444 51 (with Marpa)
thig le ‘od kyi phreng ba
Lam dri ma myed pa dngul sgong noncanonical 54 (*Ghudaripa twice)
dag pa22
Mahamudrakanakamala 2454 ?
Cittaguhyadoha 2443 79
Abhayadatta$ri Pe. 5091 84
*Catura$itisiddhasambodhihrdaya 2292 84 (=Abhayadatta’s list)
of *Viraprabha
Vajrasana’s gsol ‘deb 3758 85
rNal ‘byor pa thams cad kyi de kho 2453 381 (multiple repetitions)
na nyid snang ba zhes bya ba grub
pa rnams kyi rdo rje’i mgur
Tucci and Schmidt have independently studied the differences between
several of the eighty-four/eighty-ﬁve siddha lists, and there is no point in re-
peating their helpful results.23 More interesting, however, are some of the dif-
ferences in the manner in which these lists were gathered together. Most of
the lists, in fact, are catalogues—not of siddhas but of their songs of realiza-
tion or their speciﬁc contributions to Buddhist practice. The Saddharmopade$a
is probably a microcosm of how they were ﬁrst compiled. It provides teachings
or practices of Carya, N agarjuna (twice), Lavapa, and Sukhasiddhi (twice). A
similar list not translated into Tibetan is included in a Sanskrit manuscript in
the Nepal National Archives. Simply entitled Nanasiddhopade$a (Teachings of
Some Siddhas), it contains short meditative instructions that were associated
with thirteen siddhas.24
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 330 ---
However, it was the ﬁrst-person voice in the elusive songs that ensured
their popularity and ultimately led to the kind of compendia seen in the Sikh
Gurugranthsahib. The compelling immediacy of the ﬁrst-person expression fa-
cilitated their compilation into grand arrangements of eminent personalities.
This formula has some exceptions, however, most notably in the Vajrasana list.
This latter is a series of homages to the different siddhas but does include ma-
terial on their lives or aspects of their realizations, and Vajr asana is deﬁnitely
modeling himself after prior hagiographical sources. Vajrasana’s list also shows
the degree to which institutionalization continued, since many of the individ-
uals included (such as Asa Nga) had not usually been accorded siddha status
and certainly represented peculiar siddha personas. Moreover, because Marpa
separated the names from the homages in the Mahamudrakanakamala and
grouped the names into three versiﬁed groups, I have not been able to deter-
mine exactly how many siddhas were supposed to be represented, particularly
as the names have become corrupted in the process of transmission. Also
anomalous is the Abhayadatta$ri text, precisely because the names, verses, and
hagiographies have all been included. 
So, what is the purpose behind these numbers: forty, ﬁfty, ﬁfty-four, eighty,
eighty-four, eighty-ﬁve, all of which are speciﬁed in one or more title? Clearly,
they extended beyond the mere Buddhist usage, since ﬁfty siddhas are so des-
ignated in the %akta work, the Kubjikamata-tantra, and a section of the Skan-
dapurana is dedicated to enumerating the eighty-four li Nga of %iva.25 Even
more intriguing are allusions to unidentiﬁed numbers of siddhas, as in the case
of twenty-one unnamed siddhas being encountered in a vision by Ralo Dorjé
Drak (b. 1016). 26 First, and most obviously, such enumerations constitute or-
ganizing strategies, statements of completion, and enumerations of the songs
that might be sung at an esoteric gathering (ganacakra) of those following the
siddha path. Even when this was admitted by previous scholars, they have em-
phasized the mystical signiﬁcance of these numbers, especially the number
eighty-four. Buddhists had used this number in a variety of arrays, as in the rep-
resentation of the eighty-four thousand doors of the Dharma. Yet organizing
numbers should also be sought in the early medieval culture to see whether
there are analogues that might be of assistance in understanding the ﬁeld of sig-
niﬁcance of these numbers for Indian society in that period. 
In reality—as might be expected if the sacred/profane dualism that informs
much of Indology is put aside—most of these numbers are used elsewhere, in
particular in the economic and political organization of Indian villages. Shar-
ma shows that inscriptions and other materials from the early medieval period
support the numbers ﬁve, ten, twelve, sixteen, twenty-four, forty-two, sixty-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 331 ---
four, and so on as speciﬁc units of villages within larger political domains, or-
ganized as such for the purposes of taxation and control.27 Whereas the num-
ber ﬁfty (as in ﬁfty siddhas) appears unrepresented, the number eighty-four
(caurasi, catura$iti) has special application in this regard, for many of the areas
of North India were organized into units of eighty-four throughout the me-
dieval period, and this strategy was retained in places like Chhattisgarh right
into the period of the British Raj. 28 This number is also seen as early as the
811/12 c.e. Baroda grant of Karka II, which records the grant to the Brahman
named Bhanubhatta of a village within the A Nkottka-catura$iti, the eighty-
four villages known by the designation ANkottka.29 Thus the numbers eighty-
four (siddhas), twenty-four (pilgrimage sites), and so forth were probably gen-
erated in the same matrix as Buddhist mandalas: the organizational principles
of Indian samanta feudalism. 
This is certainly seen in sites surviving in isolation from the medieval peri-
od, perhaps most particularly in Brahmaur, the old capital of the Gaddi tribal
kingdom in the modern state of Himachal Pradesh. There the town square is
decorated with temples, mostly from the seventh to the thirteenth centuries
(Figure 22). These are said to be the caurasi sidh—the eighty-four siddhas. 30
As in the Ma ndi employment discussed in chapter 5—and the breezy usage
found in Birwa’s cemetery text above—the term “siddha” here is simply ap-
plied to any of the many divinities. Thus, in Brahmaur, the gods and god-
desses are denoted as sidhs and occupy the central place in the square of the
old capital, even though no inscriptional evidence indicates that the organiza-
tion of these temples was understood to be eighty-four when they were built.
Nor are there actually eighty-four temples, images, or li Nga present; when I
visited the site in 1997, only thirty-one sacred images or liNga were identiﬁable,
including a 1963 temple to a Jain Digambara saint. The men hanging out in
the square all agreed that the square represents the eighty-four sidhs and the
nine Naths, but were at a loss to identify which were the eighty-four. The ap-
plication of the designation eighty-four, then, may be construed to indicate a
site or arrangement in which the number having both religious and political
signiﬁcance uniﬁes these sources of power and authority.
 :
 ¯  ¯  ’ 
If ideological communities occupy one zone of the siddha cosmos, real com-
munities may be located in another part of the universe. Because our informa-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 332 ---
figure 22 Brahmaur. Caurasi-sidh Square, seventh to thirteenth centuries.
Ronald M. Davidson

--- PAGE 333 ---
tion about real siddha communities, however, is impoverished, we must rely
on hagiographical congregations to ﬁll in the details, such as they might be as-
certained. Unfortunately, undue emphasis has been placed on the work of Ab-
hayadatta$ri, and his text may be important but is by no means deﬁnitive. In
consideration of the wealth of other sources, and their relative neglect in schol-
arly literature, it would be appropriate to consider alternative descriptions of
Buddhist siddha communities.
The record of Buddhajñanapada stands out in this regard, not only because
of his personal recording in the manner of %akyamitra but for the attention it
has received in subsequent Indian literature. Preeminent is the retelling of Bud-
dhajñanapada’s travels in search of the Dharma by the master Vitapada. Clear-
ly Vitapada was a later successor following in Buddhajñanapada’s footsteps, but
his virtue is also exhibited in his revelation that he studied those records of his
predecessor that no longer survive. His reading, combined with the power of
Buddhajñanapada’s vision of the esoteric system, illuminates our task in some
measure. For our purposes, we might recollect that not only is the hagiograph-
ical remembrance important but Buddhajñ anapada’s system of Guhyasamaja
exegesis—featuring the Mañjuvajra mandala—became one of the two deﬁning
systems inherited by most concerned with the Guhyasamaja tradition.31
The surviving discussion starts with Buddhajñ anapada’s monastic career
and his study with the preeminent authority on the Perfection of Insight scrip-
tures as understood in the late eighth century: Haribhadra. This scholar is, for-
tunately, to some degree datable, for he states in his own record that he com-
pleted his magnum opus on the Perfection of Insight during the reign of
Dharmapala (c. 775–812 c.e.).32 After describing his study with Haribhadra,
Buddhajñanapada embarks on a pilgrimage to learn the new esoteric scriptures
being disseminated in the north.
The place *Gu nodaya is 230 yojanas [~ 920 miles] north of Magadha. It
is called the Source of Qualities [*Gu nodaya] because the Dakini’s bless-
ing arises out of it. This name is applied to O diyana. In a section of it is
Ratnadvipa, where was born one who obtained the Great Seal. He is
called *Citrar upa, or is otherwise known as Vil asavajra. Buddhajñ anapada
learned from him many ritual [kriya] and yoga tantras and examined them
with zeal. 
Again in a section of Odiyana was one known as Guneru, who had ob-
tained the Instruction on the Inconceivable Stages [Acintyakramopade$a]
and had obtained [a vision of] the Great Yogin i.33 Buddhajñanapada went
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 334 ---
to his place and propitiated him. He learned many anuttara yoga tantras ,
and learned the teacher’s exposition of the sacraments and the consecra-
tions, and immediately set to meditation. 
In a dream, a deity explained to Buddhajñ anapada, “In the northern
door of Odiyana is a sixteen year old young outcaste girl [m ataNgi or can-
dali] named Jathig Jvala. She is actually the same as Mah alaksmi born into
a high caste. If you go there, your wish will be accomplished!” According-
ly, he left Guneru’s entourage and went to make friends with her, and pro-
pitiated her for eight months. He realized then that he had obtained real-
ization in the Great Seal. Since he had been granted some subtle
instruction, he attained the siddhi of the god Jambhala. 
Then he proceeded to the city of Kanauj in the country of J alandhara.
In one section of that city, he went before Balipada, whose thought had be-
come like a river in comprehension of the tantras that principally represent
Insight [prajñatantra]. He propitiated the teacher and learned the texts,
heard his instruction, and assiduously practiced meditation. 
About three hundred yojanas [~ 1,200 miles] from Kanauj in the south-
ern direction is the country of KoNkana. There is a place in KoNkana called
Kanheri. Why is it called that? Because it is a place that seems to exist like
rootless vines entwined up trees [anhri] into the sky [kha]. In one part was
the Lord of Siddhas, bound to only one more birth [ekajatipratibaddha],
whose mind had become like a great river in comprehension of the tantras
that principally represent skillful means [upayatantra]. His name was *Rak-
sapada. Moreover, he was surrounded by his retinue, all of whom had
achieved miraculous powers. There was the Brahman Catrata, the Brahman
Guhyaparta [? Guhyapatra], the K satriya Mañju $ri, the Vai $ya P unya-
bhadra, and the %udras Dipamkara and Kar naputra. There were also the
prostitutes Aloki and Sadhu$ila. All of their clothing and other necessities
were furnished by Devi Vasudhara. Each day, she would bring to them ten
grains [maska] of gold, half a necklace of pearls, and three hundred cowries.
Buddhajñanapada bowed there at the teacher’s feet for nine years, so he also
became bound to only one more birth. He obtained the teacher’s under-
standing of the Samaja Mahatantra and other works, as well as the yogas as-
sociated with the Samaja Tantra. Its commentary was the *Yoga$iksamam-
sikaputri Vimalamudri [?]. All told, he listened to eighteen texts and
practiced them for eighteen months. 
Yet he had not obtained the diffusion of the waves of realization, and he
told the teacher, “I have not realized it!” But even the teacher replied, “I
have not realized it either!” So he somewhat concluded his study, thinking,
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 335 ---
“Others not realizing this would be worthless as well!” So he afﬁxed his seal
on the text of the Samaja, and, tying it around his neck, he headed north. 
Now behind Vajrasana there was a forest called Kuvaca. Buddhajñ ana-
pada decided, “I’m going to live among those beings that look out of the
Bodhimanda [Bodhgay a temple]. That forest is a terrifying place fairly
crawling with bears and tigers of desire, etc. Since I am seeking liberation
from those things, for six months I will realize the reality of the teaching
present in that forest through meditative ritual, along with the ritual request
for instruction in the Dharma.”
How did he achieve that realization? There was a monk who was an em-
anation. That is, in that forest there was a monk who was an emanation of
Vajradhara. He had a lower garment made of mouse pelts and would plow
the ﬁelds with his religious robes made into a kind of hat. He and two gu-
rus lived there along with a nasty woman, her small son, and a dog with
blotchy white marks. When Buddhajñ anapada met them, he obtained no
sense that they had waves of realization, so the teacher concluded that they
simply had no shame.34
The narrative continues with the eventual revelation of Mañjugho sa’s
mandala to Buddhajñanapada, who also received from the Bodhisattva of In-
sight the detailed meditative instructions that were eventually to become the
text of the Dvikramatattvabh avana-mukhagama (Direct Revelation of the
Cultivation of the Reality of the Two Processes). At the conclusion of the
vision, both the ma ndala and Buddhajñ anapada’s disreputable companions
were revealed as emanations of Mañjugho sa himself and were withdrawn
with him back into space. Buddhajñ anapada then retreated to a mountain
cave called Matahranitra (?) a little more than six yojanas (~ 25 miles) north-
east of Vajr asana.35 There, he began his teaching, and Vitap ada indicates
that Buddhajñ anapada accrued sixteen great disciples, of whom four were
the most important: *D ipamkarabhadra, *Pra $antamitra, *R ahulabhadra,
and Vajramah asukha.36 The community was kept alive by daily offerings of
seven hundred cowries. Eventually, Buddhajñ anapada returned to his teach-
er at Kanheri and received his blessing. 
The hagiographical communities represented here appear to become the
new synthesis for Buddhists of many kinds in the early medieval period. By
this time small communities seem to have formed in proximity to the large ex-
emplary monasteries, communities composed of both monks and siddha ﬁg-
ures (Map 4). This is certainly reﬂected in Y ukadevi’s monastery in early me-
dieval Kashmir, which was divided into two sections, one for monks adhering
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 336 ---
map 4 Probable Sites of Buddhist Siddha Activity.
Ronald M. Davidson and Richard Pinto

--- PAGE 337 ---
to the rules of discipline, the other dedicated to “monks” with the accou-
trements of householders: wives, children, cattle, and property.37 Similarly, we
see the rather breezy movement from Buddhajñanapada’s presumably monas-
tic study with Haribhadra and Vil asavajra, to his esoteric study with Guneru,
who recommends a sexual involvement with an outcaste yogin i. 
From there, Buddhajñanapada goes south to Kanheri, the important Bud-
dhist center in the hills above the modern city of Mumbai (Bombay). The
teacher’s name given by Vitapada, *Raksapada, was not the one that Buddha-
jñanapada himself employed. In his own short statement, Buddhajñ anapada
indicates that the teacher in Kanauj, Balipada (or, Balipada), and the acarya in
Kanheri were one and the same. The multicaste composition of this center in
western India is most interesting, as is the identiﬁcation of the two prostitutes
living with the yogins. Although it is difﬁcult to extrapolate from hagiograph-
ical sources, it appears that this community, at least, fell back on the old Indi-
an association of ascetics and women of easy virtue, recognized as early as the
Mahavrata rituals and carried on to this day by some Aghoris.38 Yet this is also
probably the same place in KoNkana where %akyamitra, undoubtedly a monk,
studied the esoteric canon, as seen in his short record translated in chapter 4. 
Also informative is the speciﬁcation of funding—ten grains (maska) of
gold, half a necklace of pearls, and three hundred cowries—and its attribution
to the divine providence of Devi Vasudhara. We do know that the Maharaja-
mahavihara at Kanheri of North KoNkana (Aparanta) continued to receive re-
gal largesse at least as late as 877/878 c.e. under %ilahara Kapardin II and still
exhibited signs of life as late as the twelfth century.39 Certainly, there is noth-
ing about the donation of gold, pearls, and cowries that would be inappropri-
ate from a king. Moreover, the interpretation of this community’s name is cu-
rious. Although the surviving epigraphs make clear that the name “Kanheri” is
from the Prakrit rendering of Krsnagiri (Dark Mountain), apparently both Vi-
tapada and the later Tibetan translation team interpreted it from Sanskrit as
“a tree [amhri] growing in the sky [kha].”
After Balipada informs Buddhajñanapada that he himself, although an es-
oteric teacher, has not achieved the realization of the scriptures he teaches,
Buddhajñanapada returns north and takes retreat in a forest behind Vajr asana
(which Vitapada interprets as in the northeast, toward N alanda). Curiously,
after his escapades with the outcaste yogini, he tries to keep his distance from
some Buddhist monks and teachers in the forest, for he considers them dis-
reputable. One of these is dressed as a monk while living with a bad-tempered
woman, her son, and a dog of poor complexion. The other two in the group
are simply said to be “gurus,” which could mean almost any kind of teacher,
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 338 ---
and no further information is provided. The story eventually reclaims the de-
generate monk as an emanation of Vajradhara, probably here meaning Vajra-
pani, for the two names were interchangeable during the eighth and early
ninth centuries.40
All told, the hagiography supports a sense of the strong involvement of sid-
dha ﬁgures with monks in regional centers, away from or in proximity to the
larger monastic compounds. Even when he sets up his own teaching estab-
lishment, this is evident in the hagiography. The composition of Buddha-
jñanapada’s four disciples represents their similarly mixed background. Three
appear to have monastic names (*Dipamkarabhadra, *Pra$antamitra, *Rahula-
bhadra) reﬂecting ordination in the well-attested –bhadra and –mitra monas-
tic lineages, doubtless from the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya. However, the last
name, Vajramahasukha, can only be a siddha appellation. It is extremely un-
fortunate that the “more extensive” records alluded to by Buddhajñ anapada,
and speciﬁed by Vitapada, seem no longer to survive, for they would have pro-
vided better information on Nalanda and Vajrasana, at the very least. 41
The issue of hagiography, though, would be incomplete without calling
into question the self-promotional nature of many siddhas’ representations.
Chapter 5 began with a quotation from the Krsnayamari-tantra that provided
an idealized portrait of a prototypical siddha. The variety of person depicted is
instantly recognizable: free in the world, unconcerned with the slings and ar-
rows of outrageous fortune, at ease in the tribal realms and in the forest. Those
at home in Buddhist siddha literature should be familiar with this representa-
tion—it has been used frequently in such esoteric systems as the Mah amudra
of the Tibetan Kagyüpa, where both Tilopa and Naropa are described in sim-
ilar terms. In the hagiography of the great Tibetan translator Marpa, for ex-
ample, the lay scholar goes to India for the last time to seek further instruction
from N aropa, who, he is told, is deceased. Undaunted, Marpa struggles
through a jungle, and ﬁnally N aropa appears to him, a veritable cemetery-or-
namented Heruka in the primeval forest. 42 Such portraits are also instructive
about the degree to which some of our siddha materials have been manipulat-
ed by Tibetan scholars, whose personal investments in these representations
were overwhelming. 
If these images are compared with less subjective accounts, the discontinu-
ity is immediately evident. Some of these statements are found directly in In-
dian literature. Indeed, chapter 1 began with an extract from the Mañju$rimu-
lakalpa describing a Mr. Va—evidently a real Buddhist layman—who was
wealthy, worked in the courts of kings, employed mantras and tantras for the
protection of the state, and argued incessantly on behalf of the Buddhist cause.
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 339 ---
In addition, one of the two popular stories on the preaching of the tantras in-
volved King Indrabhuti and invoked a line of aristocratic individuals. Similar-
ly, some less subjective accounts tell of N aropa, such as those found in Ati$a’s
hagiography and in the report of Nagtso Lots awa, who was sent to ﬁnd Ati $a
and bring him back to Tibet. While waiting for Ati $a to complete some ﬁnal
tasks at Vikrama$ila, Nagtso went to see N aropa in Phullahari, in eastern In-
dia, before the great siddha’s death around 1041c.e. Supported by a similar de-
scription in Ati$a’s hagiography, Nagtso’s record seems to represent a credible
eyewitness account of a paradigmatic siddha. 43
Because I went alone as an insigniﬁcant monk to invite the Lord Ati $a—
and because he tarried for one year in Magadha—I thought that I would go
see the Lord N aropa, since his reputation was so great. I went east from
Magadha for a month, as I had heard that the Lord was staying in the
monastery known as Phullahari. Very great merit arose from being able to
go see him. On the day I arrived, they said some feudal prince had come to
pay homage. So I went to the spot, and a great throne had been erected. I
sat right in front of it. The whole crowd started buzzing, “The Lord is com-
ing!” I looked and the Lord was physically quite corpulent, with his white
hair [stained with henna] bright red, and a vermilion turban bound on. He
was being carried [on a palanquin] by four men and chewing betel-leaf. I
grabbed his feet and thought, “I should listen to his pronouncements!”
Stronger and stronger people, though, pushed me further and further from
his seat and ﬁnally I was tossed out of the crowd. So, there I saw the lord’s
face, but did not actually hear his voice. 44
Collectively, these reports show Naropa—and other siddhas—not as fero-
cious Herukas in the wilderness, but as elderly lay gurus and panditas, who trav-
eled in palanquins and needed assistance simply to walk up stairs. Nagtso indi-
cated that N aropa’s teeth were probably stained red from chewing betel-leaf,
which would have given him the dramatic receding gums that afﬂict habitual
users of that mild intoxicant. He was doubtless extremely fat, as Nagtso afﬁrms,
and wore a red turban over his long, henna-dyed hair. Nagtso seems to indicate
that Naropa preferred the company of important political personages over that
of Buddhist monks, since a local prince’s visit preempted the translator from ac-
tually speaking with the aging lay scholar. Thus siddhas—and no one was a sid-
dha if N aropa was not a siddha—apparently manipulated media representa-
tions as well as any accomplished purveyor of power could, although certainly
much of it was done by their followers. Both the above evidence and others like
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 340 ---
it make it abundantly clear that siddhas were attributed a spectrum of behavior
in the received record, in greater variation than is commonly assumed.
  GAN. ACAKRAS 
  
Religious communities in India, as elsewhere, deﬁne themselves around ritual
gatherings in which individuals assume positions of importance. Beyond the
irregular ritual moments of the consecration and the individual or community
meditations, siddha communities deﬁned themselves by a regular gathering of
initiates. This gathering was called the ganacakra, which Snellgrove has labeled
the “tantric feast,” an appropriate designation in some ways. The term literal-
ly means “a group circle,” with the ﬁrst element having great resonance in the
period. Gana, for example, does mean “a group or following,” but also de-
scribes %iva’s gang, the hordes of buffoon-like, fat followers who ﬁght over
food and are led by Ga ne$a, %iva’s elephant-headed son, who rides a rat. A
ganika, conversely, is a prostitute or courtesan, for she also has a retinue, but
for decidedly less religious purposes. 
Snellgrove has presented ganacakra descriptions in the two later texts of the
Hevajra Tantraand the Samvarodaya and has established the outlines of the rite
as it was known to the communities supporting these works. 45 Unfortunately,
like ritual descriptions in so many esoteric treatises, these scriptures’ speciﬁcity
leaves something to be desired. The problem of description is often exacerbated
by domestication, for as time goes on the later texts devoted to the ganacakra rite
increasingly explain it as either visualized or otherwise sanitized.46 Other works,
though, leave little doubt about the general purpose of its exercise: acquisition of
the sorcerer’s (vidyadhara) powers through the community’s sacramental experi-
ence of otherwise forbidden items. Among the most detailed of the earlier de-
scriptions is a work dedicated to the ganacakra rite associated with the Sarva-
buddhasamayoga-tantra. Attributed to an Indrabhuti, the text is a relatively early
description, in which are provided very speciﬁc instructions.
One who has completed the collections of both merit and wisdom will
achieve success in a place appropriate for the speciﬁc arrangement of the
family [kula] for the complete ganacakra. The place should be one that is
perfect as explained in the scripture, or at least a pleasant place like a gar-
den, etc. The time for the ganacakra is at one of the two twilight periods on
the eighth or fourteenth of the waning moon or the eighth or tenth of the
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 341 ---
waxing moon. First arrange seats there that are soft and delightful to the
touch. They should be covered with cotton cloth on which are printed all
kinds of lotuses. These are the completely pure seats. These are the glori-
ous sacraments [$risamaya] of all the Buddhas. They become the joyful ap-
pearance of Vajrasattva. They are the excellent citadels of the Tath agata.
Ornament them with jewels and other ornaments. If you cover the site over
with a good canopy, then miraculously there will occur songs and music of
the excellent vajra-words, and so forth. Set out fragrant ﬂowers and oil
lamps with scented oil. Then you will accomplish the highest bliss that is
the dakinis’ assembly, the sexual union of all the Buddhas [sarvabuddha-
samayoga-dakinijala-$amvara]. 
Having ﬁrst correctly asked the Lordly Teacher [Acaryanatha], then re-
quest the followers. With the secret signs of the Buddha, take ﬂowers and
admonish these beings. “All you Yogins and Yogin is! With an intention
that is both happy and pure, I pray that you come to my place tonight to
perform the ganacakra!” 
“Hey, son, compassionate one!” [they will reply]. Now if they show you
the rosary in their hands, then it is to say that “we will come.” Since he has
moved them to present their rosaries, he becomes sacramental, one with a
good vow, a hero, acting for the welfare of others. 
Then, there is the evening gathering. Externally they are cleansed:
washing with powdered soap and fragrant water, bedecked with ﬂowers,
their yoga is puriﬁed with the Dharma mantras. Internally, they bathe as
well. They are protected and blessed with mantras. The avowed congrega-
tion [samayagana] is fully renewed in their esoteric promises. They then
may gradually enter the ritual enclosure. 
In order to test for the secret signs of those having taken the vows, there
are the two Agents [*karmin] dressed in the blue wrathful ornaments. 47
These two ascertain who knows the signs as they recite spells [to which oth-
ers are to respond correctly]. They [stand at] the frames of the two doors
for the sake of protection, saying: 
Hey, you here, beautiﬁed with the blue ornaments of the Wrathful
Kings [krodharaja]! You Sacramental agents [*samayavicaraka],
holders of the Jeweled Club of Accomplishment [siddhiratnadanda]!
Heroes and heroines, assemble! I now permit the holy name holders
[having received a name with the consecration] in the circle of
yoginis who have beautiful vaginas!om maha¯sa[ma]ya hu¯m. |
suratasta¯m. |48
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 342 ---
At this time, one of the Sarvabuddhasamayoga mandalas is constructed, and
offerings of various varieties are made, including those of ﬁsh, meat, and
liquor. Everyone meditates, visualizing the gnostic ma ndala that is propitiat-
ed. The offerings are then consumed, for, “There are no false conceptions to-
ward these foods. The Brahman, the dog, and the outcaste all eat together, for
they are each of the same nature.” 49 Likewise, the yogins and yogin is engage
in ritual intercourse. The yogin is instructed to consider that, without affec-
tion toward any of the deities of the ma ndala, “I am the Mah aheruka!” Hav-
ing relinquished his own nature, he is to indulge in whatever he likes, without
being afﬂicted by the restraint of his discipline. He is the “Latter-day Bud-
dha,” to enjoy himself without fear. 50 After having washed again, the assem-
bly concludes with more meditation and a calling of the divinities for assis-
tance. The divinities are ritually returned to their homes, and the congregation
does likewise. 
This version of the rite, therefore, calls for four principle actors. First is the
master of the rite (acarya), who acts as the leader of the congregation
(gananayaka).51 He is the one charged with conducting the ritual and is os-
tensibly the teacher of the assembly. The one preparing these offerings, laying
out the site, and requesting the performance is normatively identiﬁed as the
patron (danapati). However, this is primarily seen in other contexts, for there
the patron employs the rite as a vehicle to effect the esoteric actions of paciﬁ-
cation or increase. In distinction, Indrabh uti’s text seems to be addressed to
the person in the position of patron, but does not describe him as such, and
we have little sense of the rite serving an ulterior motive beyond the sacra-
mental. One of the most interesting sections of the text describes the Agents,
called karmavajrin in the Samvarodaya Tantra. They, like all the assembly, are
dressed in blue and bedecked with ornaments of the Wrathful Kings. They
guard the doorways and allow in only those who know the secret signs, mak-
ing sure that the participants are cleansed and generally ensuring the mainte-
nance of order. 
One problem in understanding the ganacakra is that there seems to be lit-
tle precedent for this gathering in the normative rituals of either Mahayana
Buddhism or the Hindu Var na$ramadharma. Its emphasis on sexuality, on
eating foods forbidden to caste Hindus, on the use of a circle as a ritual enclo-
sure, and on relative egalitarianism under the leadership of a teacher and his
agents all make the ganacakra stand apart from mainstream practices. Certain-
ly, we see strong continuities with the various cakra gatherings of extreme
%aiva or %akta systems, and the surviving documents also support such assem-
blies. The Kularnava, for example, provides a much-abbreviated description of
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 343 ---
conduct in the cakra, and its various admonitions against the incorrect behav-
ior of others suggest an earlier level of the ritual, against which the text re-
sponds.52 As is evident in other siddha systems, in the case of the ganacakra we
seem to have received descriptions from %aiva or %akta sources that are appar-
ently later than the surviving Buddhist works. 53
It has been suggested that tribal rituals have contributed to such practices
as the ganacakra, yet scholars suggesting such afﬁnities seldom take note of
tribal ethnography.54 It may be the case, for example, that the youth dormito-
ry system found in many groups in Central and East India was a contributor
to the ganacakra. The youth dormitories concentrate adolescents of either sex
in close proximity for a speciﬁed period of time, so that they form legitimate
sexual liaisons with others of their age. Such liaisons, even if stable for a while,
do not necessarily entail marriage.55 The best studied of these is the Ghotul of
the Muria of Madhya Pradesh and Bihar; it provides a transitional sense of
sexual and group identity for the difﬁcult years between puberty and marriage.
Both of our rather extensive studies of the Muria Ghotul have emphasized the
web of structured relations and religious responsibilities that ensues for all
Ghotul members, so that individuals (theoretically at least) can come to terms
with the overwhelming nature of their ﬁrst sexual experience, if that is their
desire.56 The regular festivals, the speciﬁc responsibilities, and the mytholog-
ical narratives all serve to make the transition smooth for the village, the fam-
ily, and the individual. The spatial placement of the Ghotul in the precincts of
the village simply reinforces its central and inclusive position in the develop-
ment of Muria society.57
We do know that tribal rituals have been viewed with consternation by
caste Indians. The offering period to the Goddess Mahamaya described in the
Kalikapurana, for example, ends with a ritual of ceremonial chaos. Here, peo-
ple were to deride one another, making rude comments and sexually explicit
jokes and generally acting as if there were no rules. 58 This chaotic ritual peri-
od is called %abarotsava, the festival of the %abaras. Rather than a truly tribal
ritual, though, its description suggests the difﬁculties experienced by caste
Hindus in an accurate assessment of the relatively egalitarian values found
among tribal peoples. The authors of the Kalikapurana project, instead, hier-
archical inversion as the consequence. 
However, the ganacakra in fact serves entirely a different function from the
village dormitory, so it is questionable whether the latter contributed in any
way. Here, the yogins and their partners become isolated from the larger soci-
ety, and the ganacakra serves to reinforce the unique opportunity that these se-
lect few have in obtaining awakening beyond the bounds of traditional reli-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 344 ---
gious strictures. Instead of a transitional condition, they are conﬁrmed into a
mystical society from which there is no retreat. Rather than being a temporary
liminal state leading to adulthood, the ganacakra requires a commitment to a
permanent liminal status in which the individual will never be reintegrated
into any village anywhere, even though he must observe his fellow ritualists as
his immutable brothers and sisters in religion. Thus as yet it is unclear whether
any tribal rites actually contributed to the development of the ganacakra or
whether the Buddhist ceremony developed from entirely other local village or
regional Kaula or %aiva rituals. 
  
Whatever the source of such erotized rituals, Buddhists formulated their iden-
tity on rules as well as on rites. Particularly in India, communities deﬁne them-
selves by rules, generally formulated as transgressions in need of ritual atone-
ment. Chapter 4 looked at one list of rather modest restrictions undertaken by
the early esoteric meditators associated with the mandalas in the Mañju$rimu-
lakalpa. However, while the lists in the ﬁrst chapters of this text are represen-
tative of institutional esoterism, they are by no means authoritative. Other lists
of appropriate vows occur, and sometimes different lists are found even within
the same tantra. This should come as no surprise, for Buddhist communities
have tended to divide and to provide self-deﬁnition by means of both their rules
and the degree to which these were in fact observed. In the case of monks, cer-
tainly, the real observance is always uncertain, in part because there were the
other systems explicit in the ideology of the three vows: those of the monk, the
bodhisattva, and the vidyadhara. Actually, the sorcerers’ discipline was not re-
quired for community behavior, for the monks were expected to maintain at
least an approximate relationship to monastic decorum and, in some monaster-
ies, the bodhisattva vows as well. Although the monastic vows were strained by
monks’ participation in esoteric communities, more than adequate evidence
shows that the vows remained an expectation if not a reality. As a result, over
time the perception grew that the discipline of the vidyadhara was, for monks,
supplemental to both the monastic and Mahayanist rules (pratimoksasamvara,
bodhisattvasamvara), since secrecy and appropriate behavior during the secret
rituals were understood as the primary contributions of the new model. 
Conversely, dedicated siddha communities, because they were not princi-
pally concerned with monastic behavior, apparently needed speciﬁc vidyadhara
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 345 ---
rules to a greater degree than those centers trying to adjudicate the several dis-
ciplinary agendas. Consequently, siddha rules have a much greater emphasis
on formalization than do the institutional esoteric strictures. Although sever-
al speciﬁc lists of esoteric vows circulated among siddha communities, two be-
came important: (I) the fourteen root transgressions and (II) the eight gross
transgressions (see lists below). These two legal agendas apparently evolved in-
dependently, for the two lists contain some redundancy as well as some differ-
ence in the meaning of speciﬁc items. Interestingly, the individual items are
actually numbered in many of the surviving catalogues. 59
, ,   ⁄ 
I. Fourteen Root Transgressions.
1. Contempt for the teacher.
2. Transgressing the message of the
Tathagata.
3. Anger at members of the feast
family.
4. Abandoning loving kindness.
5. Rejecting the thought of
awakening.
6. Abusing the three vehicles.
7. Revealing secrets to unprepared
people.
8. Disparaging the Victor’s body of
instruction.
9. Doubt about the pure-natured
Dharma.
10. [Improper] love or dispassion
toward evil people.
11. Imposition of other than non-
duality upon reality.
12. Disparaging those with faith.
13. Not relying on the sacraments
and vows.
14. Disparaging insight-ﬁlled
women.
II. Eight Gross Transgressions.
1. Seeking to take a consort who is
without sacramental preparation.
2. Relying on unauthorized
sacraments.
3. Arguing in the tantric feast.
4. Showing the secret Dharma.
5. Teaching another Dharma to
those of faith, causing confusion.
6. Staying with %ravakas for seven
days.
7. Claiming the status of a mantrin
without sufﬁcient realization.
8. Teaching secrets to the
unprepared.

--- PAGE 346 ---
Certainly, there is some discussion in Buddhist literature about the signif-
icance of these items. For example, contempt for the teacher is described in a
number of ways, ranging from insults to assaults. %akyamitra understands con-
tempt as seeing only faults in the preceptor or turning one’s back on the mas-
ter instead of greeting him with a bow to the ground. 60 Likewise, the ﬁrst
gross transgression may simply depict the unseemly circumstance of yogins
searching for sexual conquests of any variety— yaksis, r aksasis, animals, or
whatever. Some commentators say that the consorts must have physical qual-
ities as described in the tantras, and most texts declare that the ladies are
preferable if they have also been consecrated. 61 Still others claim that the fe-
male partners of whatever species should be divinely sent; they also council pa-
tience to the yogin afﬂicted by desire. 62 Similarly, the kind of women dispar-
aged is limited to consorts in the tantric feast for some, while others say that
the denigration of any woman constitutes an infraction.63 The redundancy be-
tween the lists (or within them) is evident, with I.3 and II.3, or I.7 and II.4 (or
II.8), respectively, being virtually the same, a fact taken into account by some
commentators. The apparent conﬂict between nos. I.4 and I.10 of the root
transgressions also seems quite apparent. In the former case, one is not to sur-
render to antagonism toward others, while in the latter case one should not to
be content to remain in the company of enemies of the Buddhadharma. Thus
I.4 is psychological while I.10 is behavioral. Whatever their difference of opin-
ion on speciﬁc transgressions, commentators express broad general agreement
on these rules, and almost every exegete who comments on one list also in-
cludes the other as well. 
Some information can be gleaned from both the lists. First, as already men-
tioned, their redundancy implies their origins in different sources. This inference
is veriﬁed to some degree by Mañju $rikirti, who kindly goes out of his way to
seek out the scriptural sources for each rule, to the extent that he can. His Va -
jrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, in fact, makes the comparative study of
these rules actually possible and constitutes a remarkable work of traditional
scholarship. Concomitant with his analysis, however, is the rather basic obser-
vation that neither list of faults appears intact in any single scripture. Both agen-
das therefore seem to have been synthesized outside the basic scriptural context.
Second, it is fairly clear that the rules are written for men. They can be followed
only by those who select female consorts, disparage women per se (in or out of
the tantric feast), and live with the orthodox monks (%ravakas) of the conserva-
tive monastic traditions for more than seven days. Thus these faults are framed
in order to deter potential (and probably actual) sexual predation, misogyny, and
sectarian conversion to the path of early Buddhist monasticism. 
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 347 ---
Finally, we should note the overwhelmingly social nature of these vows. So
many of them have to do with behavior in the tantric feast, with teaching or re-
vealing secrets to others, with relations between men and women, with offense
to the preceptor, and so forth. Only within the list of fourteen root transgres-
sions are there three rules that appear intellectual or psychological: not to aban-
don loving kindness (I.4), not to give in to doubt (I.9), and not to consider the
elements of reality to be pluralistic (I.11). And yet these agendas are not really
complete rules of order, for their focus is on speciﬁc kinds of transgressions, such
as claiming the status of mantrin when it is undeserved. In that regard, the trans-
gressions are curiously similar to the transgressions seen in the early Buddhist
rules (pratimoksa), for one would have difﬁculty understanding even the ideal-
ized monastic life by simply considering the two hundred plus monastic pre-
cepts. Both the esoteric strictures, then, as the early Buddhist transgressions,
represent special cases, rather than the fundamental operating procedures in-
cumbent on either community. 
This section would be incomplete without mentioning that there were oth-
er lists of rules that received currency among the siddhas, one of them an in-
triguing list of ﬁfteen transgressions. 64 It is seldom mentioned even in tradi-
tional texts, and I have seen no discussion of it at all in modern scholarly
literature. This other list cannot be considered popular, but its treatment by
Mañju$rikirti has made it accessible. Each item on the list presents an image
in association with an intended explanation.
, ,   ⁄ 
III. The Fifteen Transgressions.
1. The eye is disinterest in one’s
own divinity.
2. A moon, passing without the
sacraments.
3. Quality, or delight in others’
gods.
4. Desire, for the reality of the
Vedas
5. Arrowed, one incomplete yet
taking disciples.
6. Faculty, focused on worldly
Dharma.
7. Mountain, the ethical mountain
of killing.
8. Blessing, to teach seeking
personal gain.
9. Planets, acting without
awakened action.
10. Directions, living in pointless
existence.
11. Rudra, the elimination of play
(i.e., truth).
12. Sun, the inferior activity (i.e.,
monks’ life).
13. Branch, the thoughts of
material things.
14. Earth (vow) may not be always
kept. 
15. Dharma, or abandoning one’s
own path.

--- PAGE 348 ---
These are quite peculiar transgressions, and without Mañju $rikirti’s expla-
nations I would have little hope of understanding them. Even with the very ab-
breviated description of the items, as reﬂected in the presentation here, we can
see that this list is much more psychological, in stark contrast to the two groups
of rules that gained greatest stature. The consequences of this emphasis carry
over into the physical activity implicated in this group of rules. Thus the specif-
ically androcentric nature of the other lists is not replicated in this agenda, al-
though there is little indication that the predominantly male congregation is
different in any way. Rules III.2, 5, 6–9, 12, 14, and 15 are deﬁnitely concerned
with external action, but even then the behavior is addressed in a decidedly dif-
ferent manner, with a stress on the mental or intellectual components of the yo-
gin. Whereas the previous lists emphasized the fault of teaching the unpre-
pared, in this list the focus is on teaching others when one is unprepared (III.5)
or has improper motivation (III.8). There is much greater sense of a Buddhist
yogin losing the way, either into the Brahmanical fold (III.3–4, 11), into the
world (III.1, 2, 6, 8, 13–15), or into inferior Buddhist practice (III.12). Very in-
teresting is III.10, which is actually the antithesis of III.5. In this instance, the
yogin is described as fully prepared, but disinterested in teaching others, a sort
of latter-day Pratyekabuddha or other self-isolated ﬁgure. 
One reason that these rules are unreliable guides to the way siddhas actu-
ally behaved is that many texts presume that individuals have a great variation
in behavior or even that they are expected to change their behavior over time.
This latter instance, in particular, shows the consequences of the Buddhist
emulation of P a$upata ideals. A P a$upata was ideally to move through ﬁve
stages in his spiritual maturation, with his conduct passing through discrete
phases over time. Many Buddhist siddha systems also articulated similar stages
in the progression of the individual, generally declaring an antinomian period
somewhere in the middle of the practice. Mañju$rikirti provides an interesting
focus on variation in Buddhist practice, combined with an idealized depiction
of how the yogin is to mature.
Practice, moreover, is of four varieties. It is said that the beginner is to prac-
tice the Samantabhadra conduct. Other scriptures have a different idea and
explain that the Samantabhadra conduct is to be applied in other stages as
well. If one has obtained a degree of stability [in ma ndala visualization]
then one practices the discipline with a consort [vidyavrata].65 As it is ex-
plained, those employing mantras should engage this extreme practice for
six months or so. Finally, for those who have obtained stability in their
meditation, the Mahakhyanatantra [?] explains that they should remain in
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 349 ---
the Lordly Conduct [*nathasamudacara]. Now, it should be understood that
there are two varieties to the path of yoga: reliance on yoga and reliance on
the sacraments of skillful means [upayasamaya]. There are also, however,
those who are liberated by yoga even while they rely on the sacraments, and
those liberated by the sacraments even while they rely on yoga. 66
Similar phases of practice were commonly expressed, even if we have little un-
derstanding of how often they were actually observed. It is worthwhile, though,
to see that twelfth-century Tibetans continued to voice comparable stages of
behavior. Drakpa Gyeltsen articulates a similar strategy of passing back and
forth between Mahayanist conduct that is entirely beneﬁcial (samanta-
bhadracarya) and that which is radically antinomian (avadhutacarya).67 Thus we
can surmise from the record that selected individuals took these transitions as
veridical, even if some must have wondered about the necessity to act in so ex-
treme a manner during the middle stages of the path. 
-  
If the siddha propensity for outrageous conduct appears sometimes expressed
in the reenactment of %aiva, village, or other antinomian behaviors, the move-
ment also exhibited a strong self-critical voice. Even though this facet is some-
times overlooked in modern literature, it is certainly evident to readers of sid-
dha documents that each succeeding tangent in the tradition met with a
critical response almost as soon as the new direction was expressed. As seen in
chapter 6, sometimes criticism was conveyed surreptitiously, through the ve-
hicle of hermeneutical domestication, so that many threatening statements
were given a value entirely different from their overt meaning. Criticism is an
implied part of this strategy, attributing ignorance to those who would enact
forms of conduct as literally as they have been proposed. Here, there is the un-
spoken intimation that the authors of such contrary instructions should acqui-
esce to the interpreted (rather than their own original) directions. 
Many criticisms, however, were not so subtle, and the contentious nature
of the siddha movement is sometimes turned against itself rather than toward
other agonistic religious communities. Overall, three kinds of critiques are em-
phasized in the esoteric literature. In the ﬁrst, Buddhist yogins are critiqued
for exhibiting a level of egotism appropriate to Brahmans, for they have both
come to consider themselves divine. In the second, the criticism is voiced that
siddhas have become deluded in their obsession with artiﬁcial means of med-
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 350 ---
itation, breath control, visualization of letters, or psychic heat, and by the sid-
dhas’ search for nubile consorts. Finally, siddhas were criticized for consorting
with non-Buddhist yogins and expressing non-Buddhist doctrines. 
In the ﬁrst instance, the potential for publicly enacting the self-gloriﬁcation
inherent in the yogin’s visualization of himself as divine was given a devastat-
ing review by the anonymous authors of the “commentarial scriptures” within
the ﬁrst century of this doctrine’s articulation. The most trenchant critique I
have encountered is in the Sandhivyakarana-tantra, which is a late eighth- or
early ninth-century lengthy expansion on the Guhyasamaja, an eighth-century
tantra that has been cited throughout our investigation of the siddhas’ world.
In the middle of a longer discussion of potential problems, the scripture en-
gages in a strong broadside on the self-absorption of mantrins employing the
esoteric system for their own personal gloriﬁcation. 
O, Lord of Secrets! The scholars, having encountered this excellent meth-
od, and having correctly grasped its clear signiﬁcance, will immediately fall
into arrogance. 
For them, the peace of contemplation and even insight itself will remain
distant. Instead, they will say, “A yogin with the quality of the ﬁrst level of
the bodhisattva—that is I!”
They will always delight in egoism, and will indulge in their own de-
ceitful and artiﬁcial teachings. Moving along some path other than nirvana,
they will quarrel among themselves. 
Based on their espousal of the secret mantras, they will contest one
against the other; so they have only received M ara’s blessing. 
If one of them should attain some tiny accomplishment, then with his
pride he will think and imagine himself learned. 
They will ﬁght in the tantric gathering [ganacakra] and will act like dogs
toward the food in the feast. They just harm the beneﬁt that has resulted
from their previous positive karma. 
They will say, “Both virtuous and nonvirtuous actions, they are our pow-
ers!” Slandering the teacher, who is like the Buddha in person, they will of-
fer him no consideration.
In a second they are angry. In a moment they are greedy. They simply
exhibit the behavior of dogs, pigs, and ravens! 68
The resonance of this depiction with the general direction of the tantric
rules listed above suggests that the explicit egotism of the esoteric meditative
program was a consistent problem. Although such behaviors may not repre-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 351 ---
sent the community at large, they certainly seem to be one way to enact the
perception of oneself as divine. If the purpose behind the procedure was a
sacralization of the world around them—in which all too often warlords acted
as if they were gods—it also meant that somehow this idea needed puriﬁca-
tion as well as sanctiﬁcation. In fact, the siddhas’ texts in particular emphasize
the “recollection” of purity, in which the visualized Buddhist divinity is inter-
preted as a form revealing Buddhist truth statements. Thus the sixteen arms
of Hevajra are the sixteen forms of emptiness, his crushing of %iva is the de-
struction of the ego, Heruka’s twelve implements are the twelve stages of the
path leading to absolute awakening, and so forth. 69 Such recollection of puri-
ty statements are themselves interpretive devices to ﬁll the liturgical pro-
nouncements of the mandala visualization and its divine representations with
the expressly Buddhist content that the divine iconography did not necessari-
ly possess. This recollection of purity was part of a larger overall strategy, along
with the rules and the interpretive systems, that allowed the meditator to com-
prehend the ma ndala visualizations as speciﬁcally Buddhist events, wherein
Buddhist rules and expectations would operate.
Even then, individuals are found erecting a critique questioning whether
any of these practices were actually efﬁcacious, whether Buddhist-interpreted
or not. For these hypercritical siddhas, the visualized forms, the yogic prac-
tices, and the sexual congress in the ganacakra—each and every speciﬁc activ-
ity enjoined in any of the scriptures—were prima facie delusional. For reasons
not yet clear to me, this variety of criticism was most explicitly found in works
composed in the Apabhra m$a language, reﬂecting the doha verse form. Ever
since the 1916 publication of the doha collections attributed to Saraha and
Kanha, their Apabhra m$a verses have been very popular among Indologists,
with repeated treatments and translations of the highly critical Saraha materi-
als in particular. However, this is the tip of the proverbial iceberg, for there are
many such critical verse collections found in Tibetan translations, most of
which have not been noticed. 70 In one versiﬁed treatise, attributed to one of
the many siddhas using the name Indrabh uti, criticism of other’s practices is
included in his statement of natural reality, sahaja. 
Some claim the self is sahaja, and deluded fools make it I$vara. With their
rejection of both conceptual attributes of self and non-self, the Jinas have
declared sahaja to be the condition of nonduality [yuganaddhapada]. That is
exactly the life of living beings. It is the highest indestructible [paramak-
sara], all-pervasive and present in all bodies. However, women, children,
cowherds, mlecchas, low castes, aquatic life, gods, yaksas, along with nagas,
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 352 ---
none of these will understand sahaja. Instead, they will wander in the cities
of the world.71
. . .
Some claim that accomplishment comes from the joining of sexual or-
gans, but even if you are young and apply yourself for a long time until aged,
by this you will not achieve sahaja. The moment there is a cause, it is error
or something very similar. Some [quote] the texts about the enjoyment
[body: sambhogakaya], but this is not called sahaja. In the middle of the
navel is the highest cakra. Some practitioners continually meditate on the
resplendent form in its midst, but this is not called sahaja. The great wheel
present at the fontanel—touching it and having bliss drip from it—these are
attained by application to the ritual requirement. They are not that called
sahaja. Some make effort in restricting the “life breath” [pranavayu: breath-
ing through the nose], so as to reside [in concentration] at the tip of the
nose. Whatever is obtained by this breath restriction—that is not called sa-
haja. Others afﬂict the body by restricting the wind that evacuates the waste
[apananvayu], again and again cultivating this practice—but that is not
called sahaja.72
This and other statements contain the message that Buddhist siddhas more
than occasionally shared their company with those from the %aiva and other
camps. Nagabuddhi’s *Ardhapañcamagatha, with which this chapter begins, is
but one expression of the relatively consistent message suggested by the litera-
ture: Buddhist yogins were not to frequent non-Buddhist gatherings, they were
not to adopt their views, and they were not to accept their divinities, except in a
subordinate position in the Buddhist mandalas. Yet it is clear that such prohibi-
tions were an attempt to stem the tide and to redirect existing behavior, rather
than to act as the force of law. The reality must have been that Buddhist siddhas,
like the other religious companies in medieval India, selectively appropriated
ideas and attitudes from almost every level of society found in their environment. 
   :
   ¯ -
If the deﬁning metaphor of the Mantray ana ritual system is becoming the
Universal Ruler, then a reconsideration of how the siddha might be different
from the monk seems a desideratum. Their use of new forms of language, the
excessively erotic and violent content of their scriptures, their emphasis on pil-
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 353 ---
grimage and cemetery sites associated with non-Buddhist or tribal peoples,
their occasional voicing of hostility toward monastic institutions, their emula-
tion of ghost and tribal behavior, their employment of local glossia—all of
these are difﬁcult to explain in light of the imperial metaphor. If the monk’s
ritual is based on that imperial metaphor, then what can be said of the rituals
associated with the siddhas: the circle of offerings (ganacakra), the erotic sec-
ond and third consecrations, the worship of girls before sexual congress, the
singing and dancing in their gatherings? 
Certainly, the metaphor has become juxtaposed with several others, especial-
ly noticeable in the rhetoric of primativeness or naturalness. However, when sid-
dhas explicitly afﬁrmed their goals in their literature, it was still most often mod-
eled after becoming the overlords of the Sorcerers (vidyadharacakravartin)or of
the gods, in order to gain their powers. Although the goal was sometimes con-
sidered metaphorical, at others it was taken as literal, and this is clear in the
Vidyottama-tantra’sdiscussion of the beneﬁts of several of its practices.
Then recite the mantra in front of the painting of Vajrapani, until you hear
the roar of a lion. Having heard the lion’s roar, then demon [asura] girls will
come—but don’t become sexually attracted to them! If you do, then you will
not become a lion. Then the demon boys will come and sexually enjoy
themselves [with the girls]. If you don’t become sexually involved with
them, then you will become a lion. Since they desire the lion, eighty
Vidyadhara girls will come. And you will have a retinue of four thousand
Vidyadharas. Then you can go wherever you want, and you will be the
Vidyadhara-cakravartin. But you still haven’t obtained dominion with the
discus and other implements. So at that time, the vajra, discus, trident,
hammer, noose, lance, and club will all come, so that you give a lion’s roar
as a lion. With this lion’s roar, there will arise swords for eighty thousand
yojanas [about 320,000 miles]. And whatever Vidy adhara kings are there,
they will hear the lion’s roar and all fall to the ground. Then you will have
power over all those swords. Then you will be the Vidy adhara king, living
for an entire eon.73
Likewise, the deﬁnition of siddha offered in the Guhyasamaja-tantra empha-
sizes a similar model.
Let him go forth everywhere a siddha—through all the [worlds] as many as
sands of the Ganges. Toward each of the highest vows, let him be the lord
of sorcerers.74
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 354 ---
Sometimes the metaphor is expressed by the goal being differentiated from the
activity of the mundane ruler, although there are many rituals devised in sid-
dha scriptures to seize real political power. Explaining its version of the impe-
rial dynamic, the Catuhpitha, for example, speaks of the siddha becoming an
“absolute yogic monarch” (paramarthayoga-raja), a king of concentration on
the absolute as opposed to all those other kings concentrating on worldly life.75
Even when the simpler goal of becoming a Vidy adhara is articulated (Fig-
ure 23), that Vidyadhara is frequently considered a “lord” (prabhu), a word de-
noting leadership, chieftainship, dominion, or power. In some places in texts
like the Guhyasamaja, becoming a Vidyadhara is also equated with Vajradhara
(here probably meaning a Vajrapani).
At his accomplishment of the power of invisibility, etc., he becomes a
Vajradhara, a Prabhu.
At his accomplishment of the power of yak sa kingship, etc., he becomes a
Vidyadhara, a Prabhu.76
It is in this light that we should understand the rituals of the siddhas—
sexual or otherwise—for they emulate the behaviors that Buddhist siddhas
came to associate with achieving the state of, or dominion over, the Sorcer-
ers.77 If they were not to turn into real lions, as the Vidyottama suggests, sid-
dhas were to act like lions in their utter disdain for the conventions of a world
that inhibited their freedom. 78 Since the contemporary Indian literature de-
picted this dominion as achieved by those performing their rites in real or
visualized cemeteries, siddhas’ ritual systems demonstrate an obsession with
this same means. The cemeteries, isolated groves, primal forests, and analo-
gous locales were understood to be the gateways to the Vidyadhara realm, and
alternative species of beings—tribal, demonic, kingly, whatever—were under-
stood to be their aids to success. All these elements contributed to the sid-
dhas’ practice, whose overarching designation was simply the Vidyadhara dis-
cipline (vidyadhara-samvara).
Dominion over the Vidyadharas was associated with victory over the gods
themselves, and the narrative of subordination of India’s great gods is a con-
sistent facet of siddha hagiography and liturgy.79 This is most deﬁnitively seen
in some forms of the siddha mandalas, where the circle of vassals is constitut-
ed by gods/goddesses (or their surrogates), rather than by other Buddhas, as in
the mandalas preferred in institutional esoterism and the more conservative
siddha systems. Thus the aspiring siddha visualizes himself as Cakrasa mvara
in the midst of a mandala of Bhairavas conquered and converted to Buddhism.
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 355 ---
Analogously, Hevajra is the Heruka in a circle of goddesses, all of whom had
been objects of cults but also mythically converted to the Buddhist cause. As
seen in the Vidyottama above, Vajrapani is shown in the center of the retinue
of the seven Mothers (saptamatrka), the ancient goddesses whose cults were
widely distributed. 80 Even more dramatic is the Bhutadamara, which begins
with the sly %iva requesting that Vajrapani kill all the evil ones in the world, a
category that normally includes %iva himself. However, Vajrapani agrees that
this is a good idea and instantly slaughters all the other gods (Indra, Brahm a,
Visnu, and other available deities), whom he immediately revives with an
enormous passing of gas from his anus, a hilarious transformation of the gods
into an object of farce. 81 And even taking such statements as necessarily
metaphorical is a questionable position. Although the tantric Candrak irti at-
tempts to turn the Guhyasamaja’s deﬁnition of a siddha into a metaphor about
supremacy above the other divinities in the ma ndala, the Bhutadamara ﬂatly
declares that just seeing its own mandala will give total dominion over the real
triple universe.82
, ,   ⁄ 
figure 23
Siddha having achieved sword siddhi and become a Vidyadhara.
Ratnagiri, Orissa, eleventh century. Detail of base of
Crowned Buddha. Bihar State Museum Arch. no. 6501.
Photo Ronald M. Davidson.

--- PAGE 356 ---
Thus the siddhas were as invested in models of political success as the great
Buddhist institutions and their monastic brethren, albeit for somewhat differ-
ent reasons and employing a modiﬁed metaphor. In the one case, the monks
were concerned with the images of the ruler of the actual world as they saw it
unravel before their eyes. In the other, the siddhas were concerned with the in-
signia of supernatural powers accorded the Sorcerers. The difference was that
the monks knew their rituals to be metaphors, whereas the siddhas showed an
ambivalence toward their rites. Sometimes they seemed to realize that they
would not become actual emperors of celestial Sorcerers, while at other inter-
vals the tantras state this goal as a bald fact. In either case, the viability of sid-
dha systems hinges on the actual involvement of Buddhists siddhas with real
courts of local lords and the siddhas’ acquaintance with the ideology of power
and supremacy. Whether metaphorical in nature or based on concrete goals,
the rituals of coronation yielded dominion within a ma ndala of vassal ﬁgures
and conferred control over self and others in a world where hierarchy was not
the primary model of social relations, it was the only model. 
:  ’   ’ 
For Buddhist siddhas, community did not immediately involve the grand ed-
iﬁces of institutional monasticism, although siddhas and monks were symbi-
otically related in small regional centers. Their symbolic communities, the
mandalas, both embodied the disparate sources of siddha ideology and
demonstrated the problems with their integration into real living arrange-
ments, for they brought together multiple linguistic, cultural, and social forms
into a rough collocation. These emphasized cemeteries, palaces, forests, and
terrifying locales, although siddhas themselves lived in small congregations in
towns and cities. Likewise, siddha rituals, especially the ganacakra, sought to
develop a sense of identity and a structure for the sacraments that were inher-
ently destabilizing. Their emphasis on procedures, on ofﬁcers in charge of the
ritual enclosure, and on correct deportment belie the romantic image of indi-
viduals dedicated to personal freedom at any cost. 
In the process of institutionalization, these personalities became almost
as much literary events as real human beings and became organized as liter-
ary personas with the numerical procedures (especially the numbers eighty to
eighty-four or eighty-five) already evident in the village and regional politi-
cal organizations. Thus the economic and political structures of Orissa, Ben-
gal, Chhattisgarh, Jharkand, Madhya Pradesh, Kashmir, O diyana, and the
 ⁄ , ,  

--- PAGE 357 ---
KoNkana coast became the formulae whereby siddhas were organized with-
in institutional literature. By means of this institutionalization of noninsti-
tutional esoterism, the esoteric canon integrated ideas and behaviors derived
from %aiva, %akta, Saura, Vai snava, regional divinities, tribal groups, and lo-
cal cemetery siddha traditions, all on a catch-as-catch-can basis. 
The evident spectrum of behavior stemmed from the fact that siddhas
came from a variety of backgrounds and did not have a pan-Indic institution-
al structure to provide the relatively uniform socialization that the Buddhist
monasteries afforded the esoteric monks. Yet some had come from an elite
background and were well educated at the highest level, but left the monastery
or the capital city to engage in a new career of primitive association, free of the
strictures incumbent on the resolutely status conscious. Others were from the
lowest order and came to the life in a desperate move to make sense of the
world that continued to unravel as the gods seemingly supported the capri-
cious conduct of men with swords, power, and wealth. 
Siddhas from every level brought both strengths and weaknesses, so the
emerging culture of the perfected was constituted by a series of ritual engage-
ments and personal skills, in which charisma and devotion played as important
a part as intelligence and naturalness. The siddha process of self-criticism both
assisted the communities in their movement into the monastic curricula and
revealed the fissures that these communities continued to experience.
Notwithstanding their plethora of alternative images, the stated goal of sid-
dhas continued to be the appropriation of power accorded the sorcerers. Their
scriptures consistently maintained various versions of the imperial model of
dominion over the gods, the sorcerers, and other religious groups.
, ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 358 ---
/Tswash
he goal of this discussion has been to place the activities of Buddhist
monks and yogins, of wealthy partisans and impoverished outcastes,
of tribal peoples and agonistic trickster siddhas, into the dynamic
and quickly changing sociopolitical world of the early medieval period of In-
dian existence. From the demise of the Pu syabhutis until the inﬂux of the
Ghurids, Buddhist institutions weathered the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune by adapting to and emulating the alterations in public life on the sub-
continent. Esoteric Buddhist ideas and practices arose out of the regionaliza-
tion of Indian polity and religion during this time. Within the conﬁnes of In-
dia, it represented a moderately successful reorganization of the various
religious communities to encounter and overcome the challenges of the peri-
od. Whether economic destabilization, population relocation, loss of patron-
age, the new ﬂuid politics of samanta feudalism, or the increasing importance
of caste, feudalized gods, and regional identity—all these issues contributed to
the genesis and maturation of the Vehicle of Secret Spells. 
Buddhist communities were also facing a dramatic change in Buddhist
identity through the decline in women’s participation, the shift in intellectual
values to Brahmanical models, and the loss of both ethical and intellectual
centers of gravity. In the face of such challenges, Indian Buddhists responded
by appropriating aspects of the sociopolitical sphere, yet this response embod-
ied a tension new to the Buddhist tradition. On one end of the spectrum were
those afﬁrming and sacralizing the realpolitik of the day, the Buddhist monks
of the great institutions of the Gangetic Valley and, to a limited degree, else-
where as well. Employing the model of becoming the Supreme Overlord (ra-
jadhiraja) or the Universal Ruler (cakravartin), they developed and propagat-
ed a meditative system and attendant rituals that displayed a thorough grasp
of the ideals and methods of samanta feudalism. Constructing sacred Buddhist
paradigms of the power relations grounded in the political ma ndalas sur-

-
/Cswashonclusion: The Esoteric Conundrum

--- PAGE 359 ---
rounding them, they sacralized the observable paradigms of core zones of au-
thority and buffer client states in the relationship between the Buddhas and
bodhisattvas in the visualized sacred circles. These power relations were, as in
real states, afﬁrmed with the central ritual of the candidates’ consecration and
the investiture of these candidates into zones of dominion. 
The imperial paradigm clearly supported an egoistic perspective, one that
had to be domesticated in the matrix of responsibilities and rules of behavior.
Exactly this pattern of obligations recreated the spiritual state of the mandala,
so that it could become a description of an ideal community, rather than the
formula for personal aggrandizement. Under this reinterpretation, the ma n-
dala integrated all the ﬁgures from a region into a cosmos, one wherein the
values and perspectives of the Buddhadharma remained supreme. According-
ly, in monastic hands esoteric Buddhism became another vehicle—added to
the rites and vows of the monk and bodhisattva—that socialized neophytes
into the codes of conduct expected of the professional religious. Yet it is evi-
dent from the literature that attempts to integrate the various esoteric behav-
iors into the architecture of the Buddhist subculture were not entirely success-
ful. Not only was the monastic regimen occasionally compromised, as in the
cases of Virupa and Maitripada, but the Buddhist reputation for compassion
and decorum was by far the most serious casualty. 
At the other end of the spectrum was the newly emergent siddha form, a
nonmonastic career displacing the Mahayanist devout mercantile laity. The
siddhas’ goal was individual dominion over the sorcerers, the Vidyadharas, and
the gods themselves, those divinities by whose authority the overlord rules.
The siddha traditions also imported a politics of dominion and control, but for
the beneﬁt of the single siddha and not necessarily for the betterment of the
surrounding community. Buddhist siddhas both developed radical meditative
techniques not seen before in the Buddhist world and wrapped them in lan-
guage that was simultaneously playful and ferocious, erotic and destructive.
Their Buddhist allegiance caused them to encounter forcefully their %aiva
brethren, so that one facet of Buddhist popular identity became closer to the
%aiva models of the Pa$upatas and Kapalikas than their prior image, which had
been aligned beside the Jaina monks. Siddhas from the Buddhist persuasion
became the proponents of regional languages and cultures, of tribal afﬁrmation
and of the segmentation of power in medieval India. 
Because they did not pass through any single socializing institution that
would provide them with common training, behavior, and identity, siddhas
represented a wider spectrum of values than heretofore seen in Buddhist
saints. They forced monasteries to grapple with the new rituals, to develop
:    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 360 ---
new forms of hermeneutics, to comprehend a rapidly evolving iconography, to
employ song and dance in offerings to the new forms of the Buddhas, and to
become invested in an entirely new canon. Siddhas developed various sexual
rituals, new rites for gathering at tantric feasts, and entirely new sets of rules
incumbent on those following the vows that sometimes required them to act
as insane as others certainly believed them to be. Contentious as ever, the sid-
dha critique of others following the esoteric path is sometimes extreme, but so
is the behavior that the tantras espouse, especially those scriptures authored
within the siddha community itself. Such extreme behavior was represented by
a minority of Buddhists, and there is little indication that there were ever many
siddhas. But if these few were accorded the status of siddha, they would have
come with a degree of authority not previously granted those ﬂouting the
moral codes of Indian life. Ultimately, both monks and siddhas developed a
symbiotic relationship in the small regional monasteries located in regional
centers, towns, and at the edge of the forest, with the two estates eventually
sharing a common syllabus, ritual vocabulary, and a grudging respect for each
other’s scriptural compositions and spirituality. 
The great period for the composition of esoteric scriptures lasted an aston-
ishingly short time. From the mid-seventh century to the mid-eleventh cen-
tury, the majority of scriptures, commentaries, sadhana meditative rituals, con-
secration manuals, esoteric yogic texts, and homa procedures were composed in
India. All our evidence belies a model of slow scriptural compilation, for this
material developed so quickly that even lengthy scriptures must have been
written and accepted in a matter of a few decades, not over the centuries some-
times proposed. By the late eighth century, even the most extreme scriptures,
the yogini tantras, had begun to be integrated into the ritual curricula in the
great monastic centers of North and Central India. By the time the ﬁrst wave
of Tibetans in the new translation period came to India, toward the end of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh centuries, their complete incorporation
into the monastic regimen had already been largely effected. In these four
short centuries, thousands of texts were written, taught, transmitted, accepted,
propagated, and institutionalized. The new forms of hermeneutics to domes-
ticate the extreme varieties of literature were further employed to sponsor the
integration of tribal and outcaste models, of antinomian statements and out-
rageous humor, into the Buddhist canon. A new form of Sanskrit, regional or
tantric Sanskrit, was accepted into the Buddhist literary horizon, as was the
emergence of ritualized poetic genres in regional languages, especially
Apabhram$a and Old Bengali. 
 ⁄ :   

--- PAGE 361 ---
The esoteric conundrum was neither simply the appropriation of Brah-
manical models by Buddhist monasteries nor the integration of arguably the
most outrageous statements the world has ever seen into the solemn decorum
of Buddhist meditative centers. It was not simply the curiosity that some of the
most sophisticated intellects in Indian history had accepted tribal and outcaste
peoples as romantic simulacra of the Cosmic Buddha. Rather, the conundrum
of esoteric Buddhism extends to its modern assessment—the simultaneous
scholarly neglect of the Indian basis and fascination with its Tibetan or East
Asian secondary developments. As a historical corollary, the other part of its
paradox is the popularity and success of the Vehicle of Secret Spells through-
out virtually every area of Buddhist inﬂuence. 
At home, esoteric Buddhism demonstrated tenacious success in India for
more than ﬁve centuries at a time when the dynamics of the subcontinent were
rapidly changing, and Buddhist institutions were in retreat in the Krsna River
valley and elsewhere. It assisted the maintenance of the great monasteries and
stemmed the %aiva tide sweeping up from the south. It sponsored the devel-
opment of aesthetic and artistic forms in other countries—such as Tibet, Chi-
na, Japan, Nan-chao, and Burma—and formulated models of a hierarchical sa-
cred community that survive to the present. It developed some of the most
popular rituals ever employed in Buddhist centers and propagated them with
a rhetoric of intimacy and secrecy. Indeed, the overwhelming success of the
Secret Path has propelled it into a position where it has become perhaps the
least secret of all the Buddhist meditative systems.
:    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 362 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 363 ---
temple location approximate date
Svamighat Mathura (Uttar Pradesh) ﬁfth century c.e.
{Temple remains} Mathura (Uttar Pradesh) ﬁfth century c.e.
Yoge$vari Cave by Bombay 525 c.e.
Timbarva Karvan (Vadodara Dist., Gujurat) sixth century c.e.
Tilabhande$vara Banaras (U.P.) sixth century c.e.
Cave 1 Badami (Karnataka) sixth century c.e.
Indal Deul Kharod (Bilaspur Dist, M.P.) 650–675 c.e.
SaNgame$vara Kudaveli (Krsna & Tungabhadra Riv) 650–680 c.e.
Svarga-Brahma Alampur (near Kurnool, A.P.) 650–680 c.e.
Siddhe$vara Palari (Raipur Dist., M.P.) 675 c.e.
Rajivalocan Rajim (Raipur Dist., M.P.) seventh century c.e.
Khime$vara matha Khime $var (by Porbandar, Gujurat) seventh century c.e.
%iva temple Dah Parabatiya seventh century c.e.
(Darrang Dist., Assam)
Para$urame$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Pañca-Pandava Caves Bhubaneswar (Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Bharati Math Bhubaneswar (Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Svarnajale$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Bharate$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Patale$vara Paikapada (Koraput Dist., Orissa) seventh century c.e.
Temple remains Chittorgarh (Rajasthan) seventh century c.e.
Rampol Gate Chittorgarh (Rajasthan) seventh century c.e.
%iva temple Kusuma (Sirohi Dist., Rajasthan) seventh century c.e.
Temple remains Gwalior seventh century c.e.
Lakuli$a temple Siddhanakolla (by Aihole, A.P.) 690–696 c.e.
%iva temple Dhobini (Raipur Dist., M.P.) 700 c.e.
JambuliNga temple Pattadakal (by Aihole, A.P.) 696–720 c.e.
Kadasiddhe$vara Pattadakal (by Aihole, A.P.) 695–720 c.e.
Papanath Pattadakal (by Aihole, A.P.) 720–750 c.e.
Kansuañ temple by Kota (Rajasthan) 732 c.e.
/Aswashppendix: Probable Pa¯s´upata /Sswashites

--- PAGE 364 ---
temple location approximate date
Mahadeva temple Bithu (Pali Dist., Rajasthan) 725–750 c.e.
Mahanale$vara sub #2 Menal (Chittorgarh Dist., Rajasthan) 725–750 c.e.
Teli-ka Mandir Gwalior 725–750 c.e.
Cave 15 Ellora (Aurangabad Dist., Maharashtra) 725–750 c.e.
Lakuli$a temple Jage $vara (Almora Dist., H.P.) 725–750 c.e.
%iva temple Lakhamandal (Tehri Garhwal, U.P.) 750 c.e.
BrNge$vara Bajrakot (Dhenkanal Dist., Orissa) 750–775 c.e.
Vaitaldeul Bhubaneswar (Orissa) eighth century c.e.
%i$ire$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Tale$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Manike$vara Sukleswar (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Some$vara Jajpur (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Viraja Jajpur (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Simhanatha Mahadeva Gopinathpur (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) eighth century c.e.
Surya Temple #2 Osian (Jodhpur Dist., Rajasthan) eighth century c.e.
Kumbhasvamin Chittorgarh (Rajasthan) eighth century c.e.
Nakle$vara Karvan (Vadodara Dist., Gujurat) eighth century c.e.
near Sindhvaivamata Karvan (Vadodara Dist., Gujurat) eighth century c.e.
Kamanath Mahadeva Vadodara (Gujurat) eighth century c.e.
Dhumar Lena (#29) Ellora (Aurangabad Dist., Maharastra) eighth century c.e.
Temple 75 Jage $vara (Almora Dist., H.P.) eighth century c.e.
%iva temple Benisagar (Singhbhum Dist., Bihar) eighth century c.e.
Munde$vari Rohtas Dist. (Bihar) eighth century c.e.
Unnamed temple Pattadakal (by Aihole, A.P.) eighth century c.e.
Cave Temple Arittapatti (Madurai Dist., Tamilnadu) eighth century c.e.
Mahabodhi Bodhgaya (Gaya Dist., Bihar) 800 c.e.
Madhuke$vara Mukhalingam (Srikakulam Dist., A.P.) 800 c.e.
%iva temple Jagatsukh (Kulu Dist., H.P.) 800–825 c.e.
Kame$vara Awa (Pali Dist., Rajasthan) 800–825 c.e.
Madhuke$vara Mukhalingam (Srikakulam Dist., A.P.) 800–825 c.e.
%iva temple Bajinga (Tehri Garhwal, U.P.) 800–825 c.e.
Jale$vara Mandalgadh (Chittorgarh, Rajasthan) 850 c.e.
%iva temples #1 & #2 Jayati (Vizianagaram Dist., A.P.) 850–875 c.e.
Avanti$vara Avantipur (Kashmir Valley) 855–883 c.e.
Some$vara Mukhalingam (Srikakulam Dist., A.P.) ninth century c.e.
Nili$vara Narayanapura (Srikakulam Dist., A.P.) ninth century c.e.
Vaidyanath Svamin Pushpagiri (Cuddapah Dist., A.P.) ninth century c.e.
Mallikarjuna Pattadakal (by Badami, Karnataka) ninth century c.e.
Nilakantha Mahadeva Adaspur (Prachi Valley, Orissa) ninth century c.e.
Narasimhanath Borogram (Ganjam Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
 ⁄ :   ¯ ´ 

--- PAGE 365 ---
temple location approximate date
Bhuvane$vara Balia (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
Sidde$vara Barakar (Barddhaman Dist., W.B.) ninth century c.e.
Vaidyanath Baijnath (Satna Dist., M.P.) ninth century c.e.
%iva temple Marai (Satna Dist., M.P.) ninth century c.e.
Somanath Baramba (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
Simanath Baramba (Cuttack Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
%iva temple remains Kara (Allahabad Dist., U.P.) ninth century c.e.
%ambhunath Ghororia (Puri Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
%iva temple Kalinjar (Banda Dist., U.P.) ninth century c.e.
%iva temple Kasba (Baleshwar Dist., Orissa) ninth century c.e.
%iva temple Bhagalpur (Bihar) 900 c.e.
%iva temple Pandrethan (Kashmir Valley) 925–950 c.e.
%iva temple Payar (Kashmir Valley) 925–975 c.e.
EkaliNgaji Udaipur Dist. (Rajasthan) 971 c.e.
Bhairava temple Gangua R. (by Bhubaneswar, Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Bane$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Mukte$vara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Marici Kunda Bhubaneswar (Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Bindu Sarovara (tank) Bhubaneswar (Orissa) tenth century c.e.
%iva temple I & II Khiching (Mayurbhanj Dist., Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Indralath Deul Ranipur-Jharial (Bolangir Dist., Orissa) tenth century c.e.
Siddhanath Prabhasa (Junagadh Dist. Gujurat) tenth century c.e.
Somanath Prabhasa (Junagadh Dist. Gujurat) tenth century c.e.
Kapile$vara Mahadeva Vav (Manas Kantha Dist., Gujurat) tenth century c.e.
Krakotake$vara Naresa (Gwalior) tenth century c.e.
Pituprete$vara Naresa (Gwalior) tenth century c.e.
Temple remains Dag (Jhalawar Dist., Rajasthan) eleventh century c.e.
Temple #18 Telkupi (Purulia Dist., W.B.) eleventh century c.e.
LiNgaraja Bhubaneswar (Orissa) eleventh century c.e.
Rajarani Bhubaneswar (Orissa) eleventh century c.e.
Nilakantha Mahadeva Arthuna (Banswara Dist., Rajasthan) 1176 c.e.
Meghesvara Bhubaneswar (Orissa) 1192–95 c.e.
source: These sites are culled from Meister and Dhaky 1988–91, Shah 1984, Mitra 1984,
Donaldson 1985–87, and Majumdar 1953. Because most of these concern Oriya temples,
they may be overrepresented in the table.
A.P.—Andhra Pradesh; H.P.—Himachal Pradesh; M.P.—Madhya Pradesh; U.P.—
Uttar Pradesh; W.B.—West Bengal
:   ¯ ´  ⁄ 

--- PAGE 366 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 367 ---
abhis.eka Consecration, coronation, or rite for royal investiture
abhica¯r a Ritual of magical killing, often through the medium
of a homa ritual.
Apabhram. s´a Middle Indic language of the period, employed by
Buddhist siddhas.
Arhatsan. gha Community of saints of early Buddhism.
Bodhisattvasan. gha Community of bodhisattvas of the Mahayana form
of Buddhism.
Buddhakapa¯ la An important yogini-tantra.
Cakrasam. vara An important yogini-tantra;also called Laghusamvara.
Cakravartin Universal Ruler, an ideal type of monarch in
orthodox Buddhism.
choma¯ Lit. “disguise,” it means secret signs to accompany
coded language.
coded language The use of speciﬁc words (sandhya¯-b ha ¯s.a¯) that
represent secret meanings.
d.a¯k a An autochthonous god; may be divine or demonic;
similar krodha.
d.a ¯ kini An autochthonous goddess; may be divine or
demonic; similar yogini. 
datura A hallucinogen (esp. datura fastuosa) used by siddhas
in some rituals.
doha¯ Form of versiﬁcation commonly used in Apabhram. s´a
and other Prakrits.
early medieval Period of Indian history, c. 500-1200 c.e.
gan.acakra A circle of initiates who gather regularly for esoteric
rituals, including sexual activity and the eating of
forbidden foods.
Guhyasama¯ ja An important mahayoga-tantra.
Heruka Buddhist divinity based on cemetery gods.
Hevajra Important yogini-tantra.
homa Fire ritual, an Indian development of the ancient
/Gswashlossary

--- PAGE 368 ---
Indo-European ﬁre sacriﬁce; one of the standard
media for the four tantric activities.
Kaula Yogins associated with the worship of a goddess;
similar %akta.
Ka¯p a¯ lika Extreme form of %aiva yogin, who carries a skull and
khatvaNga club.
krodha An autochthonous god; may be divine or demonic;
similar daka.
Madhyamaka “Middle Way” school of Buddhist philosophy,
analogous to Greek Skepticism.
maha¯y oga-tantras Esoteric Buddhist scriptures that reﬂect siddha
practices and ideas.
Mantraya¯n a Esoteric Buddhism; similar Vajrayana.
mantrin A practitioner of spells (mantra) or a counselor of
state secrets (mantra).
*Ma ¯ rga-phala The esoteric tradition of Buddhism among the
Sakya in Tibet (Lam-’bras).
Nyingma The school of Tibetan Buddhism that traces its
religious lineage to the Royal Dynastic Period of
Tibetan history (c. 650–850 c.e.).
Pa¯s´ upata A sect of %aiva yogins, most of whom follow the
path attributed to Lakuli$a.
pı¯t.ha A sacred site, possibly tribal in origin, and often
dedicated to a goddess.
ra¯k s.ası¯ Feminine demon frequently encountered in Indian
mythology.
Ra¯j a¯ dhira¯j a The overlord, the one to whom the s amanta is
subordinate.
S´abara Tribal group, sometimes identiﬁed with the modern
Saora of Orissa.
Sakya Tibetan school of Buddhism formed in Sakya
Monastery (founded 1073 c.e.) in southwestern
Central Tibet.
sa ¯ manta The major term for a vassal in early medieval
Indian politics.
S´am. vara/Sam. vara Name employed for divinities in various systems,
from Vedic to the late Cakrasamvara system. 
sandhya¯- b h a ¯s.a ¯ Coded language, applied either to speciﬁc words
or as a hermeneutical technique to interpret tantric
literature as invariably nonliteral. 
Sarvabuddhasama¯ yoga An important yogini-tantra.
segmentary state Form of polity in which units have similar
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 369 ---
structures and form confederations when one
becomes dominant; easily segmented in function.
siddha Perfected—Buddhist saint who is neither a monk
nor an ordinary layman.
siddhi Magical powers attained by the siddha.
s ´ raman. a A non-orthodox ascetic, associated with Jaina,
Buddhist, or other traditions.
tantra A word that often indicates a text but may denote
speciﬁc kinds of performative systems (e.g., an army
or a ritual) or a machine (a loom).
tantric karmas Four activities associated with esoteric rituals,
especially the homa: paciﬁcation, subduing,
increasing, and ritual killing. Sometimes expanded
to include a ﬁfth activity, that of seduction rites.
vajra Scepter or thunderbolt.
V ajrapa¯n. i The central bodhisattva of esoteric Buddhism. He
wields a vajra as the emblem of his legal authority. 
Vidu¯s.aka Comical brahman in Sanskrit drama, often depicted
as short and stupid.
vidya ¯ Word indicating one or more meanings: spell,
knowledge, ritual consort. 
Vidya¯ dhara Sorcerer or master of vidya; may live on earth or in
a celestial abode.
Vijña¯nava¯d a “Mere Consciousness” school of idealist Buddhist
philosophy.
Vinaya Buddhist rules of discipline that apply to monks
and nuns. 
yoginı¯ Ferocious goddesses, at whose sites (pitha) human
sacriﬁce was offered; similar dakini.
yoginı¯-tantras Esoteric Buddhist scriptures that reﬂect extreme
siddha practices and ideas.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 370 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 371 ---
. :    
1. In Mañju$rimulakalpa, Jayaswal 1934, pp. 61–66; Sastri 1920, pp. 652–653: 
adhuna tu pravaksyami dvijanam dharma$ilinam || 955
mantratantrabhiyogena rajyavrttim upa$rita |
bhavati sarvaloke ‘smim tasmim kale sudarune || 956
vakarakhyo dvijah$ restha adhyo vedaparagah |
semam vasumatim krtsnam vicerur vadakaranat || 957
trisamudramahaparyantam paratirthanam vigrahe ratah |
sadaksaram mantrajapi tu abhimukhyo hi vagyatah || 958
kumaro gitavahy asit sattvanam hitakamyaya |
etasya kalpavisaran mahitam buddhyatandritah || 959
jayah sujaya$ caiva kirttiman $ubhamatah parah |
kulino dharmika$ caiva udyatah sadhuh madhavah || 960
madhuh sumadhu$ caiva siddho madadahanas tatha |
raghavah$ udravarnas tu $akajatas tathapare || 961
te ‘pi japinah sarve kumarasyeha vagyatah |
te capi sadhakah sarve buddhimanto bahu$rutah || 962
amukha mantribhis te ca rajyavrttisama$ritah |
The Tibetan is found To. 543, fols. 325b7–326a7, but is unhelpful in several sections.
I presume, like most translators of prophetic sections in Buddhist scriptures, that
all the preterite tenses are to be interpreted as futures in the spirit of the text. Phyl-
lis Granoff, whom I thank for corrections and suggestions to the translation of
these verses, has suggested emending vakyatah of 958d and 962b to vagyatah, a sug-
gestion I ﬁnd attractive and have accepted. The Mañju$rimulakalpa occasionally
speciﬁes a six-letter mantra for Mañju$ri (e.g., Mañju$rimulakalpa, Shastri 1920, p.
49), but I have not located the speciﬁc mantra in mantra section of chapter 2
(Mañju$rimulakalpa, Shastri 1920, pp. 25–32); the recitation of the six-letter man-
tra, om. man.i padme hu¯m. , is enjoined in the Karandavyuha-sutra, Vaidya 1961, pp.
292–296. Verse 959cd is the most difﬁcult, and the Tibetan is only moderate assis-
tance: cho ga rab ‘byam ‘di dag las | des ni de phan de la bsten. I have emended
/Nswashotes

--- PAGE 372 ---
etasyai to etasya and buddhitandritah to buddhyatandritah, so that Mr. Va will not
be an idiot. 961b is conjectural by emending siddha h namas tad a to siddho
madadahanas tatha, based on a lacuna in the foot and the Tibetan de bzhin grub
dang dregs bral dang, although this is rather tentative improvement. Granoff has
suggested that the -namas of the current text could be the end of a name, and I
have taken this suggestion with the standard equivalent of Tibetan dregs =
mada/matta/darpa. However, many alternatives to *Madadahana could be found,
and the normative name is Madanadahana, an epithet of %iva (burner of Mada,
i.e., Kamadeva); this does not ﬁt the foot, though.
2. For the date of the Mañju$rimulakalpa, see Matsunaga 1985. He points out
that this chapter on the prophecy of kings identiﬁes Gop ala, who obtained king-
ship around 750 c.e. 
3. E.g., Wayman 1977; Snellgrove 1987. 
4. E.g., Skorupski 1983 and 1994. 
5. Przyluski 1923, pp. 317–318. 
6. Sanderson 1994, accepted by Strickmann 1996, p. 26; Sanderson’s claims are
contextualized in chapter 5. 
7. Snellgrove 1987; Jong 1984; Matsunaga’s “Introduction” to the Guhyasama-
ja tantra, pp. vii–xxxi. 
8. Yoritomi 1990, pp. 130–144, proposes that the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi
be assigned to Orissa on archaeological and art historical grounds, and ties the text
to the political history of the Bhaumakaras; cf. Hodge 1994. Strickmann has at-
tempted to relate the relationship between %aivism and the Buddhist esoteric sys-
tem (1996, pp. 24–41). As will be clear from this book, Strickmann’s proposals were
limited by his modest acquaintance with Indian history and society, and by his
structuralist presumption that “tantrism” is a single entity. Thus he freely speaks of
“un tantrisme taoïste” (pp. 118–126), citing sources composed before the term
“tantra” became used in Buddhist circles. The majority of his work, though, is both
stimulating and helpful. Samuel attempts to identify various sociological sources
for “shamanic” Buddhism, but is vague on speciﬁcs of Indian history and society
(1993, pp. 427–435). 
9. Derrida’s hegemonic purpose is explicit (1967, p. 24). 
10. E.g., see Foucault’s assessment of critical history (1977, pp. 139–168), where
he projects what is apparently his own emotional turmoil into an entire discipline. 
11. Dirlik et al. 2000, pp. 40–41.
12. Chakrabarty 1992, p. 223. 
13. Lopez 1995, pp. 10–12.
14. Brennan 2000, King 1999. 
15. Evans 1999, pp. 10, 22–23, 108, 158, 163, 214–216, 220; Murphey 1994, p. 302.
16. See Allen (2000, pp. 30–47, and passim) for the history and evolution of this
term, which was coined by Julia Kristeva in her critical essays on Bakhtin. 
17. Pollock 1993, p. 111.
 ⁄ . :    

--- PAGE 373 ---
18. Thomas C. Patterson, “Archaeologists and Historians Confront Civiliza-
tion, Relativism and Poststructuralism in the Late Twentieth Century,” in Dirlik
et al. 2000, pp. 49–64 passim.
19. R. A. Abou-El-Haj, “Historiography in West Asian and North African
Studies Since Sa’id’s Orientalism,” in Dirlik et al. 2000, pp. 67–84, esp. pp. 70–71. 
20. Evans 1999, p. 109. 
21. Etlin 1996, p. 77. 
22. Murphey 1994, esp. pp. 263–302.
23. King 1999, pp. 82–95.
24. B. Lewis 1993.
25. The archaeological contributions are not well represented in Kopf (1969),
despite Kopf’s assessment of the sympathy with which the British “cultural bro-
kers” stimulated the development of Indic institutions during their occupation of
that country (ibid., pp. 275–291). For a somewhat extreme critique of Kopf, see
King 1999, pp. 86–93. Thomas R. Trautmann has discussed this issue in the con-
text of South Indian linguistics and history (“Inventing the History of South In-
dia,” in Ali 1999, pp. 36–54). See also Etlin 1996, pp. 114–122. 
26. For a discussion of the contributions of one of the more curious characters
in this process, Charles Masson, see Possehl 1990. 
27. Appiah 1991. In a withering critique, Dirlik has called Western-trained,
Western-employed South Asian scholars an “international babu class,” similar to
the old class of British government employees in India (2000, pp. 10–11). 
28. This question is frequently the ﬁeld of polemics: see Inden 1990, Lopez
1995, and, for this study in particular, the recent polemical critique of Wedemeyer
2001. 
29. King 1999, p. 211.
30. %atapañca$atka, Bailey 1951, vv. 70 and 90, pp. 86, 101; *Mahayanavatara-$as-
tra, T.1634.32.36b12–19, commenting on Catuh$ataka VIII.5.
31. Pollock 1989 has discussed this issue in the context of M imamsa. 
32. Chakrabarty 1992; King 1999. 
33. Pollock has suggested this direction (1993, p. 115). 
34. It is unfortunate that the contribution of Petrarch and his followers is even
obscure to working historians; see Evans (1996, pp. 14–17, 81), where an excessive
estimate of Leopold von Rank is offered, and Foucault (1966, pp. 367–373) shows
an inadequate understanding of critical history developed in the Renaissance. On
humanists’ critical techniques, see Paul Kristeller, “Renaissance Humanism and
Classical Antiquity,” in Rabil 1988, 1:5–16.
35. For the “mirabilia” genre, see Bloch 1982, pp. 630–636; Jacks 1993, p. 38;
Weiss 1969, pp. 6–8; Benson 1982, pp. 353–355. The Miribilia was sufﬁciently pop-
ular to be included entirely within two other works of the period—theGraphia au-
reae Urbis Romae (Description of the Golden City of Rome, c. 1155) and an ad-
ministrative handbook for the Papal Curia (Liber politicus).
. :     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 374 ---
36. Weiss 1969, pp. 18–20. 
37. Green 1982, p. 90; emphasis in original.
38. Bishop 1966, p. 7. Pfeiffer (1976) is particularly emphatic on Petrarch’s
originality: “We have often been told that humanism arose from the social and
political conditions of the consolidated new Italian city states; and it is true that
these conditions became more and more favourable to the development and dif-
fusion of Petrarch’s ideas. These ideas, however, originated from his own mind;
they did not spring from the spirit of the society of his time of which he always
spoke with contempt (‘mihi semper aetas ista displicuit’)” (p. 16). See also Mari-
stella Lorch, “Petrarch, Cicero, and the Classical Pagan Tradition,” in Rabil
1988, 1:71–94. 
39. Kelley 1988, p. 748. 
40. The following material predominantly is taken from Weiss 1969, pp. 48–89. 
41. Pfeiffer 1976, p. 27; Jacks 1993, pp. 67–73.
42. Jacks 1993, pp. 89–95.
43. Ibid., pp. 95–99.
44. Ibid., p. 110. 
45. Weiss 1969, p. 70; Jacks 1993, pp. 113–121.
46. Kelley 1988, p. 748. 
47. Ibid., p. 749. 
48. The following material on Bodin is taken from Franklin 1963, pp. 59–79,
137–154; Kelley 1988, pp. 756–758. 
49. Kelley 1988, p. 757; Franklin 1963, p. 69. 
50. Evans attributes this to von Rank (1996, pp. 14–16, 81), but this is evidently
in error, although the elaborate methodology of source criticism certainly was not
known to Bodin.
51. Arif Dirlik, “Is There History After Eurocentrism?” in Dirlik et al. 2000,
pp. 25–47, esp. pp. 40–43.
52. Schopen has proposed that the modern emphasis on texts is a result of
Protestant presuppositions in the study of Buddhism (1991, pp. 19–23). His mod-
el, however, appears less than willing to acknowledge that both traditional (India,
Tibet, and China) and modern Buddhist scholarship (Japan, China, Tibet, and
Thailand) conceive of texts as preeminently important. It would seem that Bud-
dhist studies is inﬂuenced by traditional bias of the indigenous informants more
than by the values of Protestant Christianity. My experience with Buddhist schol-
ars in India, Nepal, and Tibet has been exclusively textual, with little interest dis-
played toward epigraphy, archaeology, or other sources.
53. There is an almost complete absence of coins in India after the time of
Harsa until the Mughal period, so numismatics—important to Petrarch—must
take a subordinate position, to be supplemented to a lesser degree by the survival
of clay monastic sealings.
54. Figueira 1994, pp. 7–17; King 1999, pp. 200–218.
 ⁄ . :    

--- PAGE 375 ---
55. Fischer 1970, pp. 74–78.
56. Dietz 1984, pp. 358–399; this letter is considered in chapter 4. 
.    ,    :
  
1. Fleet (1888, p. 146, line 2): avirbh utavalepair avinayapatubhir llaNghitacara-
marggair mmohad aidaMyuginair apa$ubharatibhih pidyamana [ksma] narendraih
|.
2. Nitisara VIII.71: akirnam mandalam sarvam mitrair aribhir eva ca | sarva h
svarthaparo lokah kuto madhyasthata kvacit ||
3. Lin Li-Kouang 1935, p. 84n; Chen yen tsung chiao shih i, T.2396.75.431a8–12. 
4. This is the subtext behind Romila Thapar’s excellent studies of the Mauryas;
see Thapar 1997; 1992, pp. 1–22; and 1990, pp. 3–5.
5. For a discussion of some of these issues, see Holden Furber, “The Theme of
Imperialism and Colonialism in Modern Historical Writing on India,” in Philips
1961, pp. 332–343. 
6. Chakrabarty 1992; and the essays on histories in modern colloquial languages
collected in Phillips 1961, pp. 429–496. 
7. See R. C. Majumdar’s “Nationalist Historians,” in Philips 1961, pp. 416–428.
More recently, it is seen in writers, such as Char (1993), who carry on this tradition.
8. I am following Chattopadhyaya on both the problems and the utility of this
nomenclature (1994, pp. 12–37). 
9. The best early work on the Ephthalites has been by E noki 1959; more re-
cently, see Litvinsky et al. 1996, pp. 135–183. 
10. Bhandarkar 1981, pp. 296–305. This conclusion is supported by Litvinsky,
“The Hephthalite Empire” (in Litvinsky et al. 1996, p. 141), but has been chal-
lenged by Zeimal, “The Kidarite Kingdom in Central Asia” (ibid., pp. 123–124),
who maintains that the “H una” designation was used for all nomadic conquerors
and the Kidarites were the most likely candidates at this time. 
11. Agrawal 1989, pp. 243, 251. 
12. Fleet 1888, p. 257; Agrawal 1989, pp. 239–249. 
13. Bhandarkar 1981, pp. 360–364.
14. Sircar 1945, p. 70 n1.
15. Vakataka contributions to art and architecture have been reasserted by the
welcome work of Bakker (1997, pp. 58–92).
16. This analysis is inspired by Kulke and Rothermund (1998, pp. 9–11), al-
though it differs in details.
17. The following description of military events is taken largely from Sinha
1977, pp. 81–127; Yazdani 1960, 1:207–232; Agrawal 1989, pp. 250–269; Devahuti
1983, pp. 17–64. 
.    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 376 ---
18. The dates are reasonable temporal guideposts to active periods and not
meant to indicate anything else. 
19. Devahuti 1983, p. 18. 
20. Fleet 1888, pp. 200–206. 
21. Sircar 1945, p. 70 n5. 
22. Stadtner 1976, pp. 32–40; Sinha 1977, pp. 128–137; Devahuti 1983, pp. 53–57.
23. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. xlv–xlvii. 
24. Yazdani 1960, 1:208–209.
25. Devahuti 1983, p. 74.
26. Ibid., pp. 39–44; Sinha 1977, pp. 133–136.
27. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. xlvii. 
28. The genealogy of the Vardhanas is primarily retained in Harsacarita (1918,
p. 56), which closely matches the Banskhera Plate; see Bühler 1896–97. 
29. Harsacarita 1918, pp. 56–57. 
30. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. xlvii; Yazdani 1960, 1:209–210. 
31. Devahuti 1983, pp. 76–77. 
32. Ibid., p. 34; cf. Sinha 1977, pp. 128–133. 
33. The following material is abstracted from Devahuti 1983, pp. 37–53, 83–91;
Sinha 1977, pp. 137–143. 
34. Jayaswal 1934, p. 50, text p. 53 v. 723; the defeat of %a$aNka was clearly exag-
gerated in the Mañju$rimulakalpa.
35. %a$aNka’s capital at Karnasuvarna has been discovered in the excavations at
RajbadidaNga; see Das 1968. 
36. Devahuti 1983, p. 57; we note that the sudden rise in the fortunes of Khara-
graha I, %iladitya I’s successor, after 609 may indicate that he was in charge of this
expedition. Kharagraha I begins to issue separate grants in 616. 
37. This is his Banskhera copperplate grant; see B ühler 1896–97. 
38. Kielhorn 1900–1901a. 
39. Yazdani 1960, 1:219. 
40. Devahuti 1983, pp. 242–243. 
41. Yazdani 1960, 1:221–224. 
42. Ibid., pp. 226–228.
43. This episode is examined in detail, taking into account the T’ang sources, by
Devahuti (1983, pp. 243–269), in an excellent discussion. Unlike many historians,
Devahuti has exhibited an astute command of the Chinese texts. The name of the
prince, *Arjuna, is one of the possible sources for the Chinese rendering of his name. 
44. For the publishing history of Bh askaravarman’s Nidhanpur Grant, see
Morrison 1970, p. 161. 
45. Sinha 1977, p. 160. 
46. Ibid., p. 162; Yazdani 1960, 1:225–226. 
47. Wink 1990, p. 201; Meister and Dhaky 1988–91, vol. 2, pt. 1, p. 197. 
48. Wink 1990, p. 202. 
 ⁄ .   

--- PAGE 377 ---
49. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. lvi; Puri 1986, p. 44; Wink 1990, p. 208. 
50. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. 137–145. 
51. Wink 1990, pp. 242–244. 
52. Beckwith 1987, p. 82. 
53. Ibid., p. 87; Wink 1990, pp. 242–243.
54. Thaplyal 1985, p. 78 n4; cf. Goetz 1969, pp. 16–19.
55. Gaüdavaho, vv. 414–439. 
56. “Introduction,” in RajataraNgini, Stein 1900, 1:90–91; IV.211, 246–264;
Goetz 1969, pp. 25–35, 47–65. 
57. RajataraNgini, Stein 1892, 1900, IV.131–180; Goetz makes the claim that,
since the names rendered in the RajataraNgini are sometimes authentic historical
personages, the conquest must have been real, since Kalha na could not have in-
vented them (1969, p. 12). He presumes that Kalha na’s sources were written by
people who could not have fabricated a conquest of known parties, but this is clear-
ly unsustainable. Kalhana has drawn from many dubious and highly mythologized
sources, such as the Nilamatapurana, which ascribe ﬁctional events to known per-
sons. Wink uncritically afﬁrmed Goetz’s analysis (1990, p. 243). 
58. Goetz 1969, p. 21. 
59. Mandan has pointed out that the Ellora area was doubtless the early region
of the R astrakuta power, since most of their early inscriptions come from there
(1990, p. 33). Moreover, their early patronage of the great %aiva rock-cut caves and
temples of Ellora is in conformity with the idea of a prior homeland as a sacred site
after the actual center of power has been moved. Similarly Yazdani 1960, 1:257. 
60. Puri 1986, p. 52; Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, p. lvi. 
61. Puri 1986, p. 53; Kielhorn 1907–8. 
62. Mandan 1990, pp. 50–51; Yazdani 1960, 1:253–256. 
63. Mandan 1990, pp. 51–57. 
64. Konow 1913–14; Mandan has argued for the king’s name Nagavaloka of the
Hansot plates to apply to Dantidurga, not to Nagabhata, primarily on the use of -
avaloka as a terminal ending in R astrakuta names (1990, pp. 51–54, 80 n79). Puri
(1986, p. 71 n2), however, has already noted that Ojha (1917–18, p. 179 n3) cites the
identiﬁcation of Nagabhata II as Nagavaloka in the Jaina work Prabhavaka-carita.
Nagavaloka seems to be an acceptable equivalent for N agabhata and clearly the
Rastrakutas had no proprietary use of the -avaloka designation. Moreover, N a-
gavaloka of the 861 Pathari Pillar Inscription of Parabala appears to identify Naga-
bhata I; see Kielhorn 1907–8, p. 250. Sinha appears to think this is N agabhata II,
however (1977, p. 182). 
65. Yazdani 1960, 1:257–259.
66. Mandan 1990, pp. 61–67; Yazdani 1960, 1:258–261. 
67. Kielhorn 1896–97, v. 1; in the Bhagalpur Plate of N arayanapala (Hultzsch
1886, v. 1) the m atsyanyaya is replaced by k amakarin, acting on desires without
conscience. 
.    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 378 ---
68. The Pala chronology proposed by Susan and John Huntington (1990, p. 542,
chart 1) is used here, since it takes into account the existence of Mahendrap ala,
whose discovery was announced by Bhattacharya 1988, based on a copper charter. 
69. Sinha 1977, p. 172; Majumdar 1971, pp. 96–99; Mañju$rimulakalpa, Jayaswal
1934, v. 884. 
70. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Jayaswal 1934, LIII.884. 
71. Mandan 1990, p. 91; RajataraNgini, Stein 1892, 1900, IV.471. 
72. Yazdani 1960, 1:263; Sinha 1977, pp. 176–177. 
73. Yazdani 1960, 1:262–264. 
74. Ibid., 1:264–265; Mandan 1990.
75. This material is extracted from Mandan 1990, pp. 104–111; Yazdani 1960,
1:268–70; Sinha 1977, pp. 179–182; Puri 1986, pp. 67–70. 
76. Yazdani 1960, 1:268–273; Mandan 1990, pp. 108–111. 
77. Sinha 1977, p. 184. 
78. Ibid., p. 186.
79. Mandan 1990, pp. 116–119; Yazdani 1960, 1:276–279. 
80. Puri 1986, p. 86. 
81. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. lxxii–iv.
82. Puri 1986, pp. 90–92.
83. Mandan 1990, pp. 124–125; Yazdani 1960, 1:282–284, 476–480; Mirashi 1955,
pt. 1, p. lxxii. Bhima was Vijayaditya’s nephew, not his son. 
84. We have records indicating that these three kings claim to have taken con-
trol following Devap ala: Majumdar 1971, pp. 119–122; Sinha 1977, pp. 188–190;
Bhattacharya 1988. Their claims ignore each other, and Sinha has postulated di-
vided rule for %urapala and Vigrahapala (1977, p. 191). Mahendrapala and %urapala
were brothers, while Vigrahapala was the son of Jayap ala, whose line did not pass
through Dharmapala and Devapala, but by another line to Gop ala. 
85. Mandan 1990, p. 126. 
86. Puri 1986, p. 103.
87. Mandan 1990, pp. 130–132. 
88. Yazdani 1960, 2:481. Previously, virtually all historians maintained that Ma-
hendrapala invaded Bengal and Bihar and ruled over the P ala domains as a con-
queror. This judgment was based on a series of grants found in these areas identi-
fying the ruler as one Mahendrapala. This scenario is seriously called into question
by Bhattacharya’s decifering the plate of the P ala emperor Mahendrap ala (Bhat-
tacharya 1988). A casual perusal of the grants of “Mahendrap ala,” in fact, reveals
that two chronologies are employed: one that is normative for the Kanauj state,
and one that is normative for the Pala dynasty. Grants employing the former per-
tain to lands in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and west, while grants using the P ala
chronology denote lands in Bihar and Bengal. These disparate chronologies seem
to separate these ﬁgures, one following the Gurjara-Pratihara system, the other the
Pala chronology. See Puri for a list of Mahendrap ala’s grants (1986, pp. 221–223). 
 ⁄ .   

--- PAGE 379 ---
89. Puri 1986, p. 122; Mandan details an alternative scenario (1990, pp. 128–129). 
90. Puri 1986, p. 132. 
91. These events are discussed extensively in Mandan 1990, pp. 136–141. 
92. Yazdani 1960, 1:288–289.
93. Ibid., pp. 481–487.
94. Puri 1986, pp. 133–148. 
95. Yazdani 1960, 1:289–293; Mandan 1990, pp. 141–148.
96. Yazdani 1960, 1:293–297; Mandan 1990, pp. 149–161. 
97. Yazdani 1960, 1:297; Mandan 1990, p. 160. 
98. Majumdar 1971, pp. 125–126, 205. 
99. Ibid., pp. 131, 166–169, 199–206; Sinha 1977, p. 195. 
100. Opinions on the origins of the Kambojas are discussed in Majumdar 1971,
pp. 172–173. 
101. Sinha 1977, pp. 195–197; Majumdar 1971, p. 172. 
102. Sinha 1977, pp. 199–201; Majumdar 1971, pp. 131–137. 
103. The history of the Ch alukyas of Kaly ani is recounted in Yazdani 1960,
1:315–454.
104. Chattopadhyaya discusses some of the inscriptions concerning the C a-
hamanas and Guhilas (1994, pp. 57–88); he provides a bibliography on the Ag-
nikula origin myth (p. 57 n1). 
105. Raizul Islam and C. E. Bosworth, “The Delhi Sultanate,” in Asimov and
Bosworth 1998, pp. 269–291; see also Deyell 1990, pp. 195–219.
106. Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, pp. lxxxix–c. 
107. Sinha 1977, pp. 211–243; Majumdar 1971, pp. 199–218.
108. Majumdar 1971, pp. 219–253. 
109. Banerji 1963. 
110. MD% VII.89: ahavesu mitho ‘nyonyam jighamsanto mahiksitah |
yudhyamanah param$ aktya svargam yanty aparaNmukhah || 
111. Scharfe 1993, p. 231; Lingat 1973, pp. 123–132; the Mahabharata is more dif-
ﬁcult, but many scholars would agree that the bulk of the current text was com-
pleted by 500 c.e.
112. See, for example, Aiyangar’s “Introduction” to Krtyakalpataru, vol. 11
(1943). Rajadharma-kanda, in which all unchivalrous behavior is attributed to
Muslims, the East India Company, or His Majesty’s Army (pp. 70–72). 
113. Brunt 1983, 2:339; cf. Jones 1930, 7:69. 
114. In Tibet of the eleventh century, several Indian pa nditas were accused of
representing themselves in a manner lacking honesty; see Davidson (2002a, forth-
coming a, and forthcoming b). 
115. Jones 1930, 7:95–99.
116. Keegan 1993, pp. 29, 301. 
117. The classic statement by Sharma discusses this in detail (1987, pp. 37, 46,
50, 60, 63, 65, 68, 79, 86, 178–185). 
.    ⁄ 

--- PAGE 380 ---
118. Keegan 1993, p. 301. 
119. Compare ibid., pp. 139–45, with Nitisara IV.57–61; 7.12.3; cf. Prasad 1989,
p. 108.
120. Varady 1979. 
121. Nitisara XIX.54–71, passim; cf. Nitisara XVI.
122. Artha$astra XII.1.19–2.18, 4.4–23.
123. E.g., Chattopadhyaya 1990, p. 71;1994, p. 62.
124. Contamine 1984, pp. 15, 275–276; this effect was clearly evident in medieval
Europe. 
125. Andrew: “Donald Pearce, a subaltern in the North Nova Scotia High-
landers, recalled how individual battle experiences were just that. ‘No one else has
really been in the same places as anyone else’ he wrote ‘and I refuse to play the
game of comparing experiences. The whole war seems to be a quite private expe-
rience; I mean for everyone. Each man talks about a quite different war from mine,
and ultimately everyone is separated from everyone by layers of privacy or egoism’”
(1992, p. 58). 
126. Mookerji 1928/1972, pp. 162, 233.
127. Hira Lal 1909–10, p. 26. 
128. Siddhaikaviramahatantra, p. 3; p. 5.1–4: e sa mantrarajah sarvakalikalahavi-
vadopasargavidhuresu japtah$ antim karoti | tu sahomena ca sarva $antir bhavati |
yathalabdhakusumani mantram uccarya udake pravahayet | sarva$antim vijayañ ca
prapnoti na sa m$ayah | nagarad ahe ‘gnisa mmukham sthitva saptañjalim abhi-
mantrya ksipet | yasya grhasya raksitukamas tasya raksam karoti | 
129. Nitisara X.3–5 enumerates nineteen reasons for a king to go to war.
130. Kielhorn 1907–8, pp. 253, 255 (verse 15).
131. Willis 1995; 1997, p. 24. 
132. Nitisara XVI.3–43.
133. Thakur and Jha 1994, pp. 302–312; see also Sharma 1987, pp. 178–185.
134. RajataraNgini IV.628. Cf. MD% VII.123 on the corruption of a king’s ofﬁcials.
135. For a discussion of piracy, see Gopal 1965, pp. 127–130. 
136. Chattopadhyaya lists six characteristics of early medieval India: political
decentralization, the emergence of landed intermediaries, a change to self-sufﬁ-
cient villages as units of production, the subjection of the peasantry and the pro-
liferation of castes (1994, pp. 10–12). 
137. Keegan 1993, p. 142. While we do not have a thorough discussion of this
problem in the early medieval period, R. S. Sharma has made a beginning in “Ap-
pendix II—Fortiﬁed Settlements Under the P alas and Candellas” (1965/1987, pp.
287–292).
138. Mahabharata 12.74: striyam hatva brahmanam vapi papah sabhayam yatra
labhate ‘nuvadam | rajñah saka$e na bibheti capi tato bhayam jayate ksatriyasya ||
16 papaih pape kriyamane ‘tivelam tato rudro jayate deva esah | papaih papah sam-
janayanti rudram tatah sarvan sadhvasadhun hinasti || 17 . . . atma rudro hradaye
 ⁄ .   

--- PAGE 381 ---
manavanam svam svam deham paradeham ca hanti | vatotpataih sadr$am rudram
ahur davair jimutaih sadr$am rupam asya || 19 
I thank Phyllis Granoff for reining in my imagination on this material.
139. Keegan 1993, pp. 3–60, 386–392. 
140. Nitisara, X.3–30. 
141. Granoff (1984) has made a strong case for the similarity between hagiogra-
phies of saints and biographies (hagiographies?) of kings in the medieval period.
142. Fleet 1888, pp. 1–17. 
143. Ibid., no. 1, lines 6, 16, and 27.
144. Compare the rather prosaic discussion of the songs and adulation (gita,
stuti) generated by vandanajana (panegyrists) in line 14 of the Bhitari Stone Pillar
Inscription of Skandagupta (Fleet 1888, pp. 52–56). The inscription itself does not
provide these verses or songs, but only mentions them in passing; nor does it in-
dicate the identity of the vandanajana, who were presumably too insigniﬁcant to
be so named. 
145. Ibid., pp. 79–88. 
146. Ibid., pp. 142–150. 
147. Ibid., pp. 150–158, line 14. 
148. Kielhorn 1900–1901a, v. 5: lak smir bh avitachapalapi cha k rta $auryena
yenatmasadrajasij Jayasimhavallabha. Translation Kiehhorn’s.
149. Kielhorn 1900–1901a, vv. 14–18. 
150. Salomon 1996; Mirashi 1955, 1:89, 215–224, etc.; see the discussion in chap-
ter 3.
151. Kielhorn 1900–1901a.
152. Mirashi 1955, 1:224. 
153. Huizinga 1950/1955, pp. 89–104. 
154. Datta 1989, p. 225. 
155. Singh 1993, pp. 294–303.
156. Kulke and Rothermund 1998, pp. 122, 136–138.
157. Williams 1982, pp. 157–158, 174. 
158. See Chattopadhyaya 1994, p. 151. 
159. Rao indicates that it was probably built by either Ch alukya Bhima I (r.
892–921) or Danarnava (r. 971–73), and Rao prefers the former as its royal builder
(1, p. 1). 
160. Li 1993 and Berkemer 1992. 
3.    
1. Mañju$rimulakalpa, XXXVII.933–935:
pravrajya dhruvam asthaya $akyapravacane tada |
$asanartham karisyanti mantravadasadaratah || 933
.     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 382 ---
astamgate munivare lokaikragrasucaksuse |
tesam kumara vaksyami $rnusvaikamanas tada || 934
yugante naste loke $astupravacane bhuvi |
bhavisyanti na sandeho yatayo rajyavrttinah || 935
Jayaswal (1934) publishes 935a as “ce sta” for “naste”; emendation based on To.
543, fol. 325a6: ston pa’i gsung rab sa steng du | dus mthar ‘jig rten nyams pa na |
sdom brtson rgyal po’i tshul gyis ni | ‘byung bar ‘gyur bar the tshom med |. Note
that the Tibetan translators read “rajavrttinah.” 
2. Pollock (1996) has called this the transculturation of the Sanskrit cosmopo-
lis, a very stimulating formulation. However, as seen in the question of regional
Sanskrit next chapter, Pollock sidesteps the issue of varieties of Sanskrit (1996, p.
201), a position to which he returns (1998, pp. 14–19).
3. Please note particularly the statement found in Brahmasutrabhasya to 2.2.32,
p. 479: “Alternatively, we see that the Buddha had such animosity to humans that
he thought, ‘It’s possible that they could be deluded by this teaching that has all
these internal contradictions!’
” (pradveso v a prajasu viruddh arthapratipattya vi-
muhyeyur imah praja iti |). 
4. For now classic discussions of the symbiotic relationships between the
Samgha and the guilds, see Ray 1986, with relatively weak evidence, and Liu 1988.
Much more could be said, however, and, for some of it, see Gernet 1995 and
Schopen 1994.
5. See Basak 1919–20, p. 131.
6. See the material collected in Jettmar 1989, 1993.
7. The Kuchean (Tokharian B) Buddhist material has been best studied by
French and German scholars; see Thomas 1964, 2:72, XXXII.
8. Humbach 1980, p. 109.
9. Gandavyuha, Suzuki and Idzumi 1949, pp. 225–226.
10. Ray 1994, pp. 153–154.
11. Da$abhumika, Kondo 1936, pp. 28–29; Va rnarhavarnastotra, Hartmann 1987,
p. 109; Bodhicaryavatara I:11 (Buddha), III.30–32 (bodhisattva vow), Vaidya 1960,
pp. 8–9, 43. Further references in T. Lewis 1993, pp. 138–142.
12. Gernet: “The needs of the Buddhist communities and laity favored cer-
tain businesses—especially those related to construction, the timber trade, dye-
ing products, and others—and gave rise to or developed certain trades: builders,
architects, sculptors, painters, goldsmiths, and copyists all benefited from the re-
ligious movement at the same time that agriculture suffered from the requisi-
tioning or hiring of peasants from the great Buddhist construction works” (1995,
p. 14).
13. E.g., Dhammapadatthakatha, vol. 1, part 2, pp. 239–248; Apadana, 1:58–59;
Manoratha-purani (ANguttara-nikaya Atthakatha), vol. 1, part i, pp. 209–220; Para-
mattha-dipani (Theragatha-atthakatha), 2:213–216, 236–242. 
14. Divyavadana, pp. 427–428.
 ⁄ .    

--- PAGE 383 ---
15. Pollock 1996, Hinüber 1989, and Salomon 1989 discuss some of the issues of
medieval Sanskrit.
16. Gernet 1995, pp. 158–178; Schopen 1994. For the G andhari materials, we
must rely on the Niya documents, studied by Agrawala (1955) and, more recently,
by Atwood (1991). It may be that the new discoveries in Gandhari manuscripts will
assist us in understanding patronage issues; see Salomon 1999. 
17. E.g., RajataraNgini IV.628; Nitisara V.82–86; MD% VII.123. 
18. Deyel 1990, pp. 23–43; cf. Shrimali 1991. 
19. Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha XVIII.203; Lorenzen 1978. 
20. Yadzani 1960, 1: 433–436; Gupta 1983–84; Abraham 1988. Indians were ap-
parently poor at handling and breeding horses. Because two of the branches of
warfare (cavalry and chariot) required the regular replacement of horses, the horse
trade became an intense part of North Indian trade. 
21. Jain 1990, p. 181; Jain notes that the guilds at this time became solidiﬁed as
subcastes and identiﬁed as prakrti-s, that is, they ﬁt into a recognized governmen-
tal structure (p. 61). When we do ﬁnd traders (vanik) mentioned elsewhere in In-
dia, most frequently they are not identiﬁed as a formal corporate guild, as in the
Anjaneri Plates of Bhoga$akti; Mirashi 1955, pt. 1, I.146–159. 
22. Jain 1990, pp. 182–184.
23. Yazdani 1960, 1:433–436; Abraham 1988; Fleet 1881.
24. Summarized by Lin 1935, p. 93.
25. This material is taken from Emmerick 1983. 
26. Frye 1984, pp. 341–357; 
27. Frye 1975, p. 95.
28. See the essays contained in Asimov and Bosworth 1998, especially pp.
30–94.
29. For a discussion of the importance of the Sogdians and the Sasanian coin
ﬁnds in the reconstruction of the changing economics of Turfan in the eighth cen-
tury, see Skaff 1998, pp. 99–104.
30. Mackerras 1990, p. 330. 
31. Mackerras suggests others did so, but they remain unspeciﬁed (1990, p. 331);
he shows the spread of Manichaeism into China principally as a result of Uyghur
inﬂuence (1972, pp. 42–43). The Manichaeans were also included in the Wu-tsung
suppression of Buddhism (840–846 c.e). 
32. Elliot and Dowson 1867–77, 1:4; Wink tries unsuccessfully to extend this
point into an economic argument (1990, pp. 303–307). 
33. Simkin 1968, p. 84.
34. Hourani 1951, pp. 76–77. 
35. H. Sastri 1942, pp. 92–102; Barua 1981, pp. 62–64.
36. Beckwith 1977.
37. Evinced by the movement of statuary, Banerji-Sastri (1940) and in inscrip-
tions recorded in Huntington (1984, pp. 203–250) and Fleet 1881. 
.     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 384 ---
38. %ardulakarnavadana, Mukhopadhyaya 1954, esp. pp. 10–12. 
39. Inden 1978, pp. 48–49; Inden is, unfortunately, less than completely clear on
the evidence for this. 
40. Hultzsch 1886, l. 39. 
41. See the appendix for Pa$upata temple afﬁliation.
42. Bhattacharya 1955.
43. See Shah, “Lakul i$a: %aivite Saint,” and Mitra, “Lakul i$a and Early %aiva
Temples in Orissa,” in Meister 1984.
44. Mañju$rimulakalpa, LIII.680–690, LIII.883; Sastri 1920, pp. 631–632, 647.
The verse numbering is from Jayaswal 1934. 
45. H. Sastri 1942, p. 91; translation abbreviated with some changes.
46. Mirashi 1955, 1:218; translation abbreviated with some changes; Kielhorn
(1888–92b).
47. H. Sastri 1942, pp. 100, 102, v. 33: samasta-$atru-vanita-vaidhavya-diksa-gu-
rum krtva.
48. Hultzsch 1886, pp. 305–306, 308, v. 13; I thank Phyllis Granoff for pointing
out the pun on having drunk blood (pitalohitah) in the text: bhayad aratibhir yasya
ranamurddhani visphuran | asir indivara$yamo dadr$e pitalohitah ||.
49. Wogihara 1930–36, pp. 165–166; Demiéville, “Le bouddhisme de la guerre,”
reprinted in Demiéville 1973, pp. 261–299, esp. 293; Tatz 1986, pp. 70–71. 
50. We note that the phrase used, tasm ad r ajyai$varyadhipatyac cy avayati
(Wogihara 1930–36, p. 166.16–17), could be used to deﬁne the murder of the in-
dividual, although it is not interpreted in that sense. See Tatz 1986, p. 215.
51. Ta t’ang hsi yü chi, T.2087.893c–894b; Beal 1869, pp. 210–234. 
52. Fleet 1888, pp. 52–56.
53. Kielhorn 1892, p. 81: k alah kule vidvisam.
54. Cf. Banerji 1919–20 and Misra 1934, pp. 40–51.
55. Kielhorn 1892, p. 58; same language in the N alanda copperplate, but un-
translated by H. Sastri (1942, p. 97, v. 12). 
56. Harsacarita, Kane 1918, p. 133.
57. Rice 1886, pp. 172, 175, l. 15: tribhuvana-madhya-varttin am praninam para-
makarunakathaya bodhisatvopamanasya. I do not follow Rice in reading parama-
karunikataya.
58. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Jayaswal 1934, vv. 534–535, provides a life in hell for the
king “Gomi,” whom Jayaswal identiﬁes as Pusyamitra, vs. a future as a cakravartin
for Baladitya (v. 668).
59. Mitra provides a survey of the more important sites (1971, pp. 198–222). 
60. See Das (1993, passim) for a site-by-site analysis of decline; Sharma 1987,
pp. 95–100. Amar avati is anomalous in that some sculptures were carved but no
inscriptions or inhabitation appear during the eighth to eleventh centuries; see
Knox 1992, for images. It experienced a slight resurgence from the twelfth through
the fourteenth centuries, but it is unclear that occupation was continuous. I thank
 ⁄ .    

--- PAGE 385 ---
Himanshu Ray for calling attention to the sculpture, even though we disagree on
its signiﬁcance.
61. Fleet 1881 and 1889.
62. Gross 1993, pp. 18–24, 90–93; Shaw employs the phrase “androcentric se-
lectivity” in the documents (1994, pp. 12–14, 75–78), dismissing all quantitative
evidence as “absurd” and articulates theoretical structures admitting of an un-
critical verification of hagiographical sources about women (ibid., p. 78). The
kind of careful philological and historical investigation found in Hindu stu-
dies, such as Feldhaus 1995, Orr 2000, and Jamison 1996, are all too rare in Bud-
dhist studies, gratifying exceptions include Paul 1980 and Nattier 1991, pp.
28–33. 
63. Fischer 1970, pp. 74–78.
64. Orr has presented a model of how such evidence may be assessed (2000, pp.
161–180). 
65. An inadequate survey of this material is in Law (1939–40). 
66. One only need review Lüders (1912, passim) for entries too numerous to list.
An example of the many records that have come to light since Lüders’ publication
is cited in note 67. 
67. Lüders 1961, p. 166: 
(maharajasya) [d](e)vaputrasa Huv[i] skasya sa[ m] 30 9 va 3 di 5 etasya[ m] pur-
va[y](am) bh[i]khuniye Pu$aha[th]iniye [a](mtevasi)ni[y](e) bh[i]khuniye Budha-
devaye Bodhisatvo pratithapito saha matapitihi sarvasat[v]ahitasukh[a].
Translation is Lüders’s, with minor changes.
68. Bühler 1894, pp. 113–115, 403–407. 
69. Bühler’s tabulation may actually be an underassessment of women’s partic-
ipation. My own (very rough) evaluation of the much larger body of S añci in-
scriptions in Marshall and Foucher (1940, 1: 301–383) yields a monks to nuns ratio
of 168 : 156 and a laymen to laywomen ration of 208 : 190, or about 52% men to 48%
women in both cases. This suggests virtual gender parity at this pre-Gupta site.
See also Schopen for an afﬁrmation that early nuns’ resources were well reported
(1996, pp. 563–565).
70. Falk 1979; unfortunately, Falk’s data is insufﬁcient to illustrate this point,
since it is drawn almost exclusively from literature.
71. Huntington 1984, appendix, no. 2 (description to ﬁg. 5), pp. 203–204. 
72. Ibid., appendix, nos. 7, 8, 16, 21, 22, 23, 25, 43, 45, 55, 60. 
73. Banerji-Sastri 1940; by women, inscriptions nos. 4, 20, 22, 53, 56, 58, 59, 84,
and 88; by all men, inscriptions nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 15, 17, 18, 21, 23, 25, 30, 31, 32, 33,
37, 38, 43, 49, 51, 52, 55, 63, 67, 69, 70, 81, 83, 85, 87, 90, 91, and 92. Monks are found
in inscriptions nos. 2, 6, 18, 23, 31, 32, 51, 52, 90, 91, and perhaps 69 from the lan-
guage. While nos. 31 and 32 are perhaps by the same man, the same could be spec-
ulated of the women’s names in nos. 20 and 56. 
74. H. Sastri 1942, pp. 58–64. 
.     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 386 ---
75. Ibid., p. 112, no. 78, the name as read by the editor, Chakravarti; Sastri read
Karaluka and was uncertain of the reading. 
76. Ibid., p. 62. 
77. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan , T.2125.54.216b11–24; translation T akakusu
1896, p. 80.
78. Quoted in Sawyer 1993, pp. 159 and 178 n2. 
79. Miller and Wertz 1976, pp. 11 and 142. 
80. Parry 1985, pp. 56 and 73 n11. 
81. Denton 1991, pp. 212 n1, 220–225.
82. Sawyer 1993, p. 178 n3.
83. Barrow 1893, p. 224.
84. Ibid., p. 239.
85. Respectively, Grub thob brgyad cu rtsa bzhi’i gsol ‘debs (To. 3758); *Catura$iti-
siddhabhisamaya (To. 4317); Grub thob lnga bcu’i rtogs pa brjod pa thig le ‘od kyi phreng
ba (To. 2444); dPal u rgyan du tshogs ‘khor byas pa’i dus su rnal ‘byor pa grub pa thob
pa bzhi bcus rdo rje’i mgur bzhengs pa nyams kyi man ngag thig le gser gyi phreng ba,
(To. 2449); *Catura$itisiddhapravrtti (Pe. 5091); and *Catura$itisiddhasambodhihr-
daya (To. 2292). 
86. Ye shes kyi mkha’ ‘gro ma sum cu rtsa lnga’i rtogs pa brjod pa (To. 2450). These
Zha-ma lo-tsa-ba materials are discussed in Davidson 2002a.
87. Respectively, the Cittaguhyadoha (To. 2443); the *Sarvayogatattvaloka-
vikalavajragiti (To. 2453).
88. gZ´uN bshad klog skya ma, p. 444. 
89. I thank Douglas Brooks for a similar observation concerning %aiva texts;
personal communication, April 1996.
90. Shaw 1994, p. 182.
91. Vyaktabhavanugata-tattva-siddhi, pp. 169–172, 176.11.
92. On the problems of extending Western feminist formulae to non-European
societies, see Chandra Talpade Mohanty’s “Under Western Eyes: Feminist Schol-
arship and Colonial Discourse,” in Mongia 1996, pp. 172–197.
93. Lévi 1937, p. 232; Konow 1907–8. 
94. Misra 1934, pp. 40–50; this assumes, with Rajaguru (1955–76), that the
Bhauma era began in 739 c.e., a date not universally accepted; Sircar’s 831 period
inauguration has been accepted by Salomon (1998, pp. 190–191), although I cannot
follow him in this opinion.
95. Joan W. Scott has maintained that there are two fundamental fantasies
found in feminist histories: the orator and the mother (2001, pp. 293–304). By this
she does not mean that these are false, but that feminist historians tend to place
themselves as subjects within history. For her, feminist fantasy “is rather the des-
ignation of a set of psychic operations by which certain categories of identity are
made to elide historical differences and create apparent continuity” (p. 304). I
 ⁄ .    

--- PAGE 387 ---
would have framed this somewhat differently, but the process of projecting self
into history seems to be the crux of the matter. 
96. On the problems associated with resistance studies, see Florencia E. Mal-
lon, “The Promise and Dilemma of Subaltern Studies: Perspectives from Latin
American History,” in Dirlik et al. 2000, pp. 191–217.
97. Harsacarita, Kane 1918, p. 140. 
98. %ardulakarnavadana, pp. 11 ff.
99. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fol. 121a2–3: ‘dzum shing ‘gro la smra shing zur
mig can | yan lang thams cad yid ‘phrog byed pa’i gzugs | bu med gzugs ni mtshon
cha ‘jebs ‘dra bas | skye pa’i sems ni mngon du ‘phrog par byed ||. This section cor-
responds to T. 895.18.721c9. 
100. See Vigrahavyavartani, Johnston and Kunst 1978, pt. 1, pp. 21–24, pt. 2, pp.
27–30. 
101. Mulamadhyamakakarika, La Vallée Poussin 1903–13, which includes the
Prasannapada, p. 494; Vigrahavyavartani, Johnston and Kunst 1978, pt. 1, p. 24n.
102. See Groarke 1990, for a nuanced discussion of both the doctrines and
problems of skepticism. The extraordinary similarities between Greek skepticism
and the Madhymaka position have yet to be thoroughly explored. 
103. Madhyamakavatara, pp. 288–301; Huntington 1989, pp. 177–179; Mulamad-
hyamakakarika, La Vallée Poussin 1903–13, pp. 73–74. 
104. SatyadvayavibhaNga, Eckel 1987, pp. 137–138. 
105. RajataraNgini III.11–12. The chronology represented here is questionable.
The preceptor of the father of her contemporary, Am rtaprabha, was evidently a
Tibetan named Lo-ston-pa, the teacher of Lo. This is probably gLo-bo, the Ti-
betan title for Mustang, suggesting a later chronology. As Stein points out (1892,
1:73 n9) a monastery attributed to Am rtaprabha was known to the Chinese monk
O-k’ung, who took precepts in the valley in 749. 
106. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa ch’uan; the translation from T akakusu 1896, p. 51
and cf. p. 52; corresponds to T. 2125.54.211c14–19, 212a5–6; we note that a later
discussion of this point (T akakusu 1896, p. 93; 218b25–6) is about specifically
Chinese monks, but the earlier quotation does not seem to represent a specif-
ically Chinese position; rather, a pitfall of the unexamined concentration on
emptiness. 
107. For a more recent discussion of the meaning of %akya Bhiksu, see Cohen
2000. 
108. Brahmasutrabhasya to 2.2.5.32: ata$ canupapanno vaina$ikatantravyavaharah |.
109. Nagarjuna’s entire discussion of the vindication of his “non assumption of
a proposition” is done in the context of the ascertainment of valid sources of rea-
soning. See Vigrahavyavartani, passim. 
110. Wayman 1958. 
111. Cf. Abhidharmasamuccaya, pp. 104–106. 
.     ⁄ 

--- PAGE 388 ---
112. Yogacarabhumi, Bhattacharya 1957, pp. 118–160; these are placed in the text
for the purpose of recognizing incorrect mental application, ayoni $omanskara. 
113. Abhidharmasamuccaya, p. 106.4–5: api khalu svahitasukhakamena vadesv ab-
hijnatum pravarttitavyam na parai h vivadam karttum |. This is followed by a
lengthy quotation from the seminal Mahayanabhidharmasutra verifying his position;
cf. Abhidharmasamuccaya-bhasyam, p. 154; and Jinaputra’s Abhidharmasamuccaya-
vyakhya, Peking 5555, TTP vol. 113.227.3.7. 
114. Lamotte 1949, pp. 359–361; Davidson 1990, p. 302. 
115. For these standards of authenticity, see Davidson 1990.
116. See the analysis by Snellgrove 1958.
117. Dreyfus 1997, p. 15. 
118. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan, p. 205a24–b1; Takakusu 1896, pp. 7–8. 
119. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan , p. 206c1; Takakusu 1896, p. 20. The relative
periods of composition of the various Vinayas is a disputed matter. 
120. A good summary of the introduction of the Vinaya into Tibet is in the Bod
rje lha btsan po’i gdung rabs tshig nyung don gsal , pp. 82–85; cf. mKhas pa’i dga’ ston,
1: 465–506, for an extended discussion.
121. I thank Gregory Schopen for this latter observation. 
122. Ta t’ang hsi yü chi, T. 2087.51.923c19; Beal 1869, 2:170. 
123. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan, pp. 214a4, 227a25–26; Takakusu 1896, pp. 65,
154; Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan, T.2066.51.6b20; Lahiri 1986, p. 51.
124. See Bhattacharya 1985 and Stewart 1989 for discussions of the site. While
I know of no one yet deﬁnitively identifying Stupa 3 as the mulagandha-kuti, I have
little hesitation in making that identiﬁcation.
125. Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan, T.2066.51.5c15, 6a29; Lahiri 1986, pp.
53, 58; in this latter place, Lahiri mistranslates the Chinese, which does not read “if
you see one, you have seen all the seven,” but “if you have seen one, the other sev-
en are similar.”
126. Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan, T.2066.51.5b27; Lahiri 1986, p. 51.
127. Mulasarvastivada Vinaya, %ayanasanavastu, Gnoli 1978, p. 11; cf. Schopen
1994, pp. 529–531; Schopen’s attempt to problematize the signiﬁcance of pura : rtsegs
is in error. The signiﬁcance of rtsegs as a Tibetan building term is well established,
meaning “story,” as embodied in the gSum-brtsegs at Alchi or in the descriptions of
other Tibetan buildings. We also note that the %ayanasanavastu’sallowance of a sev-
en-story Perfumed Chamber (saptapura gandhakutih) with the ﬁve-story monks’
chambers is that which we might expect at Nalanda, given the respective site remains
and footprints of Stupa 3 and Monastery 1. 
128. Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan, T.2066.51.5b23; Lahiri 1986, p. 51.
129. Sastri 1942, pp. 81, 91, 102, etc.
130. Ibid., passim.
131. Ibid., pp. 103–105.
132. Clearly spelled out in Dutta 1995, pp. 98–114. 
 ⁄ .    

--- PAGE 389 ---
133. Nitisara X.4, 8; Davis 1997, pp. 51–87. 
134. sBa bzhed zhabs btags ma, Stein 1961, pp. 52–53; sBa bzhed, 1980, p. 62; dBa’
bzhed, Wangdu and Diemberger 2000, p. 90. 
135. sBa bzhed, 1980, p. 50: ma ga dha’i rgyal po’i khab kyi sgo mdun na dha ru
rtse do bya ba’i mchod rten gcig gi nang na rgyal po ma skyes dgra’i skal ba |; sBa
bzhed zhabs btags ma indicates that the purpose is entirely different, for the caitya
contains “the fortune of the essence of the embodied king”: rgyal po gzugs can sny-
ing po’i bskal ba, which constitute one Indian measure of the Buddha’s relics and
bones (Stein 1961, p. 42). dBa’ bzhed does not contain this material. 
.     
   
1. Namasamgitimandalavidhyaka$avimala, To. 2543, fol. 13b1–2: sangs rgyas rdo
rje ‘dzin bcas pas | kun gyis deng khyod dbang bskur bas | khams gsum gyi ni rgyal
po che | rgyal ba’i bdag po ston pa yin | deng ni bdud las rnam rgyal te | grong
khyer mchog tu rab tu zhugs | khyed rnams kyis ni sangs rgyas nyid | deng nyid
the tshom med par ‘thob | 
2. I employ the terms esoteric Buddhism (Chinese: mi chiao), Mantrayana (chen
yen) and Vajray ana interchangeably. Although referring to the system as the re-
sultant vehicle (phalayana) is acceptable as well, this need not be used here. There
is no valid reason for employing any of the modern neologisms—sahajayana, kala-
cakrayana, tantrayana, and so on—that litter the literature about the esoteric dis-
pensation; they remain unattested in any of our Buddhist sources and appear the
result of misunderstandings by modern scholars. 
3. This position is especially noticeable in the two primary statements in Eng-
lish, that of Snellgrove (1987) and the introduction to Matsunaga’s edition of the
Guhyasamaja Tantra (1978, pp. vii–xxxi). 
4. The standard description of Chinese esoterism in English is Chou Yi-Liang
1945. See, as well, Weinstein 1987, pp. 77–89; Orlando 1980; Strickmann 1996. We
have to concur with Orzech (1989, 1998) and Strickmann (1983, 1990, 1996), how-
ever, that the serious study of Chinese tantrism is in its infancy, and the wide-
spread impression that Chou Yi-Liang has presented all the material is mislead-
ing. Both Strickmann’s (1996, pp. 41–45) and Orzech’s (1998, pp. xiv, 68) recent
studies of the intersection of Chinese esoterism and politics appears in support of
the model of imperial patronage. 
5. For a review of this material, see Kapstein 2000, pp. 25–65.
6. See, especially, the “long roll” of esoteric images painted between 1173 and
1176 (Chapin 1972). Backus (1981, pp. 162 ff.) considers the period in decline, re-
taining the ideology of the Later Ta-li kingdom. 
7. See, for example, Woodward 1981. Strachan interprets Pagan solely in light
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 390 ---
of Theravada tradition, even while acknowledging that the primary artistic and ar-
chitectural tradition was P ala and was close in form and aesthetics to N alanda
(1989, pp. 17, 25, 64, etc.; e.g., p. 38, where esoteric ﬁgures are illustrated). For an-
other opinion on this period of Burmese history, see Strong 1992, pp. 174–179.
8. This is contra Samuel, who articulates the theory that centralized states pre-
fer non-“shamanic” forms of Buddhism (1993, pp. 390–391). His theory does not
accord with our data in India or many other areas; for the earliest mantrin’s inﬂu-
ence in Chinese state politics, see the biography of Fo T’u-teng in Wright (1990,
pp. 34–68). 
9. Strickmann has imputed Chinese class associations into Indian society and has
misunderstood the metaphorical nature of the ritual enterprise, assuming that those
conducting these rituals would represent the aristocratic class (1996, pp. 37–40). 
10. See Lamotte 1944–80, 4:1854–1869; Braarvig 1985; Wayman 1975–76; Schopen
1985. We sometimes even ﬁnd spells in the Vinaya, such as an early version of the
Mahamayurividyarajñi in the Bhaisajyavastu of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya; Dutt
1941–50, vol. 3, part 2, pp. 286–288.
11. Braarvig 1997.
12. Strickmann justiﬁes the term, but with some uneasiness, for he recognizes
that “proto-tantric” texts continue to be composed long after the advent of the
tantras (1996, p. 130; 2002, pp. 103–109). Methodologically, then, the term “proto-
tantric” is a questionable description, and it is not clear that the authors of these
works understood other texts as superior. I have chosen only to typify “mature es-
oterism” as the fundamental change in system and not to speak of the texts that
represent a different ideology except as they do not embody the basic metaphor ex-
plained later in this chapter. 
13. Strickmann afﬁrms Atik uta’s Dharanisamgraha as not a literal translation,
based on Chinese models intruding into the text (1996, pp. 53, 153; 2002, p. 264).
As such, we need to take Dharanisamgraha as an important mark in ritualism
around 653/54, rather than a translation of a much earlier work. On the ma ndalas
in the Dharanisamgraha, see Yoritomi 1990, pp. 81–84.
14. Lin 1935, p. 84n; Chen yen tsung chiao shih i, T.2396.75.431a8–12. 
15. See Jong’s (1984) summary of M atsunaga’s standard work, p. 100; Mat-
sunaga 1978, p. xvii; Chou 1945, p. 265. 
16. Ta t’ang hsi yü chi T.2087.51.882b13–14; Beal does not represent this section
entirely accurately (1869, p. 120). I-ching’s involvement with esoteric Buddhism is
chronicled in his hagiography, Sung kao seng chuan, T.2061.50.710.b8–711.b4.
17. Bodhiruci died in 727. Elements of his hagiography are found in the Sung
kao seng chuan, T.2061.50.720b4-c12; Hsü ku chin i ching t’u chi , T.2152.55.371a28
(identified as Dharmaruci); and Ta chou k’an ting chung ching mu lu,
T.2153.55.379c29, 380a8, 395a3; 2154.569b13, 570b15. Strickmann 1996, pp. 252–259,
and 2002, pp. 254–255; Linrothe 1999, pp. 88–89, 132; and Y oritomi 1990, pp.
46–47, 89–94, discuss some of Bodhiruci’s oeuvre.
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 391 ---
18. See the material in chapter 5. This is indicated by several quotations to a ver-
sion of the Cakrasamvara-tantra in the works of Vilasavajra, particularly his com-
mentaries on the Guhyagarbha and the Mañju$rinamasamgiti; see Davidson for ref-
erences (1981, pp. 8–9). We also note that at least one version of the earliest yogini
tantra, the Sarvabuddhasamayoga (To. 366) was translated in the Tibetan Royal
Dynastic period; its translation is discussed in chapter 5. It is referenced as one of
the eighteen tantras of the early Mah ayoga canon; cf. Amoghavajra’s Chin kang
ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei , T.869.18.286c9–16 trans. Giebel 1995, pp.
177–182, and Jñ anamitra’s Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fol.
273a3. I am indebted to Kenneth Eastman for drawing my attention to these works
and to Steven Weinberger for reference to Giebel’s 1995 translation. K anaoka
(1966, p. 476) has pointed out that Jñanamitra’s text appears to be the one listed in
the dKar chag ldan dkar ma; Lalou 1953, p. 331, no. 523. 
19. Examples of this perspective are provided by T suda 1978 and 1990. 
20. The defense of this position is found in Lessing and Wayman 1968, pp.
164–165.
21. See Davidson 1991, for something of the discussion of Ngor-chen’s refuta-
tions; they are embodied in his two works examining the ritual systems of texts
classiﬁed as kriya and carya-tantras: the Bya rgyud spyi’i rnam par bshad pa legs par
bshad pa’i rgya mtsho, and the sPyod pa’i rgyud spyi’i rnam par gzhags pa legs par bshad
pa’i sgron me.
22. An introduction to polythetic category construction is provided in Lakoff
1987. 
23. Murphey for a discussion of the more important research on categories
(1994, pp. 10–19); Keil for problems with prototype theory (1989, pp. 26–33).
24. Wittgenstein 1958, § 67. 
25. Keil 1989, pp. 83–84, 267–283; Murphey 1994, pp. 14–16. 
26. The jump from individual maturation to social maturation of conceptual
ﬁelds is made by Keil in the articulation of analogies between a child’s maturation
and the novice/expert distinction (1989, pp. 254–265).
27. Rabe for a consideration of the importance of this work in the socio-polit-
cal life of the early medieval period (1997, p. 218).
28. Kavyamimamsa, Parashar 2000, pp. 164–179. 
29. Snellgrove 1959 articulated some of these considerations with respect to ab-
hiseka, but did not pursue the metaphor much beyond this point, and was forced
to infer “non-Buddhist” inﬂuences rather than determine their nature from evi-
dence. I thank Charles Orzech for drawing my attention to this article.
30. The best collection I have seen of Buddhist texts to date is S akurai 1996,
pp. 407–584.
31. Law 1919 and Inden 1978 are the primary studies, based on entirely different
materials. 
32. Law 1919, pp. 87–90. 
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 392 ---
33. Krtyakalpataru, vol. 11: Rajadharma-kanda, Aiyangar 1943, pp. 9–17. The
ﬁrst scriptural source given by Lak smidhara is not called the *Adipurana, but the
Brahmapurana. It is well known, though, that the received Brahmapurana has no
connection with the text Laksmidhara quotes as such, but is the old *Adipurana. It
is extremely common for multiple Indic texts to circulate under a single title or for
a single text to be known under multiple titles. The surviving fragments of the old
*Adipurana have been edited (with the sections included in the Krtyakalpataru ) by
Y. Ikari and T. Hayashi, in Ikari 1994, pp. 83–136. 
34. Inden 1978, pp. 41–58. 
35. Ibid., pp. 49–55. Cf. the ritual in Heesterman 1957, esp. pp. 63–90, where the
“unction festival” is clearly not given much weight in the ceremonial agenda and was
principally for the coronation of kings achieving independence for the ﬁrst time. 
36. Schlingloff 1964, textband, p. 41, and references, pp. 194–195; Ruegg 1967;
Yamabe 1999, pp. 60–72. 
37. Ch’an mi yao fa ching, T. 613.15.256c1–15.
38. Kuan fo san mei hai ching , T.643.15.664c9–11; I am grateful to Y amabe
Nobuyoshi for providing these references to the Kuan fo san mei hai ching . See
Yamabe 1999, pp. 302–312.
39. Dharanisamgraha, T.901.18.799c25–800a2, 802a17-b3, 857b6-c1, 871a1-c6,
875c13–876a5, 889a23–892b20
40. Da$abhumika, Kondo 1936, pp. 178–189; LaNkavatara, Bunyiu Nanjio 1923,
pp. 1.11, 45.13, 70.3, 100.9, 101.11, 102.13, 103.6, 123.6, 190.17, 322.4, 359.16; these ref-
erences are from S uzuki 1934, p. 25b; cf. also the articulation of the Da$abhumika
model by Candrakirti, Madhyamakavatara, La Vallée Poussin 1907–12, pp. 349–50.
For the importance of this myth in the Mahayana legitimization of scripture, see
Davidson 1990. 
41. Strickmann 1990; idem 1996, pp. 78–87, 98–100, 113–123, 330–332; idem 2002,
pp. 113–119, 132–140; the consecration ritual is found T.1331.21.479b5–24.
42. I tsu fo ting lun wang ching T.951.19.251b12–252c10. The date is from the Kai
yuan shih chiao mu lu T.2154.55.569c5, although this text is notoriously unreliable.
T.951 and its closely related T.952 are extremely important to demonstrate the
transition between the seventh-century material and the rapidly evolving eighth-
century synthesis. They, along with the Subahupariprccha, the Susiddhikara and
the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-vikurvana, really demonstrate that transition
rather well. Y oritomi (1990, pp. 116–119) discusses the relationship between
many of these texts and Atik uta’s *Dharanisamgraha. On the question of a “sin-
gle syllable” (ek aksara) in the approximately contemporary Mañju$rimulakalpa,
see Przyluski 1923.
43. I tsu fo ting lun wang ching, T. 951.19.250b20–23.
44. Susiddhikaramahatantrasadhanopayikapatala, To. 807, fols. 201b3–203b6;
T.893.18.
45. Haribhadra’s Abhisamayalamkaraloka, p. 270.13; dKar chag ldan dkar ma,
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 393 ---
Lalou 1953, p. 326, no. 318; Buddhaguhya’s V airocanabhisambodhitantrapindartha,
To. 2662, fol. 3b4.
46. Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra, To. 496: de nas rdo rje ldan pa khyod | rdo
rje’i chos ni rab brjod pa | sangs rgyas kun gyis khyod lag tu | ting ‘dzin ‘byung ba’i
rdo rje byin | deng nas ‘jig rten thams cad kyi | lag na rdo rje rdzul ‘phrul che |
sdang ba rnams ni tshar bcad dang | bstan pa la ni gnod byed pa | de dag gdul bar
bya ba’i phyir | ’dren pa rnams kyis rdo rje byin | ci ltar ‘khor los sgyur ba’i rgyal |
bdag por bya phyir dbang bskur ba | de bzhin chos rgyal dbang bskur phyir | rdo
rje blo ldan dbang bskur brjod |.
47. Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra, To. 494, fols. 239b2–241a6; cf. Buddha-
guhya’s rNam par snang mdzad mngon par byang chub pa’i rgyud chen po’i ‘grel bshad,
To. 2663, vol. nyu, fol. 350b. 
48. In his Namasamgitimandalavidhyaka$avimala, To. 2543, fols. 11b1–13b2. 
49. Inden 1978, p. 38.
50. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fols. 122b7–125a5. 
51. See Flood 1989, esp. p. 24.
52. Schwab has illustrated that the famous Herakles/Vajrap ani of niche V 2 at
Tepe Shutur is an excellent example of the Herakles Epitrapezios type, which was
believed to be associated with the sculptor Lysippos (1998). 
53. Kuan ting ching, T.1331.21.515a23-b13. More than twenty years ago, in a grad-
uate seminar at Berkeley Michel Strickmann attracted my attention to this bizarre
work, which was the topic of his celebrated article on the Consecration Scripture
(1990). 
54. For one description of the Hevajra system, see Davidson 1992. 
55. On esoteric Buddhist texts and spirit possession, see Granoff 1979, pp.
78–79; Strickmann 1996, pp. 213–226.
56. MD%, VII.5: yasmad esam surendranam matrabho nirmito nrpah | tasmad
abhibhavaty esa sarvabhutani tejasa ||. 
57. See Kulke 1978; 1993, pp. 327–381; the quotation is from p. 365. 
58. Pollock 1996, pp. 236–239; 1998, pp. 13, 31–34.
59. Kielhorn 1900–1901a, v. 11; I thank Phyllis Granoff for pointing out to me
the subsets of vibhuti.
60. Nitisara, I.4a: sadhubhutaladevatvam.
61. Krtyakalpataru, vol. 11: Rajadharma-kanda, Aiyangar 1943, p. 4: a $ucir va-
canad yasya $ucir bhavati p urusah | $uci$ caiva$ucih sadyah katham raja na dai-
vatam ||. I thank Phyllis Granoff for correcting my translation of this passage.
62. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Sastri 1920, p. 135: pa$yed yo hi sa dharmatma mucyate
sarvakilbisat | pañcanantaryakari ‘pi duh$ilo mandamedhasah ||. I have read with
the Tibetan, fol. 175b6: gang gis bdag nyid chen po mthong. 
63. Krtyakalpataru, vol. 11: Rajadharmakanda, Aiyangar 1943, pp. 12–13.
64. The normative esoteric deﬁnition for ma ndala is milana, a gathering, cog-
nate with Hindi mel a/melan; Guhyasamaja XVIII.24, Hevajra Tantra II.iii.27,
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 394 ---
which Snellgrove emended to malana against all the manuscripts for ideological
reasons (1959, 1:97n1); Hevajra Tantra II.iii.26 calls a ma ndala the “city composed
of Buddhas,” sarvabuddhatmakampuram. Strickmann (1996, p. 145), citing Brun-
ner (1986), proposes that the Buddhist ma ndala form derives exclusively from
%aivite tantric useage, which is unlikely in the face of its political components. 
65. Susiddhikara, To. 807, fols. 209b2–214a3. 
66. Karunapundarika, Yamada 1968, 1:67–70; cf. Gómez 1996, pp. 37, 320. 
67. Schopen 1977.
68. Mulasarvastivada Vinaya, Sa Nghabhedavastu, Gnoli 1977, 1:15: k setranam
adhipatih ksatac ca tr ayata iti k satriyah ksatriyah samjñodapadi |; Dighanikaya,
Rhys Davids and Carpenter 1890–1911, 3:93: khett anam adhipati ti kho v asettha
khattiyo khattiyo tv eva dutiyam akkharam upanibbattam | (in the middle of deﬁn-
ing Mahasammata, khattiya, and raja). This is the Buddhist version of the Manu
story, used for various reasons; cf. Mahabharata, %antiparvan, Sukthankar et al.
1949–50, 12.67.17–38.
69. Edgerton 1953, 2:198b, 201a.
70. See Scharfe: “The relative constancy of Indian social structures and mores
over long periods of time makes the particular century in which a certain chapter
has been composed often seem irrelevant. But since extensive interpolations in the
text cannot be proved, the existing signs of a more recent date that are found in
dozens of places must indicate the date of the compilation as a whole. I propose
the ﬁrst or perhaps the second century a.d.” (1993, p. 293). This agrees with the
employment of siddha explored in chapter 5.
71. This material is taken from Artha$astra 6.2.2–26 in Kangle 1960; cf. Scharfe
1993, pp. 104–124. Curiously, neither Scharfe nor the other authorities he quotes
have directly represented the schematic of the text as it is written. They have tak-
en mandala exclusively in the sense of physical circle as opposed to “spheres of in-
ﬂuence”; the Artha$astra was not drawing exact circles.
72. Chattopadhyaya 1994, pp. 10–37.
73. Kielhorn 1900–1901a, v. 23. 
74. Kulke and Rothermund make this observation (1998, p. 126), although it is
not entirely clear from their inscriptions; see Singh for a discussion of this point
(1993, pp. 66–67). 
75. Sharma 1965, p. 1. Wink took strong exception to Sharma’s work (1990, pp.
219–223). On the nature of feudalism in general, see Strayer 1965, pp. 11–14; Reynolds
1994, pp. 1–74. Sharma has restated his position recently (2001, pp. 16–118).
76. This is a summary of Fox’s ideas based on Stein 1991. 
77. Artha$astra, VII.1.32.
78. Nitisara I.18, IV.1, X.28. 
79. Chattopadhyaya 1994, pp. 34–37, 186–202. 
80. Ibid., pp. 80–3, 217–221; Sharma 1965, pp. 20–30; Gopal 1965, pp. 263–281;
Devahuti 1983, pp. 184–187; Sharma 1996, pp. 62–70; and see Singh, for the most
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 395 ---
thorough list of political designations found in a speciﬁc locale, in this case Oris-
sa (1993, pp. 321–325). The extent of the list underlines how little we know of the
particular powers attached to individual titles under speciﬁc administrations. 
81. As with the coronation ceremony, Snellgrove recognizes the structural sim-
ilarity between the ma ndala and political systems but does not pursue the
metaphor: “There is an exact analogy with the gradations of chief ministers, less-
er minsters serving staff and messengers, with which a great king seated in state
might be supposed to be surrounded.” Because it is “profane,” though, Snellgrove
dismisses the analogy (1987, 1:199). 
82. Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, Chandra 1987, pp. 5–18.
83. Sarvadurgatipari$odhana-tantra, Skorupski 1983, sec. 35a, pp. 32, 174.
84. Fleet 1888, p. 168.
85. Bhavnagar Archaeological Dept., pp. 41 (plate II, line 11), 44.
86. Kane 1918, pp. 33–34.
87. Mayamata, Dagens 1985, pp. 119–148, 176–203. 
88. Meister 1979.
89. Manava Dharma %astra VII.119; cf. Doniger and Smith 1991, p. 140 n.
90. Irawati 1953, pp. 50–54.
91. Reported by I-ching in his Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan , T.2125.216c15;
Takakusu 1896, p. 82; noticed in Schopen 1987, p. 199. Unfortunately, this notice
relies on the transcription of kula as chü lo, which is not exceptional but the exact
identity of the Sanskrit term is difﬁcult to afﬁrm in the absence of Indic attestation.
92. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Sastri 1920, p. 327: tathastakulika mantra astabhyo dik-
su ni$rita | uttarayam di$i sidhyante mantra vai jinasambhava || purvade$e tatha sid-
dhih mantra vai padmasambhava | daksinapatham ni$ritya sidhyante kuli$alayah ||
pa$cimena gañjah prokto vidi$e manikulas tatha | pa$cime cottare samdhau siddhis
tesu prakalpita || pascime daksine capi samdhau yaksakulas tatha | daksine pur-
vadigbhage $ravakanam mahaujasam ||  kul akhyam tesu drstam vai tatra sthanesu
sidhyanti | purvottare di$abhage pratyekanam jinasambhavam || kulakhyam bahu-
matam loke siddhis tesu tatra vai | adha$ caiva di$abhage sidhyante sarvalaukika ||
patalaprave$ika mantra vai sidhyante ‘ stakulesu ca | lokottar a tatha mantra us-
nisadyah prakirtitah || siddhim ayanti te urdhvam cakravartijinodita |. The transla-
tion of the obscure Sanskrit takes into account the Tibetan version, To. 543, fols.
323a2–7, and the Chinese of T.1191.20.898b26-c6. There is a textual problem with
the line pa $cimena gañjah prokto, and I have emended the printed gaja to gañja
based on the Tibetan mdzod (fol. 232a4). The Chinese renders (898b29) it phonet-
ically, saying that thena-ja family is uncertain as to its direction, suggesting that the
translators had a poorer text than we. 
93. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Sastri 1920, p. 326; this is analogous to the depictions of
the sinister south in such texts as the Karandavyuha; see Lienhard 1985 and 1993. 
94. On the discussion if worldly (laukika) beings constituted a kula or not, see
Ruegg 1964, pp. 79–80.
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 396 ---
95. Nitisara XVII.6–7; Artha$astra:II.4.23.
96. Strickmann (1983) indicates that the earliest description of these activities in
Chinese literature is found in the I tsu fo ting lun wang ching,said to be translated by
Bodhiruci in 709 c.e.; T.951.19.261c. Included is a ﬁfth activity, that of seduction. 
97. Homa is another ritual just beginning to receive the attention it is due; see
Skorupski 1983 and Strickmann 1983, both in the landmark Agni by F. Staal. Sko-
rupski’s excellent study has a somewhat misleading title (“Tibetan Homa Rites”)
for they represent Indian rituals, some in the Tibetan language. 
98. E.g., this description is found in the Pradipodyotana, p. 194.24.
99. Skorupski 1994. 
100. Bentor 2000. 
101. The best description of Vajrap ani’s position in normative Buddhism re-
mains Lamotte 1966. Snellgrove 1987, 1:134–141, has contributed much. 
102. Lamotte 1966, pp. 114–115, 152–153. 
103. Sircar 1966, pp. 336–337; the term most consistently employed for Vajra-
pani is guhyakadhipati. 
104. Krtyakalpataru, Rajadharmakanda, pp. 101–110; the Yajñavalkya quotation
is p. 103.
105. Manasollasa, I.52–59. 
106. Nitisara XII.3, XVI.57; Strickmann 1996, pp. 10, 40, etc., calls attention to
the use of the loanword in Chinese as Mandarin from mantrin, but does not place
its employment in India as a political ofﬁce. 
107. Ray 1994, pp. 407–410.
108. Ta t’ang hsi yü chi, T.2087.51.923a8; Beal 1869, 2:165; Demiéville 1932, pp.
60–61. 
109. We see this evidence in the birchbark manuscript of the Karandavyuha,
Mette 1997, p. 97, and we notice the maintenance of this language even in the
Newari manuscript transcribed by Mette, p. 143. Meisezahl was also of this opin-
ion in his work on the Amoghapa$ahrdayadharani; see Meisezahl 1962, p. 270. On
the topic of birch bark as a manuscript material, see Salomon 1999, pp. 15–22, 57–71,
81–109; Witzel 1994, pp. 6–14. The location of U ddiyana/Odiyana has been ﬁnal-
ly afﬁrmed by inscriptions; see Kuwayama1991. 
110. Abhidharmako$abhasya VII.47, pp. 424–5.
111. I have in my possession such a manuscript in Tibetan given to me by a Ti-
betan lama. It is a collection of mantras, much written over and corrected. It is en-
titled the Las sgrub rgyun gcod kyi sngags brgya pa, or The Hundred Mantras That
Continually Remove Karmic Obscurations, and is attributed one Mi-pham ‘Jam-dpal
dgyes-pa’i rdo-rje, one of the pen names of the famous nineteenth–twentieth-cen-
tury rNying-ma-pa teacher, ‘Jam-mgon Mi-pham rgya-mtsho (1846–1912). 
112. *Dharanisamgra, T.901.18.785b3.
113. %iksasamuccaya, p. 79.
114. Matsunaga, in his introduction to the Guhyasamaja, p. IX, identiﬁes the
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 397 ---
Dharmaguptaka collection as a Vidyadhara-pitaka, and the issue of vidy adhara is
taken up in succeeding chapters. For other issues associated with the Vidyottama
and related texts, see Stein 1978, pp. 434–439.
115. An esoteric canon said to be the entire V ajra$ekhara scripture is the subject
of Amoghavajra’s Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei , T.869, trans-
lated Giebel 1995; Yoritomi 1990, pp. 172–179. 
116. Cf. Rocher 1986, pp. 30-34. Eastman’s 1981 presented but unfortunately un-
published paper is the best investigation of the Buddhist problem to date. Anoth-
er Indian source afﬁrming a canon of eighteen tantras is Jñ anamitra’s Prajña-
paramita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fol. 273a3, and a section of this is
translated in chapter 6; this later source is discussed by Kanaoka 1966. 
117. On scriptural formulation, see Davidson 1990 and Collins 1990.
118. The conversion of Vajrapani is found throughout North Indian Buddhist
literature; Lamotte 1966 for a survey. 
119. Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, Chandra 1987, pp. 5–6: samantabhadratv at
vajrasattvasamadheh sudrdhatvac caikaghanah samantabhadramahabodhisattvaka-
yah sambhuya bhagavato vairocanasya h rdaye sthitvidam udanam udanayamasa |
aho samantabhadro ‘ha m drdhasattvah svayambhuvam | yad drdhatvad akayo ‘pi
sattvakayatvam agatah || atha samantabhadramah abodhisattvakayo bhagavato
hrdayad avatirya sarvatathagatanam purata$ candramandala$rityo bhutvajñam mar-
gayamasa || atha bhagavan sarvatathagatajñanasamayavajramnamasamadhimsama-
padyasarvatath agata $ilasam adhiprajñ avimuktivimuktijñ anadar $anadharma-
cakrapravartana-sattvarthamahopayabalaviryamahajñanasamayam a $esanava$esa-
sattvadhatuparitranasarvadhipatya-sarvasukhasaumanasyânubhavan artham yavat
sarvatath agatasamat ajñanabhijñanuttara-mah ayanabhisamayottamasiddhyav a-
ptiphalahetos tatsarvatathagatasiddhivajram tasmaisamantabhadraya mahabodhi-
sattvaya sarvatathagatacakravartitve sarvabuddhakayaratnamukutapattabhisekenâ-
bhisicya panibhyam anupradat | tatah sarvatathagatair vajrapanir vajrapanir iti vaj-
ranamabhisekenâbhisiktah || atha vajrap anir bodhisattvo mah asattvo vamavajra-
garvollalanataya tadvajram svahrdy utkarsanayogena dharayann idam udanam uda-
nayamasa || idam tatsarvabuddhanam siddhivajram anuttaram | aham mama kare
dattam vajram vajre pratisthitam || iti || I have largely followed %akyamitra’s Kosa-
lalamkara, To. 2503, vol. yi, fols. 30a5–33b6. A proﬁtable comparison can be made
against the same episode in a slightly different narrative form found in the Vajrapany-
abhiseka-mahatantra, To. 496, fols. 25a3–26a3.
120. Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, Chandra 1987, pp. 56–60; V ajra$ekhara, To.
480, fols. 236a7–262a7; Trailokyavijaya, To. 482, fols. 10a5–13a7; Candraguhyatila-
ka, To. 477, fols. 281a6–287a7; Iyanaga 1985; Snellgrove 1987, 1:134–141; Davidson
1991, 1995b; Stein 1995; Mayer 1998.
121. On this phenomenon, see Mair 1988. 
122. E.g., Trailokyavijaya, To. 482, fols. 10a5–13a7.
123. Sadhanamala has a sadhana of Trailokyavijaya in this position (1925, 2:511).
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 398 ---
124. Tantrarthavatara, To. 2501, fols. 76b6, 78b5, 79a7. 
125. This might be the material we could establish as central for the evolving
institutional esoterism if we look at the gsang sngags kyi rgyud and gzungs sections
of the dKar chag ldan dkar ma (Lalou 1953, pp. 326–328), at the translations into
Chinese by the T’ang translators (Chou 1945, passim), and the scriptures speciﬁed
by Buddhaguhya in his introduction to the Mahavairocabhisambodhi, his V airocan-
abhisambodhitantrapindartha, To. 2662, fol. 3a4–3b6. 
126. For example, the doctrinal statements of many of these early tantras em-
phasizes the issue of the nature of the mind, such as the Subahupariprccha, To. 805,
fols. 121b1–122b7, the Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra, To. 494, fols. 153b1–160a2;
Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, Chandra 1987, p. 4; Sarvadurgatipari $odhana-
tantra, Skorupski 1983, sections 2b–4b, 17b, etc. N amai 1997 covers some of this
material, which calls into question the estimation that esoteric Buddhism made no
contribution to Buddhist doctrine.
127. Mitra 1981, 1:108–138; Linrothe 1999, pp. 252–257. I believe Linrothe’s phase
stratigraphy suffers from an insufﬁcient consideration of relatively datable esoteric
literature. 
128. Chag lo tsa ba’i rnam thar, Roerich 1959, p. 42; see also Rwa lo tsa ba’i rnam
thar, p. 71.
129. Bhotasvamidasalekha, Dietz 1984, p. 361.
130. sBa bzhed, mGon-po rgyal mtshan 1980, p. 1; sBa bzhed zhabs btags ma ,
Stein 1961, p. 1; this is missing in the dBa’ bzhed, Wangdu and Diemberger 2000,
pp. 23–25. 
131. This text has been edited and translated into German in Dietz 1984, pp.
360–365. Her notes are very useful, although I have differed from her translation
on small points. I am well aware that the text as it stands cannot be entirely a Roy-
al Dynastic Tibetan production, and sections have been added; see Karmay 1980,
p. 9. I do believe, however, that the above material is authentic.
132. The dKar chag ldan dkar ma , Lalou 1953, nos. 322, 324, 328, are commen-
taries on the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi, the Sarvadurgatipari$odhana, and the
Dhyanottara, respectively, but are attributed to Buddhagupta. Yet these are un-
doubtedly the works of Buddhaguhya (as is probably no. 326, an unidentiﬁed com-
mentary on the Subahupariprccha). While it is possible that he was also known by
the name Buddhagupta, I ﬁnd it equally likely that his name was translated back
into Sanskrit by the librarian. Hodge 1994, p. 69, calls attention to Guhyagarbha
commentaries in the Peking that are attributed to Buddhaguhya. There is much
about the Peking bsTan ‘gyur, that is problematic, however, and these works may
require reattribution. Please also see Germano 2002.
133. kLong chen chos ‘byung, pp. 272–275: babs gsum pa ni | slob dpon sangs rgyas
gsang ba gangs ti si la byon pa’i tshe chos gsungs pa rnams yin te | sku che ba’i lo
rgyus ni | rgya gar nub phyogs pa’i rgyal rigs chen po zhig yin cing | lan gcig gi
tshe rgyal po chen po zhig la sras zhig ‘khrungs pa las | rgyal po’i thugs dgongs la
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 399 ---
nga’i bu ‘di la ‘jig rten gyi khams na gang zag mi’i slob dpon du bya ba’i ‘os med
pas mkhyen rab kyi mnga’ bdag ‘phags pa ‘jam dpal bsgrub tu bcug la de la slob
dpon zhu dgos snyam nas | sku rten lugs sku khru gang | gsung rten me tog pad-
ma | thugs rten ‘o ma spar bu gang gtad de | rgyal pos ‘jam dpal gyi sgom lung
phog nas bsgrub tu bcug pas rgyal po bsod nams che ba dang | rgyal rigs yin pas
zhag drug nas ‘grub ste | lugs sku zhal ‘dzum pa dang bzhad pa la sogs pa byung |
padma’ang sor mar skyes pa ‘dra ba byung | ’o ma yang lud la khad pa byung ste
rgyal bu’i bsam pa la ‘jam dpal ‘grub nas ‘dug bas siddhi gang la blangs na drag
snyam pa’i the tshom skyes pa las | lha nyid bdud ‘char ka nag po zhes bya ste |
bya nag po chen po zhig tu sprul nas gshogs pa chur bcug pa sa la bsgres te | slob
dpon gyi ‘gram pa la brgyab pas dar cig brgyal bar gyur te | [brgyal ba] sangs pa
dang bltas pas | lugs sku’ang nag log [ger] song | padma yang rnying par [273] song
| ’o ma yang bskams la khad par song | [rgyal bu’i bsam pa la] da res siddhi gang
la blangs kyang chog pa’i dus su siddhi ma blangs pas lan | de cis nyes snyam na
the tshom zos pas lan | de cis lan na thos pa chung bas lan snyam nas | ha cang
thos pa chung na yang bdud kyi las su rig par bya ste | nga’am nga lta bu’o gsungs
nas | yab rgyal po la zhus nas | rgya gar shar phyogs su pandi ta lnga brgya’i drung
du thos pa mdzad du byon pas | khong rigs bzang ba dang | ’jam dpal grub pa’i
stobs kyis pandi ta lnga brgya’i mkhyen pa thams cad thogs pa med par thugs su
chud cing mkhas pa chen por gyur te khong rigs bzang ba dang mkhas pa’i stobs
kyis longs spyod ‘du ‘dzi mang po ‘dus pas g.yengs pa shin tu che ste | skyo ba skyes
nas ha cang thos pa che na bdud kyi las su rigs par bya ste | nga’am nga lta bu’o
gsungs nas | gangs ti se bya rog gi gdong pa can gser brag bya skyibs bya bar sgom
sgrub la byon pa dang de’i dus su bod yul na chos skyong ba’i rgyal po mnga’ bdag
khri srong lde btsan bzhugs pa dang dus mtshungs nas | gang ti si na rgya gar gyi
pandi ta mkhas pa zhig byon nas ‘dug zer ba thos nas | lo tsa ba dba’ manydzu shri
warma dang | mchims shakya pra bha dang | bran ka ra mu khendra | rtsangs the
leg dra dang bzhi la gser phye bre gsum bskur nas gdan ‘dren du btang bas | nga
sgrub pa’i dam bca’ zhig byas nas yod pas bod du mi ‘gro gsungs nas | ’byon du ma
bzhed | mi ‘byon na chos zhu ‘tshal zhus pas | chos bshad pa’i dus la bab bam mi
bab yi dam gyi lha la dri yis [274] gsungs nas | zhag gsum yi dam lha la gsol ba btab
nas dris pas | dus la bab par yi dam lhas lung bstan nas |  chos gsung bar gnang ste
| gsang sngags kyi chos zab mo bshad pa la sngon la dbang bskur dgos gsungs nas
| slob dpon gyis mtsho ma pham g.yu’i mandal bkod pa ‘dra ba la | thig sna bskur
ba tsam gyis zhi ba rdo rje dbyings kyi dkyil ‘khor lha tshogs bzhi bcu rtsa gnyis
mdun gyi nam mkha’ la bkra sa le ‘dug pa bang chen pa rnams kyis zhal mthong
ba byung | der slob dpon gyis dbang lha la zhu ba’am nga la zhu gsungs pas |
khong rnams kyi sems par | lha de nas mi snang bar ‘gro bas | sngon la lha la zhu
byas pas | slob dpon gyis se gol gtogs pa zhig byas te | lha tshogs rnams thugs kar
bsdus nas | khyed bod srin po gdong dmar ba ‘di dam tshig shin tu chung bar ‘dug
ste | chos ‘chad pa’i ‘brel ba tsam ‘dug pas | bshad par bya | gsungs nas mngon par
byang chub pa’i rgyud dang | ngan song sbyong rgyud sgrub thabs dang bcas pa |
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 400 ---
man ngag a ba ta ra la sogs la yo ga’i chos rnams dang | gzhan yang gsang sngags
nang gi sgyu ‘phrul gsang ba’i snying po ‘grel pa dang bcas pa | man ngag lam rim
| slob dpon nyid kyis mdzad pa’i man ngag rdo rje lam rim | khro bo’i lam rim dang
| zhi ba drwa chen drwa chung dang | ’bring po la sogs man ngag phra mo mang
po dang | bsam gtan phyi ma’i rgya cher ‘grel pa dang bcas pa | gsang sngags phyi
nang gi chos mang du bsgyur nas byung ba yin no | bang chen pa rnams kyis rgyal
po la gsungs pa | rgyal pos lo ts a ba [275] rma gnyags gnyis la bshad | de nas mar
sgyu ‘phrul gyi brgyud pa spyi mdo dang mthun par gsungs so || Cf. Germano 2002.
134. Ta ra na tha’i rgya gar chos ‘byung, Schiefner 1868, pp. 170–171. 
135. V ajravidaranadharanyekavirasadhana, To. 2926, fol. 330a2, ri gangs can here
= himavat. McKay discusses Grunendahl’s suggestion that, at the time the Ma-
habharata was composed, Kailasa was a mountain located in the Badrinath region
of the Garwhal (1998, pp. 169–70). While this is appealing, we appear to lack ar-
chaeological evidence for this assignment. 
136. Meister and Dhaky describe surviving sites that Buddhaguhya could have
visited (1988–91, vol. 2, pt. 2, pp. 92–118). 
137. Unfortunately, we have no complete survey of his references. I have not-
ed the following esoteric titles in Buddhaguhya’s works, a list instructive but by
no means exhaustive. In his V airocanabhisambodhitantrapi ndartha, To. 2662: Sar-
vatathagatatattvasamgraha (ref. fols. 3b3, 13a3–6, 16b2, 34b5–6), Mahavairocanab-
hisambodhitantra (ref. fols. 10a1, 23a5, 36a1, 36a7), *Trisamayaraja (ref. fol. 3b4),
Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra (ref. fol. 3b4), Paramadya (ref. fol. 3b3), *Samayo-
ga (fol. 20b7), *Guhyamandalopade$a (fol. 23a2), *V ajrasamayasamodaya(fol. 26b4),
Trailokyavijaya (fol. 26b7–27a1), *Acalamantra (fol. 27a1), Subahupariprccha (fol.
28a7). In the Dhyanottara-patala-tika, To. 2670: *V ajrosnisatantra (fols. 3a4, 15a4–
7), Susiddhikara (fol. 9a4), Subahupariprccha (fol. 9a4–7), Mahavairocanabhisam-
bodhitantra (fols. 9a5–b3, 15b1), Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra (fol. 9a5–b4), Vid-
yadharapitaka (fol. 9a6), Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha (fol. 30b4), V ajra$ekhara
(fol. 30b4–5). In his Subahupariprccha-tantra-pindartha, To. 2671: “Laukika and
Lokottara tantras” (fol. 45a7), Vidyadharapitaka (fol. 49a4). This latter text (To.
2671) appears an early composition, as reﬂected in the paucity of references. 
138. His discussions of gnosis and emptiness probably lead the way; e.g.,
Dhyanottara-patala-tika, To. 2670, fols. 3a5–4a2, 
139. The experience of ‘Brog-mi will be covered in my forthcoming work on the
Tibetan Renaissance (forthcoming b); see, for example, Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan’s
bLa ma brgyud pa bod kyi lo rgyus , the earliest source on ‘Brog-mi’s life. Ba-ri’s ha-
giography has been recovered: bLa ma ba ri lo ts a ba rin chen grags kyi rnam thar ,
and covers the late eleventh century. Just as interesting is the thirteenth-century
Rwa lo tsa ba’i rnam thar, and the Indian portion of the hagiography covers sever-
al centers, pp. 67–80.
140. Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan , T.2125.54.209b20-c11; T akakusu 1896, pp.
38–39. 
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 401 ---
141. Bhadracaryapranidhanarajatika, To. 4013, fol. 234a3: shakya’i bshes gnyen blo
ldan gyis | shakya’i gdung rgyud ‘phel ba’i phyir | kun tu bzang po spyod pa yi | rgya
cher ‘grel pa rab bzang byas |. This text is listed in the dKar chag ldan dkar ma, Lalou
1953, no. 559.
142. Cohen 2000. 
143. Kosalalamkara, To. 2503, fols. 1b5–2a4: grong khyer bzang por sangs rgyas
sde zhes grags thob gang | bla ma’i mchog de dang por rab dad mnyes byas te |
gnang ba mnos shing cho gas dam tshig thob nas ni | de la shin tu mang thos mang
du rnam par dpyad | kong ka nir ni dra mi da dang dbang phyug dpal ‘dus dang |
chos sde chos kyi ‘byung gnas dga’ bas bsnyen bkur byas | sa hyer chos kyi rdo rje
mchog tu mtshan gsol dang | gtsug tor rdo rje’ang mang du legs par bsnyen bkur
byas | yon tan ‘byung gnas byang phyogs u rgyan yul grod de | rgyud don de nyid
‘dzin rgyal indra bhuti bsnyen | tag kyer grong khyer ka sha la yi slob dpon ni | blo
brtan blo gros ‘byung gnas tshul mkhas gus pas bsten | bla ma’i zhal nas yang dag
man ngag gang las ni | cung zad bdag gis ci rtogs dag pa’i lung gi tshul | ’jig rten
rnal ‘byor cho gas slob dpon bzhin rim gyis | ’di ni yun ring gnas phyir bdag gis
rnam par bsams | 
144. Kao seng fa hsien chuan, T.2085.51.862b2–11; Legge 1886, pp. 78–9.
145. Pye is both interesting and illuminating on skillful means, although he
does not adhere to the idea that the Mahayana introduced any signiﬁcant change
in content and refers to this idea as a “crude interpretation” (1978, p. 33), an as-
sessment with which I cannot agree.
146. V airocanabhisambodhitantrapindartha, To. 2662, fol. 2b1–2: gzhan gyi don
phun sum tshogs pa ni sku la sogs pa mi zad pa rnam par sprul pa de nyid kyi byin
gyi rlabs kyi phyag rgya dang | gsang sngags dang | dkyil ‘khor la sogs par brtags
pa’i sgo thabs dang bcas par brjod pa yin no |. 
147. Ibid., fols. 20b6, 35a5–6, 46b3, 58b3, 59a4, 61a6, 61b4, 63a1, 64b1; Dhyanot-
tara-patala-tika, fols. 4b6–7, 10a5.
148. On the simile, and other ﬁgures of speech as well, see Gonda 1949. 
149. Ratnagotravibhaga, Johnston 1950, I.95–133; V ajracchedika Prajñaparamita,
Conze 1957, p. 62, although there are many other Mahayanist texts that expand on
these images. 
150. Trim$ikavijñaptibhasya, Lévi 1925, pp. 15–20. 
151. See, for example, Bhavya’s defense of mantras, explored in Braarvig 1997. 
152. V airocanabhisambodhitantrapindartha, To. 2662, fol. 63b2: de la gsangs
sngags mnyes par byed pa’i las dge ba kha cig gi ‘bras bu ni srid pa gzhan du mn-
gon par ‘grub pa nyid do | kha cig ni bsam pa dang sbyor ba’i dbang gis tshe ‘di
nyid la rnam par smin par ‘gyur te |. 
153. We also frequently ﬁnd the use of √ parinam- in various forms; see Sad-
hanamala, 1925, passim (1:8, 9, etc.)
154. For the Yogacara literature, see Davidson 1985; for one classic statement in
esoteric literature, see Khasama-tantra-tika, 1983, p. 231. 
.         ⁄ 

--- PAGE 402 ---
155. Pithadinirnaya, To. 1606, fols. 134b7–135a2: pu m yi ge la sogs pa’i yi ge
yongs su gyur pa las ‘khor lo’i rtsibs rnams kyi stongs pa’i nang du gnas la sogs
pa’i gnas rnams spyi bo la sogs pa rnams su blta bar bya’o | gnas la sogs pa de
rnams su de de’i gnas su son pa’i rtsa rnams de dang de’i lha’i gzugs kyis yongs
su gyur pa rnam par gzhag ste bsgom par bya’o | dper na phyi rol du gnas la sogs
pa dang nye bar gnas pa’i chu klung gi chu yis gso bar byed pa de bzhin du | lus
la yang rtsa rnams kyis sen mo la sogs pa gso bar byed do zhes pa mtshungs pa
nyid do |. 
156. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Sastri 1920, pp. 51–52: vaktavya$ ca iyam bho mahabod-
hisattvasya mañju$riyah kumarabhutasya samayarahsyam matikramisyatha iti |  m a
bahu apunyam prasavisyatha iti | sarvamantra$ ca na pratikseptavyah | sarvabuddha-
bodhisattva$ ca na visa mvadaniyah | gurur aradhaniya$ ceti | anyath a samay-
atikramah syat | mantra$ ca siddhim na gaccheyuh | bahu punyam syad iti | 
157. Bagchi 1945, esp. pp. 145–146, which speciﬁes the transgressions that be-
come impediments to consecration. 
158. This burning has been cited in Tibetan political literature; see the sBa
bzhed zhabs btags ma , Stein 1961, pp. 52–53; sBa bzhed , mGon-po rgyal-mtshan
1980, p. 62; dBa’ bzhed, Wangdu and Diemberger 2000, p. 90. 
159. Sastri 1942, pp. 103–105.
160. Mahakalatantra, To. 440, fols. 78a2–79a2.
161. See Fussman 1994 for an afﬁrmation that Buddhist doctrine did not sub-
stantially change its formulation with the development in Gandhara. I thank Gre-
gory Schopen for providing me with a copy of this article.
162. Nihom 1994, pp. 151–173; Klimburg-Salter 1997, pp. 207–216; Vitali 1990,
pp. 40–51.
.     
1. Krsnayamari-tantra, Rinpoche and Dvivedi 1992, XI.9–12, p. 73: 
mahataviprade$esu aruhya mahisottamam |
sarpair abharanam krtva ayovajram tu dharayet || 9
ke$am tu piNgalam karyam urdhvarupam vi$esatah |
$irah kapalaih samvestya $ma$rau piNgalam acaret || 10
hrih stryadi mantram uccarya ayovajram samudvahet |
simhanadam tatah karyam yamarivajraprayogatah || 11
kiñcitsamarthyam abhujya kridaya nagaram vi$et |
rtyam ca subhagam karyam sadavadipragayanam || 12
The translation supposes that the ochre (piNgala) smeared in the hair and beard
of our siddha friend is that of gorocana; see Harsacarita for its use by
Bhairavacarya’s disciples, Kane 1918, p. 50. I have accepted the editors’ suggestion
 ⁄ .        

--- PAGE 403 ---
that 12d read “pragayanam” instead of “pra$ayanam” (Tib., glu blang bya). I thank
Phyllis Granoff for suggestions on the translation of these verses.
2. Ruegg 1964, especially pp. 87–90.
3. Sanderson 1994, p. 92.
4. Saussure 1983, pp. 13–15.
5. For a cogent criticism of Saussure’s model, see Volo$inov 1973, pp. 57–63. 
6. White 1996, especially the summary p. 335. As is obvious in the following
discussion, I cannot entirely agree with the ﬁndings of Professor White’s text. 
7. For a broad overview, which is not without difﬁculties, see Mishra 1973. 
8. Stein 1980, p. 79; Ta t’ang hsi yü chi, Beal 1869, 2:227 ff. 
9. The text has been edited and commented on many times. I am using the edi-
tion prepared in Barua 1938. I know of no earlier epigraphic mention of siddhas.
10. The tenth-century c.e. Digambara work by Nemicandra, the Dravva-sam-
gaha, v. 51, deﬁnes a siddha as a soul having the shape of a human, but with a body
in which the eight forms of karma destroyed. 
11. Fleet 1888, pp. 79–88.
12. Ramayana, Yuddhakanda, Vaidya 1971, Appendix I, no. 65, pp. 1082–83. For
an important recent work on the early solar cult, see Chenet 1993. 
13. There are similar references in the surviving works of the second-century
Buddhist poet A $vaghosa, the Saundarananda, Johnston 1928, X.6, and Bud-
dhacarita, Johnston 1936, VII.1, XIV.87. 
14. Artha$astra, Kangle 1960, IV.3.40–44.
15. Artha$astra, Kangle 1960, IV.5.1–16. 
16. Artha$astra, Kangle 1960, V.1.33–34, XII.2.14.
17. Virtually all of Artha$astra XII.2 is so dedicated. 
18. Artha$astra, Kangle 1960, V.2.59–63, V.6.48.
19. Artha$astra, Kangle 1960, V.2.39–41.
20. Ramayana I.30.14.
21. Ramayana I.28.2cd: siddha$rama iti khyatah siddho hy atra mahatapah |
22. Milindapañha, Trenckner 1880, IV.1.43–45, pp. 120–121.
23. Harsacarita, Kane 1918, pp. 46–54.
24. Ibid., p. 53: kuntal i kiriti hari keyuri mekhali mudgari khadgi. The most
normative equipment of the Vidyadhara is the sword. See Hinüber 1978. 
25. Avantisundarikatha, Kale 1966, pp. 172–173; this work used to be called the
Da$akumaracarita before its true identity was discovered; see Rabe 1997. 
26. For example, Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha, Poddar 1986, XX.97–131.
27. The protest against the excessive reductionism of legitimation theory by
Pollock is well merited (1996, pp. 236–239; 1998, pp. 13, 31–34). However, we must
also consider—as Pollock does himself—questions of legitimation and its social
function must be assessed, even if it cannot be the sole cause for such relations. 
28. Lorenzen 1972, pp. 88–90.
29. Ibid., p. 2.
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 404 ---
30. Sanderson 1988, pp. 665–666.
31. Hinüber 1992, pp. 35–82.
32. MD%, VIII.93, XI.72–89; the translation makes this latter section XI.73–90. 
33. The Rucikaratika; cited in Tucci 1930, p. 131; Lorenzen 1972, p. 49 n.
34. Sanderson 1988, p. 674; Dyczkowski 1988, p. 38.
35. Karpuramañjari I.22–23 (Know and Lanman, pp. 24–25): 
mantana tantana na kim pi jane jhanam ca no kim pi guruppasaa | 
majjam piamo mihilam ramamo mokkham ca jamo kulamaggalagga || 22
avi a randa canda dikkhia dhammadara majjam mamsam pijjae khajjae a | 
bhikkha bhojjam cammakhandam ca sejja kolo dhammo kassa no bhai
rammo || 23
36. Gaüdavaho 319 (Suru 1975). 
37. Dehejia 1986. 
38. These other potential sites include Palodhar (in the Mahesana District of
Gujarat), Kamli (close to Siddhpur in Gujarat), Bharuch (Gujarat), Ajmer, Ujjain,
and Delhi; see ibid., pp. 67–90. 
39. For a summary discussion of the Hirapur site, see Donaldson 1985–87,
1:261–263. 
40. Donaldson 1986.
41. For the Siyan inscription of Nayapala, see Sircar 1971; pp. 47–48, 54; for Uda-
yaditya’s Mominabad inscription, see Desai 1962, pp. 94–95. 
42. Fleet 1888, p. 76 l. 37. 
43. The best discussions to date are by Lorenzen 1972, pp. 173–192; Dyczkows-
ki 1988, pp. 19–26; Bhandarkar 1908; and, perhaps most important, the various ar-
ticles by Hara (1958, 1973, 1994). 
44. Hara 1958; Gonda 1977, pp. 216–224; Lorenzen 1972, pp. 173–192. This ma-
terial is treated in chapter 3 of the main text: Pa$upatasutra, Sastri 1940, pp. 77 ff. 
45. Pa$upatasutra, Sastri 1940, V. 20: siddhayogi na lipyate karmana patakena va ||. 
46. Bhattacharya 1955. 
47. Freed and Freed 1993, pp. 15–18, 190–211.
48. On the association of mediumship and spirit possession with esoteric Bud-
dhism, see Granoff 1979, p. 78; Strickmann 1996, pp. 50–52, 215–220; idem 2002,
pp. 204–218.
49. Fleet 1888, pp. 260–262.
50. Bühler 1892, pp. 106, 111, v. 27: va nik prasiddhas siddhatmajo manyukana-
madheyah |. Bühler, following others, assigns the date of this inscription to 804
c.e., but Vogel reassesses the date to 1204 c.e. (1905–6, p. 22). This 1204 date has
been accepted by others, especially Postel et al. (1985, p. 114). 
51. Ojha 1917–18. 
52. Postel et al. 1985, pp. 250–251, 124, frontispiece. 
53. The best study of this phenomenon of which I am aware is that in Camp-
bell (1976, pp. 24, 29, 70), but is much more widespread than the Kangra Valley.
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 405 ---
See also Emerson 1920, pp. 118–119, for Ma ndi State. The term “sidh” also applies
to gods, and this usage is already seen in the Candamaharosana-tantra 6.196.
54. Campbell 1976, p. 29. Cf. Emerson 1920, p. 112.
55. For Banarsi Bir Babas, see Coccari 1989.
56. See Temple 1884–90 for Punjabi versions of sidh legends; for example, P u-
ran Bhagat’s legends are described on pp. 517–562. 
57. This information is based both on Upadhyay 1986 and my own ﬁeldwork in
Mandi.
58. Yazdani 1960, 1:438–444; Mishra 1973, pp. 146–153; this popular position is
still seen as recently as Sharma 1996, pp. 90–131. 
59. Bhagavadgita IX.23: ye ‘py anyadevatabhakta yajante $raddhaya ‘anvitah | te
‘pi mam eva kaunteya yajanty avidhipurvakam ||. 
60. For example, Chattopadhyaya 1994, pp. 223–232; Singh 1993, pp. 295–303. 
61. Stein 1980, pp. 80–81.
62. Mukherjee 1940, pp. 26, 53. 
63. Granoff 1986–92 has discussed some of these voices.
64. Granoff 2000, pp. 404–409. 
65. For example, Krsnayamari-tantra, Rinpoche and Dvivedi 1992, XIV.16–18. 
66. Ibid., XVII.13: svaparadharmam na dusayet. 
67. V ajrapañjara, To. 419, fol. 54b7–55a1: bcom ldan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal pa | stong
ba snying rje tha dad med | gang du sems ni rab bsgoms pa | ’di ni sangs rgyas chos
dang ni | dge ‘dun gyi yang bstan pa’o | mu stegs can sun dbyung ba dang | rgol
ba rnams tshar gcod pa dang |  rang gi sde’i gzhung brjod pa zhes bya ba’i ting nge
‘dzin to |
68. Tillopadadohakosa, pp. 46–77: bamh avihnu mahesura dev a | bohisattva ma
karahu seva || deva ma pujahu titya na java | devapujahi na mokkha pava || 
69. Guhyasamaja-tantra, XIII.67–68: sarvat irtyapravadistambhanavajro n ama
samadhih | krodh akaram trivajragran p itakiñjalkasannibhan | girir aja iva sarv an
dhyatva murdhni prabh avayet || 67 buddhasainyam api stambhe mriyate n atra
sam$ayah || 68
This interpretation follows Pradipodyotana, Chakravarti 1984, p. 133. 
70. Siklós 1996, p. 35. 
71. For example, Krsnayamari-tantra IV.56. 
72. E.g., bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo rgyus , SKB III.170.1.1–173.1.6. 
73. De 1953. 
74. The literature on Vidy adharas is not as extensive as one might want; im-
portant are Lüders 1939, Przyluski 1923, Hinüber 1978, Jain 1974, and more recent-
ly Granoff 2000, pp. 412–419. To this list may be added the speciﬁcally early eso-
teric afﬁrmation of Vidy adharas as sorcerers, for that is the understanding of the
Royal Dynastic Tibetan translators of the Vidyottama, who rendered the term as
rig-sngags-’chang, rather than the later rig-’dzin; see Vidyottama-mahatantra, To.
746, fols. 3b3–4a1, 9a2, 11a4, etc. 
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 406 ---
75. %ardulakarnavadana, p. 2; the mention of the mother as a vidy adhari does
not seem to be found in the earliest Chinese translations of the work. 
76. Ratnagunasañcaya-gatha XXVII.5.
77. LaNkavatara-sutra, 1923, p. 248; Bodhisattvabhumi, Wogihara 1930–36, p.
359.
78. This usage is sustained as late as Alb iruni’s description, written approxi-
mately 1030, when he refers to vidyadharas as “demon-sorcerers”; Sachau 1910, 1:91.
79. Va rnarhavarnastotra II.33 [Hartmann 1987, p. 108]: sarvakle $amayaghnaya
sarva$alyapaharine | siddhavidy adharayâstu bhisacchresthaya te nama h ||. I have
accepted Hartmann’s reconstruction of this verse. Matrceta’s date would be from
his association with Kaniska, now usually understood to be active in the ﬁrst quar-
ter of the second century c.e.
80. Wright indicates that Fo T’u-teng was inﬂuential in four areas: agriculture,
warfare, medicine, and politics—all good siddha concerns (1990, p. 38); Bod-
hisattvabhumi, Wogihara 1930–36, p. 359. 
81. I do not have in mind Samuel’s “shamanic” vs. clerical Buddhism, which
primarily refers to esoteric vs. exoteric Buddhist practices (Samuel 1993, pp. 3–10).
I ﬁnd Samuel’s formulation unhelpful, in part because esoteric Buddhism adheres
to neither the ecological nor the phenomenological aspects of normative shaman-
ism. See Hultkrantz 1978 for a thoughtful discussion. 
82. V ajra$ekhara, To. 480, fol. 149a7–b1; Pe. 113, rgyud, nya 170a3–4; quoted in the
Yogaratnamala of Kanhapa, Hevajra Tantra,Snellgrove 1959, 2:104–105: drdham sa-
ram asau$isyam acchedyabhedyalaksanam | adahi avina$i ca $unyata vajram ucyate ||.
This verse is also quoted in Munidatta’s commentary to the Caryagitiko$a, Kværne
1977, pp. 84–85; in the Advayavajrasamgraha, 1927, p. 23.23–24; and elsewhere. Al-
though this verse of the V ajra$ekhara has been considered authoritative, it is notable
that it comes in the middle of an extended treatise on deﬁnitions of esoteric termi-
nology and even includes an entirely different deﬁnition of vajra (To. 480, fol.
149b3–4, Pe. 113, fol. 170a7) in conjunction with amoghavajra and vajrakula, much as
this one occurred in conjunction with emptiness. Another, probably earlier deﬁni-
tion of vajra in the same vein, which may have informed the V ajra$ekhara, was the
V ajravidarana-dharani, 1937, p. 7. This work was very popular at one time, with
commentaries and ritual manuals ranging from those attributed to Buddhaguhya to
one ascribed to Virupa; see To. 2678–2687.
83. Mañju$rinamasamgiti v.1b [Davidson, ed. and trans. 1981, pp. 18, 49, for re-
lated literature].
84. For the eroticization of Vajrasattva, see the longer Sarvabuddhasamayoga,
To. 366, fols. 152b2, 153a4, 154b3, etc. 
85. Guhyasamaja XVIII.52: moho dve sas tath a ragah sada vajre rati h sthita |
upayas tena buddhanam vajrayanam iti smrtam ||. 
86. Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei, T.869.18.286c12–15; Giebel
1995, pp. 181-2; I thank Kenneth Eastman for sharing this point with me.
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 407 ---
87. I discuss this material in Davidson 2002b. 
88. For example, Pañcakrama II.65 (%akyamitra’s section); Chin kang ting ching
yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei, T.869.18.286c; Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkati-
ka, To. 2647, fol. 273a3; Jñ anamitra’s work is included in the early ninth-century
dKar chag ldan dkar ma, Lalou 1953, no. 523; for a discussion of its importance, see
Kanaoka 1966. I discuss the Vil asavajra references in Mañju$rinamasamgiti,
Davidson 1981, pp. 7–8; see also Davidson forthcoming a. The Laghusamvara
Tantra, To. 368, fols. 216a4, 232a5–6, references several other works: the
Tattvasamgraha, the “Guhyatantra,” the Paramadya, and the V ajrabhairava Tantra.
This latter is the most intriguing, yet is not as clear as we might like. For a recent
translation of ﬁve tantras designated as “ V ajrabhairava,”see Siklós 1996.
89. For example, Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fol. 152b6; Guhyasamaja
VII.21—27, X.14, XI.3, etc., with XV.15–18, 39–48, being particularly interesting;
Laghusamvara, To. 368, fols. 224a4–b5, 237a4–7, 239b1–4, etc.
90. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fols. 138b6–139a4; cf. fols. 130b5–131a4 and Sub-
ahupariprccha-tantrapindartha, To. 2671, fols. 52b6–53a2.
91. Subahupariprccha-tantra-pindartha, To. 2671, fols. 52b7–53a2.
92. Dhyanottarapatalakrama, To. 808, fol. 225a6, has a section on controlling
various beings, including women, but there appears nothing sexual in the context,
and Buddhaguhya treats it as an unremarkable verse; Dhyanottara-patala-tika, To.
2670, fol. 34b2.
93. Guhyasiddhi, 1987, pp. 50–59; VIII.33 is particularly interesting in this regard. 
94. V ajrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, To. 2488, fol. 222a4; this material is
translated and discussed in chapter 7.
95. Jñanasiddhi XVII.9cd: dharmar ajyabhisekagram abhi sekam niruttaram.
Similarly, the V ajramalabhidhana-mahayoga-tantra, To. 445, fol. 212b2–4.
96. See Sekatanvayasamgraha, in Advayavajrasamgraha, 1927, pp. 36–39; To.
2243, fols. 122b4–124b7. Theoretical and synthetic texts dealing with consecration
surviving in Tibetan are found in several places in the sDe-dge canon, To.
2243–2244, 2252–2253, 2470, 2472–2477. An exception is Guhyasiddhi Ch. III.
97. Abhisekanirukti, To. 2476, vol. zi, fols. 159b4–168b7; esp. fol. 167a1; cf.
Guhyasiddhi III.
98. Bodhipathapradipa, Eimer 1978; see also Davidson, trans. 1995. 
99. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fol. 137b2–4; T.895b7–17. In the explanation, I
follow the only extensive commentary, the ‘Phags pa dpung bzangs kyis zhus ba’i
rgyud kyi tshig gi don bshad pa’i brjed byang , To. 2672. We know almost nothing
about this valuable commentary, either its author or its translator, if it was trans-
lated. Bu-ston’s bsTan-’gyur catalogue, the bsTan ‘gyur gyi dkar chag yid bzhin nor
bu dbang gi rgyal po’i phreng ba, p. 520.7, includes the commentary but provides no
more information than the title. 
100. Buddhaguhya certainly recognizes other siddhis, especially the sword ac-
complishment; see Dhyanottara-patala-tika, To. 2670, fol. 30b5, 37b7; in the for-
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 408 ---
mer place he references the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha and the V ajra$ekhara as
the sources. See also V airocanabhisambodhitantrapindartha, To. 2662, fol. 64a7.
101. Sadhanamala, 1925, 2:350; see Lessing and Wayman 1968, pp. 220–221 n;
Pradipodyotana, Chakravarti 1984, p. 194; sometimes, as in the latter case, we see
“pill manufacture” gulika in the place of passing through the earth as a form of
siddhi. 
102. See the different list produced in Siklós 1996, p. 28n7.
103. Krsnayamari-tantra IV.45, IX.4 (seeds); Samputa, To. 381, fols. 121b5, 128a6;
Samvarodaya-tantra X.36, XXVII.10–14; Mahakala-tantra, in Stablein 1976, pp.
169, 267, 275–277; V ajramahabhairava-tantra, in Siklós 1996, p. 83; Guhyasamaja
XV.81. 
104. Harner 1973, pp. 125–147.
105. Sanderson 1994, pp. 94–95; Sanderson (2001) does not bring the issue of
the K apalikas into the discussion, but simply refers to the proposed sources as
Vidyapitha and Kaula (including Krama). Sanderson is certainly to be congratu-
lated for the discovery of the intertextuality between speciﬁc works, but we may
wonder whether there is a curious theology of scripture that informs his proposals.
He does not seem to question the category construction of “Vidy apitha tantras,”
although the emergence of texts would seem necessarily to predate the category,
and Sanderson appears to presume that the category formed as a whole. While it
is seldom that a received body of texts reﬂects no inﬂuence at all, this seems to be
Sanderson’s ultimate position on the Vidyapitha %aiva scriptures. There is even a
prima facie argument against the proposed direction of the borrowing, since
Sanderson (2001, pp. 44–47) takes as prototypical that a ungrammatical verse of the
Laghusamvara can only be from the Picumata, which provides a good Sanskrit
reading. Yet this method apparently contradicts the well-known textual procedure
of assuming the difﬁcult reading to be the preferred one, summed up by Johann
Albrecht Bengel in his famous 1734 dictum, “to the easier reading, the harder is to
be preferred” (proclivi scriptioni praestat ardua). As Baird (1992, p. 73) notes, “Be-
hind this principle is the assumption that scribes tend to change (or corrupt) a text
in order to make it more readable.” As will be clear in chapter 6, the nature of Bud-
dhist tantric Sanskrit must be assessed in the environment of regional Sanskrits,
and its later “improvement” was a consistent theme in the Buddhist (and we might
suppose %aiva) context. This direction accords well with the understanding of
Goudriaan and Gupta (1981, p. 29), who point out that the later %aiva and %akta
tantras demonstrate better Sanskrit. Even then, decisions about textual borrowing
are best made case by case, rather than corpus by corpus, and I believe that a re-
ciprocal appropriation model (allowing for oral recitation, partial memorization,
ritual imitation, individual conversion, etc.) will prove the most fruitful. It is in-
structive that, while Bühnemann accepts aspects of Sanderson’s model, she also
ﬁnds Buddhist inﬂuences within %aiva scriptures (1999, 2000). I thank Fred Smith
for drawing my attention to Sanderson’s 2001 article and providing me with a copy.
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 409 ---
106. The sources of this version of the myth are discussed in Davidson 1991 and
Stein 1995.
107. Kubjikamatatantra, “Introduction,” in Goudriaan and Schoterman 1988,
pp. 111–112; White 1996, pp. 110–113; Lorenzen 1972, pp. 51–52; the art historical cir-
cumstances are explored in Shaw 1997, although his command of the textual ma-
terial is weak.
108. Malatimadhava I.15–16, V.1–6, V.21-VI.2, VIII.8, IX.1–7, 41–54, X.16–25.
109. This date is found in the relatively early (800 c.e.) catalogue of Yüan-chao,
the Chen yüan hsin ting shih chiao mu lu , T.2157.55.974c3; Strickmann has empha-
sized certain aspects of the text that appear more peripheral than central (1996, pp.
221–231); cf. Lalou 1955. 
110. The section actually begins in chapter 6 and continues through chapter 7;
Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fols. 129a4–131b2; Subhakarasi mha’s translation ob-
scures the signiﬁcance, T.895.18.726c29–728a14. 
111. Granoff speculates that the mention of Nilapatas (evidently the same as nil-
ambara) by Jayantabhatta’s Nyayamañjari may identify Jainas (1986–92, p. 297 n),
but Ruegg argues for their Buddhist character (1981, pp. 223–224), which the Sub-
ahupariprccha appears to support. Alb iruni, writing about 1030 c.e., notes that
Brahmans were forbidden to wear or touch the color blue, and this may be related
to the “blue-clad” behavior; Sachau 1910, 2:132. See also Murthy 1987.
112. Chapter 5 of Subahupariprccha is particularly important in this regard: To.
805, fol. 125a4–127b3; T.895.18.725a20–726a18; the term “siddhi” is translated some-
times as ch’eng-chiu and other times as hsi-ti.
113. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fol. 123a3: T. 895.18.723a28; compare Guhyasama-
ja XIV.60, which details a similar list of materials to be used in the manufacture
of ritual daggers (kila).
114. Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei; T. 869.18.286c9–16. 
115. Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fol. 273a3; as pointed out
by Kanaoka 1966, p. 467, Jñanamitra’s work is included in the early ninth-centu-
ry dKar chag ldan dkar ma, Lalou 1953, no. 523. 
116. Kaneko 1982, no. 207; mTshams-brag manuscript, vol. tsha, fols. 1b1–26a7. 
117. A comparison of the texts shows many sections, included within differing
chapters, that indicate a common basis for the Tibetan translations of those vers-
es or sections; cf., especially, the ma ndala arrangement and justiﬁcation found in
the second chapter of the shorter recension, fols. 7b4–12a7, against virtually the
same material found in chapter 5 of To. 366, fols. 155b3–159a4. The chapter order
and naming, though, is completely different, and we might suspect an earlier ver-
sion that had no chapter divisions in the manner of the received versions. The pri-
ma facie supposition that the shorter text is earlier may be called into question by
the presence of rather advanced terminology in the text, e.g., the four kinds of
bliss, fol. 3a6. The shorter text, while one-third to one-half the size of the longer
version, has eleven chapters (kalpa), whereas To. 366 has ten. Sarvabuddhasamayo-
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 410 ---
ga-dakinimaya-sambara-tantrarthodaratika, To. 1659, fols. 245a5–248b3, attributed
to Indranala, discusses the question of its preaching and provides contents for both
this and its Uttarottaratantra. Similarly, the *Suratavajra commentary, Sarvabud-
dhasamayoga-dakinimaya-sambara-vrtti-samayogalamkara, To. 1660, fol. 389 b,
discusses the recensions available to him. 
118. See Kaneko 1982, nos. 206 (= To. 366) and 207; both versions are includ-
ed in mTshams-brag, vol. tsha; To. 366 is found in mTshams-brag manuscript,
tsha, fols. 58b3–126b3. 
119. mTshams-brag, vol. tsha, fols. 26a6–7, represents the shorter text to be the
translation of Pandita [?Buddha-] Guhya and ‘Brog-mi dPal gyi ye-shes; fol. 126b1
represents the longer text to be the translation of Vajrah asa and rMa Rin-chen-
mchog. The Sarvabuddhasamayoga is not mentioned in the dKar chag ldan mkhar
ma (Lalou 1953), yet it is quoted in the bSam gtan mig sgron of gNubs-chen, pp.
204.6–205.2 and appears in the list of Devaputra as Kayatantrasarvabuddhasamayo-
ga; see Hackin 1924, p. 6; it is mentioned in Pañcakrama II.65. It seems to be ref-
erenced by Buddhaguhya as well; see chapter 4, n. 137, above.
120. Sanderson 1988. Goudriaan and Gupta (1981, p. 45) believe the Ja-
yarathayamala to be later than Sanderson’s chronology allows. Sanderson’s in-
formative and detailed discussion (2001, pp. 2–18) concludes: “It is quite possible
that by the seventh century most of the literature available to %aiva scholars in the
tenth was already in existence. But it is not until the beginning of the ninth that
we have ﬁrm evidence of speciﬁc texts.” We may want to resist, though, the move-
ment from possibility to probability without further evidence.
121. Majumdar 1953, no. 152, pp. 362–382; Cœdès and Dupont 1943–46; Chakra-
varti 1978 is a two-volume work dedicated to the inscription.
122. For example, Dyczkowski 1988, p. 36; Sanderson 2001, p. 8n; Goudriaan
and Gupta 1981, 21.
123. Majumdar 1953, no. 54, pp. 57–60; Chakravarti 1978, 1:127.
124. Majumdar 1953, p. 60, v. 32. 
125. Chakravarti 1978, 1:147 n81.
126. Abhinavagupta’s sources have been detailed by Rastogi 1987, appendices 1,
4, 5, and 9. Sanderson 2001 provides excellent data.
127. For a discussion of this passage, see Sanderson 2001, pp. 10–13, which cor-
rects my earlier Mañju$rinamasamgiti, Davidson 1981, p. 8n21.
128.K alikapurana 59.71,77; 60.1, 10, and so on throughout chapters 60, 61, 63,
64, etc.
129. Gross 1992, pp. 127–131.
130. See Huber 1990 for some problems of geography. Mayer (1998, p. 280) has
questioned my assertion that we have little validation that these twenty-four sites
were speciﬁcally %aiva (1991), but has presented no evidence beyond mythology for
such an afﬁrmation. 
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 411 ---
131. Lorenzen 1972, pp. 21–22; idem 1989; Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha, 21.144,
22.228; Kalika-purana, chapter 35.
132. Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha, 21.144; Lorenzen 1972, pp. 50–52. 
133. Sircar 1948, passim; Kubjikamatatantra, “Introduction,” in Goudriaan and
Schoterman 1988, pp. 123–126; Satsahasra Samhita, Schoterman 1982, pp. 148–50, to
name but a few. 
134. Kuwayama1991, pp. 269–275.
135. Hevajra Tantra, I.vii.12.
136. Kalika-purana, 38.99–161; 64.36.
137. Ta t’ang hsi yü chi, T.2087.51.932a14–23 [Beal 1869, 2:233]; Beal observes, “I
am disposed, therefore, to think that he did not go farther south than Kanchi. In
this case the subsequent account he gives us of Malakû ta, Mount Malaya, and
Potaraka (Potalaka), is derived from hearsay” (2:231n). A more reliable description
is the pilgrimage guide found in Po ta lar ‘gro ba’i lam yig , To. 3756, which men-
tions its placement in the Malaya Mts., fol. 101a2; this is in accord with v. 7c of the
Potalakastaka: malayagiricandanadhuparatim. Cf. Tucci 1949, 2.552–553.
138. Kavyamimamsa, Parashar 2000, pp. 261–262.
139. Chattopadhyaya 1994, p. 61. For Abu’s sites, Mehta 1970. According to Surya-
vanshi 1962, p. 12, the area around Mt. Arbuda was called Abhirade$a at one time.
140. Natya$astra, XVII.63
141. Mirashi 1955, 1:233.
142. Krtyakalpataru, Tirthavivecanakandam, p. 254. 
143. Rocher 1986, pp. 229, 234.
144. McKay 1998, pp. 170–171. 
145. Sircar 1948, p. 32.
146. Pithadinirnaya, To. 1606, especially ff. 131a forward. 
147. Pithadinirnaya, To. 1606, fol. 132a7-b1: de ci ltar mi ‘gal zhe na | gnas dang
nye ba’i zhing dag tsha grang dang dngos po dang dngos med bzhin du phan tshun
‘gal ba ni ma yin te | gcig la yang ming sna tshogs ji ltar mi ‘gal zhes so | ’dir na ga
ra dang | pat a li pu ta dang | ma la wa sogs gsum ni nye ba’i zhing du gsungs so |.
Nagara was considered by Sircar (1971, p. 206) the ancient capital of the region; ev-
idently it was given the name Pataliputa at this time as well.
148. Mahamayurividyarajñi, Shu¯yo 1972, pp. 10–58; these materials were ﬁrst
explored by Lévi 1915.
149. Mañju$rimulakalpa, chapter 30 of the received text, Sastri 1920, pp.
325–326; To. 543, fols. 230b7–233a2; T.1191.20.898a18-c24. It is interesting that the
Chinese translation does not identify either C ina or Mah acina with China, but
renders them phonetically instead. 
150. Pa$upatasutra, chapter 5, is a lengthy description of %iva’s names; see the
introduction to the Kaundinya-bhasya, in Pa$upatasutra, Sastri 1940, pp. 109–110,
for the context. 
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 412 ---
151. Kalika-purana, 35.10–11; 46.4–10, 
152. Kalika-purana, 50.59–147. 
153. Shafer 1954, pp. 124–125. 
154. This is the opinion of Guha (1991, pp. 2–28); cf. p. 21, where he uses this
ethnonym to designation several different tribes, including the Boro, Kachari,
Mech, Rabha, Dimasa, Hojai, Hajong, Lalung, Tipra Goro, and probably
Chutiyas and Morans. 
155. Subahupariprccha, To. 805, fol. 118b6; T.895.18.720a9.
156. Kalika-purana, 63.135–137b: (with minor emendations) $ma$anam heruka-
khyam ca raktavarnam bhayaNkaram | asicarmadharam raudram bhuñjanam manu-
jamisam || tis rbhir mu ndamalabhir galadrakt abhi rajitam | agninirdagdhaviga-
laddantapretoparisthitam || pujayec cintanenaiva $astravahanabhusanam |. The text
also uses the designation Heruka for a liNgam nearby; Kalika-purana, 67.69, 79.172.
157. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366. fols. 167a5–168a3, 167a6, 171a6–172b2, 181a6–
181b3, 187a1, 188b7–189a1; similarly the shorter Sarvabuddhasamayoga, fols. 6a3–6b3. 
158. Rgveda 1.51.6, 1.59.6, 6.47.21; studied by Parpola 1988, pp. 215, 261-2.
159. Rgveda 6.31.4, 7.99.5.
160. Rgveda 4.30.14, 6.26.5.
161. Artha$astra XIV.3.19.
162. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fol. 151b6–7.
163. Studied by Goudriaan 1973, and in his introduction to the edition and
translation of the Vina$ikhatantra, pp. 18–23; Tumburu also occurs in the
Mañju$rimulakalpa, references in Goudriaan 1973, p. 85. 
164. Vina$ikhatantra vv. 323–363; the relationship of this section to Agni Purana
348 or other sources has yet to be explored. For the Buddhist ekaksara ideology and
practices, see Przyluski 1923, p. 305, who speciﬁes T. 956, 1181–82; this idea became
reafﬁrmed in Mañju$rimulakalpa, chapters 9, 14, 25–27 (Sastri 1920, pp. 81–84,
129–144, 284–310) and was extended in the 709 c.e. translation of Bodhiruci, I tsu
fo ting lun wang ching T. 951. The notion of a unique syllable was further the top-
ic of T. 950, 953–958, all of which concern the practice and all were translated from
the early to mid-eighth century.
165. Rudrayamala, chapters 37–40, pp. 372–394; Goudriaan and Gupta 1981, p.
87; this material from different sources has been studied in Bharati 1965, pp. 66–79,
238–244.
166. The ﬁrst thirty chapters of the Kalika-purana are almost exclusively Vais-
nava, with a heavy emphasis on the Var aha incarnation; the Va isnavitantra is ref-
erenced in Kalika-purana 59.37, 59.68, 60.5, 61.36, and chapters 63, 64 passim, etc.
167. Sadhanamala, “Introduction,” in Bhattacharya 1925, 2:cxi–ii; Bhattacharya
1930; the Rudrayamala section is chapter 17 of the received text Rudrayamala,
Yogatantra Department 1980, pp. 169–183. For a somewhat different approach to
this issue, see Bühnemann 1999, pp. 303 ff., and 2000. 
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 413 ---
168. GoraksasiddhantasaNgraha, P andeya 1973, p. 16: k apaliko m argah kim
artham prakatikrtah ? ity apeksyayaha visno$ caturvim$atisaNkhyaka avatara jatas te
ca karyante madonmatta jatah | katham ? yatha ‘nte tiryagyonayo jantavah kridah
kurvanti tath a varaho n rsimha$ cetyadayo bh udaranavanyabhayadanadikarane
pravrttah | puragramaditadanam kesañcit samudrapato ‘pi | tatr api krsnena vyab-
hicaribhavo vi$esena dhrtah | para$uramenaikaksatriyadosenanekesam ksatriyanam
na$ah krta ityadi viruddhacaropari nathena kopam krtva caturvim$atyavataropari
caturvim$ati kapalikarupani dhrtani | dh rtva ca caturvim$atyavataraih saha sama-
ram krtam | tatra sarve sam avataranam kapalani chinnani krtani | svakarais t ani
dhrtani | tena kapalika jatah |. 
169. Satsahasra Samhita, Schoterman 1982, pp. 37–38.
170. Dyczkowski 1988, p. 102.
171. Mulasarvastivada Vinaya, Gnoli 1977, 1:153, 217–229; 2:295–297.
172. To. 2393: Tithika tsandalika = *Tirthikacandalika, fols. 22b7–23a3: rgya gar
skad du | ti thi ka tsa ndali ka na ma | bod skad du | mu stegs kyi gtum mo zhes
bya ba | byang chub sems dpa’ thal skud can la phyag ‘tshal lo | bud med gnas ni
dbu rgyan ma | rigs ni gtum mo’i rigs gyur pa | srid pa gsum yang sreg par byed |
me lce nam mkhar khyab par byed | a tsin dpal ni gar byed ‘gyur | nam mkhar
rnge’u chung sa la rnge’u chung brdung | rdo rje me yis rgya mtsho skems | nyi zla
gnyis kyang skyabs su gzhug | gar byed dpal gyi a tsin thod pa can | nam mkhar
rnge’u chung sa la rnge’u chung brdung | lha dang lha min mi rnams dang | dbang
phyug u ma la sogs pa | thams cad ye shes me yis bsregs | gar byed dpal gyi a tsin
thod pa can | nam mkhar rnge’u chung sa la rnge’u chung brdung | rnal ‘byor ma
ni khrid byas nas | mgon po’i gnas su ‘jug par byed | ’di lta’i dkyil ‘khor glu ru
blangs | gar byed dpal ni a tsin thod pa can | nam mkhar rnge’u chung sa la rnge’u
chung brdung | mu stegs kyi gtum mo zhes bya ba slob dpon a tsintas mdzad pa
rdzogs so ||. The translation presumes that the “little drum” (rnge’u chung) is a
damaruka, the drum used by %aivas and tantric Buddhists, as well as by wandering
storytellers and monkey trainers.
173. See note 43 above for references. 
174. Pa$upatasutra, Sastri 1940, p. 83; Ingalls 1962, p. 289. 
175. Ibid.: atra purusakhyah pretah | na mrtakhyah | kasmat  | acaranopade$at |
vad iti kiñcidupama | unmattasadr$adaridrapurusenâtimaladigdhaNgena rudha$ma$-
runakharomadharina sarvasaMskaravarjitena bhavitavyam | ato varna$ramavyucche-
do vairagyotsaha$ ca jayate | prayojananispatti$ ca bhavati avamanadi |. I have fol-
lowed Ingalls’ suggestion (1962, p. 289n19) in reading this passage, which he partially
translated.
176. Bhandarkar 1908; LiNgapurana XXIV.124–133, quoted in ibid., p. 154. 
177. Svacchandatantra XIII.36–38; Samnyasa-Upanisad, Schrader 1912, p. 154:
avyaktaliNgo ‘vyaktacaro balonmattapi$acavad. 
178. Olivelle 1992, pp. 105–112. 
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 414 ---
179. Samnyasa-Upanisad, Schrader 1912, pp. 99–102. Note that the descrip-
tion there and in the Naradaparivrajakopanisad is exactly the same, with the
exception that the A$ramopanisad leaves “like a demon” (pi $acavat) out of the
description.
180. Bharati 1970, p. 153. 
181. Freed and Freed 1993; it is impossible to praise this study too highly; see
also Stanley 1988. 
182. Schopen 1992, pp. 8–11.
183. Although Teiser mentions the “interplay between ‘Indian’ and ‘Chinese’
aspects in the religion of medieval China” (1988, pp. 15–25), his otherwise excellent
treatment takes as a given that it is principally a Chinese phenomenon, discussed
under Chinese rubrics, and located primarily in Chinese spatial and temporal do-
mains. By the same token, Maudgalyayana is only identiﬁed by his Indian name a
few times; for most of the text, he is “Mu-lien,” the Chinese rendering of his very
Indian monastic identity. This is a curious reading of a quintessentially Indian
concern, which has not received in secondary literature the place it commands in
Indian sources.
184. For example, Vajrapanyabhiseka-tantra, To. 496, fols. 100a4–102a2; Sub-
ahupariprccha, To. 805, fols. 130a3–132b3. 
185. Subhasita-Samgraha, 1904, p. 37 (italics added): 
unmattarupam asthaya maunibhutva samahitah |
svadhidaivatayogena paryateta pi$acavat || 
bhaiksaparyatanarthaya na patram samgrahed vrati |
bhuktojjhitam tu samgrhya rathyakarparamallakam || 
tatraiva paryateta bhiksam yatamanas tu bhaksayet |
bhaksayitva tu tat tasmims trptas tatraiva tat tyajet || 
kaupinam tu tato dharyam sphutitam jarjarikrtam |
digambaro ‘thava bhutva paryateta yathecchaya || 
Bendall reads “yatamanam” in the third verse above. The section appears ex-
tracted from Guhyasiddhi VI.13, 33–35, VII.6. 
186. Amoghapa$ahrdayadharani, Meisezahl 1962, p. 322: mahapa$upative$adhara
(describing Avalokite$vara); cf. Regamey 1971.
187. rGyud kyi mngon par rtogs pa rin po che’i ljon shing, SKBIII.48.4.2–49.49.2.3.
188. Pa$upatasutra I.8: hasitagitanrttadumdumkaranamaskarajapyopaharenopa-
tisthet |; similar statements in Madhava; cf. Hara 1958, pp. 26–27, and his refer-
ences to the Ganakarika and commentary. 
189. Kaundinya’s commentary to Pa$upatasutra I.8, p. 13.14–17. 
190. Lorenzen 1972, p. 127.
191. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fol. 163b2: khams gsum pa yi rgyal srid che |
bdag rtul phod pas mnan nas ni | ’gro ba thams cad rab ‘joms par | rta yi gar gyis ston
par byed |.
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 415 ---
192. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fols. 170b7–171a1: phyag rgya shes pa ‘di dag
gi | sangs rgyas sprul pa’i glu mchog ni | ’grub par ‘gyur ba byed pa’i mchog | las
rnams thams cad rab sgrub pa | slong bar byed pa brtan sgrub pa | de bzhin sna tshogs
rgyas pa dag | drug pa’i dbyangs kyi glu blangs nas | de ba ta yi glu blang ngo |.
193. Indraji 1881, p. 344; translation his. 
194. A recent example is Sharma 1996, p. 105. 
195. See the excellent study of this process in Orissa in the work of Eschmann
et al. 1978.
196. The antiquity of this practice is evident from its statement as required in
Kalika-purana 38.99–161; 64.36.
197. It is dismaying to see that the aggressive activity of the Vishwa Hindu
Parishad is characterized as “service” by an anthropologist, who further identiﬁes
tribal peoples in Cachar as “tantric” (Danda 1994); this article is a particularly good
example of the myopia of Hindu nationalism. 
198. Mahabharata 12.59.103; cf. Shafer 1954, p. 18. Sharma’s recent discussion
(2001, pp. 235–265) is also not well informed on tribal ethnography or languages.
See Nath 2001 for a more thoughtful presentation.
199. Artha$astra 8.4.41–43.
200. Da$abhumika, pp. 28.8, 29.5.
201. Kiratarjuniye, Bahadur 1972.
202. Gaüdavaho 336. 
203. Elwin also argues for a change in attitude toward tribals in early medieval
Sanskrit literature (1955, pp. 17–19).
204. Fleet 1888, p. 293.
205. For example, Guhyasamaja-tantra XII.2, 65; Pradipodyotana, Chakravarti
1984, p. 107; cf. the Krsnayamari quotation at the head of the chapter.
206. For example, Yogaratnamala, in Hevajra Tantra, Snellgrove 1959, 2:121;
Mahamudra-tilaka, To. 420, fol. 76a3; Samputa-tilaka, To. 382, fol. 159a4. Cf. %ri
Hevajrapañjika Muktavali, Tripathi and Negi 2001, p. 168.
207. Shafer tries to derive the term “mleccha” from a Tibeto-Burman word
(1954, p. 23), but I ﬁnd his linguistic analysis unsuccessful; his literary references,
though, indicate that the author of one section of the Mahabharata he references
applied it to the inhabitants of the Punjab and Bengal (ibid., p. 22). Mahabharata
12.59.103 identiﬁes mlecchas as living in the Vindhya mountains, which during this
period meant much of the area of Maharastra and Madhya Pradesh. Compare the
use of “mlecchatavi” as a single referent in Artha$astra 7.10.16. See also Shafer’s dis-
cussion of other origin myths for mlecchas in the Mahabharata; Shafer 1954, pp.
18–24.
208. I have dealt with the question of sahaja in some detail in Davidson 2002b.
209. This Munda language–speaking tribe has currently several hundred thou-
sand members and has been described by both Elwin (1955) and Vitebsky (1992). 
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 416 ---
210. Caryagitiko$a, verse 28 [Kværne 1977, pp. 181–188; Sen 1977, p. 138]: 
ucau ca pabata tahñ basaï sabari bali |
moraNgi piccha parahina sabari gibata guñjari mali ||
umata sabaro pagala sabaro ma kara guli guhada |
tohauri nia gharini name sahaja sundari ||
nana tarubara maülila re gaanata lageli dali |
ekeli sabari e bana hindaï karna kundala bajra dhari ||
tia dhau khata parila sabaro mahasukhe seji chaili |
sabaro bhujaNga nairamani dari pemha rati pohaili ||
hia tabola mahasuhe kapura khai |
suna nairamani kanthe laïa mahasuhe rati pohai ||
gurubaka puñcaa bindha nia mane bane |
eke $ara sandhane bindhaha bindhaha parama nibane ||
umata sabaro garua rose |
giribara sihara sandhi païsante sabaro loriba kaïse ||
211. Kanhapadasya dohakosa, no. 25 [Bagchi 1935, p. 133; Shahidullah 1928, pp.
79–80]; baragiri $ihara uttuNga muni savare jahi m kia basa | naü la mghia pañca-
nanehi karibara d uria asa ||. This verse is also quoted by Munidatta, Caryagi-
tiko$a, Kværne 1977, p. 98. My interpretation of the difﬁcult last part is drawn
from the commentary of Amit abha, %ri-Krsnavajrapadadohakosatika, To. 2302,
fols. 240b5–241a1.
212. Kanhapadasya dohakosa, Bagchi 1935, commentary to no. 25, p. 133.
213. Tucci 1930, pp. 153–154; Lévi 1930; this material has been studied (from a
somewhat different perspective) by Tatz (1987, 1988). A %abari ascetic woman is
represented in the Ramayana; cf. Lutgendorf 2001.
214. mKhas grub khyung po rnal ‘byor gyi rnam thar, 1996, pp. 20–21.
215. Cittaguhyagambhirarthagiti, fol. 83a1. The chronology is deﬁned by Pha-
dam-pa’s primary translator, Zha-ma lo-tsa-ba Chos kyi rgyal-po (1069–1144). 
216. That is, Khyung-po rnal-’byor; for the hagiography of this %avaripa, see
Stearns 1996, pp. 139–141.
217. %unyatadrsti, To. 2426, fols. 40a3—40b1: rgya gar skad du | sh u nya ta dri
shti na ma | bod skad du | stong pa nyid kyi lta ba zhes bya ba | spyan ras gzigs
dbang phyug la phyag ‘tshal lo | 
sems kyi rtog rtse chos nyid ni | sa bon nam mkha’i dbyings su smos | bdag med
gzhon nus mgul nas ‘khyud | gnyid sad byed pa nyid du gnas | spongs shig dor shig
bdag smongs so | kye ho bcings ba ma lus pa | sha ba ri bde chen por rol | stong
pa’i btsun mo ‘khyud byas te | kye ho lus ngag sems smin te | thams cad dus su
brtags pa yis | sha ba ri ni myos par ‘gyur |  dga’ ba’i rnam pa thams cad du | sha
ba ri ni gnyid log nas | gnyid ni nam mkha’i dbyings su log | kye ho bdag gi de
nyid ni | sa bon nam mkhar mnyam par smos | ’bras bu nam mkhar skar chen shar
| spongs shig dor shig bdag smongs so | srid pa’i bcings ba’i glang chen bsad |
 ⁄ .     

--- PAGE 417 ---
dbang po lnga yi gtor ma byas | bdag gi sdug bsngal thams cad spangs | spongs
shig dor shig bdag rmongs so | nyin mtshan rtag tu gnyid med par | rang gi sems
la bya ra byas | de nas skye pa bud med ni | gcig tu dben par song ste gnas | gtso
bo ‘jig rten mgon pa smra | spongs shig dor shig bdag smongs so | stong pa’i bt-
sun mo ‘khyud byas te | sha ba ri bde chen por gnas | stong pa nyid kyi lta ba zhes
bya ba slob dpon sha ba ris mdzad pa rdzogs so ||
218. Russell 1916, 4:503–504; see also Elwin (1955, pp. 14–33) for a discussion of
the relation of the current Saora to the %abara of literature. 
219. Krsnayamari-tantra XV.1–19, Rinpoche and Dvivedi 1992, pp. 114–117. See
also Sadhanamala, 1925, 1: 177, 217, 245–9, 252–3, 250, 308–310. To. 571 (= To. 990,
T. 1264), 736 (= To. 995, T. 1384), 3206, 3245, 3360, 3365, 3508, 3509, 3511–13, 3538,
3539, 3540. There are undoubtedly more rituals that might be located in the vari-
ous tantras, but this list provides a rough idea of the extent of the literature. 
220. Kumaracandra’s commentary adds that the snake is in her (upper) right
hand, with a sword and knife in the other two; in the left three hands are a wheel,
a lotus and a skullcap. 
221. In Krsnayamari XV.4b, sphota is translated by the Tibetan translators as
a chain, lcags sgrogs, roughly equivalent to the name of the deity carrying it,
$rkhala.
222. Krsnayamari XV.1–6: 
athatah sampravaksyami aryajaNgulisadhanam |
yena bhavitamatrena jalasyopari caNkramet || 
trimukham sadbhujam pitam phuhkarabijasambhavam |
sarpahastam maharupam mayuravahanapriyam || 
purvato mayurim likhed daksine bhrkutim tatha |
pa$cime parna$abarim uttare vajra$rNkhalam || 
paksam kamandalum$ akham sphotam capi vibhavayet |
pitam raktam tatha$ yamam nilam varnaprabhedatah || 
eta vibhavayet prajño mantram caiva japet tatah | om phuh jah || 
mudgaradin nyased dvare puspadin konake nyaset |
aryajaNguliyogena jalam akramyate sada ||
For the Chinese use of JaNguli spells, see Strickmann 2002, pp. 151–156; I thank
James Robson for drawing my attention to this passage.
223. Shafer 1954, p. 139. 
224. Eschmann et al. 1978, pp. 99–117. 
225. Elwin 1955, p. 298.
226. Eschmann et al. 1978, pp. 79–94.
227. Gaüdavaho vv. 319–338. 
228. Hevajra TantraI.i.31: candali jvalita nabhau | dahati pañcatathagatan || 
dahati ca locanadih | dagdhe ‘ham sravate $a$i ||. See Ratnakara$anti’s %ri Hevaj-
rapañjika Muktavali, Tripathi and Negi 2001, pp. 27–28, for an exegesis to this verse.
.      ⁄ 

--- PAGE 418 ---
. , ,   
1. %ri-Guhyasamajatantra-nidana-gurupade$ana-vyakhyana, fol. 90b6–91a1. 
2. Ray 1994, pp. 407–410; on p. 410, Ray mentions that Vajray ana was a forest
tradition.
3. Dimock 1966, pp. 95–96. 
4. Barrow 1893, pp. 211–212.
5. Gross 1992, pp. 124–135; on p. 135, he mentions the scarcity of jungle sadhus,
but attributes their rarity to a decline of habitat. I propose that they were probably
always relatively few.
6. On the social composition and role of the s uta, see Rocher 1986, pp. 53–59.
7. Man ngag gces pa btus pa contains forty-nine short instructions, although one
is by Sa-skya Pandita, a Tibetan; the Phyag rgya chen po gces pa btus pa’i man ngag
is based on Man ngag gces pa btus paand contains thirty-two short instructions. We
also ﬁnd compendia demonstrating this kind of direction, especially one attributed
to an Indian siddha, Pha-dam-pa sangs-rgyas Kamala $ila. This is the ﬁve-volume
Zhi byed snyan rgyud zab byed ma (Aziz 1979); in it the ﬁrst and some of the sec-
ond volumes retain instructions attributed to the Indian saint.
8. These scriptures are found in the Tibetan canon, To. 383–411, 413–415; these
thirty-two tantras total about seventy-seven folia. 
9. Both of the lengthy Dakarnava and the V ajradaka contain ﬁfty chapters in
110–125 folia in their Tibetan translations.
10. Because of its anomalous position in esoteric literature, the Kalacakra and
related literature are given less consideration than its importance in Tibet and its
recent popularity seem to require.
11. Guhyasamaja discussion following XVII.71 (Matsunaga 1978, pp. 108–109).
12. See, for example, the Guhyasamaja XVIII.79, 125, 175, Matsunaga 1978.
13. Hevajra Tantra, Snellgrove 1959, II.ii.51. Ratn akara$anti’s %ri Hevajrapañji-
ka muktavali, Tripathi and Negi 2001, p. 150, deﬁnes the Buddhist heretic as one
who accepts the Buddha as teacher but despises the Vajray ana, which is the es-
sence of his teaching: buddhasya tirthika buddhatirthikah | katham te buddhasya?
buddhasyaiva $astur abhyupagamat | katha m tirthikah? buddha$asanasare ‘pi va-
jrayane pradvesat ||
14. ime dharm ah sutre ‘vataranti vinaye sa mdr$yante dharmat añ ca na vilo-
mayanti |. For references on this formula, see Davidson 1990, pp. 300–301.
15. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fol. 151b.3: bud med kun gyi sgyu ma’i rgya |
’di ni gnyis med theg pa’i mchog |. 
16. Divyavadana, Vaidya 1959, p. 258.
17. Walleser (1922) has collected and translated the sources. 
18. Harrison 1978; Gómez 1995.
19. Mattavilasaprahasana, Lockwood and Bhat 1981, pp. 42–45.
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 419 ---
20. Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fols. 272b7–273b2 (with
minor emendations): gsung rab ‘di’i lo rgyus bshad na | sngon sangs rgyas mi yul
na lo brgyad cu bzhugs pa’i tshe na | sarba buddha sa ma yo ga dang | guhya sa
manytsa la sogs pas ‘dul zhing theg pa de dag gi snod du gyur pa ‘dzam bu’i gling
gi mi yul na med pas rgyal chen ris bzhi pas sum cu rtsa gsum dang | dga’ ldan la
sogs pa’i gnas na lha rnams dang bskal pa bzang po’i byang chub sems dpa’ la sogs
pa snod du gyur nas de’i tshe mdo sde de ni bzhugs so | slad kyis sangs rgyas mya
ngan las ‘das pa’i ‘og tu za hor gyi rgyal po ‘khor dang bcas pa ngo mtshar du chos
la dad pa dag cig ‘dug pa theg pa de’i ‘dul skal du gyur cing snod du gyur nas | sar-
ba buddha sa ma yo ga la sogs pa sde chen po bco brgyad phyag na rdo rje’i byin
gyi rlabs kyis za hor gyi yul du gshegs pa dang | za hor gyi rgyal po Indra bh u tis
mdo sde dag bltas na brda ma phrad nas sngon gyi las kyi dbang gis na mngon par
shes pa thob pas bltas na yul gyi dbus yul ma la pa na a tsarya ku ku ra nyin zhing
khyi stong tsam la chos ‘chad | mtshan zhing ni khyi de dag la dam tshig longs
spyod mdzad pa khyi’i slob dpon mdzad pa zhig bzhugs pa de theg pa’i snod du
gyur la | bdag gi ‘dul skal du gyur pa yang ‘dra nas rgyal pos pho nya btang ste slob
dpon gshegs su gsol pa dang | slob dpon de yang sngon gyi las kyi dbang gis na
mngon par shes pa lnga dang ldan nas | rgyal po de bdag gi ‘dul skal du ‘bab bam
mi ‘bab mdo sde de dag gi snod du bdag gyur ram ma gyur brtags na | bdag gi ‘dul
skal du yang ‘bab | bdag kyang mdo sde’i snod du yang gyur | rgyal po’i the tshom
yang sel bar ‘gyur mod kyi | ’on kyang mdo sde dag sngar ma bltas na brgya la rgyal
po’i the tshom dag ma sel bar gyur na shin du ma legs pas pho nya la slar spring
ba | mdo sde dag kho bos sngar blta ‘tshal gyis tshur bskur cig ces spring ba dang
| de nas mdo sde dag pas gshegs te bltas na mgo mjug gar lta ba’i cha ma mchis na
de nyid du lus brdabs te mgon med do | skyab med do zhes bos pa dang dpal rdo
rje sems dpa’ mngon par gshegs te khyod ci ‘dod ces dris pa dang | bdag mdo sde
zab mo ‘di bltas pa tsam gyis shes par ‘dod ces gsol ba dang | de bzhin gnang ngo
zhes gsungs nas de nas sarba buddha sa ma yo ga la sogs pa’i glegs bam rnams ma
phye bar de dag gi don yid la mngon sum du gsal bar gyur to | de nas slob dpon
de za hor gyi yul ‘du gshegs nas rgyal po ‘khor dang bcas pa rnams la dharm a de
dag bshad de | rdo rje sems dpas lung bstan nas rgyal po ‘khor dang bcas pa rnams
rdo rje dbyings kyi dkyil ‘khor ltar sgom du stsal te |.
21. dKar chag ldan dkar ma, Lalou 1953, no. 522.
22. Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fol. 274a1. 
23. Various forms of this story are encountered widely in siddha literature. A par-
tial list: %ri-Tattvapradipa-mahayogini-tantraraja, fol. 142b1–6; Jñ anavarman’s %ri-
Jñanatilakapañjika-guhyatattva, fols. 210b5, 268b1–270b1; %ri-Sahajapradipa-pañjika,
fols. 197b3–200b4. Cf. V ajragarbhatantrarajasutra, T. 1198.20.542c-548b; trans. in
Bagchi 1944. Tibetan versions are found by bSod-nams rtse-mo in the Rgyud sde spy-
i’i rnam par gzhag pa, p. 271.2–2.3; cf. A-mes-zhabs, Gsang ‘dus byung tshul, pp.
13.4–15.4. In the eleventh century, Zahor is located by Rong-zom chos-kyi bzang-po
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 420 ---
to the southeast (!) of Bodhgaya; see Rog Bande, Grub mtha’ so so’i b´ zed tshul g´zuN
gsal bar ston pa chos ‘byuN grub mtha’ chen po bstan pa’i sgron me,pp. 43.3–47.4.
24. Pod ser LL XI.479.
25. I thank Ken Eastman for attracting my attention to this text and pointing
out the issue of Kukura’s beastiality. 
26. bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo rgyus , SKB III.170.2.3–4.1.
27. Sahajasiddhi-paddhati, To. 2211, fols. 6a6–7b2; some of this latter material is
in Davidson 2002b. 
28. On this school, see Holub 1984. 
29. Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya (1928) discusses much of the speciﬁcally Ma-
hayanist context; cf. also Ruegg 1989.
30. rGyud sde spyi’i rnam par gzhag pa, SKB II.271.2–2.3. 
31. For an introduction to these problems, see Broido 1982, 1983, 1984; and
Steinkellner 1978. 
32. As is so often the case with Indic works, the text is ambiguous as to the
speaker’s identity from this point on; Padmavajra’s commentary makes it clear that
Vajrapani is continuing to ask his extended question until the miracle mantra be-
low; Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Tattvacandrika, To. 1653, fol. 153b7.
33. The phrase rgyud thams cad kyi bdag po’i dbang phyug la appears in the
text to apply to Vajrapani, but (possibly based on gender endings) some commen-
tators make these epithets appositive to Lha-mo in the text; see To. %ri-Bud-
dhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, 1652.108b2–3; %ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrara-
jatika Abhayapaddhatih, To.1654.169.b4–5.
34. The mantras given in the sDe-dge and Peking canons are both corrupt, and
I have tried to provide a close approximation of the text. Normatively, one would
have recourse to a sadhana in which the mantra would appear, but the Buddhaka-
palasadhana found in Sadhanamala, Bhattacharya 1925, 2:500–503, reproduces an-
other mantra entirely: om. maha¯vajro herukavajro dharatu dharatu maha¯-
jña¯nasphet.ane ´si¯ghram. sa¯dhaya stambhaya ki¯laya hum. phat. sva¯ha¯| .
35. %ri-Buddhakapala-yogini-tantra-raja, To. 424, fols. 143a3–144a3: Peking 63,
fols. 126b7–128a2:
de nas bcom ldan ‘das kyis rdo rje’i tshig gis rdo rje chen po’i gnas su rgyud
thams cad dang sngags yang dag par bshad nas | de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad
kyi bdag pos rdo rje dang pad ma’i yang dag par sbyar bas btsun mo’i bha gar
yongs su mya ngan las ‘das so | de yongs su mya ngan las ‘das pa mthong nas |
byang chub sems dpa’ thams cad dang | rnal ‘byor ma thams cad rmad du gyur
te gcig la gcig lta zhing e ma’o bcom ldang ‘das de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi
bdag po dkyil ‘khor chen po rgyan dang ldan pa’i dbus su ji ltar yongs su mya
ngan las ‘das | 
de nas rnal ‘byor ma sna tshogs sde ma la byang chub sems dpa’ sems dpa’ chen
po phyag na rdo rjes ‘di skad ces gsol to | lha mo sems can bsod nams dman pa
rnams nus pa la zhon par ‘gyur ba’i thabs cung zad mchis sam | 
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 421 ---
gsungs pa | rnal ‘byor gyi rgyud la bye ba phrag drug nyid do | rnal ‘byor ma’i
rgyud la ni bye ba phrag bcu drug nyid do | mdo sde so so la ni bye ba phrag br-
gyad bcu’o | de bzhin du pha rol tu phyin pa’i theg pa la ni bye ba la bsgres ba’i
‘bum phrag lnga’o | ’di dag thams cad ni thub pa’i dbang pos gsungs so | sngags
dang bral na ni rgyud kyi nus pa mi snang ste | rgyud la lar ni ci nas sngags bye ba
bzlas par gsungs so | bsod nams ‘bring po rnams kyis ni sngags ‘bum bzlas pas byur
bar ‘grub par gsungs so | bsod nams che bas khris bzlas pas shin tu myur bar ‘grub
bo | de ltar rdo rje can chen po rgyud kyi bdag po’i gtso bos gsungs so | bsod nams
chung ba’i sems can rnams kyis ni bye ba bzlas par gsungs so | sems can ‘bad rtsol
chung ba rnams kyis ni ‘bum bzlas bar bdag smra’o | sems can sgom pa la zhen pa
rnams kyis ni khri kho na bzlas par bya’o | sems can ‘dod chags la zhugs pa rnams
kyi bzlas pa ji ltar lags | blun po dang lkugs pa’i rigs can rnams kyi sngags kyi
grangs ji ltar lags | shin tu dmigs pa’i sngags kyi bzlas pa ji ltar lags | ’di ltar phan
tshun smra bas bzlas na dngos grub gzhan du yang ‘gyur ro | gal te dman pa’i sems
kyis nyon mongs bzhin pas bzlas pa de’i tshe bskal pa skar ma lta bur bye bar yang
de la dngos grub med do | 
de ltar thos nas rnal ‘byor ma sna tshogs sde ma bcom ldan ‘das kyi zhal la lta
bar byed cing zur mig dang bcas pa’i chags pas bltas te | shin tu khros bas ‘jigs par
byed cing snying rje’i thugs ‘khrugs pas bdud kyi dpung rab tu bcom mo | de ltar
zhugs pa’i lha mo chen mo rgyud thams cad kyi bdag po’i dbyang phyug la de na
des gzigs pa tsam gyis bcom ldan ‘das kyi dbu las sngags byung ngo | om buddhe
siddhe susiddhe amr.ita arje buddha kapa¯la sphot.anipa¯taya tra¯sa y a hu¯m.
ho phat. |
de ltar sngags kyi mchog gsan bas sa rim pa bdun gyi ‘og tu chud pa’i klu rnams
bcom par byas shing phye mar byas nas slar ‘ongs te sna tshogs sde ma’i zhal tu zhugs
te | pad ma’i nang nas byung nas slar thod par zhugs so | sngags ‘di’i mthus klu rnams
zhig ste | skrag cing rdul ‘byung bar ‘gyur ro | nor rgyas la sogs pa’i rdzul ‘phrul chen
po’i klu thams cad lhags te | stobs kyi rgyu dang | dud skyong dang | ’jog po dang |
mtha’ yas dang | pad ma dang | pad ma chen po la sogs pa klu chen po rnams
dang | gzhan gang yang rung ba dug las byung ba thams cad kyang lhags so | 
rnal ‘byor ma sna tshogs sde ma la kha phyogs te klu thams cad kyis zhus pa |
lha mo bka’ ci stsol gi zhig bgyi zhes smra’o | gsungs pa gang yang sangs rgyas
nyams su myong ba de ltar gyis shig | de ltar thos pa tsam gyis dkyil ‘khor chen po
brgyan dang ldan pa’i dbus su bcom ldan ‘das kyi thod pa kha phye ste legs bam
byung ngo | nam mkha’ la sgra byung ngo | 
lha mo lha tshogs sde ma zung | sems can kun la phan ‘dogs pa | 
rgyud ‘di rgyal po chen po ste | rnal ‘byor ma yi gong na med | 
sangs rgyas thod pa zhes bya ba | sems can kun la phan byed pa’o | 
de ltar thos nas sna tshogs sde mas glegs bam yang dag par bzhung te | phyag
na rdo rje la nye bar gtad do |.
36. %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, To 1652; see bibliography for a
complete citation.
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 422 ---
37. Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Tattvacandrika, To. 1653; see bibliography for a
complete citation. The title is incorrectly reconstructed by the editors of the To-
hoku catalogue as Buddhakapalatantratattvacandrikapañjika: Sangs rgyas thod pa’i
rgyud kyi dka’ ‘grel de kho na nyid kyi zla ba. This commentary covers only the ﬁrst
two chapters of the tantra. Despite the colophon claiming that the commentary is
complete, it is possible that Padmavajra completed the commentary and his exe-
gesis was lost, or was interrupted in the process, or that the tantra only had two
chapters at the time of his writing. 
38. %ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrarajatika Abhayapaddhatih, To. 1654; see the
bibliography for a complete citation. At least two manuscripts of this work are pre-
served in South Asia—one in the National Archives of Nepal and one in the Asi-
atic Society of Calcutta. 
39. %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, To. 1652, fol. 104b4–5: gal te yang
bcom ldan ‘das nyid ston pa po la sogs pa’i gzugs su bzhugs mod kyi | ’on kyang
bdag nyid bcom ldan ‘das ma’i gzugs su logs su bstan to |. Cf. Hevajra Tantra
II.ii.39; Davidson 1991, p. 213. Ratn akara$anti’s %ri Hevajrapañjika muktavali, Tri-
pathi and Negi 2001, p. 146, explains this through a hermemeutic of the various
bodies of the Buddha. For the veriﬁcation of Citrasena’s identity, see Nispannayo-
gavali, Bhattacharya 1949, p. 23. 
40. %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, To. 1652, fol. 106a4–5: byang
chub sems dpa’ thams cad de mig la sogs pa’i dbang po drug go |.
41. %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, To. 1652, fol. 106a3–4: mya ngan
las ‘das pa ni rnam par rtog pa las nges par byung ba ste | de ni chos kyi sku’i rang
bzhin zhes bya ba’i tha tshig go || de yong su mya ngan las ‘da’ ba mthong nas zhes
bya ba ni | chos kyi sku de gzigs nas zhes bya ba’i don to |.
42. Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Tattvacandrika, To. 1653, fol. 152a4–5: de lta bur
bcom ldan ‘das bde ba chen po’i ngo bor snyoms par zhugs par yongs su snang ba na
byang chub sems dpa’ la sogs pa rnams ngo mtsar rmad du gyur pa yin par blta’o |
da mya ngan las ‘das pa mthog ste zhes bya ba la sogs pa ni byang chub sems dpa’ la
sogs pa rnams dam pa skyes par gyur na ni de kho na nyid kyi mchog rab tu gsal bar
rab tu ‘byed par mdzad pas so |.
43. %ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrarajatika Abhayapaddhatih, To. 1654, fol. 168b4:
der bcom ldan ‘das phyag rgya chen po rdo rje’i gnas kyi shes rab kyis srid pa la mi
gnas shing snying rjes zhi ba la mi gnas pa’o zhes pa mi gnas pa’i mya ngan las ‘das
pas yongs su mya ngan las ‘das te | de’i bdag nyid du gyur nas ro gcig pa’i rang
bzhin gyis tha dad mtha’ dag gis ma reg pa las ‘khor ba’i bar du dpag tu med pa’i
de bzhin gzhegs pa dang | byang chub sems dpa’ dang | rnal ‘byor ma dang | ’dod
chag dang bral ba dang | phyag rgya dang | dkyil ‘khor dang | sngags bye ba phrag
brgyad cu po rnams dang lhan cig rnam par rtog pa med par gyur kyang sngon gyi
‘phan pa’i dbang las sems can thams cad la ci bya ba’i tshul gyis bzhugs so zhes bya
ba’i don to |.
44. E.g., Grub thob brgyad cu rtsa bzhi’i gsol ‘debs , fol. 110b1–2. 
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 423 ---
45. bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo rgyus , SKB III.170.2.2–5; Guenther 1963, pp. 24–28;
Tatz 1987, 1988.
46. Luhipa is described as a scribe (yi ge pa ? = kayastha) in the bDe mchog lu hi
pa’i lugs kyi bla ma brgyud pa’i lo rgyus , SKB III.294.1.1; the early lineage hagiogra-
phy of Dombiheruka is (according to the tradition) part of the bLa ma rgya gar ba’i
lo rgyus, SKB III.171.1.6–172.2.2, where the boatman (ko-mkhan) was understood to
be this siddha; the longer hagiography is preserved in Ngor-chen’s rGyud kyi rgyal
po dpal kye rdo rje’i byung tshul dang brgyud pa’i bla ma dam pa rnams kyi rnam par
thar pa ngo mtshar rgya mtsho , SKB IX.281.4.6–282.2.4. 
47. Guhyasamaja Mah aguhyatantraraja, M atsunaga 1978, p. 6 (emphasis
added): atha bhagavanta h sarvatathagatah punah samajama gamya bhagavantam
bodhicittavajram sarvatathagatapujaspharanasamayatattvaratnameghaih sampujya
pranipatyaivam ahuh |
bhasasva bhagavan tattvam vajrasarasamuccayam |
sarvatathagatam guhyam samajam guhyasambhavam || iti
atha bhagavan bodhicittavajras tathagatas tan sarvatathagatan evam aha | sadhu
sadhu bhagavantah sarvatathagatah | kin tu sarvatath agatanam api sa m$ayakaro
‘yam kuto ‘nyesam bodhisattvanam iti |.
atha bhagavantah sarvatathagtaa $caryaprapta adbhutapraptah | sarvatathagata-
sam$ayacchettaram bhagavantam sarvatathagatasvaminam papracchuh | yad bha-
gavan eva m gunavi$iste ‘pi sarvatath agataparsadi sarvatath agatakayavakcittaguh-
yam nirdestum notsahate |.
48. Karandavyuha-sutra, Mette 1997, p. 82.8–9; cf. idem, Vaidya 1961, p.
292.17–18.
49. Steinkellner has already discussed some of the principal issues invoked by
Candrakirti in his commentary; see Steinkellner 1978. 
50. Pradipodyotana, Chakravarti 1984, p. 22.4–13 (emphasis added): bodhicit-
tavajradharah (text: yo ‘dhicittavajradhara h) sarvatath agatan eva m vakti | s adhu
sadhv ity abhyupagame | abhimatarthadyotakatvat pra$nasya | kin tu $abdo vitarke
| sarvatathagatanam api sandehakaro ‘yam iti | gha tamanayogino ‘tra tath agatah
bodhisattva$ ca drastavyah | na hi kle$avasanaprahinanam buddhabodhisattvanam
sam$ayo ‘sti | tath agata atra ratnapudgal ah paripakvaku$alamulah $ rutiparaNgata
buddhatvabhilasino niyatagotrah | guruvaktrena vina tesam apy avi$ayah samajar-
thahu hapagatvat | kuto ‘nye sam bodhisattvanam iti? candanadinam pudgalanam
paripakvaku$alamulanam hinadhimuktinam pratipadite ‘pi durgrahyatvad anutsa-
ham avedayati |.
51. Guhyasamaja, Matsunaga 1978, XV.39; the conclusion of chapter XV, p. 85,
the prose section following XVII.36. 
52. Jñanasiddhi and Prajñopayavini$cayasiddhi in Bhattacharya 1929. 
53. Guhyasiddhi, Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, p. 5 (emphasis added): 
lokacarair vimuktam parama$ivapadam vyapinam nihsvabhavam | 
nityotpannam ya[tindrair] munivaravrsabhair vanditam dhyanahinam | 
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 424 ---
buddhanam apy agamyam paramusitamalam tattva[ta]s tam pranamya | 
$rimatkayam jinanam kim api padavaram$ uddham apy atmavrttya ||
54. For a discussion of this introductory material and its importance to Guhya-
samaja exegesis, see Wayman 1977. 
55. Guhyasiddhi, Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, pp. 12–13 (emphasis added):
athatah sampravaksyami sadhanam guhyasambhavam |
kiñcit samajamargena nanyatantrakramena tu || 1||
bahyatantrakriyamargam sarvam tyaktva ‘tiduratah |
samnyayakramayogena yathabhutam nigadyate || 2||
acarya bahavah prahus tantre samgitikarakam |
loke$am nayakam viram$ risamaje mahadyutim || 3||
vayam tu kevalam brumo gurupadaprasadatah |
abhavah$ risamajasya anyasamgitikarakah || 4||
srasta tantrasya hrdvajro vakta sa eva de$akah |
abhavas tavat anyasya varjitva mahasukham || 5||
evam$ ruteti yad vakyam vijaharapade sthitam |
tat svayam sarvabuddhesu kathitam cittavajrina || 6||
yathavad bhasitam divyam vijaharapadam$ ubham |
$rimahasukhanathena tatha kiñcid bravimy aham || 7||
ekasmin parame de$e yatha nirdistavan prabhuh |
buddhanam tantrasadbhavam svyam eva mahasukham || 8||
tam$ rutva tantrasadbhavam sarve caiva jinatmajah |
kampitas trasam apannas tam ucuh parame$varam || 9||
kim iyam dharmata vira durbhasya bhasita prabho |
atyantam trasajanani buddhanam api sarvatha || 10||
atyantaguptam udghatya vajrayanam anuttaram |
sarvadharmasamaikatvam yat tvaya bhasitam prabho || 11||
evam prajalpamanas te sarvabuddhamahaujasah |
prakampya murccham agamya bodhicitte mano dadhuh || 12||
aho guptatiguptasya vajrayanasya de$ana |
nihsvabhavasya $uddhasya vidyate yasya nopama || 13||
tan drstva vajrasattvas tu sarvabuddhan vimurcchitan |
divyam samadhim asthaya mahasukhasukhatmakam || 14||
niyujya ca tato buddhan vajrapadmaprayogatah |
paramanandarupena provaca madhuram giram || 15||
56. Broido 1982, pp. 8 ff.
57. Broido 1982, 1983, 1984; Steinkellner 1978; Wayman 1968; Ruegg 1989;
Caryagitiko$a, Kværne 1977. 
58. Caryagitiko$a, Kværne 1977, pp. 81–83: 
eka se $undini dui ghare sandhaa | cia na bakalaa baruni bandhaa || 
sahaje thira kari baruni bandha | je ajaramara hoi dirha kandha || 
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 425 ---
da$ami duarata cihna dekhia | aila garahaka apane bahia ||
caü$athi ghariye deta pasara | paithela garahaka nahi nisara ||
eka gharuli sarui nala | bhananti Birua thira kari cala ||
Kværne reads ciana na bakulaa in 1c, but I follow the manuscript and read c ia
as the noun. The kind of liquor mentioned, baruni, is not made with yeast. Baruni
is a local rot-gut made from sugar, fruit juices, and some vegetable matter, such as
bark or grass. The point, then, is that she brews without expected ingredients, such
as cia, not that there is necessarily a paradox built into the song. Kværne has in-
terpreted ghare in 1c as a dual, whereas it is a locative and understood as such in
the Tibetan translation and in the verse ascribed to K anha quoted in Munidatta,
Caryagitiko$a, Kværne 1977, p. 84. 
59. Ibid., pp. 84–86. 
60. The basic sources for Vir upa’s hagiography are the bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo
rgyus (drinking episode, SKB III.171.2.4–3.1), Bhir ba pa’i lo rgyus (a lacuna at the
beginning of the episode, pp. 368–9), the Lam ‘bras snyan brgyud (pp. 419–420),
Abhayadatta$ri, *Catura$itisiddhapravrtti (Pe. 5091, fol. 4b2–4b4). 
61. Mattavalasaprahasana, Lockwood and Bhat 1981, pp. 30–31: kap ali — priye
| pa$ya pa$ya | esa surapano yajñavatavibhutim anukaroti | atra hi dhvajastambho
yupah | sura somah | $aunda rtvijah | casaka$ camasah | $ulyamamsaprabhrtaya
upadam$a havirvi$esah | mattavacanani yajumsi | gitani samani | udaNkah sruvah |
tarso ‘gnih | surapanadhipatir yajamanah |.
62. Dakinijalasamvararahasya, Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1990, p. 1: mah amudra-
nuragena yad ak saram sukham caturtham tat punas tath abhisekah samvarasid-
dhaye sandhyabhasaya cokto bhagavata |.
63. The equivalents are taken from Wayman 1968. 
64. Hevajra Tantra, Snellgrove 1959, 2:121.
65. Samdhi-bhasa-tika, To. 1206, bstan-’gyur, rgyud, ja fols. 297a5–301b4.
66. See Wayman 1968, p. 796. 
67. Paia-Sadda-Maha nnavo, Seth 1963, p. 333. We may observe the derivation
chadman > *chaduman > chaum a > choma ; we also may go chadman > *chandi-
ma > *chandima > cha ndia. Seth glosses this latter word with the Sanskrit equiv-
alents of channa = hidden, and gupta = covered, secret. Chapter 9 of the Sam-
varodaya-tantra also discusses chom a; see Samvarodaya-tantra, Tsuda 1974, pp.
102–106. 
68. Artha$astra-XII.5.38. 
69. Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha XXI.27: trida ndipandaraNgadipasandai$ chad-
makaNkataih | v aranasi mahacaurais t irthadhvaNksair adhi sthita ||. Those who
have spent time in modern Banares might ﬁnd themselves wondering whether the
city has changed very much. 
70. Sarvabuddhasamayoga, To. 366, fols. 184b2–187b1; the entire *chomamudra
section goes from 183a4–187b1.
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 426 ---
71. Samputa, To. 381, fols. 118a5–119b3; the exact meaning of this and many
other coded language materials await the critical editing of the available Sanskrit
documents. 
72. Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja, To. 428, fols. 204a5–205a1.
73. Buddhakapala, To. 424, fols. 156a6–156b2; Peking 63, 141a6–141b2 (emphasis
added): sangs rgyas thod pa’i rnal ‘byor pa | med par phan tshun smra mi bya | ’on
kyang bshad chen de nyid ‘di | gcig la gcig gis smra bar bya | rgyud rnams thams
cad tu sbas pa | rgyud ‘di ru ni gsal bar byed | . . . de ltar dgongs pas bshad pa ni |
bder gshegs rnams kyis mi mkhyen no | spyan ma la sogs rnal ‘byor ma | rnams kyi
khong du mi chud cing | byang chub sems dpa’ yul min zhing | bla ma gu pa’i rnal
‘byor pas | . . .
74. Jñanatilaka, To. 422, fols. 117b3–118a3. 
75. Mahamudra-tilaka, To. 420, fol. 76a3: au di ya na gnas la sogs par ni | rnal
‘byor ma ni ‘dus pa’o | de yi gnas su skad smra ba | gsang ba’i sgra ni yod pa’o |. 
76. %ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati, To. 1652, fol. 132a4: de ltar dgongs
pas bshad ces bya ba sogs pa ni go sla’o |. 
77. %ri-Samputatantrarajatikamnyayamañjari, To. 1198, fol. 229b3–4. 
78. Ibid., fols. 229a6–238b4.
79. *Sarvatantranidanamahaguhya$risamputatantrarajatika, To. 1199, fol. 75b2–7. 
80. Jñanatilakapañjika-guhyatattva, To. 1203, fol. 247b1. 
81. Guhyarthapraka$amahadbhuta, To. 1200, fol. 138b2–6; I have interpreted the
name given as Pa la sa badzra in the retouched xylograph (138b4) as the well-
known master Vilasavajra. 
82. Beyond the citations noted in the text, see Pithadinirnaya, To. 1606, fol.
131b3.
83. Wayman 1968.
84. Burrow and Emaneau 1984, nos. 4358, 4541; I am quite aware that Dravidi-
an specialists could provide better etymologies than these.
85. Ibid., no. 1075.
86. Ibid., no. 1719.
87. Vidyottama, To. 746, fol. 13a7–13b3; mentioned by Lalou 1956, pp. 292–293.
88. Mañju$rimulakalpa, Sastri 1920, p. 326: daksinapatham a$ritya sidhyante pa-
pakarminam. 
89. Wayman 1968. 
90. Sadhanamala, 1925, 1:501. 
91. While it appears preserved only in the two Tibetan recensions, neither
Sarvabuddhasamayoga version seems to include directly Apabhra m$a material, al-
though the longer version identiﬁes the use of vajrag iti in offerings (To. 366, fol.
169b6), and our received examples of vajrag iti are in some form of Apabhra m$a;
see Chaudhuri 1935 on the Dakarnava. Ruegg overlooks the employment of
Apabhram$a in the tantras as Buddhavacana and treats it solely as a $astric phe-
nomenon (1989, pp. 321–322). 
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 427 ---
92. Bhayani’s essay on the Apabra m$a in the Appendix, Krsnayamari-tantra,
Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1992, pp. 145–152. 
93. Ruegg 1989, p. 321.
94. Ibid., p. 322.
95. This argument of Pu ndarika’s has also been accepted by Goudriaan (1996,
pp. 269–272).
96. Newman 1988, p. 132.
97. D’souza 1992, p. 17. 
98. Natya$astra, Kavi 1926–34, 2:365–378; this material has been edited and
translated in Nitti-Dolci 1972, pp. 61–92.
99. Natya$astra, XVII.1–65; investigated in Nitti-Dolci 1972, pp. 61–92. 
100. Schomer 1987; all the articles included in this excellent volume are deserv-
ing of attention.
101. Kielhorn 1888–1892a, pp. 164–166. 
102. Compare the introduction to the Kubjikamatatantra, Goudriaan and
Schoterman 1988, pp. 45–92; Goudriaan and Gupta 1981, pp. 27–31; these latter
authorities are critical of the idea that the form of Sanskrit was used for didacti-
cal reasons.
103. Goudriaan doubts that we can speak of Tantric Sanskrit in the manner
that we can of Epic Sanskrit or Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit (1996, p. 266). Yet
Deshpande has articulated many of the same conventions observable in this re-
gional Sanskrit in his study of modern “priestly Sanskrit” (1996), which I would ar-
gue is a similar phenomenon. 
104. Especially noticable is the employment of sahaja and citta, this latter instead
of the Prakrit ciä; Kanhapadasya dohakosa, nos. 3, 10, 12, 16, 18, 19, 26, 30; Tillopadado-
hakosa, nos. 1–3, 5, 8, 10–12, 22, 30; Sarahapadasya dohakosa, nos. 20, 25, 29, 36–7, 42,
44–6, 57, 63, 72, 77, 83, 85–7, 99, 100, 104–8; Krsnayamari-tantra, Rinpoche and
Dwivedi 1992, pp. 148–149; verses from the Dakarnava, in Chaudhuri 1935, pp. 1, 16,
32, 99, 123, 137–138, 141, 143. We also see the variation between “sijja” (ibid., p. 5) and
“siddha,” in Kanhapadasya dohakosa, no. 19, and Sarahapadasya dohakosa, no. 80.
105. The lengthy statement in the Vajrapadasarasamgrahapañjika occurs in To.
1186, fols. 58b6–62a5. It is useful to note that Pundarika also puts forward a similar
argument; Vimalaprabha, Upadhyaya 1986, 1:31–32.
106. In fact these were alluded to twice by P undarika (artha$aranatam a$ritya),
but Newman has overlooked the reference (1988, p. 125); for the position these play
in canonical criticism, see Davidson 1990. 
107. This is decidedly a different process from the system of transculturation
and vernacularization explored by Pollock 1996 and 1998, for Pollock is discussing
a “cosmopolis,” in which high-status forms were paramount. Still, we might won-
der whether Pollock’s overlooking the regional forms observed in the smaller ar-
eas, like those in Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, and elsewhere, have not contributed to
a somewhat reiﬁed picture.
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 428 ---
108. Colophon to To. 1186, Chinnamundasadhana, To. 1555, fol. 208a3: birba pa
yis ‘di byes te | sgra yig legs par ma rdzogs kyang | mkha’ ‘gro ma rnams bzod par
rigs |. The circumstance of this colophon becomes clear when we compare it to the
surviving Sanskrit texts, edited and discussed in Nihom 1992; Nihom draws paral-
lels between this text and Sadhanamala, nos. 232, 234 and 238, and Bhattacharya
1925, 2:452–533, 455, 458.
109. See Dikshit 1955 and 1956 for his only reporting of the excavation; the ex-
cavator discussed some of the bronzes found there in Dikshit 1955–57.
110. Bajpai and Pandey 1978. 
111. Ibid., plate XVIIa, incorrectly identiﬁed as a Hevajra, even if the eighth-
century date is seemingly appropriate. 
112. Jain 1969, p. 61, line 11. 
113. Vairocanavajra is the translator of Kanhapadasya dohakosa, To. 2301, bsTan-
’gyur, rgyud, zhi, and identiﬁed fol. 230a6. Schaeffer 2000 treats this ﬁgure, but his
geography is not a clear as it could be.
114. Rwa lo tsa ba’i rnam thar, pp. 293–295; this young girl was the daughter of
one Kong-po A-rgyal.
115. Mahamayuri-vidyarajñi-dharani, Shu¯yo 1972, passim. 
116. Morrell 1983, pp. 80–81. 
117. Lutgendorf 1991, p. 209; for a consideration of the relationship between
oral and literate forms, see Olson and Torrance 1991. 
118. On this point, see Blackburn et al. 1989 and Richman 1991.
119. Gitomer 1991, p. 100. 
120. Gerow 1977, pp. 226–227, 245–250.
121. Natya$astra, Kavi 1926–34, 1:11. 
122. The best technical study of the comic sentiment to date seems to be
Sharma 1941. Although Siegel recognizes both “improprieties and incongruities,”
he glosses over the difference between Bharata and Abhinavagupta (1987, pp.
12–34). 
123. Compare Aristotle’s Poetics (trans. Janko, 1987, pp. 49–55, 170–174), with
Natya$astra VI.56 prose, Kavi 1926–34, 1:313–314, 
124. Fundamental Vid usaka discussions are found in Shulman 1985; Kuiper
1979; and Bhatt 1959.
125. Bhasanat.akacakram, Vetal et al. 1963, vol. 1, section 3, p. 28: kissa aham
avedi’o | sunahi dava | athi r ama’anamn ama nattasattham | tassi m pañca sulo’a
asampunne samvacchare ma’e pathida |
126. Jefferds 1981, p. 73. 
127. The use of a fork for blood sacriﬁce of al least goats at the Ugra-tara-pitha
in Bengal is attested in Morinis 1984, pp. 184–185. I have seen the form employed
elsewhere, as at Kamakhya, Guwahati, Assam. Despite afﬁrmations by some phe-
nomenologists, it is not clear whether this forked stick is developed from the yupa,
the Vedic sacriﬁcial post, or whether it constitutes a separately developed sacriﬁ-
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 429 ---
cial system. bLa ma brgyud pa’i rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar snang ba has the an-
tagonists being female, yoginis rather than yogins (p. 112.5). 
128. Ibid., p. 113.2, reads bying (to sink) for bcings (to bind), meaning that Viru-
pa causes the head to sink to the heart and replaces it with a caitya, hardly under-
standable given that he grabs the ear between these two activities. It further iden-
tiﬁes the name of this state as rNa-`chus lha-mo (the Devi with the Twisted Ear).
129. bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo rgyus , SKB, III.172.1.2–2.1: de nas shar phyogs su sa
ha dza de w i zhes bya ba rang byung gi tri sh u la dang | lha mo tsanti ka’i rang
byung gi rdo sku yod pa la phyi rol pa’i rnal ‘byor pa rnams kyis mi der khrid pas
rang byung gi tri shu la lkog ma la zug nas ‘chi | de’i sha las tshogs kyi ‘khor lo byed
pa yod pa de’i sar slob dpon dpon g.yog gsum gyis byon pa dang | rnal ‘byor pa
rnams za bar ‘dod nas tshogs khang gi nang du bos pas slob dpon gyis g.yog po la
dbugs phyir rgyur ma gzhugs par nang du sdoms la sdod cig gsungs nas | slob dpon
nyid nang du byon pa dang | rnal ‘byor pa de rnams na re | khyod kyi grogs po gnyis
po gar song zer | phyi rol na ‘dug gsungs pas | tshur khug zer | de khyed rang khug
gsungs pas | khong gis bos nas kyang skad med ‘dzug gu sug byas pa’i shul na tshur
dbugs ngan su su | dri chen ‘bur ‘bur byung bas ‘dis rul nas ‘dug zer log pa dang |
tri shu la de ‘dar yeng yeng ‘dug pa dang | slob dpon gyis thal mo gcig brdabs pas
de phye mar sil gyis song ngo | de nas lha mo tsanti ka’i sku de par par ‘dug pa la
sphyi bor thal mo cig brgyab ste mgo bo snying ga’i bar du bcings | rna ba nas bzung
nas spyi bor mchod rten zhig bzhag ste rnal ‘byor pa rnams brgyal bar gyur to | de
nas brgyal bsangs pa dang | rnal ‘byor pa rnams na re | khyed nang pa sangs rgyas
pa snying rje che ba yin na ‘di lta bu byed pa zer ba la | sems can bsad pa’i sha dang
khrag dron mos mchod pa ma byed byas pas | de rnams kyis slob dpon gyi zhabs la
phyag ‘tshal zhing skyabs su song nas sangs rgyas pa’i rnal ‘byor par song ngo |.
130. This revelation is the ostensible text of the Lam ‘bras bu dang bcas pa’i gdams
ngag dang man ngag tu bcas pa ; for an edition and translation of this work, see
Davidson (forthcoming b).
131. The Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja, for example, indicates (fol. 223a6)
that the yogins’ body becomes like crystal as a result of his practice. 
132. Natya$astra VI:43-45ab, Kavi 1926–34, 1:296:
tesam utpattihetava$ catvaro rasah | tadyatha $rNgaro raudro viro bibhatsa iti |
atra (43)
$rNgarad dhi bhaved dhasyo raudrac ca karuno rasah |
virac caivâdbhutotpattir bibhatsac ca bhayanakah || (44) 
$rNgaranukrtir ya tu sa hasyas tu prakirtitah | (45 ab)
133. Natya$astra, Kavi 1926–34, 1:297: eva m tadabhasataya prakarah $rNgarena
sucitah | tena karunadyabhasesv api hasyatvam sarvesu mantavyam | p. 314: etena
sarve rasa hasye ‘ntarbhuta iti dar$ita. 
134. Ibid.: anaucityapravrttikrtam eva hi hasyavibhavatvam | taccanaucityam sar-
varasanam vibhavanubhavadau sambhavyate | tena vyabhicarinam apy esaiva varta |. 
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 430 ---
135. Morrell 1983, pp. 15–16.
136. Schopenhauer 1958, 1:59. 
137. On Yaksa lore generally, see Sutherland 1991. 
138. The earliest images of Virupa are from the early thirteenth century. An ear-
ly Sa-skya-pa painting is illustrated in Kossak and Singer (1998, pp. 136–138), al-
though there are problems with their analysis. The other example is an image in
the upper left-hand position on the Dhoti of the colossal Mañju $ri statue to the
right of the gSum-brtsegs lha-khang in Alchi; this Vir upa is almost visible in
Goepper (1996, p. 103), but not really identiﬁable as Vir upa; its identiﬁcation was
done by the author at the site in late July 2000, but no photograph was possible at
that time. Interestingly, this Alchi Vir upa is not obese, unlike every other known
exemplar and apparently represents a Kashmiri variation, possibly because the
Bengali conventions were unknown to the artist, who simply rendered Virupa like
most of the other siddhas with only his attributes differentiating him.
139. Strong 1992, pp. 273–290. 
140. Bakhtin 1968, pp. 344–347. 
141. Ibid., p. 10.
142. Ibid., p. 317.
143. Buitenen 1958. 
144. Subhasita-samgraha, in Le Muséon 23 (1904): 5n2.
145. Milindapañha, IV.1.43–45, Trenckner 1880, pp. 120–121.
. , ,   
1. *Ardhapañcamagatha, To. 2278, fol. 132b4–b7: gdol pa dza zhes bya ba zhig gis
| slob dpon chen po ku ku ri pa la brten te | don dam sems la dmigs pa’o | rdzogs
pa’i rim pa phyogs gcig pa bsgoms pa las | chos thams cad brten med du zhen par
‘gyur ro | de nas yul dza lan dha rar | rims nad kyis mi phal cher tshe’i dus byas so
| lo tog thams cad ser bas bcom mo | lo lngar char ma bab nas | bram ze gsang
tshig mkhan la dris pa dang | sa phyogs ‘di ni mi nang pa sang rgyas pa gnas nas |
phyi rol gyi grub mtha’ gsang bar smra ba la phyogs te gnas pas | bkra mi shis pa
sna tshogs byung ste | ’jig rten ‘di la gzhan phung zhing | ma ‘ongs pa la rang
phung bar byed do zhes pa dang | dpal ku ku ri pas thos te | gdol pa dza’i drung
du byong nas smras pa |. 
2. Siddhaikaviramahatantra, especially observable in the ﬁrst two of the four
chapters, pp. 1–14. 
3. E.g., V ajravidaranadharanyekavirasadhana, To. 2926; Davidson 1992, pp.
123–124.
4. Davidson 2002b. 
5. Hevajra Tantra, Snellgrove 1959, 1:127; Nispannayogavali, 1949, pp. 40–41,
14–15. 
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 431 ---
6. Nispannayogavali, 1949, pp. 43–44, 23; there is an expanded Buddhakap ala
mandala, in ibid., pp. 47, 30–31.
7. Ibid., pp. 42–43, 20–21.
8. Ibid., pp. 41–42, 52–53, 16–17, 40–41. 
9. E.g., at Ratnagiri; Mitra 1981, 1:108–138. 
10. Lalou 1936, pp. 332–335.
11. Hevajrasekaprkriya, Finot 1934, p. 24; the language here is reasonably close
to that found in the Samksiptabhisekavidhi, Sakurai 1996, pp. 411–412. 
12. Nispannayogavali, 1949, pp. 72–73, 75–76.
13. Vidyottama-mahatantra, To. 746, fols. 48a4–b6: de nas nam mkha’ la rgyu
ba’i ma mo bdun gyis ca co dang ga zha’i sgra bton nas ‘khor de nyid du ‘dus par
gyur te | ’khor ‘dus pa de dag thams cad la lan gsum bskor ba byas nas bcom ldan
‘das kyi zhabs la mgo bos phyag ‘tshal te bcom ldan ‘das la ‘di skad ces gsol to |
bcom ldan ‘das bdag cag gis kyang byang chub sems dpa’ chen po lag na rdo rje la
gsang sngags kyi shas ‘bul bar ‘tshal lo | de nas bcom ldan ‘das kyis ma mo de dag
la ‘di skad ces bka’ stsal to | sring mo dag gang khyed sems can thams cad la phan
pa’i phyir zhugs pa ni legs so legs so | de nas ma mo de dag gis tshigs mthun p a
lag na rdo rje la ng sngags phul ba | na mo buddh a ya | na mo badzra p a na ye |
ma ha yaksa se na pa ta ye | tad ya th a | hu lu hu lu | la hu la hu | ha ha | ti stha
tistha | bhra ma bhra ma | bandha bandha | kh a da kha da | ma tsa me kashcid
bighnam ka ri shya te | mo ha ni mo ha ni | na ya ti na ya | m ali ni bi shwe shwa
re | a mo ghe na ma sb a ha | rig sngags ‘di dran pa tsam gyis rig pa mchog sgrub
pa’i rig sngags ‘chang de la bdag cag ma mo bdun gyis dpag tshad gcig gi bar du
bsrung bar bgyi | yang dag par so sor bskyab par bgyi’o | rig sngags kyi las rnams
‘byung ste ras sar pa la sbyin dang ma ‘dres pa’i tshon rtsis lag na rdo rje mdog
sngo bsangs la lo bcu drug lon pa’i sha gzugs can rgyan thams cad kyis brgyan pa
ma mo bdun gyis bskor bar bri’o | ma mo bdun ni ‘jigs pa’i tshul du bsgrub par
bya’o | de nas zhag gsum smyang ba byas te mar gyi ngo zhag bcu bzhi la ci nus
kyi mchod pa byas te | chang dang sha’i gtor ma yang sbyin par bya’o | de nas
rig sngag ‘chang gis ri mo’i sku gzugs kyi mdun du seng ldeng gi shing gis me
sbar la yungs kar khrag gis bsgos pas lan brgya stong sbyin sreg byas te | de nas
ri mo’i sku gzugs ‘gul bar mthong na rigs sngags ‘chang gis rig pa mchog dran
par bya’o | bu med mche ba gtsigs pa yang ‘ong bar ‘gyur te des ‘jigs par mi bya
bar sring mo khyod ‘ongs pa legs so | rdo rje ‘dzin gyis dam tshig byin pa gang
yin pa de dran par gyis shig ces smros shig | de skad thos nas ca co’i sgra phyung
ste de bzhin du bya’o zhes nas mi snang bar ‘gyur ro | de nas nyin gcig bzhin du
ti na ra re sbyin par byed cing don thams cad sgrubs te rig sngags kyi dgnos grub
kyang sbyin par byed do |.
14. Ibid., fols. 48b6–49b2.
15. Hevajra Tantra, Snellgrove 1959, II.v.29; cy. 2:153.
16. Kulke and Rothermund 1998, pp. 136–138; in this description, they are pri-
marily concerned with the intimate connection of divinities to real princes. 
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 432 ---
17. Uddiyana$riyogayoginisvabhutasambhoga-$ma$anakalpa, To. 1744, passim;
these names, their order, and almost everything about the directions assigned are
anomalous. Cf. Samvarodaya-tantra, Tsuda 1974, XVII.36–45; treated by T suda
1990; I cannot agree with T suda’s understanding of the historical circumstances
of this material. 
18. Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika, To. 2647, fols. 272b7–273b7.
19. Tatz 1987, 1988.
20. Tucci 1930. 
21. Sahajasiddhi, To. 2260, fols. 1b1–4; Sahajasiddhi-paddhati, To. 2261, fols.
6a5–13b7. 
22. There are actually three texts included in the Dam-pa sangs-rgyas collec-
tion, the Zhi byed snyan rgyud zab byed ma (Aziz 1979), which feature ﬁfty-four
names, but all have multiple repetitions. Beyond the above text, I.235.1–242.5,
probably the most Indic, there is the rNal ‘byor pho mo lnga bcu rtsa bzhi’i dgongs pa
dril ba | lam dri am myed pa gser sgong dag pa’i skor(I.242.6–247.6), and the rNal ‘byor
pho mo lnga bcu rtsa bzhi’i gdams pa yin | lam dri ma myed pa shel sgong dag pa’i skor
(I.247.7–254.8). These latter two texts include the Tibetan translator Rin-chen
bzang-po (!) as a siddha. 
23. Tucci 1949, 1:227–230; Schmidt 1958, pp. 17–18.
24. This list is found in the manuscript that has been attributed the title of its
ﬁrst work, Yogavataradisamgraha; Nepal National Archives, t rtiya 366–3, fols.
9b3–11a6. There is also a modern copy of this manuscript placed in the Asiatic So-
ciety, ms. G8060. 
25. Kubjikamata-tantra, Goudriaan and Schoterman 1988, X.112–130; Rocher
1986, p. 229. 
26. Rwa lo tsa ba’i rnam thar, p. 265; elsewhere in the same work, Rwa-lo en-
counters eighty siddhas, pp. 230, 240. 
27. Sharma 1965, pp. 86–87, 104–109, 176–188, 213–216, 264.
28. Wills 1919; Chhattisgarh used to be part of Madhya Pradesh, but became a
separate state at the end of 2000. 
29. Fleet 1883, p. 160, line 46; Sharma 1965 for a synthesis of this and other
grants. 
30. For a discussion of this locale, see Postel et al. 1985, pp. 28–31, 40–46, 93–97,
121–122, 302.
31. See A mes zhabs, Gsang ‘dus byung tshul, pp. 37.4–40.3, for his understand-
ing of Buddhajñanapada’s system.
32. Abhisamayalamkaraloka, Vaidya 1960, p. 558.15.
33. The Dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama, To. 1853, fol. 2a2, seems to de-
scribe Guneru (there written Gunenu) as a male teacher, so this is probably not a
title. Otherwise, when Vitap ada’s text indicates a teaching received, usually the
verb thob pa is employed, so the exact signiﬁcance of this phrase is unclear. 
34. Sukusuma-nama-dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama-vrtti, To. 1866, fols.
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 433 ---
89b4–90b5: de nas yul dbus las byang du dpag tshad nyis brgya sum cu’i phyogs na
yon tan kun ‘byung zhes te mkha’ ‘gro mas byin gyis rlob pa phal cher de las ‘byung
ba’i phyir | u rgyan gyi yul la bya’o | der bgrod nas de’i phyogs gcig nor bu’i gling
du sku ‘khrungs pa’i phyag rgya chen po thob pa | dpal sna tshogs gzugs zhes kyang
grags pa | slob dpon chen po ‘jo sgeg rdo rje zhes bya ba yod de | de la bya ba dang
rnal ‘byor gyi rgyud mang du thos nas | ’bad pas rnam par dpyad pa yang byas so |
yang gnas de nyid kyi phyogs gcig na bsam gyis mi khyab pa’i rim pa’i man ngag
thob pa | rnal ‘byor ma chen mo de nyid brnyes pa gu ne ru zhes bya ba zhig gnas
pa de’i drung du bgrod nas de mnyes par byas te | bla na med pa’i rgyud mang du
thos par byas nas | ji skad du gsungs pa’i dam tshig dang dbang la sogs pas bla ma
de’i lung thob nas gzod bsgom pa la zhugs so | lhas rmi lam du bstan pa u rgyan
gyi gnas de yi byang phyogs kyi chab sgo na | gdol pa’i rigs dz a thig dzwa la zhes
bya ba la bu mo lo bcu drug lon pa zhig yod kyis | de ni rigs las skyes [90a] pa’i
rnal ‘byor ma laksmi chen mo zhes bya ba yin gyis der song dang khyod kyi dgongs
pa ‘grub par ‘gyur ro zhes pa dang | ’phral du song nas de dang bshes su ‘thams
nas | zla ba brgyad kyi bar du mnyes par byas so | des kyang phyag rgya chen po
la drod pa yin par rtogs nas | phra mo’i lung stsal ba tsam gyis dpal dza m bha la’i
grub pa thob par gyur to | de nas yul dz a lendhar zhes bya ba na grong khyer ka
no dzer zhes bya ba yod de | de’i phyogs gcig na shes rab gtso bor byed pa’i rgyud
la bsam pa chu klung lta bur gyur pa byis pa chung ba’i zhabs zhes bya ba’i drung
du bgrod nas | de mnyes par byas nas de’i gzhung thos shing lung yang thob par
byas te bsgom pa yang nan tan du byed do | de nas yul dbus nas lho phyogs su dpag
tshad sum brgya yod pa na yul kongka na zhes bya ba yod de | de la nam mkha’i
shing ldan zhes bya ste | ci’i phyir zhe na | rtsa ba med par shing rnams la ‘khril
shing steng du kril pa lta bur gnas pa’o | yul de’i phyogs gcig na thabs gtso bor byed
pa’i rgyud la dgongs pa chu klung chen po lta bur gyur pa skye ba gcig gis thogs pa
grub pa’i dbyang phyug bsrung ba’i zhabs zhes bya ba gnas te | de yang rdzu ‘phrul
dang ldan pa’i slob mas bskor ba’o | de dag kyang gang zhe na | bram ze tsa tra ra
zhes bya ba dang | bram ze gu hya parta zhes bya ba dang | rgyal rigs manydzu shri
zhes bya ba dang rje’u rigs purna bha dra zhes bya ba dang | dmangs rigs d i pam
ka ra zhes bya ba dang | dmangs rigs karna pu tra zhes bya ba dang | smad ‘tshong
ma a lo ki zhes bya ba dang | smad ‘tshong ma sa du shi la zhes bya ba ste | de kun
gyi yo byad dang gos zas ni lha mo nor gyi rgyun zhes bya ba des nyi ma re re zhing
gser gyis ma sha bcu dang mu tig gi ha ra phyed dang k arsa pana sum brgya sbyor
ro | bla ma dam pa de’i drung du lo dgu’i bar du ‘dud cing skye ba gcig gis thogs
par byas so | ’dus pa’i rgyud chen zhes pa la sogs pa ni bla ma’i dgongs pa ste | de
la ‘dus pa’i rgyud ni rnal ‘gyor rnams so | de’i ‘grel pa ni rnal ‘byor bslab pa sme sha
can gyi bu mo bi ma la mu dri’o | de dang bcas par bco brgyad bar du mnyan [90b]
pa ni zla ba bco brgyad kyi bar du bsgrub pa’o | bdag gis ma rtogs pa zhes ba ni
rtogs pa’i dba’ rlabs ma ‘phros pa’o | bla ma chen pos kyang bdag gis kyang ma
rtogs zhes gsungs pa dang | thugs cung zad chad nas ‘di ma rtogs par gzhan ni don
med do par bsams nas | rang gi phyag rgya ‘dus pa’i glegs bam du byas nas mgul
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 434 ---
du btags nas de las byang phyogs su bgrod de | rdo rje gdan gyi rgyab na ku ba tsa
zhes bya ba’i tshal yod de der phyin pa’o | de yi dgongs pa ni byang chub kyi sny-
ing po las kha phyir bltas pa’i sems can rnams kyi nang na bdag gnas te |  de na
‘dod chags la sogs pa’i stag dang dred la sogs pa mang zhing shin tu ‘jigs pa’i sa ste |
bdag de las thar par ‘dod pa’i phyir der zla ba drug bskul ba dang bcas pa’i bsgrub
pas gnas pa’i chos rnams kyi de bzhin nyid rtogs so zhes so | ji ltar rtogs she na |
sprul pa’i dge slong zhes pa la sogs pa’o | de yang rdo rje ‘dzin pa chen pos sprul
pa’i dge slong byi ba’i sham thabs can chos gos las thod byas pa gcig zhing rmo
zhing gnas pa dang | bla ma gnyis te bu chung dang ldan pa’i bud med ngan pa
dang | khyi mo dkar ba mtshan ma can no | de rnams dang phrad ba las rtogs pa’i
rlabs mi mnga’ bas bla mas de rnams la ma khrel to |.
I have emended rtsa ba med par shing rnams la ‘khris shing steng du bris pa,
to rtsa ba med par shing rnams la ‘khril shing steng du kril pa; kha and ba, sa and
la are quite similar in manuscripts and easily confused. 
35. Dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama, To. 1853, fol. 16a4, describes it as 50
krosa, with the kro sa normally four to the yojana; however, in Sukusuma-nama-
dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama-vrtti, To. 1866, fol. 135a2, Vitapada translates
this into six yojana and two krosa, so that we would understand eight krosa to the
yojana. 
36. Sukusuma-nama-dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama-vrtti, To. 1866, fol.
135a5–6. 
37. RajataraNgini III.11–12. The sixth-century chronology represented here ap-
pears faulty, and other evidence points to an eighth century date for this
monastery; see chapter 3, n. 105. 
38. See Gonda 1961 and Parry 1985.
39. Mirashi 1976, pp. xlvii, 6–8.
40. Mañju$rinamasamgiti, Davidson 1981, p. 18, n. 52, for references on this issue. 
41. Sukusuma-nama-dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama-vrtti, To. 1866, fol.
135b3–4: gtam rgyud rgyas par shes byas nas | zhes pa ni bla ma chen po’i gtam
rgyud rgyas pa na lendra ‘dul ba dang | rdo rje gdan gyi mchod pa byas pa dang |
rab tu gnas pa byas pa la sogs pa’i lo rgyus kyis skal ba dang ldan pa cher dad par
byas nas | des kyang rang gi ‘dod pa’i gzhung la mkhas pa ni bla ma ste |.
42. Mar pa lo tsa’i rnam thar, p. 84; Nalanda Translation Committee 1982, p. 85. 
43. This date is variously interpreted as 1040 or 1041; the sources are rNam thar
rgyas pa, Eimer 1979, §§ 231–232; Deb ther sngon po, 1984, 1:303, and Roerich 1949,
1:247.
44. rNal ‘byor byang chub seng ge’i dris lan, SKBIII.277.4.5–278.2.2: nag tsho lo tsa
ba’i zhal nas | nga btsun chung gcig gis jo bo spyan ‘dren du phyin tsa na | jo bo
ma ga dhar stabs kas lo gcig ‘gor bar byung nas | jo bo na ro pa snyan pa che bas
zhal blta ba la ‘gro snyam ste | ma ga dh a nas zla ba gcig shar lhor phyin pa na |
phulla ha ri zhes bya ba’i gtsug lag khang na jo bo bzhugs zhes thos te de blta bar
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 435 ---
phyin pas nga bsod nams che bar byung ste | sleb pa’i nyin par jo bo la rgyal phran
zhig phyag ‘tshal ba yin zer nas phyin pas khri chen po zhig brtsigs nas ‘dug pa’i
rtsar bsdad | de nas khrom tham cad ‘ur langs nas | jo bo byon kyin ‘dug zer te bltas
pas | jo bo sku bongs che ba | dbu skra dkar ba las thal nas | dmar sang nge ba
sindhu ra’i thod bcings pa | mi bzhi tsam gyis bteg nas go la mur gin byon pa
mthong | zhabs la ‘ju | gsung thos pa[r] bya snyam tsa na | dbang che ches phar
phar phul nas tha mar bton | der jo bo’i zhal ni mthong | gsung ni ma thos |.
45. Snellgrove 1987, 1:160–170. 
46. The layout of the ga nacakra mandala provided in Wallace 2001 is a classic
example of an idealized form that would be virtually impossible to reproduce (p.
127). It calls for several kinds of tribals, foreigners, and outcastes in its makeup,
many of which are seldom found in the same place in medieval India. 
47. The text has las mkhan, for which I can ﬁnd no attested Sanskrit equiva-
lent; Samvarodaya-tantra, Tsuda 1974, VIII.23, appears to identify this ofﬁcal as a
karmavajrin.
48. Sarvabuddhasamayoga-ganavidhi, To. 1672, fols. 195b3–196a4: bsod nams ye
shes tshogs rdzogs pas | kun ldan tshogs kyi ‘khor lo yi | rigs kyi bkod pa so so’i
gnas | phun sum tshogs par bstan pa’am | yang na bde ba’i gnas dag tu | skyed mos
tshal la sogs par bsgrub | mar ngo’i brgyad dang bcu bzhi dang | yar ngo’i brgyad
dang bcu mtshams gnyis | der ni dang po gdan bshams te | ’jam zhing reg na bde
‘gyur ba’i | sna tshogs padma ras kyis g.yogs | de ni thams cad dag pa’i gdan | sangs
rgyas kun gyi dam tshig dpal | rdo rje sems dpa’i snang ba bde | de bzhin gshegs
pa’i pho brang mchog | rin chen rgyan la sogs pas spras | dril bu rgyal mtshan
mchog ldan pa’i | bla re dam pa bres pa na | rdo rje tshig dang mchog la sogs | glu
dang sil snyan rnam par ‘phrul | me tog bdug pa’i sbyor ba dang | mar me dri la
sogs ldan par | sangs rgyas thams cad mnyam sbyor ba’i | mkha’ ‘gru sgyu ma bde
mchog bsgrub | slob dpon mgon la legs zhus nas | phun sum tshogs pa’i rjes ‘jug
cing | sangs rgyas brda dang ldan pa yis | me tog thogs te ‘gro la bskul | rnal ‘gyor
pho mo thams cad kun | dga’ zhing dang ba’i sems bcas kyis | do nub bdag gi gnas
dag tu | tshogs kyi cho ga mdzad par gsol | e ma bu ni snying rje che | gal te lag
pa’i phreng ston na | ’du bar bya zhes smra ba yin | phreng ba mngon par btang
byas nas | dam tshig la gnas brtul zhugs bzang | dpa’ bo gzhan don spyod pa’o | de
nas nub mo ‘dus pa dang | phyi nas ‘dag chal dri chab chus | khrus byas me tog gis
brgyan cing | rnal ‘byor dag chos sngags kyis sbyang | de nas nang gi khrus byas te
| sngags kyi bsrungs shing byin brlabs nas | dam tshig tshogs rnams bskang gso
zhing | rim bzhin nang du ‘gro bar bya | dam tshig brda sogs brtag pa’i phyir | khro
bo’i rgyan sngon las mkhan gnyis | rig pa’i sngags brjod thob ‘dzin | bsrung ba’i
don phyir sgo ‘gram gnyis | kye khro rgyal rgyan sngon dag gis mdzes | dam tshig
rnam par spyod pa po | dngos grub rin chen dbyug to ‘dzin | dpa’ bo dpa’ mo ‘du
bar mdzod | mkha’ mdzes rnal ‘byor ma dkyil du | dam pa’i mtshan ldan bdag
thong shig | om ma ha sa ya hum | su ra ta stam |.
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 436 ---
49. Ibid., fol. 196b4: ‘di la rnam rtog yod ma yin | bram ze khyi dang gdol pa
rnams | rang bzhin gcig pas lhan cig bza’ |. 
50. Ibid ., fol. 197a2–3: de dag la ni snying ring nas | snying nas khrag chen
‘thungs pa yin | bdag gi ngo bo yongs spangs shing | dka’ thub kyis ni gzir mi bya
| ci bde bar ni bde bar spyad | ’di ni phyi dus sangs rgyas yin | rnal ‘byor longs spy-
od thams cad la | cis kyang mi ‘jigs dga’ bar gyis | 
51. On these terms, see Samvarodaya-tantra, VIII.7. 
52. Kularnava, Vidyaratna 1917, VIII.96–111. The practice is not mentioned in
the earlier Kulacudamani; see Finn 1986, pp. 74–147. 
53. Bühnemann has accepted the eleventh to the ﬁfteenth centuries as the date
of the Kularnava’s composition (1992, p. 62). Gupta et al. (1979, p. 155) take the
Kularnava as paradigmatic for this practice; cf. Bharati 1965, pp. 257–261. 
54. E.g., Sharma 1996, p. 105.
55. See Elwin 1947, pp. 269–325, for a somewhat dated assessment of this
institution.
56. Ibid.; and Gell 1992; cf. Vitebsky 1992, pp. 48–49, and Boal 1982, pp. 20–22. 
57. Elwin 1947, pp. 326–332, and Gell 1992, p. 64.
58. Kalikapurana, XLI.17–23.
59. A corrupt version of the Sanskrit of this list is found in the Mulapattayah
Sthulapattayah in the Advayavajrasamgraha, Shastri 1927, p. 13; among the many
problems in the text, gotraguna (l. 5) should read gotragana, jane pak.se (l. 7) should
be jane ‘pak se, and i sta- (l. 8) should be du sta. I have relied of the various short
texts covering these twenty-two, collectively To. 2478–2488, especially the Va -
jrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, To. 2488, of Mañju$rikirti. This text is provid-
ed with an incomplete title both on the title page and in the Tohoku catalogue,
but on fol. 231b6 the text is titled: rdo rje theg pa’i rtsa ba’i ltung ba’i rgya cher ‘grel
pa lam gyi sgron ma zhes bya ba . 
60. Pañcakrama, II.80–81; as noted in Mimaki and Tomabechi 1994, this ma-
terial is also found quoted in the Subhasita-Samgraha, 1903–4, p. 386. 
61. Cf. Hevajra Tantra, II.viii.2–5. 
62. Cf. *V ajrayanacaturda$amulapattitika, To. 2485, fol. 184a7–b2; *V ajrayanamu-
lapattitika, To. 2486, fol.189a3–b1; V ajrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, To. 2488,
fols. 219a6–b1. Cf. Guhyasiddhi, pp. 50–59.
63. Cf. *V ajrayanacaturda$amulapattitika, To. 2485, fol. 184a3–5; *V ajrayanamu-
lapattitika, To. 2486, fol. 188b6–189a3; V ajrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, To.
2488, fol. 218a5–b1. 
64. *Pañcada$apatti, To. 2480; another such list is a list of seven, Yan lag gi nyes
pa bdun pa, To. 2481; without a commentary, though, its meaning is unclear and
the text appears unreliable. 
65. Vidyavrata is the topic of chapters 7 and 8 of Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi,
Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, pp. 50–57. While sexual activity with a consort is its
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 437 ---
fundamental feature, it encompasses a wider series of activities, including partici-
pation in the tantric feast. 
66. V ajrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa, To. 2488, fols. 221b7–222a5: spyod pa
de yang rnam pa bzhi ste las dang po pas kun tu bzang po’i spyod pa bya bar gsungs
te | rgyud gzhan las kun du bzang po’i spyod pa gnas skabs gzhan du yang bstan te
dgongs pa gzhan no | cung cad brtan pa thob nas rig pa’i brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa
ste | sngags spyod kyis zla ba drug la sogs par bya bar gshad do | brtan pa thob pa
rnams kyis mgon po kun du spyod pa la gnas par bya’o zhes bshad pa’i rgyud chen
po las bshad do |  . . . ‘dir rnal ‘byor gyi lam rnam pa gnyis su shes par bya ste | rnal
‘byor la brten pa dang | thabs kyi dam tshigs la brten pa’o | kha cig dam tshig la
brten nas rnal ‘byor gyis grol ba yang yod | kha cig rnal ‘byor la brten nas dam tshig
gis grol ba yang yod |.
67. rGyud kyi mngon par rtogs pa rin po che’i ljon shing , SKB, III.48.1.4–49.4.5. 
68. Sandhivyakarana-tantra, To. 444, fol. 161b3–7: gsang ba’i bdag po mkhas
rnams kyis | tshul mchog ‘di ni rnyed gyur nas | don gsal yang dag rnyed pa dang |
de yang nga rgyal dag tu ltung | de rnams ting ‘dzin zhi nyid dang | shes rab nyid
kyang shin tu ring | rab tu dga’ dang ldan pa yis | rnal ‘byor pa ni bdag nyid ces |
mngon pa’i nga rgyal la rtag dga’ | sgyu dang bcos ma’i chos dang ldan | mya ngan
‘das dang gzhan ‘gro ba | phan tshun dag ni sun yang ‘byin | gsang sngags smra ba
la brten nas | gcig la gcig ni rtsod par ‘gyur | de rnams bdud kyi byin brlabs kyis |
gal te dngos grub phra thob na | des ni mngon par rang (sic for nga) rgyal bas |
mkhas pa nyam du shes par ‘gyur | tshogs pa’i nang du rtsod pa dang | khyi bzhin
kha zas la spyod ‘gyur | rang las ‘bras las byung ba yi | phan pa la ni gnod pa byed |
de rnams dge dang mi dge rnams | bdag cag rnams kyi stobs yin zer | mngon sum
sangs rgyas ‘dra ba yi | slob dpon smod cing bsnyen bkur med | skad cig gcig gis
sdang byed cing | de la skad cig gis rjes chags | khyi dang phag dang khwa rnams kyi
| spyod pa dag ni ston par byed |.
69. One text dedicated to this description is the He ru ka’i rnam par dag pa, To.
1481, attributed to %raddhakaravarman. 
70. While I have emphasized the Sahajasiddhi, other examples of a criticism of
esoteric conduct are found in works attributed to Virupa, especially hisVirupadacau-
rasi, To. 2283, his Dohakosa, To. 2280, and his Sunisprapañcatattvopade$a, To. 2020. 
71. Sahajasiddhi, To. 2260, fols. 2a4–2b2:
la la bdag ni lhan cig skyes | kha cig rmongs pas dbang phyug ste | 
bdag bcas ma yin bdag med pa | rtog pa gnyis ni spangs pa nyid | 
de ni zung ‘jug go ‘phang du | rgyal bas lhan cig skyes par gsungs | 
de nyid srog chags rnams kyi srog | de nyid mchog tu mi ‘gyur ba | 
de nyid kun la khyab pa yi | lus kun la ni rnam par gnas | 
bud med byis pa ba lang rdzi | kla klo dang ni rigs ngan dang | 
chu yi nang gnas sems can dang | lha dang gnod sbyin klur bcas pa’i | 
de rnams lhan cig skyes mi shes | ’gro ba’i grong khyer dag tu ‘khyam |
. , ,   ⁄ 

--- PAGE 438 ---
72. Ibid., fols. 3a1–4:
kha cig dngos grub dbang gnyis skyes | byis pa yun ring rgan sogs kyis | 
‘bad pa yis ni thob mi ‘gyur | 
rgyu dang bcas pa’i skad cig ma | ’khrul dang rnam par ‘khrul ‘dra ma | 
kha cig longs spyod rdzogs pa’i gzhung | de ni lhan cig skyes brjod min | 
lte ba’i dbus su ‘khor lo mchog | de dbus gzi brjid gzugs can ni | 
sgrub pa po yis rtag bsgoms pa | de ni lhan cig skyes brjod min | 
spyi bor gnas pa’i ‘khor lo che | de la reg dang bde ba ‘bab | 
bya ba’i rab tu sbyor bas ‘thob | de ni lhan cig skyes brjod min | 
srog gi rlung ni ‘gog pa ru | ’bad pa yis ni gang zhig byed | 
sna yi rtse mor rab gzhug bya | de ‘gog pa yis gang thob pa | 
de ni lhan cig skys brjod min | 
thur sel rlung ni ‘gog pa yis | lus ni gdung ba byas nas su | 
yang nas yang du goms par byed | de ni lhan cig skyes mi brjod |
73. Vidyottama-maha-tantra, To. 746, fols. 12b4–13a1: de nas lag na rdo rje’i
mdun du bzlas brjod bgyis te seng ge’i sgra ‘byin gyi bar du bgyi’o | seng ge’i sgra
thos nas lha ma yin gyi bu mo rnams ‘byung ste de dag la ‘dod pa bskyed par ma
bgyi’o | gal te ‘dod pa bskyed na seng ge ni ma mchis so | lha ma yin gyi bu rnams
ni mchis te lha ma yin gyi bu rnams kyang yongs su spyad par ‘gyur ro | gal te de
dag la ‘dod pa ma bskyed na seng ger ‘gyur te | seng ge la zhen na rig sngags ‘chang
gi bu mo brgyad cu ‘byung ngo | rig sngags ‘chang bzhi stong yang g.yog ‘khor du
‘gyur ro | gang du ‘dod pa der mchi’o | rig sngags ‘chang gi ‘khor los sgyur bar ‘gyur
ro | ’khor lo la sogs pa’i spyod yul du mi ‘gyur ro | gang gi tshe rdo rje dang ‘khor
lo dang mdung rtse gsum pa dang be con dang | zhags pa dang | mdung thung
dang dbyug to rnams mchi ba de’i tshe seng ges seng ga’i sgra ‘byin te seng ge’i
sgras mtshon pa thams cad dpag tshad brgyad khrir mchi’o | rig sngags ‘chang gi
rgyal po gang dag seng ge’i sgra thos pa de dag tham cad sa la lhung ngo | mtshon
cha de dag thams cad kyang dbang du ‘gyur ro | bskal par gnas pa’i rig sngags
‘chang gi rgyal por ‘gyur ro |.
74. Guhyasamaja-tantra, XII.51: vicaret samantatah siddho gaNgavalukasarvatah |
sarvesu samayagresu vidyadharaprabhur bhavet ||. I am relying on the Pradipody-
otana, Chakravarti 1984, p. 113, for the interpretation of the ﬁrst half of the verse. 
75. Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja, fol. 27a2.
76. Guhyasamaja, XVI.88: antarddhanadisamsiddhau bhaved vajradharah prab-
huh | yaksarajadisamsiddhau bhaved vidyadharah prabhuh |. Cf. Pradipodyotana,
Chakravarti 1984, p. 199.
77. Cf. Guhyasamaja, IX, passim; especially pp. 105, 111.
78. Ibid., XVIII.67–71.
79. Cf. Guhyasamaja, XII.9–16.
80. Vidyottama-maha-tantra, fol. 48b2.
81. Bhutadamara, fols. 238a3–7
82. Ibid., fol. 249b2–3; cf. Sandhivyakarana, fol. 194b5.
 ⁄ . , ,  

--- PAGE 439 ---
A% Artha$astra
Asc. Ascribed to
BEFEO Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient
BST Buddhist Sanskrit Texts series
CAJ Central Asiatic Journal
CII Corpus Inscriptionem Indicarum
EI Epigraphia Indica
GOS Gaekwad’s Oriental Series
HOS Harvard Oriental Series
HT Hevajra Tantra
IA Indian Antiquary
IHQ Indian Historical Quarterly
IIJ Indo-Iranian Journal
JA Journal Asiatique
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society
JIABS Journal of the International Association of
Buddhist Studies
JASB Journal of the (Royal) Asiatic Society of Bengal
LL Lam ‘bras slob bshad
MCB Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques
MD% Manava Dharma %astra
Pe. Peking canon numbers (S uzuki 1957)
RBTS Rare Buddhist Text Series (Sarnath)
SKB Sa-skya bKa’-’bum (Bsod Nams Rgya Mtsho 1969)
T. Taisho shinshu daizokyo number; Takakusu and
Watanabe 1924–34
To. sDe-dge canon numbers (UI et al. 1934)
TSWS Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series
/Aswashbbreviations

--- PAGE 440 ---
This page intentionally left blank 

--- PAGE 441 ---
The bibliography is ordered as follows: Indic and Ostensibly Indic Tibetan
Sources, Chinese Sources, Indigenous Tibetan Sources, Archaeological and
Epigraphic Materials, and General Modern Sources. Indic sources are
arranged according to the Sanskrit alphabet, with Tibetan titles for which
there is no Indic equivalent inserted in Tibetan dictionary order. Indige-
nous Tibetan sources are also in dictionary order. Chinese sources and gen-
eral modern sources are ordered according to the Roman alphabet.
     
Advayavajrasamgraha.
Shastri, Haraprasad, ed. 1927. Advayavajrasamgraha. GOS, no. 40. Baroda:
Oriental Institute. 
Apadana.
Lilley, M., ed. 1925–27. Apadana. London: Oxford University Press for the Pali
Text Society. 
Abhidharmako$abhasya.
Pradhan, Pralhad, ed. 1975. Abhidharmako$abhasyam of V asubandhu.TSWS, vol. 8.
2d. rev. ed. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute.
Abhidharmasamuccaya.
Pradhan, Pralhad, ed. 1950. Abhidharma Samuccaya of Asanga. Santiniketan:
Visvabharati. To. 4049; T. 1605.
Abhidharmasamuccaya-bhasyam.
Tatia, Nathmal, ed. 1976. Abhidharmasamuccaya-bhasyam. TSWS, no. 17. Patna:
K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute. To. 4053; T. 1606. 
Abhidharmasamuccaya-vyakhya. Asc. Jinaputra. To. 4054. bsTan-’gyur, sems-tsam,
li, fols. 117a5–293a7. 
/Bswashibliography

--- PAGE 442 ---
Abhisekanirukti. Asc. Ratnakara$anti. To. 2476. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, zi, fols.
159b4–168b7.
Abhisamayalamkaraloka.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1960. Astasahasrika Prajñaparamita with Haribhadra’s
Commentary Called Aloka. BST, no. 4. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute.
Amoghapa$ahrdayadharani.
Meisezahl, R. O. 1962. “The Amoghap a$ahrdaya-dharani: The Early Sanskrit
Manuscript of the Ruiunji Critically Edited and Translated.” Monumenta
Nipponica 17:265–328. 
Artha$astra.
Kangle, R. P., ed. and trans. 1960. The Kautiliya Artha$astra. University of
Bombay Studies in Sanskrit, Pakrit, and Pali, nos. 1–3. Bombay: University of
Bombay. See Scharfe 1993, below. 
*Ardhapañcamagatha. Asc. Nagabuddhi. To. 2278. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols.
128a6–133a4.
Avadana$atakam.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1958. Avadana$atakam. BST, no. 19. Darbhanga: Mithila
Institute. 
Avantisundarikatha.
Kale, M. R. 1966. Da$akumaracarita of Dandin. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Uddiyana$riyogayoginisvabhutasambhoga-$ma$anakalpa. Asc. Birba-pa (Virupa).
To. 1744. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, sha, fols. 111b6–113b2. 
Rgveda.
Van Nooten, Barend A., and Gary B. Holland. 1994. Rig Veda: A Metrically
Restored Text with an Introduction and Notes. HOS, vol. 50. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press. 
Karunapundarika.
Yamada, Isshi. 1968. Karunapundarika: The White Lotus of Compassion. 2 vols.
London: School of Oriental and African Studies. Reprint, New Delhi:
Heritage, 1989. 
Karpuramañjari.
Konow, Sten, and Charles Rockwell Lanman, ed. and trans. 1901. Raja-Çekhara’s
Karpura-Mañjari—A Drama by the Indian Poet R ajaçekhara (About 900 a.d.).
HOS, vol. 4. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Kanhapadasya dohakosa.
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. 1935. Dohakosa. University of Calcutta Journal of the
Department of Letters 28. [Monograph with the surviving anonymous Sanskrit
commentary.]
Shahidullah, M. 1928. Les Chants mystiques de Kanha et de Saraha—les Doha-Kosa.
Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 443 ---
Karandavyuha-sutra.
Mette, Adelheid, ed. and trans. 1997. Die Gilgitfragmente des Karandavyuha.
Indica et Tibetica Monographien zu end Sprachen und Literaturen des indo-
tibetischen Kulturraumes, no. 29. Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica
Verlag. 
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1961. Mahayana-Sutra-SaMgraha. Part 1. BST, no. 17, pp.
258–308. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute.
Kalikapurana.
Shastri, B. N. 1991–92. The Kalikapurana (Text, Introduction & Translation in
English). 3 vols. Delhi: Nag Publishers. 
Kavyamimamsa.
Parashar, Sadhana, ed. and trans. 2000. KavyamimaMsa of Raja$ekhara: Original
Text in Sanskrit and Translation with Explanatory Notes. New Delhi: D. K.
Printworld.
KavyalaNkara.
Sastry, P. V. Naganatha. 1970. KavyalaNkara of Bhamaha—Edited with English
Translation and Notes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kiratarjuniye.
Bahadur, Kaisher, ed. and trans. 1972. The Kiratarjuniye by Bharavi. Vol. 1.
Kathmandu: Ratna Pustak Bhandar. 
Kubjikamata-tantra.
Goudriaan, T., and J. A. Schoterman, eds. 1988. Kubjikamatatantra—
Kulalikamnaya Version. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Kularnava Tantra.
Vidyaratna, Taranatha, ed. 1917. Kularnava Tantra. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1965.
Krtyakalpataru.
Aiyangar, K. V. Rangaswami, ed. 1942. Krtyakalpataru of Bhatta Laksmidhara.
Vol. 8: Tirthavivecana-kanda. GOS, no. 98. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
———. 1943. Idem. Vol. 11: Rajadharma-kanda. GOS, no. 100. Baroda: Oriental
Institute. 
———. 1950. Idem. Vol. 4: %raddhakanda. GOS, no. 110. Baroda: Oriental
Institute. 
Krsnayamari-tantra.
Rinpoche, Samdhong, and Vrajvallabh Dwivedi, eds. 1992. Krsnayamari-tantram
with Ratnavali Pañjika of Kumaracandra. RBTS, no. 9. Sarnath: Central
Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies. 
Kosalalamkara-tattvasamgraha-tika. %akyamitra. To. 2503. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, yi,
fols. 1b1–245a7, ri, fols. 1b1–202a5.
Khasama-tantraraja. To. 386. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ga, fols. 199a7–202a1. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 444 ---
Khasama-tantra-tika. Ratnakara$anti.
Upadhyay, Jagannath, ed. 1983. Khasama-tantra-tika.Varanasi: Sampurnananda
Samskrta Vi$vavidyalaya. To. 1424. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, wa, fols. 153a3–171a7.
Gaüdavaho.
Suru, N. G., ed. and trans. 1975. Gaüdavaho of Vakpatiraja. Prakrit Text Society
Series, no. 18. Ahmedabad: Prakrit Text Society. 
Gandavyuha.
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro, and Hokei Idzumi, eds. 1949. The Gandavyuha Sutra.
2d rev. ed. Tokyo: Society for the Publication of Sacred Books of the World. 
Guhyagarbha-tantra (also known as Guhyako$a-tantra). To. 832. bsTan-’gyur,
rnying rgyud, kha, fols. 110b1–132a7. See Kaneko 1982, no. 187.
Guhyasamaja Mahaguhyatantraraja.
Matsunaga, Yukei, ed. 1978. Guhyasamaja Tantra. Osaka: Toho Shuppan.
Guhyasiddhi. Asc. Padmavajra. 
Rinpoche, Samdhong, and Vrajvallabh Dwivedi, eds. 1987. Guhyadi-Astasiddhi-
SaNgraha. RBTS, no. 1, pp. 5–62. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher
Tibetan Studies. 
Guhyarthapraka$amahadbhuta. Asc. Gambhiravajra (Zab-pa’i rdo-rje). To. 1200.
bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ja, fols. 111a2–154b1.
GoraksasiddhantasaNgraha.
Pandeya, Janardana %astri, ed. 1973. GoraksasiddhantasaNgraha. Saraswatibhavana-
Granthamala, Vol. 110. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrta Vi$vavidyalaya. 
Grub thob brgyad cu rtsa bzhi’i gsol ‘debs. Asc. Vajrasana. To. 3758. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, tshu, fols. 110a6–113b3.
Grub thob lnga bcu’i rtogs pa brjod pa thig le ‘od kyi phreng ba. Asc. *Dakini. To.
2444. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols. 71b1–74a7. 
Candamaharosana-tantra.
George, Christopher S., ed. and trans. 1974. Candamaharosana-tantra. New
Haven, CT: American Oriental Society. To. 431.
Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja. To. 428. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, nga, fols.
181a1–231b5.
Catuh$ataka.
Lang, Karen, ed. and trans. 1981. Aryadeva’s Catuh$ataka: On the Bodhisattva’s
Cultivation of Merit and Knowledge. Indiske Studier, no. 7. Copenhagen:
Akademisk Forlag.
*Catura$itisiddhapravrtti. Asc. Abhayadatta$ri. Pe. 5091.
Dowman, Keith, trans. 1985. Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and Histories of the
Eighty-Four Buddhist Siddhas. Albany: State University of New York Press.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 445 ---
Robinson, James B., ed. and trans. 1979. Buddha’s Lions: The Lives of the Eighty-
Four Siddhas. Berkeley: Dharma.
*Catura$itisiddhasambodhihrdaya. Asc. dPa’-bo ‘od-gsal (*Viraprabha). To. 2292.
bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols. 153a6–158b1.
*Catura$itisiddhabhisamaya. Asc. *%risena (dPal gyi sde) of Nepal. To. 4317. Ed.
and trans. in Schmidt 1958, pp. 155–169.
Candraguhya-tilaka-mahatantraraja. To. 477. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ja, fols.
247b4–303a7.
Caryagitiko$a.
Kværne, Per. 1977. An Anthology of Buddhist Tantric Songs: A Study of the
Caryagiti. Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi II Hist.-Filos. Klasse Skrifter
Ny Serie, no. 14. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
Sen, Nilratan. 1977. Caryagitikosa Facsimile Edition. Simla: Indian Institute of
Advanced Study. 
Cittaguhyagambhirarthagiti. Asc. %abare$vara. To. 2448. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi,
fols. 82b1–83a1.
Cittaguhyadoha. Asc. *Dakini. To. 2443. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols. 67a3–71a7.
Chinnamundasadhana. Asc. Birwa. To. 1555. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, za, fols.
206a1–208a4. See Nihom 1992. 
Jñanatilaka-tantra. %ri Jñanatilaka-yoginitantraraja-paramamahadbhuta. To. 422.
bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, nga, fols. 96b6–136b4.
Jñanatilakapañjika-guhyatattva. Attributed to Jñanaparama. To. 1203. bsTan-
’gyur, rgyud, ja, fols. 208b1–271b7. 
Jñanasiddhi. Asc. Indrabhuti. Edited with Guhyasiddhi, pp. 93–157. 
Bhattacharya, Benoytosh, ed. 1929. Two V ajray ¯ana Works.GOS, no. 44. Baroda:
Oriental Institute. 
Dakarnava-tantra.%riD akarnavamahayoginitantraraja. To. 372. bKa’-’gyur,rgyud-
’bum, kha, fols. 137a1–264b7. The Apabhram$a verses edited in Chaudhuri 1935.
Dakinyupade$a$rotraparamparapidacchedanavavada. Anon. To. 2286. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, zhi, fols. 145a1–150a2.
Dakinijalasamvararahasya. Asc. AnaNga Yogin. 
Rinpoche, Samdhong, and Vrajvallabh Dwivedi, eds. 1990.
Dakinijalasamvararahasya. RBTS, no. 8. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher
Tibetan Studies. 
Tantrarthavatara. Asc. Buddhaguhya. To. 2501. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ‘i, fols.
1b1–91b6.
Tillopadadohakosa. In Bagchi 1935, with Kanhapadasya dohakosa, pp. 1–4, 41–51.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 446 ---
*Tirthikacandalika. Asc. Acarya Acinta. To. 2393. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols.
22b7–23a3. See chapter 5.
Trim$ikavijñaptibhasya.
Lévi, Sylvain, ed. 1925. Vijñaptimatratasiddhi. Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes
Études, fasc. 245. Paris: Librairie Ancienne Honoré Champion. 
Trailokyavijaya-mahakalparaja. To. 482. bKa’-’gyur, gyud ‘bum, ta, fols. 10a1–57a7.
T. 1171, 1172.
Da$abhumika.
Kondo, Ryuko, ed. 1936. Da$abhumi$varo Nama Mahayanasutram. Rinsen
Buddhist Text Series II. Reprint, Kyoto: Rinsen Book Company, 1983. 
Divyavadana.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1959. Divyavadana. BST, no. 20. Darbhanga: Mithila
Institute.
Dighanikaya.
Rhys Davids, T. W., and J. E. Carpenter, eds. 1890–1911. Dighanikaya. 3 vols.
London: H. Frowde for the Pali Text Society. 
Dohakosa. Asc. Birba-pa. To. 2280. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols. 134a1–136a4. 
Dravva-samgaha. Nemicandra Siddhanta-cakravartti. 
Ghoshal, Sarat Chandra, ed. and trans. 1917. Dravya-samgraha. The Sacred
Books of the Jainas, vol. 1. Arrah: Central Jaina Publishing House.
Dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama. Asc. Buddha$rijñana. To. 1853. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, di, fols. 1b1–17b2. 
Dhammapadatthakatha.
Smith, H., and H. E. Norman, eds. 1906–1915. Dhammapadatthakatha. 5 vols.
London: H. Frowde for the Pali Text Society. 
Burlingame, E.W., trans. 1921. Buddhist Legends. HOS, nos. 28–30. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press. 
*Dharanisamgraha. Translated 653–654 c.e. by *Atikuta. T.901.18.785a1–897b19. 
Dhyanottarapatalakrama. To. 808. bKa’-’gyur, gyud ‘bum, wa, fols. 223a1–225b7.
Dhyanottara-patala-tika Asc. Buddhaguhya. To. 2670. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, thu,
fols. 1b1–38a3.
Natya$astra.
Kavi, Manavalli Ramakrishna, ed. 1926–34. Natya$astra with the Commentary of
Abhinavagupta. GOS, nos. 36 and 68. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
Namasamgitimandalavidhyaka$avimala. Asc. Mañju$rimitra. To. 2543. bsTan-
’gyur, rgyud, ngu, fols. 1b1–13b6.
rNam par snang mdzad mngon par byang chub pa’i rgyud chen po’i ‘grel bshad. Asc.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 447 ---
Buddhaguhya. To. 2663. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, nyu, fols. 65a3–351a7, tu, fols.
1b1–116a7.
Nispannayogavali. Asc. Abhayakaragupta. 
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh, ed. 1949. Nispannayogavali. GOS, no. 109. Baroda:
Oriental Institute. 
Nitisara.
Mitra, Rajendralal, ed. 1982. Revised with English translation by Sisir Kumar
Mitra. The Nitisara or the Elements of Polity by K amandaki. Bibliotheca Indica,
no. 309. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. 
Pañcakrama. Asc. Siddha Nagarjuna. 
Mimaki, Katsumi, and Toru Tomabechi, eds. 1994. Pañcakrama—Sanskrit and
Tibetan Texts Critically Edited with Verse Index and Facsimile Edition of the
Sanskrit Manuscripts. Bibliotheca Codicum Asiaticorum, no. 8. Tokyo:
Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies for UNESCO.
*Pañcada$apatti. Anon. To. 2480. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fol. 180a3–5; a superior
recension of the text is found in Mañju $rikirti’s V ajrayanamulapattitika-
margapradipa, To. 2488, bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fol. 220b5–7.
Paramattha-dipani (Theragatha-atthakatha).
Woodward, F. L., ed. 1940–52. Paramattha-dipani (Theragatha-atthakatha).
London: Pali Text Society. 
Paramadya-mahayanakalparaja. To. 487. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ta, fols.
150b1–173a4. T. 220 (10), 240–4. 
Paiä-Sadda-Mahannavo.
Seth, Pandita Haragovindadas Trikamacand, ed. 1963. Paiä-Sadda-Mahannavo.
Prakrit Text Society series, no. 7. Varanasi: Prakrit Text Society.
Pa$upatasutra.
Sastri, R. Ananthakrishna, ed. 1940. Pasupata Sutras with
Pancharthabhashya–Kaundinya. Trivadrum Sanskrit Series no. CXLIII.
Trivandrum: Oriental Manuscripts Library of the University of Travancore. 
Pithadinirnaya. Asc. %akyaraksita. To. 1606. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ‘a, fols.
130a1–137a7. 
Potalakastaka. Anon.
Pandey, Janardan Shastri, ed. 1994. Bauddha-Stotra-SaMgraha, pp. 123–124.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Po ta lar ‘gro ba’i lam yig. Anon. To. 3756. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, tshu, fols.
100a6–106b6.
Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika. Asc. Jñanamitra. To. 2647. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, ju, fols. 272b7–294a5. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 448 ---
Prajñopayavini$cayasiddhi. Asc. AnaNgavajra. Edited with Guhyasiddhi, pp. 63–88. 
Pradipodyotana.
Chakravarti, Chintaharan, ed. 1984. Guhyasamajatantrapradipodyotanatika-
satkotivyakhya. TSWS, no. 25. Patna: Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research
Institute. 
dPal u rgyan du tshogs ‘khor byas pa’i dus su rnal ‘byor pa grub pa thob pa bzhi bcus
rdo rje’i mgur bzhengs pa nyams kyi man ngag thig le gser gyi phreng ba. Anon.
To. 2449. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols. 83a1–85b6. 
‘Phags pa dpung bzangs kyis zhus ba’i rgyud kyi tshig gi don bshad pa’i brjed byang.
Anon. To. 2672. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, thu, fols. 54b7–100b6.
Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Tattvacandrika. Asc. Padmavajra. To. 1653 bsTan-
’gyur, rgyud, ra, fols. 150a3–166a7. [The title is incorrectly reconstructed by UI
et al., the editors of the Tohoku catalogue, as Buddhakapalatantratattvacan-
drikapañjika.]
Buddhacarita. Asc. A$vaghosa. 
Johnston, E. H., ed. and trans. 1936. The Buddhacarita: or, Acts of the Buddha.
Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1972. 
Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha.
Poddar, Ram Prakash, and Neelima Sinha, ed. and trans. 1986. Buddhasvamin’s
Brhatkatha$lokasaMgraha with English Translation. Pracyabharati Series, no.
21. Varanasi: Tara Printing Works.
Bodhicaryavatara.
Vaidya, P.L., ed. 1960. Bodhicaryavatara of %antideva, with the Commentary
Pañjika of Prajñakaramati. BST, no. 12. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute.
Bodhipathapradipa. Asc. Ati$a Dipamkara$rijñana. In Eimer 1978 below. 
Davidson, trans. 1995a. 
Bodhisattvabhumi.
Wogihara, Unrai, ed. 1930–36. Bodhisattvabhumi: A Statement of Whole Course of
the Bodhisattva (Being Fifteenth Section of Yogacarabhumi). Reprint, Tokyo:
Sankibo Buddhist Book Store, 1971. To. 4037; T. 1579. See Tatz 1986.
Brahmasutrabhasya.
%astri, Jagadisa L., ed. 1980. Brahmasutra-$ankarabhasyam—With the
Commentaries: Bhasyaratnaprabha of Govindananda, Bhamati of Vacaspatimi$ra,
Nyaya-Nirnaya of Anandagiri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Bhadracaryapranidhanarajatika. Asc. %akyamitra. To. 4013. bsTan-’gyur,mdo ‘grel,
nyi, fols. 201a4–234a4.
Bhasanatakacakram.
Vetal, Pt. Anantaram Sastri, et al., eds. 1963. Bhasanatakacakram. 2 vols.
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 449 ---
Bhiksuni-Vinaya.
Roth, Gustav, ed. 1970. Bhiksuni-Vinaya: Manual of Discipline for Buddhist Nuns.
TSWS, vol. 12. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute.
Bhutadamara-mahatantraraja. To. 747. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, dza, fols.
238a1–263a7.
Mañju$rimulakalpa.
Sastri, T. Ganapati. 1920. Aryamañju$rimulakalpa. Trivandrum: Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series. Reprint, Trivandrum: C B H Publications, 1992. 
Ch. 53 (rajavyakarana) see Jayaswal 1934; cf. Matsunaga 1985.
Mañju$rinamasamgiti.
Davidson, Ronald M., ed. and trans. 1981. “The Litany of Names of Mañju$ri:
Text and Translation of the Mañju$rinamasamgiti.” In Michel Strickmann,
ed., Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein. MCB 20:1–69.
Mattavilasaprahasana.
Lockwood, Michael, and A. Vishnu Bhat, ed. and trans. 1981. Mattavilasa
Prahasana (“The Farce of Drunken Sport”) by King Mahendravikramavarma
Pallava. Madras: Christian Literature Society.
Madhyamakavatara.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de, ed. 1907–12. Madhyamakavatara par Candrakirti.
Bibliotheca Buddhica, no. IX. Saint-Petersburg: Académie Impériale des
Sciences. 
Huntington, C. W., trans. 1989. The Emptiness of Emptiness: An Introduction to
Early Indian Madhyamika. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Manoratha-purani (ANguttara-nikaya Atthakatha).
Walleser, M., and H. Kopp, eds. 1924–1956. Manoratha-purani (ANguttara-nikaya
Atthakatha). 5 vols. London: Oxford University Press for Pali Text Society. 
Mayamata.
Dagens, Bruno, ed. and trans. 1970–76. Mayamata—traité sanskrit d’architecture.
Publications de l’Institut Français d’Indologie, nos. 40–I and II. Pondichéry:
Institut Français d’Indologie.
———. 1985. Mayamata—An Indian Treatise on Housing Architecture and
Iconography. New Delhi: Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Science & Research. 
Mahakalatantra. To. 440. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ca, fols. 45b6–86a7. See
Stablein 1976.
Mahabharata. %antiparvan.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S., et al., ed. 1949–50. Mahabharata. %antiparvan. 2 parts.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 
Mahamayurividyarajñi.
Shu¯yo Takubo, ed. 1972. Arya-Maha-Mayuri Vidya-Rajñi. Tokyo: Sankibo. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 450 ---
Mahamudrakanakamala. Asc. Maitripa. To. 2454. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols.
115b3–124b3.
*Mahayanavatara-$astra. Asc. *Drdhramati. T.1634.32.36a–49c.
Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra. Extended title: Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-
vikurvitadhisthana-vaipulyasutrendraraja-nama-dharmaparyaya. To. 494.
bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, tha, fols. 151b2–260a7; T.848.18.1a–55a. 
Malatimadhava.
Kale, M.R., ed. 1928. Bhavabhuti’s Malatimadhava, With the Commentary of
Jagaddhara. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. 
Manava Dharma %astra.
Shastri, J. L., ed. 1983. Manusmrti, With the Sanskrit Commentary Manvartha-
Muktavali of Kulluka Bhatta. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Doniger, Wendy, and Brian K. Smith, trans. The Laws of Manu. London and
New York: Penguin Books, 1991.
Manasollasa. Asc. Bhulokamalla Some$vara, and probably written 1131 c.e.
Shrigondekar, G. K., ed. 1925–61. Manasollasa of King Bhulokamalla Some$vara.
GOS, nos. 28, 64, and 138. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Milindapañha.
Trenckner, V., ed. 1880. Milindapañha. London: Williams and Norgate. 
Mulamadhyamakakarika.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de, ed. 1903–1913. Mulamadhyamakakarikas de
Nagarjuna avec la Prasannapada Commentaire de Candrakirti. Bibliotheca
Buddhica, no. 4. St. Petersburg: l’Académie Impériale des Sciences. 
Mulasarvastivada Vinaya.
Dutt, Nalinaksha, ed. 1941–50. Gilgit Manuscripts. Vols. 2 and 3. Srinagar:
Kashmir Research Department.
Gnoli, Raniero, ed. 1977. The Gilgit Manuscript of the Sa Nghabhedavastu. Serie
Oriental Roma, vol. 49, 2 pts. Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed
Estremo Oriente. 
———. 1978. The Gilgit Manuscript of the %ayanasanavastu and the
Adhikaranavastu. Serie Oriental Roma, vol. 50. Rome: Istituto Italiano per il
Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Ye shes kyi mkha’ ‘gro ma sum cu rtsa lnga’i rtogs pa brjod pa. Anon. To. 2450.
bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols. 85b6–88a1.
Yogacarabhumi.
Bhattacharya, Vidushekhara, partially ed. 1957. The Yogacarabhumi of Acarya
AsaNga. Calcutta: University of Calcutta. 
Cf. Bodhisattvabhumi, above, and %ravakabhumi below. To. 4035–4042. T. 1579. 
Yogavataradisamgraha. Nepal National Archives, ms. trtiya 366–3. Modern copy
in the Asiatic Society, ms. G8060. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 451 ---
Ratnagunasañcaya-gatha.
Yuyama, Akira, ed. 1976. Prajña-paramita-ratna-gunasamcaya-gatha (Sanskrit
Recension A). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ratnagotravibhaga.
Johnston, E. H., ed. 1950. Ratnagotravibhaga Mahayanottaratantra$astra. Patna:
Bihar Research Society. 
Ratnamalavadana.
Takahata, Kanga, ed. 1954. Ratnamalavadana: A Garland of Precious Gems.
Oriental Library Series D. Vol. 3. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko.
RajataraNgini.
Stein, Marc Aurel, ed. 1892. Kalhana’s RajataraNgini or the Chronicle of the Kings
of Kashmir. Bombay: n.p.
Stein, Marc Aurel, trans. 1900. Kalhana’s RajataraNgini, a Chronicle of the Kings of
Kashmir. 2 vols. Westminster: n.p.
Ramayana. Balakanda.
Bhatt, G. H., ed. 1960. Ramayana. Balakanda. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Vaidya, P. L., ed. 1971. Yuddhakanda. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Shah, Umakant P., ed. 1975. Uttarakanda. Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Rudrayamala.
Yogatantra Department, ed. 1980. Rudrayamala. Yogatantra-Granthamala, vol. 7.
Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 
Laghusamvara-tantra. Tantraraja-$rilaghusambara. To. 368. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-
’bum, ka, fols. 213b1–246b7.
LaNkavatara-sutra.
Nanjio, Bunyiu, ed. 1923. LaNkavatara-sutra. Reprint, Bibliotheca Otaniensis,
vol. 1. Kyoto: Otani University Press, 1956. 
Lam ‘bras bu dang bcas pa’i gdams ngag dang man ngag tu bcas pa. Asc. Virupa. To.
2284. bsTan-`gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols. 139a6–142b7. 
*V ajragarbhatantrarajasutra. T.1198.20.542c-548b. Trans. in Bagchi 1944. 
V ajracchedika Prajñaparamita.
Conze, Edward, ed. and trans. 1957. V ajracchedika Prajñaparamita. Serie
Orientale Roma, no. 13. Rome: Is.M.E.O. 
V ajrapañjara.Dakinivajrapañjara-mahatantrarajakalpa. To. 419. bKa’-’gyur,
rgyud-’bum, nga, fols. 30a4–65b7.
Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra. To. 496. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud ‘bum, da, fols.
1b1–156b7.
Vajrapadasarasamgrahapañjika. Asc. *Ya$askirtibhadra (sNyan-grags bzng-po).
To. 1186. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, ga, fols. 58b4–146b6. 
V ajramahabhairava-tantra. To. 468. Ed. and trans. in Siklós 1996. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 452 ---
V ajramalabhidhana-mahayoga-tantra. To. 445. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ca, fols.
208a1–277b3.
*V ajrayanacaturda$amulapattitika. Asc. Laksmikara. To. 2485. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud,
zi, fols. 181a5–185a7. 
*V ajrayanamulapattitika [rDo rje theg pa’i rtsa ba’i ltung ba’i rgya cher ‘grel pa]. Asc.
*Garbhapada (sNying-po-zhabs). To. 2486. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols.
185a7–192b6.
V ajrayanamulapattitika-margapradipa. Asc. Mañju$rikirti. To. 2488. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, zi, fols. 197b7–231b7.
V ajrayanasthulapatti. Asc. Nagarjuna. To. 2482. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, zi, fols.
180a2–b3.
V ajravidarana-dharani.
Iwamoto, Yukata, ed. 1937. Kleinere Dharani Texte, pp. 7–9. Beiträge zur
Indologie, no. 2. Kyoto: n.p.
V ajravidaranadharanyekavirasadhana. Asc. Buddhaguhya. To. 2926. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, nu, fols. 329a6–330a3. 
V ajra$ekhara-mahaguhyayogatantra. To. 480. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, nya, fols.
142b1–274a5.
Va rnarhavarnastotra.
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, ed. 1987. Das V arnarhavarnastotra des Matrceta.
Sanskrittetexte aus den Turfanfunden, vol. 12. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht. To. 1138. 
Vigrahavyavartani.
Johnston, E. H., and Arnold Kunst, ed.; Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, trans. 1978.
The Dialectical Method of Nagarjuna. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Vidyottama-mahatantra. To. 746. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, dza, fols. 1b1–237b7.
Vimalaprabha.
Upadhyaya, Jagannatha, ed. 1986. Vimalaprabha. Bibliotheca Indo-Tibetica Series
no. XI. Sarnath: Central Institute for Higher Tibetan Studies.
Viruapadacaurasi. Asc. Virupa. To. 2283. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, zhi, fols.
138a4–139a6.
Vina$ikhatantra.
Goudriaan, Teun, ed. and trans. 1985. The Vina$ikhatantra: A %aiva Tantra of the
Left Current. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
V airocanabhisambodhitantrapindartha. Asc. Buddhaguhya. To. 2662. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, nyu, fols. 1–65a. 
Vyaktabhavanugata-tattva-siddhi. Asc. Yogini Cint a. With Guhyasiddhi, pp.
169–179.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 453 ---
%atapañca$atka.
Bailey, D.R. Shackleton, ed. and trans. 1951. The %atapañca$atka of Matrceta.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
%ardulakarnavadana.
Mukhopadhyaya, Sujitkumar, ed. 1954. %ardulakarnavadana. Santiniketan:
Vi$vabharati. To. 358. T.551, 552, 1300, 1301.
%iksasamuccaya. Asc. %antideva. 
Vaidya, P.L., ed. 1961. %iksasamuccaya of %antideva. BST, no. 11. Darbhanga:
Mithila Institute. To. 3940. T. 1636. 
%unyatadrsti. Asc. %abaripa. To. 2426. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, zi, fols. 40a3–40b1.
Translated in chapter 5.
%ravakabhumi.
Shukla, Karunesha, ed. 1973. %ravakabhumi of Acarya AsaNga. TSWS, vol. 14.
Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute. 
%ri-Krsnavajrapadadohakosatika. Asc. *Amitabha. To. 2302. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud,
zhi, fols. 230a6–242b7.
%ri-Guhyasamajatantra-nidana-gurupade$ana-vyakhyana. Asc.Vilasavajra. To.
1910. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, phi, fols. 89b1–97b5.
%ri-Jñanatilakapañjika-guhyatattva. Asc. Jñanavarman. To. 1203. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, ja, fols. 208b1–271b7. 
%ri-Tattvapradipa-mahayogini-tantraraja. To. 423. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, nga,
fols. 136b5–142b7.
%ri-Buddhakapala-yogini-tantra-raja. To. 424. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, nga, fols.
143a1–167a5; Pe. 63. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, da, fols. 126b4–153a6.
%ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika Jñanavati. Asc. Saraha. To 1652. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, ra, fols. 104b1–150a2.
%ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrarajatika Abhayapaddhatih. Asc. Abhayakaragupta.
To. 1654, bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, ra, fols. 166b1–255b3. Manuscript Asiatic Society
no. 3827; Nepal National Archives, ms. pañca 21.
%ri-Samputatantrarajatikamnyayamañjari. Asc. Abhayakaragupta. To. 1198.
bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, cha, fols. 1b1–316a7.
%ri-Sahajapradipa-pañjika. Asc. *Vajragupta. To. 1202. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, ja,
fols. 160a1–208b1.
%ri Hevajrapañjika muktavali. Asc. Ratnakara$anti. 
Tripathi, Ram Shankar, and Thakur Sain Negi, eds. 2001. Hevajratantram with
Muktavalipañjika of Mahapanditacarya Ratnakara$anti. Bibliotheca Indo-
Tibetica Series, XLVIII. Sarnath: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan
Studies. To. 1189. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ga, fols. 221a1–297a7.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 454 ---
Satsahasra Samhita.
Schoterman, J. A. 1982. The Satsahasra Samhita: Chapters 1–5. Orientalia Rheno-
Traiectina, vol. 27. Leiden: Brill. 
Saddharmopade$a. Asc. Tillipa. To. 2330. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols.
270a7–271a3.
Samvarodaya-tantra.
Tsuda, Shinichi, ed. and trans. 1974. The SaMvarodaya-Tantra—Selected
Chapters. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press. 
Samksiptabhisekavidhi. Asc. Vagi$varakirti. In Sakurai 1996, ed., pp. 407–441.
SatyadvayavibhaNga.
Eckel, Malcolm David, ed. and trans. 1987. Jñanagarbha’s Commentary on the
Distinction Between the Two Truths. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
Samdhi-bhasa-tika. Asc. Nagarjunapada. To. 1206. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ja fols.
297a5–301b4.
Sandhivyakarana-tantra. To. 444. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ca, fols. 158a1–207b7.
Samnyasa-upanisad.
Schrader, F. Otto, ed. 1912. The Minor Upanisads—Vol 1: Samnyasa-Upanisads.
Madras: Adyar Library. 
Olivelle, Patrick, trans. 1992. Samnyasa Upanisads: Hindu Scriptures on Asceticism
and Renunciation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Samputa. Samputodbhava. To. 381. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ga, fols. 73b1–158b7;
Pe. 26. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ga, fols. 244a2–330a5. Partially edited and
described in Skorupski 1996. 
Samputa-tilaka. To. 382. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ga, fols. 158b7–184a7.
Sarahapadasya dohakosa. Published with the surviving commentary in Bagchi 1935
and published and translated in Shahidullah 1928; see Kanhapadasya dohakosa.
Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha. To. 479; T. 882.
Chandra, Lokesh, ed. 1987. Sarva-Tathagata-Tattva-SaNgraha. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass. 
Yamada, Isshi, ed. 1980. Sarva-tathagata-TattvasaNgraha: A Critical Edition
Based on a Sanskrit Manuscript and Chinese and Tibetan Translations. New
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture. 
See Iyanaga 1985 for a discussion of the textual transmission.
*Sarvatantranidanamahaguhya$risamputatantrarajatika. Asc. Viravajra. To. 1199.
bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ja, fols. 1b1–111a2.
Sarvadurgatipari$odhana-tantra.
Skorupski, Tadeusz, ed. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipari$odhana Tantra—Elimination
of All Evil Destinies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 455 ---
Sarvabuddhasamayoga, or Sarvabuddhasamayoga-dakinijala-sambara-nama-uttara-
tantra. (longer recension) To. 366. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, ka, fols.
151b1–193a6.
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-ganavidhi. Asc. Indrabhuti. To. 1672. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud,
la, fols. 195a7–199a4.
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-dakinimaya-sambara-tantrarthodaratika. Asc. Indranala
(brGya-byin sdong-po). To. 1659. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ra, fols. 245a1–389a5.
Commentary to To. 366.
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-dakinimaya-sambara-vrtti-samayogalamkara. Asc.
*Suratavajra (Rab-tu dga’-ba’i rdo-rje). To. 1660. bsTan-’gyur, rgyud, ra, fols.
389a5–439a7. Commentary to To. 366.
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-tantraraja (shorter recension). rNying ma rgyud ‘bum,
mTshams-brag ms., vol. tsha, fols. 1b1–26a7. K aneko 1982, no. 207. Refer-
ences are to the mTshams-brag.
*Sarvayogatattvaloka-vikalavajragiti. Anon. To. 2453. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zi, fols.
92b1–115b3.
Sahajasiddhi. Asc. Indrabhuti. To. 2260. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols. 1b1–4a3; Pe.
3107. bsTan-’gyur rgyud-’grel, tsi, fols. 1b1–4b7.
Sahajasiddhi-paddhati. Asc. Lha-lcam rje-btsun-ma dpal-mo (? = *Dev ibhattari-
ka$ri). To. 2261. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, zhi, fols. 4a3–25a1; Pe. 3108. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud-’grel, tsi, fols. 4b8–29a7. 
Sadhanamala.
Bhattacharya, Benoytosh, ed. 1925.S adhanamala. GOS, nos. 26, 41. Baroda:
Oriental Institute. Reprint, Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1968. 
Siddhaikaviramahatantra.
Pandey, Janardan, ed. 1998. Siddhaikaviramahatantra. RBTS, no. 20. Sarnath:
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Sukusuma-nama-dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama-vrtti. Asc. Vitapada. To.
1866. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, di, fols. 87a3–139b3. 
Sunisprapañcatattvopade$a. Asc. Virupa. To. 2020. bsTan-’gyur,rgyud, tsi, fols.
81a7–84a6.
Subahupariprccha. T.895.18.719a–746b, translated by Shan-wu-wei in 726 C.E.;
To. 805. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum, wa, fols. 118a–140b. 
Subahupariprccha-tantra-pindartha. Asc. Buddhaguhya. To. 2671. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, thu, fols. 38a3–54b7.
Subhasita-Samgraha.
Bendall, Cecil, ed. 1903–4. Subhasita-Samgraha. In Le Muséon 22 (1903): 375–402;
23 (1904): 1–46, 245–274.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 456 ---
Susiddhikara-mahatantrasadhanopayikapatala. To. 807. bKa’-’gyur, rgyud-’bum,
wa, 168a1–222b7; T.893.18.603a-633c.
Saundarananda.
Johnston, E. H. 1928. The Saundarananda of A$vaghosa. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1975. 
Hartmann, Jen-Uwe. 1988. Neue A$vaghosa- und Matrceta-Fragmente aus
Ostturkistan, pp. 18–23. Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in
Göttingen I. Philologische-Historische Klasse, no. 2. [includes new frag-
ments and bibliography.]
Svacchandatantra.
Yogatantra Department, ed. 1992. %ri Svacchandatantra with the Commentary
‘Uddyota’ by Mahamahe$vara %ri Ksemaraja. Yogatantra-Granthamala, vol. 19.
5 parts. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 
Harsacarita.
Kane, P. V., ed. 1918. The Harshacarita of Banabhatta. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar.
Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1986. 
He ru ka’i rnam par dag pa. Asc. %raddhakaravarman. To. 1481. bsTan-’gyur,
rgyud, zha, fols. 125a3–128b4.
Hevajra Tantra.
Snellgrove, David L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study. London Oriental
Series, vol. 6. 2 pts. London: Oxford University Press. [Includes the
Yogaratnamala of Kanhapada.] 
Hevajrasekaprakriya. In Finot 1934, pp. 19–31. 
 
Ch’an mi yao fa ching. T. 613.15.242a–267c. Translation asc. Kumarajiva between
402 and 412 c.e.
Chen yen tsung chiao shih i. T.2396.75.374a–450a.
Chen yüan hsin ting shih chiao mu lu. T.2157.55.771a–1048a. Composed in 800 c.e.
by Yüan-chao. 
Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui chih kuei. T.869.18.284c–287c. Translation
asc. Amoghavajra between 746 and 774 c.e..
Hsü ku chin i ching t’u chi. T. 2152.55. Compiled by Chih Sheng in 730 c.e.
I tsu fo ting lun wang ching.T.951.19.224a–263b. Translation asc. Bodhiruci in
709 c.e.
K’ai yuan shih chiao mu lu. T.2154.55. Compiled by Chih Sheng in 730 c.e.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 457 ---
Kao seng fa hsien chuan. T.2085.51.857a–866c. 
Legge, James, trans. 1886. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Kuan fo san mei hai ching. T.643.15.645c–697a. 
Kuan ting ching. T.1331.21.495a–536b. Translation asc. %rimitra, 317–322 c.e. See
Strickmann 1990.
Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan. I-ching. T. 2125.54.204c–234a. 
Takakusu, Junjiro, trans. 1896. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practice in
India and the Malay Archipelago (a.d. 671–695). London: Clarendon Press. 
Sung kao sung chuan. Tsan Ning, completed in 988 c.e. T. 2061.50.709a–900a.
Ta chou k’an ting chung ching mu lu. T. 2153.55. Compiled by Ming Chuan in
695 c.e.
Ta t’ang hsi yü chi. Hsüan-tsang. T.2087.51. 
Beal, Samuel, trans. 1869. Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World.
London: Kegan Paul, Trench, and Trübner.
Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan. I-ching. T.2066.51.1a–12b. 
Lahiri, Latika, trans. 1986. Chinese Monks in India. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1995. 
  
kLong chen chos ‘byung. Asc. (probably apocraphally) kLong-chen rab-’byams-pa
(1308–1363). Lhasa: Bod ljongs bod yig dpe rnying dpe skrun khang, 1991. 
dKar chag ldan dkar ma. Pho brang stod thang ldan dkar gyi chos ‘gyur ro cog gi dkar
chag. To. 4364. 
Lalou, Marcelle. 1953. “Les Textes bouddhiques au temps du Roi Khri-sro N-lde-
bcan,” JA 241, no. 3: 313–353.
mKhas grub khyung po rnal ‘byor gyi rnam thar. Anon. 
bSod nams tshe brtan, ed. 1996. Shangs pa bka’ brgyud pa bla rabs kyi rnam thar.
Lhasa: Bod ljongs bod yig dpe rnying dpe skrun khang.
mKhas pa’i dga’ ston. dPa’ bo gtsug lang phreng ba; written 1545–1564 c.e.
Dam pa’i chos kyi ‘khor lo bsgyur ba rnams kyi byung ba gsal bar byed pa mkhas pa’i
dga’ ston. 2 vols. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1986. 
Grub mtha’ so so’i b´ zed tshul g´zuN gsal bar ston pa chos ‘byuN grub mtha’ chen po bstan
pa’i sgron me. Rog Bande Shes-rab-’od. Leh, Ladakh: Tshul Khrims-Jam
dbyang, 1971?
rGyud kyi rgyal po dpal kye rdo rje’i byung tshul dang brgyud pa’i bla ma dam pa
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 458 ---
rnams kyi rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar rgya mtsho. Written 1525 c.e. Ngor-chen
Kun-dga’ bzang-po. SKB IX.278.1.1–284.3.3.
rGyud kyi mngon par rtogs pa rin po che’i ljon shing. Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan. SKB
III.1–70.1.
rGyud sde spyi’i rnam par gzhag pa. bSod-nams rtse-mo. SKB II.1–37.
Chag lo tsa ba’i rnam thar. ‘Ju-ba Chos-dar. 
Roerich, G. N., ed. and trans. 1959. Biography of Dharmasvamin (Chag lo-tsa-ba
Chos-rje-dpal). Historical Researches Series, vol. 2. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal
Research Institute.
rNying ma rgyud ‘bum. mTshams-brag manuscript. 
The mTshams-Brag Manuscript of the rNying-ma rgyud ‘bum . Thimphu, Bhutan:
National Library, 1981.
rNying ma rgyud ‘bum. gTing-skyes manuscript.
The Collected Tantras of the Ancient School of Tibetan Buddhism. Thimbu, Bhutan:
Dil mgo mkhyen brtse, 1973.
See Kaneko 1982, for a catalogue of the gTing-skyes.
Ta ra na tha’i rgya gar chos ‘byung.
Schiefner, Antonius, ed. 1868. Târanâthæ de Doctrinæ Buddhicæ in India
Propagatione. St. Petersburg: Imprimerie Academiæ Scientiarum. 
bsTan ‘gyur gyi dkar chag yid bzhin nor bu dbang gi rgyal po’i phreng ba. Bu-ston
Rin-chen-grub (1290–1364 c.e.).
Chandra, Lokesh, ed. 1971. The Collected Works of Bu-Ston. %ata-Pitaka Series, vol.
60, part 26, pp. 401–643. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Deb ther sngon po. 1984. ‘Gos lo-tsa-ba gZhon-nu dpal (written between 1476 and
1478 c.e.). 2 vols. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
Roerich, George N., trans. 1949. The Blue Annals. Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal
Monograph Series, no. 7. 2 vols. Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal.
bDe mchog lu hi pa’i lugs kyi bla ma brgyud pa’i lo rgyus. Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan.
SKB III.293.2–298.4. 
rNam thar rgyas pa.
Eimer, Helmut, ed. and trans. 1979. Rnam Thar Rgyas Pa: Materialien zu einer
Biographie des Ati$a (Dipamkara$rijñana). Asiatische Forschungen, no. 67.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
rNal ‘byor byang chub seng ge’i dris lan. Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan. SKB
III.276.4.1–278.2.7.
Pod ser. First compiled by Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan, with many additions.
LL XI.
sPyod pa’i rgyud spyi’i rnam par gzhags pa legs par bshad pa’i sgron me. Completed
by Ngor-chen Kun-dga’ bzang-po in 1420 c.e. SKB X.248.3.1–265.4.2.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 459 ---
Phyag rgya chen po gces pa btus pa’i man ngag. Collection attributed to Grags-pa
rgyal-mtshan. SKB IV.302.3.1–311.4.5.
Bod rje lha btsan po’i gdung rabs tshig nyung don gsal. Kah-thog mkhan-po Tshe-
dbang nor-bu (written 1745 c.e.). In Bod kyi lo rgyus deb ther khag lnga, pp.
55–86. Lhasa: Bod ljongs bod yig dpe rnying dpe skrun khang, 1990. 
Bhir ba pa’i lo rgyus. In g´ZuN bsad Klog skya ma and Other Related Esoteric Texts,
pp. 347–404.
Bya rgyud spyi’i rnam par bshad pa legs par bshad pa’i rgya mtsho. Completed by
Ngor-chen in 1420 c.e. SKB X.265.4.2–319.1.6.
bLa ma rgya gar ba’i lo rgyus. Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan. SKB III.170.1.1–173.1.6; LL
I.2.1–14.4; LL XI.581–594. 
bLa ma brgyud pa bod kyi lo rgyus. Grags-pa rgyal-mtshan. SKB III.173.1.7–174.1.7;
LL I.14–18; LL XI.594–599. 
bLa ma brgyud pa’i rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar snang ba. Asc. bLa-ma Dam-pa
bSod-nams rgyal-mtshan (1312–1375), LL XVI.2–121.
bLa ma ba ri lo ts a ba rin chen grags kyi rnam thar. bSod-nams rtse-mo. Sa skya’i
rje btsun gong ma rnam lnga’i gsung ma phyi gsar rnyed, 1:255–266. 
dBa’ bzhed.
Wangdu, Pasang, and Hildegard Diemberger, ed. and trans. 2000. dBa’ bzhed:
The Royal Narrative Concerning the Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to Tibet.
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Historische
Klasse, Denkschriften, no. 219. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
sBa bzhed.
mGon-po rgyal-mtshan, ed. 1980. sBa bzhed. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
sBa bzhed zhabs btags ma.
Stein, Rolf A., ed. 1961. Une chronique ancienne de bSam-yas: sBa-b´zed.
Publications de l’Institut des Hautes Études Chinoises, Textes et documents,
no. 1. Paris: Institut de Hautes Études Chinoises.
Man ngag gces pa btus pa. Compiled by Sa-chen Kun-dga’ snying-po (1092–1158).
dPal sa skya pa’i man ngag gces pa btus pa rin po che’i phreng ba.SKB
I.268.2.1–281.2.6.
Mar pa lo tsa’i rnam thar. Asc. Khrag-’thung rgyal-po (gTsang-smyong he-ru-ka,
1452–1507). 
Mar pa lo tsa’i rnam thar. 1983. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
Nalanda Translation Committee, trans. 1982. The Life of Marpa the Translator.
Boston and London: Shambhala.
Zhi byed snyan rgyud zab byed ma.
Aziz, Barbara Nimri, ed. 1979. The Tradition of Pha Dam-pa SaNs-rgyas:
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 460 ---
A Treasured Collection of His Teachings Transmitted by Thugs-sras Kun-dga’.
5 vols. Thimphu: Druk Sherik Parkhang.
gZ´uN bsad Klog skya ma and Other Related Esoteric Sa-skya-pa Texts. 1975. Tashi
Dorje, ed. Dolanji, Himachal Pradesh: Tibetan Bompo Monastic Centre. 
Rwa lo tsa ba’i rnam thar. Attributed to Rwa ye-shes seng-ge. 
mThu stobs dbang phyug rje btsun rwa lo ts a ba’i rnam par thar pa kun khyab snyan
pa’i snga sgra. 1989. Xining: mTsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
Lam ‘bras snyan brgyud. In g ´ZuN bsad Klog skya ma and Other Related Esoteric
Texts, pp. 405–590.
Lam ‘bras slob bshad.
Sa-skya Khri-’dzin Ngag gi dbang phyug, ed. 1983–84. Lam ‘bras slob bshad. 31
vols. Dehra Dun: Sakya Centre.
Sa skya bka’ ‘bum.
Bsod Nams Rgya Mtsho, ed. 1968. The Complete Works of the Great Masters of the
Sa Skya Sect of the Tibetan Buddhism. 14 vols. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko. 
Sa skya’i rje btsun gong ma rnam lnga’i gsung ma phyi gsar rnyed. bSod-nams tshe-
’phel et al., eds. 3 vols. n.p. (Lhasa?), n.d. (late 1980s). [Copy provided cour-
tesy of E. Gene Smith and the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, Cam-
bridge, MA.] 
Sras don ma. Sa-chen Kun-dga’ snying-po. Lam ‘bras gzhung bshad sras don ma.
LL XII.1–446.
Gsang ‘dus byung tshul. dPal gsang ba ‘dus pa’i dam pa’i chos byung ba’i tshul legs par
bshad pa gsang ‘dus chos kun gsal pa’i nyin byed. 1985. A mes zhabs Ngag-dbang
kun-dga’ bsod-nams. Dehra Dun: Sakya Centre.
bSam gtan mig sgron. Asc. gNubs-chen sangs-rgyas ye-shes.
Rnal ‘Byor Mig Gi Bsam Gtan or Bsam Gtan Mig Sgron . 1974. Leh: Khor-gdoN
Gter-sprul Chi-med-rig-’dzin.
   
Bajpai, K. D., and S. K. Pandey. 1978. Malhar: 1975–76.Sagar: University of Sagar.
Bakker, Hans T. 1997. The Vakatakas: An Essay in Hindu Iconology. Gonda
Indological Studies, vol. 5. Groningen: Egbert Forsten. 
Banerji, R. D. 1917–18. “The Bangarh Grant of Mahi-Pala I: The 9th Year.” EI
14:324–330.
———. 1919–20. “Neulpur Grant of Subhakara: The 8th year.” EI 15:1–8.
Banerji-Sastri, A. 1940. “Ninety-three Inscriptions on the Kurkihar Bronzes.”
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 26, no. 3:236–251, 299–308.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 461 ---
Barua, B. M. 1938. “Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela.” IHQ 19:459–485. 
Barua, Dipak K. 1981. Buddha Gaya Temple: Its History. Buddha Gaya, Bihar:
Buddha Gaya Temple Management Committee. 
Basak, Radhagovinda. 1919–20. “The Five Damodarpur Copper-Plate
Inscriptions of the Gupta Period.” EI 15:113–145.
Berkemer, George. 1992. “The ‘Centre Out There’ as State Archive: The Temple
of Simhacalam.” In Hans Bakker, ed., The Sacred Centre as the Focus of
Political Interest, pp. 119–130. Groningen Oriental Studies, vol. 6. Groningen:
Egbert Forsten. 
Bhandarkar, Devadatta R. 1908. “An Ekli Ngî Stone Inscription and the Origin
and History of the Lakuli$a Sect.” Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society 22:151–167.
———. 1981. “Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings.” In Bahadurchand
Chhabra and Govind Swamirao Gai, ed., CII, III. New Delhi: Archæological
Survey of India. 
Bhattacharya, Gouriswar. 1985. “The Newly Discovered Buddhist Temple at
Nalanda.” In Janine Schotsmans and Maurizio Taddei, eds., South Asian
Archæology 1983. Istituto Universitario Orientale Series Minor, vol. 23. Naples:
Istituto Universitario Orientale. 
———. 1988. “The New Pala Ruler Mahendrapala: Discovery of a Valuable
Charter.” South Asian Studies 4:71–73. 
Bhavnagar Archæological Department, ed. n.d. A Collection of Prakrit and
Sanskrit Inscriptions. Bhaabnagar, Gujarat: State Printing Press. 
Bühler, G. 1892. “Two Prasastis of Baijn atha.” EI 1:97–118. 
———. 1894. “Further Inscriptions from Sanchi.” EI 2:366–408; “Votive
Inscriptions from the Sanchi Stupas.” EI 2:87–116. 
———. 1896–97. “Banskhera Plate of Harsha, [Year 22].” EI 4:208–211. 
Chakravarti, Adhir. 1978. The Sdok Kak Thom Inscription—A Study of Indo-Khmèr
Civilization. Calcutta Sanskrit College Research Series, no. 111. 2 vols.
Calcutta: Sanskrit College. 
Chapin, Helen B. 1972. A Long Roll of Buddhist Images. Ascona, Switzerland:
Artibus Asiæ.
Cœdès, G., and P. Dupont. 1943–46. “Les stèles de Sdök Käk Thom, Phno m
Sandak et Prah Vihar.” BEFEO 43:56–154. 
Das, Jithendra. 1993. The Buddhist Architecture in Andhra. New Delhi: Books &
Books.
Das, Sudhir Ranjan. 1968. RajbadidaNga:1 9 6 2 .Asiatic Society Monograph Series,
vol. 14. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. 
De, S. C. 1953. “A %iva LiNga Inscribed with Buddhist Dharani from Soro.”
Orissa Historical Research Journal 1:271–273.
Dehejia, Vidya. 1986. Yogini Cult and Temples, A Tantric Tradition.New Delhi:
National Museum. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 462 ---
Desai, P. B. 1962. Select Stone Inscriptions of Andhra Pradesh. Andhra Pradesh
Governement Archæology Series, no. 9. Hyderabad, India: Government of
Andhra Pradesh.
Dikshit, Moreshwar G. 1955. “Excavation at Sirpur, District Raipur.” Indian
Archæology 1954–55:24–26.
———. 1955–57. “Some Buddhist Bronzes from Sirpur, Madhya Pradesh.”
Bulletin of the Prince of Wales Museum of Western India 5:1–11.
———. 1956. “Excavation at Sirpur, District Raipur.” Indian Archæology
1955–56:26–27.
Donaldson, Thomas E. 1985–87. Hindu Temple Art of Orissa. 3 vols. Leiden:
E. J. Brill. 
———. 1986. “Erotic Rituals on Orissan Temples.” East and West 36:137–182. 
Fleet, John Faithfull. 1881. “Sanskrit and Old-Canarese Inscriptions, No. CXVI.”
IA 10:185–190.
———. 1883. “Sanskrit and Old-Canarese Inscriptions.” IA 12:156–165.
———. 1888. Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings. CII , III. Calcutta:
Government of India.
———. 1889. “Belur Inscription of the Time of Jayasimha III—Saka Samvat
944.” IA 18:270–275.
Flood, F. B. 1989. “Herakles and the ‘Perpetual Acolyte’ of the Buddha: Some
Observations on the Iconography of Vajrapani in Gandharan Art.” South
Asian Studies 5:17–27. 
Goepper, Roger. 1996. Alchi: Ladakh’s Hidden Buddhist Sanctuary—the Sumtsek.
London: Serindia.
Hira Lal, Rai Bahadur. 1909–10. “Kuruspal Stone Inscription of Somesvaradeva.”
EI 10:25–31.
Hultzsch, E. 1886. “The Bhagalpur Plate of Narayanapala.” IA 15:304–310.
Humbach, Helmut. 1980. “Hybrid Sanskrit in the Gilgit Br ahmi Inscriptions.”
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 5, no. 6:99–121. 
Huntington, Susan L. 1984. The “Pala-Sena” Schools of Sculpture. Studies in South
Asian Culture, vol. 10. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Huntington, Susan L., and John C. Huntington. 1990. Leaves from the Bodhi
Tree: The Art of Pala India (8th–12th Centuries) and Its International Legacy.
Dayton, Seattle, and Washington: Dayton Art Institute in Association with
the University of Washington Press.
Indraji, Pandit Bhagwânlâl. 1881. “An Inscription at Gayâ Dated in the Year 1813
of Buddha’s Nirvâna, with Two Others of the Same Period.” IA 10:341–347. 
Jain, Balchandra. 1969. “Sirpur Inscription of Acharya Buddhaghosha.” EI
38:2:59–62.
Jettmar, Karl, ed. 1989. Antiquities of Northern Pakistan: Reports and Studies. Vol.
1, pts. 1–2. Mainz: Philipp von Zabern. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 463 ---
———. 1993. Antiquities of Northern Pakistan: Reports and Studies. Vol. 2. Mainz:
Philipp von Zabern. 
Kielhorn, F. 1886. “The Sasbahu Temple Inscription of Mahipala, of Vikrama-
SaMvat 1150.” IA 15:33–46.
———. 1888–92a. “Siyadoni Stone Inscription.” EI 1:162–179.
———. 1888–92b. “Bilhari Stone Inscription of the Rulers of Chedi.” EI 1:251–270.
———. 1892. “Mungir Copper-Plate Grant of Devapaladeva.” IA 21:253–258. 
———. 1896–97. “Khalimpur Plate of Dharmapaladeva, [Year 32].” EI 4:243–254. 
———. 1900–1901a. “Aihole Inscription of Pulike$in II, %aka-SaMvat 556.” EI
6:1–12. 
———. 1900–1901b. “Radhanpur Plates of Govinda III, %aka SaMvat 730.” EI
6:239–251. 
———. 1907–8. “Pathari Pillar Inscription of Parabala, [Vikrama] SaMvat 917.”
EI 9:248–256. 
Kinnard, Jacob N. 2000. “The Polyvalent Padas of Visnu and the Buddha.”
History of Religions 40:32–57. 
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah E. 1997. Tabo: A Lamp for the Kingdom. New York:
Thames and Hudson.
Knox, Robert. 1992. Amaravati: Buddhist Sculpture from the Great Stupa. London:
British Museum Press.
Konow, Sten. 1907–8. “Sarnath Inscription of Kumaradevi.” EI 9:319–328.
———. 1913–14. “Hansot Plates of Chahmana Bhartrivaddha, SaMvat 813.” EI
12:197–204. 
Kossak, Steven M., and Jane Casey Singer. 1998. Sacred Visions: Early Paintings
from Central Tibet. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Kuwayama, Shoshin. 1991. “L’inscription du Gane$a de Gardez et la chronologie
des Turki-Sahi.” JA 279:267–287.
Law, Bimala Churn. 1939–40. “Bhikshunis in Indian Inscriptions.” EI 25:31–34.
Lévi, Sylvain. 1937. “Les Donations religieuses de rois de Valabhî.” In Paul
Hartman, ed., Mémorial Sylvain Lévi,pp. 218–234. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. 
Linda, Mary F. 1993. “Temples of Stone, Centers of Culture: Sacred Space in
Early Medieval KaliNga.” In Howard Spodek and Doris Meth Srinivasan,
eds., Urban Form and Meaning in South Asia: The Shaping of Cities from
Prehistoric to Precolonial Times, pp. 145–162. Studies in the History of Art, no.
31. Washington: National Gallery of Art. 
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan
Esoteric Buddhist Art. Boston: Shambhala. 
Lüders, Heinrich. 1912. A List of Brahmi Inscriptions from the Earliest Times to
about a.d. 400 with the Exception of Those of Asoka. Appendix to EI 10.
New Delhi: Government of India Press. Reprint, New Delhi: Government of
India Press, 1959. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 464 ---
———. 1961. Mathura Inscriptions. Klaus L. Janert, ed. Abhandlungen der
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen Philologisch-Historische Kalsse,
Dritte Folge, no. 47. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht. 
Majumdar, B. P. 1953. “Lakuli$a Pa$upatas and Their Temples in Mediaeval
India.” Journal of the Bihar Research Society 39:1–9. 
Majumdar, R. C. 1953. Inscriptions of Kambuja. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. 
Marshall, John and Alfred Foucher. 1940. The Monuments of Sañci. 3 vols.
London: Probsthain.
Meister, Michael W. 1979. “Mandala and Practice in Nagara Architecture in
North India.” JAOS 99:204–219. 
———. 1984. Discourses on %iva: Proceedings of a Symposium on the Nature of
Religious Imagery. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Meister, Michael W., and M. A. Dhaky, eds. 1988–91. Encyclopædia of Indian
Temple Architecture.4 vols. in 8 parts. Princeton and New Delhi: Princeton
University Press and the American Institute of Indian Studies.
Mirashi, Vasudeva Vishnu. 1955. “Inscriptions of the Kalachuri-Chedi Era.” In
CII, IV. 2 parts. Ootacamund, India: Government Epigraphist for India. 
———. 1976. Inscriptions of the Silaharas. In CII, VI. New Delhi: Archæological
Survey of India. 
Misra, Binayak. 1934. Orissa Under the Bhauma Kings. Calcutta: Viswamitra
Press.
Mitra, Debala. 1971. Buddhist Monuments. Calcutta: Sahitya Samshad.
———. 1981. Ratnagiri (1958–61). Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of
India, no. 80. 2 vols. New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India. 
———. 1984. “Lakuli$a and Early %aiva Temples in Orissa.” In Meister 1984,
pp. 103–118. 
Morrison, Barrie M. 1970. Political Centers and Cultural Regions in Early Bengal.
Association for Asian Studies: Monographs and Papers, no. 25. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.
Mookerji, Radha Kumud. 1928. Asoka. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1972. 
Ojha, Gaurishankar Hirachand. 1917–18. “Partabgarh Inscription of the Time of
[the Pratihara] King Mahendrapala II of Mahodaya, SaMvat 1003.” EI
14:176–188. 
Postel, M., A. Neven, and K. Mankodi. 1985. Antiquities of Himachal. Bombay:
Project for Indian Cultural Studies. 
Rajaguru, Satyanarayan. 1955–76. Inscriptions of Orissa. 5 vols. Bhubaneswar,
Orissa: Orissa State Muesum. 
Rao, M. Rama. 1964. Eastern Calukyan Temples of Andhra De$a. Andhra Pradesh
Government Archæological Series, no. 19. Hyderabad: Government of
Andhra Pradesh.
Rice, Lewis. 1886. “Mudyanur Plates of Saka 261 of the Bana King Malladeva-
Nandivarman.” Indian Antiquary 15:172–177.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 465 ---
Salomon, Richard. 1990. “New Evidence for a G andhari Origin of the
Arapacana Syllabary.” JAOS 110:255–273.
———. 1996. “British Museum Stone Inscription of the Tripur i Kalacuri Prince
Valleka.” IIJ 39:133–161. 
———. 1998. Indian Epigraphy—A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit,
Prakrit, and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
———. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara—The British Library
Kharosthi Fragments. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Sastri, Hirananda. 1942. Nalanda and Its Epigraphic Material. Memoirs of the
Archæological Survey of India. Delhi: Archæological Survey of India. 
Schwab, Katherine A. 1998. “The Lysippan Herakles as Vajrapani in Hadda.”
In Olga Palagia and William Coulson, eds., Regional Schools in Hellenistic
Sculpture, pp. 27–33. Oxbow Monograph, no. 90. Oxford: Oxbow Books. 
Shah, U. P. “Lakuli$a: %aivite Saint.” In Meister 1984, pp. 92–102. 
Shaw, Richard. 1997. “Srisailam: Centre of the Siddhas.” South Asian Studies
13:161–178. 
Sircar, Dinesh Chandra. 1948. “The %akta Pithas.” JASB Letters 14:1–108. 
———. 1971. “Siyan Stone Slab Inscription of Nayap ala.” EI 39:39–56.
Skaff, Jonathan Karam. 1998. “Sasanian and Arab-Sasanian Silver Coins from
Turfan: Their Relationship to International Trade and the Local Economy.”
Asia Major 11:67–115.
Stadtner, Donald Martin. 1976. “From Sirpur to R ajim: The Art of Kosala
During the Seventh Century.” Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley. 
Stewart, Mary L. 1989. Nalanda Mahavihara—A Study of an Indian Pala Period
Buddhist Site and British Historical Archæology, 1861–1938. BAR International
Series, no. 524. Oxford: BAR.
Strachan, Paul. 1989. Imperial Pagan: Art and Architecture of Burma. Reprint,
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1991(?). 
Thaplyal, Kiran Kumar. 1985. Inscriptions of the Maukharis, later Guptas,
Pusyabhutis, and Yasovarman of Kanauj. Delhi: Indian Council of Historical
Research. 
Upadhyay, Neelmani. 1986. Temples of Mandi. Mandi, Himachal Pradesh:
Rupendra.
van der Veer, Peter. 1992. “Ayodhya and Somnath: Eternal Shrines, Contested
Histories.” Social Research 59:85–109.
Vitali, Roberto. 1990. Early Temples of Central Tibet. London: Serindia
Publications.
Vogel, J. Ph. 1905–6. “Ancient Monuments of K angra Ruined in the
Earthquake.” Archæological Survey of Indian, Annual Report 1905–6:10–27. 
Williams, Joanna Gottfried. 1982. The Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 466 ---
Willis, Michael D. 1995. “Some Notes on the Palaces of the Imperial Gurjara
Pratiharas.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 3d ser. 5, no. 3:351–360.
———. 1997. Temples of Gopaksetra. London: British Museum. 
Woodward, Hiram W. 1981. “Tantric Buddhism at Angkor Thom.” Ars
Orientalis 12:57–67 + plates.
  
Abraham, Meera. 1988. Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India. Delhi:
Manohar Publications. 
Agrawal, Ashvini. 1989. Rise and Fall of the Imperial Guptas. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Agrawala, Ratna Chandra. 1955. “Religious Conditions as Depicted in the Niya
Documents from Central Asia.” Journal of the Greater India Society 14:13–54.
Ali, Daud, ed. 1999. Invoking the Past: The Uses of History in South Asia. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Allen, Graham. 2000. Intertextuality. New York: Routledge. 
Andrew, Bill. 1992. “The Soldier and the Battle.” In David A. Charters et al.,
eds., Military History and Military Profession, pp. 57–72. Westport and
London: Praeger. 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. 1991. “Is the Post- in Postmodernism the Post- in
Postcolonial?” Critical Inquiry 17:336–357. 
Aristotle. 1987. Poetics. Richard Janko, trans. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Asimov, M. S., and C. E. Bosworth, eds. 1998. The Age of Achievement: A.D. 750 to
the End of the Fifteenth Century; Part One, The Historical, Social and Economic
Setting.History of Civilizations of Central Asia, vol. 4. Paris: UNESCO.
Atwood, Christopher. 1991. “Life in Third–Fourth Century Cadh’ota: A Survey
of Information Gathered from the Prakrit Documents Found North of
Mingeng (Niyä).” CAJ 35:161–199.
Backus, Charles. 1981. The Nan-chao Kingdom and T’ang China’s Southestern
Frontier. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bagchi, Prabhodha Chandra. 1944. “Vajragarbhatantrarajasutra: A New Work of
King Indrabodhi.” Sino-Indian Studies 1, no. 1:22–59. 
———. 1945. “Bodhisattva-$ila of %ubhakarasimha.” Sino-Indian Studies 1, no.
3:132–160.
Baird, William. 1992. History of New Testament Research. Volume One: From Deism
to Tübingen. Minneapolis: Fortress Press. 
Bakhtin, M. M. 1968. Rabelais and His World. Trans. Hélène Iswolsky.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984.
Banerji, Adris. 1963. “Eastern Expansion of the G ahadavala Kingdom.” Journal of
the Asiatic Society 5, nos. 3–4:105–111.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 467 ---
Barrow, H. W. 1893. “On Aghoris and Aghorapanthis.” Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Bombay 3:197–251.
Beckwith, Christopher I. 1977. “Tibet and the Early Medieval Florissance in
Eurasia: A Preliminary Note on the Economic History of the Tibetan
Empire.” CAJ 21:89–104. 
———. 1987. The Tibetan Empire in Central Asia. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Benson, Robert L. 1982. “Political Renovatio: Two Models from Roman
Antiquity.” In Robert L. Benson et al., eds., Renaissance and Renewal in the
Twelfth Century, pp. 339–386. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Bentor, Yael. 2000. “Interiorized Fire Rituals in India and Tibet.” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 120:594–613.
Bergson, Henri. 1911. Laughter, An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic. C. Brereton
and F. Rothwell, trans. New York: Macmillan. 
Bharati, Agehananda. 1965. The Tantric Tradition. London: Rider. 
———. 1970. The Ochre Robe: An Autobiography. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Bhatt, G. K. 1959. The Vidusaka. Ahmedabad, Gujarat: New Order Book
Company.
Bhattacharya, Benoytosh. 1930. “Buddhist Deities in Hindu Garb.” In
Proceedings and Transactions of the Fifth Indian Oriental Conference, vol. 2, pp.
1277–1298. Lahore: University of the Panjab. 
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. 1955. “La secte des P açupata dans l’ancien
Cambodge.” JA 243:479–490. 
Bhattacharya, Vidhushekhara. 1928. “Sandhabhasa.” IHQ 4:287–296.
Bishop, Morris. 1966. Letters from Petrarch. Bloomington and London: Indiana
University Press.
Blackburn, Stuart H., et al., eds. 1989. Oral Epics in India. Berkeley: University of
California Press. 
Bloch, Herbert. 1982. “The New Fascination with Ancient Rome.” In Benson et
al. 1982, pp. 615–636. 
Boal, Barbara M. 1982. The Konds—Human Sacriﬁce and Religious Change.
Warminster, Wilts, UK: Aris and Phillips. 
Braarvig, Jens. 1985. “Dharani and Pratibhana: Memory and Eloquence of the
Bodhisattvas.” JIABS 8:17–29. 
———. 1997. “Bhavya on Mantras: Apologetic Endeavors on Behalf of
Mahayana.” Studia Indologiczne 4:31–39.
Brennan, Timothy. 2000. “The Illusion of a Future: Orientalism as a Traveling
Theory.” Critical Inquiry 26:558–583.
Broido, Michael. 1982. “Does Tibetan Hermeneutics Throw Any Light on
Sandhabhasa?” Journal of the Tibet Society 2:5–39.
———. 1983. “bshad thabs: Some Tibetan Methods of Explaining the Tantras.”
In Ernst Steinkellner and Helmut Tauscher, eds., Contributions on Tibetan
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 468 ---
and Buddhist Religion and Philosophy, vol. 2, pp. 15–45. Vienna: Universität
Wien. 
———. 1984. “Abhipraya and Implication in Tibetan Linguistics.” Journal of
Indian Philosophy 12:1–33.
Brunner, Hélène. 1986. “Mandala et yantra dans le $ivaïsme agamique.” In André
Padoux, ed., Mantras et diagrammes rituels dans l’hindouïsme, pp. 11–35. Paris:
Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. 
Brunt, P.A., trans. 1976. Arrian: History of Alexander and Indica. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 236. 2 vols. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 1992. “On Pura$carana: Kularnavatantra, Chapter 15.” In
Teun Goudriaan, ed., Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor
of André Padoux, pp. 61–106. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
———. 1999. “Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras: I. The
Tantrasarasamgraha and the I$ana$ivagurudevapaddhati.” IIJ 42:303–334. 
———. 2000. “Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras: II. The
%rividyarnavatantra and the Tantrasara.” IIJ 43/1: 27–48. 
Buitenen, Hans van. 1958. “The Indian Hero as Vidy adhara.” Journal of American
Folklore 71:305–311.
Burrow, T., and M. B. Emeneau. 1984. A Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. 2d
ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bury, R. G. 1926. Plato: Laws. Leob Classical Library. 2 vols. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press. 
Caillat, Colette, ed. 1989. Dialectes dans les littératures indo-aryennes. Publications
de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, no. 55. Paris: Éditions e. de Boccard.
Campbell, J. Gabriel. 1976. Saints and Householders: A Study of Hindu Ritual and
Myth Among the Kangra Rajputs. Kathmandu: Ratna Pustak Bhandar.
Chakrabarty, Dipesh. 1992. “Postcoloniality and the Artiﬁce of History: Who
Speaks for ‘Indian’ Pasts?” Representations 37:1–26. Reprinted in Mongia 1996,
pp. 223–247.
Char, S. V. Desika. 1993. Caste, Religion and Country: A View of Ancient and
Medieval India. New Delhi: Orient Longman. 
Chattopadhyaya, Brajadulal. 1990. Aspects of Rural Settlements and Rural Society in
Early Medieval India. Calcutta and New Delhi: K. P. Bagchi. 
———. 1994. The Making of Early Medieval India. Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Chaudhuri, Nagendra N. 1935. Dakarnavah—Studies in the Apabhram$a Texts of
the Dakarnava. Calcutta Sanskrit Series, no. 10. Calcutta: Metropolitan
Printing and Publishing House.
Chenet, François. 1993. “Le Sauras de l’Inde: le brilliant échec d’une identité
religieuse inclusiviste?” JA 281:317–392. 
Chou Yi-Liang. 1945. “Tantrism in China.” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies
8:241–332. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 469 ---
Coccari, Diane M. 1989. “Protection and Identity: Banaras’s Bir Babas as
Neighborhood Guardian Deities.” In Sandria B. Freitag, ed., Culture and
Power in Banaras: Community, Performance, and Environment, 1800–1980,
pp. 130–146. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Cohen, Richard S. 2000. “Kinsmen of the Son: %akyabhiksus and the
Institutionalization of the Bodhisattva Ideal.” History of Religions 40,
no. 1:1–31.
Collins, Steven. 1990. “On the Very Idea of a Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali
Text Society 15:89–126.
Contamine, Philippe. 1984. War in the Middle Ages. Michael Jones, trans. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell. 
Danda, Dipali G. 1994. “Method of Hinduization in North Cachar.” Journal of
the Indian Anthropological Society 29:143–49.
Datta, Swati. 1989. Migrant Brahmanas in Northern India: Their Settlement and
General Impact c. a.d. 475–1030. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Davidson, Ronald M. 1985. “Buddhist Systems of Transformation: A$raya-
parivrtti / paravrtti Among the Yogacara.” Ph.D. diss., University of
California, Berkeley. 
———. 1990. “An Introduction to the Standards of Scriptural Authenticity in
Indian Buddhism.” In Robert E. Buswell, ed., Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha,
pp. 291–325. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
———. 1991. “Reﬂections on the Mahe $vara Subjugation Myth: Indic Materials,
Sa-skya-pa Apologetics, and the Birth of Heruka.” JIABS 14, no. 2:197–235.
———. 1992. “Preliminary Studies on Hevajra’s Abhisamaya and the Lam-’bras
Tshogs-bshad.” In Steven D. Goodman and Ronald M. Davidson, eds.,
Tibetan Buddhism: Reason and Revelation, pp. 107–132, 176–184. Albany: State
University of New York Press. 
———. 1995a. “Ati$a’s A Lamp for the Path to Awakening.” In Donald Lopez, ed.,
Buddhism: In Practice, pp. 290–301. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
———. 1995b. “The Bodhisattva Vajrapani’s Subjugation of %iva.” In Donald
Lopez, ed., Religions of India: In Practice, pp. 547–555. Princeton: Princeton
University Press. 
———. 1999. “Masquerading as Pram ana: Esoteric Buddhism and
Epistemological Nomenclature.” In Katsura Shoryu, ed., Dharmakirti’s
Thought and Its Impact on Indian and Tibetan Philosophy—Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Dharmakirti and Pramana, pp. 25–35.
Vienna: Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
———. 2002a. “Gsar-ma Apocrypha: Gray Texts, Oral Traditions, and the
Creation of Orthodoxy.” In Helmut Eimer and David Germano, eds., The
Many Canons of Tibetan Buddhism, pp. 203–224. Leiden: Brill.
———. 2002b. “Reframing Sahaja: Genre, Representation, Ritual and Lineage.”
Journal of Indian Philosophy 30: 45–83.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 470 ---
———. forthcoming a. “Vajras at Thirty Paces: Authority, Lineage, and
Religious Conﬂict in gSar-’gyur Central Tibet.” In Elliot Sperling, ed.,
Proceedings of the Eighth Seminar of the International Association of Tibetan
Studies. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. forthcoming b. Tibetan Renaissance: Indian Yogins, Solemn Clansmen and
the Rise of Sakya.
Davis, Richard H. 1997. Lives of Indian Images. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Demiéville, Paul. 1924. “Les versions chinoises du Milindapa ñha.” BEFEO
24:1–264. 
———. 1932. “L’origine des sectes bouddhiques d’après Paramartha.” MCB
1:15–64.
———. 1973. Choix d’études bouddhiques (1929–1970). Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Denton, Lynn Teskey. 1991. “Varieties of Hindu Female Asceticism.” In Leslie
1991, pp. 211–231. 
Derrida, Jacques. 1967. of Grammatology. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, trans.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974. 
Deshpande, Madhav M. 1996. “Contextualizing the Eternal Language: Features
of Priestly Sanskrit.” In Houben 1996, pp. 401–436.
Devahuti, D. 1983. Harsha—A Political Study. 2d rev. ed. Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
Deyell, John S. 1990. Living Without Silver: The Monetary History of Early
Medieval North India. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Dietz, Siglinde. 1984. Die Buddhistische Brieﬂiteratur Indiens—Nach dem tibetischen
Tanjur herausgegeben, übersetzt und erläutert.Asiatische Forschungen, no. 84.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Dimock, Edward C., Jr. 1966. The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in
the V aisnava-sahajiya Cult of Bengal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Dirlik, Arif, et al., eds. 2000. History After the Three Worlds: Post-Eurocentric
Historiographies. Lanham, Boulder, New York, and Oxford: Rowman and
Littleﬁeld. 
Dowman, Keith. 1985. Masters of Mahamudra: Songs and Histories of the Eighty-
Four Buddhist Siddhas. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dreyfus, Georges B. J. 1997. Recognizing Reality—Dharmakirti’s Philosophy and
Its Tibetan Interpretations. Albany: State University of New York Press.
D’souza, Jean. 1992. “Dimensions of South Asia as a Sociolinguistic Area.” In
Edward C. Dimock et al., eds., Dimensions of Sociolinguistics in South Asia:
Papers in Memory of Gerald B. Kelly. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Dutta, Saroj. 1995. Land System in Northern India, c. a.d. 400–c. a.d. 700.
New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1988. The Canon of the %aivagama and the Kubjika Tantras
of the Western Kaula Tradition.Albany: State University of New York Press. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 471 ---
Eastman, Kenneth W. 1981. “The Eighteen Tantras of the Vajra $ekhara/
Mayajala.” Paper presented at the 26th International Conference of
Orientalists in Japan, May 8.
Eck, Diana. 1982. Banaras: City of Light. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Edgerton, Franklin. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary.
New Haven: Yale University Press. 2 vols.
Eimer, Helmut, ed. and trans. 1978. Bodhipathapradipa: Ein Lehrgedicht de Ati$a
(Dipamkara$rijñana) in der Tibetischen Überlieferung. Asiatische Forschungen,
no. 59. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Elliot, H. M., and John Dowson. 1867–77. The History of India, as Told by Its
Own Historians: The Muhammadan Period. 8 vols. London: Trübner. 
Elwin, Verrier. 1947. The Muria and Their Ghotul. Bombay: Oxford University
Press.
———. 1955. The Religion of an Indian Tribe. Bombay: Oxford University Press. 
Emerson, H.W., ed. 1920. Punjab Gazetteers: Mandi State. Lahore:
Superintendent, Government Printing, Punjab.
Emmerick, R. E. 1983. “Buddhism Among Iranian Peoples.” In Ehsan
Yarshater, ed., The Cambridge History of Iran: The Seleucid, Parthian and
Sasanian Periods, vol. 3, part 2, pp. 949–964. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 
Enoki, Kazuo. 1959. “On the Nationality of the Ephthalites.” Memoirs of the
Research Department of the Toyo Bunko 18:1–58.
Eschmann, Anncharlott, Hermann Kulke, and Gaya Charan Tripathi, ed. 1978.
The Cult of Jagannath and the Regional Tradition of Orissa. South Asia
Institute, Heidelberg University, South Asian Studies, no. 8. New Delhi:
Manohar. Reprint, New Delhi: Manohar, 1986. 
Etlin, Richard A. 1996. In Defense of Humanism: V alue in the Arts and Letters.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, Richard J. 1999. In Defense of History. 2d rev. ed. New York and London:
W. W. Norton. 
Falk, Nancy Auer. 1979. “The Case of the Vanishing Nuns: The Fruits of
Ambivalence in Ancient Indian Buddhism.” In Nancy Falk and Rita Gross,
eds., Unspoken Worlds: Women’s Religious Lives in Non-Western Cultures, pp.
207–224. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Feldhaus, Anne. 1995. Water and Womanhood: Religious Meaning of Rivers in
Maharashtra. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Figueira, Dorothy M. 1994. The Exotic: A Decadent Quest. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Finn, Louise M. 1986. The Kulacudamani Tantra and the Vamake$vara Tantra
with the Jayaratha Commentary. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Finot, Louis. 1934. “Manuscrits sanskrits de S adhana retrouvés en Chine.”
Journal Asiatique 225:1–86.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 472 ---
Fischer, David Hackett. 1970. Historians’ Fallacies—Toward a Logic of Historical
Thought. New York: Harper and Row.
Foucault, Michel. 1966. The Order of Things: An Archæology of the Human Sciences.
[English edition, New York: Random House, 1970.] 
———. 1977. Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Fowler, Harold N., and W. R. M. Lamb. 1925. Plato: The Statesman, Philebus,
and Ion. Leob Classical Library. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Franklin, Julian H. 1963. Jean Bodin and the Sixteenth-Century Revolution in the
Methodology of Law and History . New York: Columbia University Press. 
Freed, Ruth S., and Stanley A. Freed. 1993. Ghosts: Life and Death in North
India. American Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers, no. 72.
New York: American Museum of Natural History.
Frye, Richard N. 1975. The Golden Age of Persia: The Arabs in the East. London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 
———. 1984. The History of Ancient Iran. Munich: C. H. Becksche
Verlagsbuchhandlung. 
Fussman, Gérard. 1994. “Upaya-kau$alya: L’implantation du bouddhisme au
Gandhara.” In Fumimasa Fukui and Gérard Fussman, eds., Bouddhisme et
cultures locales: Quelques cas de réciproques adaptations, pp. 17–51. Paris: École
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Gell, Simeran M. S. 1992. The Ghotul in Muria Society. Studies in Anthropology
and History, vol. 7. Philadelphia: Harwood Academic. 
Germano, David. 2002. “The Seven Descents and the Early History of Rnying
ma Transmissions.” In Helmut Eimer and David Germano, eds., The Many
Canons of Tibetan Buddhism, pp. 225–263. Leiden: Brill.
Gernet, Jacques. 1995. Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from the
Fifth to the Tenth Centuries. Franciscus Verellen, trans. New York: Columbia
University Press. [Rev. edition of his Les aspects économiques du bouddhisme
dans la société chinoise du Ve au Xe siècle (Hanoi, 1956).] 
Gerow, Edwin. 1977. Indian Poetics. A History of Indian Literature, vol. 5, part 3.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Giebel, Rolf W. 1995. “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei:
An Annotated Translation.” Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies
18:107-201.
Gitomer, David L. 1991. “Such as a Face Without a Nose: The Comic Body in
Sanskrit Literature.” Journal of South Asian Literature 26, nos. 1–2:78–110. 
Goetz, Hermann. 1969. Studies in the History and Art of Kashmir and the Indian
Himalaya. Universität Heidelberg Studien Institut Schriftenreihe, no. 4.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Gómez, Luis O. 1995. “The Whole Universe as a Sutra.” In Donald Lopez,
Buddhism—In Practice, pp. 107–112. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 473 ---
———. 1996. The Land of Bliss: The Paradise of the Buddha of Measureless Light.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Gonda, Jan. 1949. Remarks on Similes in Sanskrit Literature. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
———. 1961. “Ascetics and Courtesans.” Adyar Library Bulletin 25:78–102.
———. 1977. Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit. A History of Indian
Literature, vol. 2, part 1. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Gopal, Lallanji. 1965. The Economic Life of Northern India, c. a.d. 700–1200.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 2d rev. ed., Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989. 
Goudriaan, Teun. 1973. “Tumburu and His Sisters.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Sudasiens 17: 49–95.
———. 1996. “Speech of the Gurus: Instances of Treatment of Sanskrit in
Tantric Literature.” In Houben 1996, pp. 267–274.
Goudriaan, Teun, and Sanjukta Gupta. 1981. Hindu Tantric and %akta
Literature. A History of Indian Literature, vol. 2, part 2. Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz. 
Granoff, Phyllis. 1979. “Mahe$vara/Mahakala: A Unique Buddhist Image from
Ka$mir.” Artibus Asiae 41:64–82.
———. 1984. “Holy Warriors: A Preliminary Study of Some Biographies of
Saints and Kings in the Classical Indian Tradition.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 12:291–303. 
———. 1986–92. “Tolerance in the Tantras: Its Form and Function.” Journal of
Oriental Research, Madras 56–62:283–302.
———. 2000. “Other People’s Rituals: Ritual Eclecticism in Early Medieval
Indian Religious.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 28, no. 4:399–424. 
Green, Thomas M. 1982. The Light in Troy: Imitation and Discovery in
Renaissance Poetry. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. 
———. 1988. “Petrarch and the Humanist Hermeneutic.” In Harold Bloom, ed.,
Petrarch, pp. 103–123. New York and Philadelphia: Chelsea House. 
Groarke, Leo. 1990. Greek Scepticism: Anti-Realist Trends in Ancient Thought.
Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 
Gross, Rita M. 1993. Buddhism After Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis, and
Reconstruction of Buddhism. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Gross, Robert Lewis. 1992. The Sadhus of India: A Study of Hindu Asceticism.
Jaipur and New Delhi: Rawat Publications. 
Guenther, Herbert V. 1963. The Life and Teaching of Naropa. Oxford: Clarendon
Press. 
Guha, Amalendu. 1991. Medieval and Early Colonial Assam: Society, Polity,
Economy. Calcutta and New Delhi: K. P. Bagchi. 
Gupta, Chitrarekha. 1983–84. “Horse Trade in North India: Some Reﬂections on
Socio-Economic Life.” Journal of Ancient Indian History 14:186–206. 
Gupta, Sanjukta, et al. 1979. Hindu Tantrism. Leiden: Brill. 
Hackin, Joseph. 1924. Formulaire sanscrit-tibétain du Xe siècle. Mission Pelliot en
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 474 ---
Asie Centrale, Série Petit in Octavo, vol. 2. Paris: Librarie Orientaliste
Paul Geuthner. 
Hara, Minoru. 1958. “Nakuli$a-Pa$upata-Dar$anam.” IIJ 2:8–32.
———. 1973. “Pa$upata and Samkhya-Yoga.” Journal of Oriental Research
(Madras) 34–35:76–87. 
———. 1994. “Pa$upata Studies II.” Weiner Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
3:323–335. 
Harner, Michael J., ed. 1973. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. New York: Oxford
University Press. 
Harrison, Paul M. 1978. “Buddhanusmrti in the Pratyutpanna-Buddha-
Sammukhavasthita-Samadhi-sutra.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 6:35–57. 
Heesterman, J. C. 1957. The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration: The Rajasuya
Described According to the Yajus Texts and Annotated. The Hague: Mouton.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1978. “Das Schwert des Vidy adhara.” Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde Südasiens 22:45–48. 
———. 1989. “Origin and Varieties of Buddhist Sanskrit.” In Caillat 1989, pp.
341–367. 
———. 1992. Sprachentwicklung und Kulturgeschichte—Ein Beitrag zur materiellen
Kultur des buddhistischen Klosterlebens. Abhandlungen der Geistes-und
Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse Jahrgang 1992, no. 6. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner
Verlag. 
Hodge, Stephen. 1994. “Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins
of the Mahavairocanabhisambodhi-sutra.” In Tadeusz Skorupski and Ulrich
Pagel, eds., The Buddhist Forum, Vol. III: Papers in Honour and Appreciation of
Professor David Seyfort Ruegg’s Contribution to Indological, Buddhist, and
Tibetan Studies, pp. 57–83. London: School of Oriental and African Studies. 
Holub, Robert C. 1984. Reception Theory: A Critical Introduction. London and
New York: Methuen.
Houben, Jan E. M., ed. 1996. Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the
History of the Sanskrit Language. Brill’s Indological Library, vol. 13. Leiden: E.
J. Brill.
Hourani, George F. 1951. Arab Seafaring. Rev. and expanded by John Carswell,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995. 
Huber, Toni. 1990. “Where Exactly Are C aritra, Devikota and Himavat? A
Sacred Geography Controversy and the Development of Tantric Buddhist
Pilgrimage Sites in Tibet.” Kailash: A Journal of Himalayan Studies 16, nos.
3–4:121–164. 
Huizinga, Johan. 1950. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Element in Culture .
Boston: Beacon Press. Reprint, Boston: Beacon Press, 1955. 
Hultkrantz, Ake. 1978. “Ecological and Phenomenological Aspects of
Shamanism.” In V. Diószegi and M. Hoppál, eds., Shamanism in Siberia, pp.
27–58. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 475 ---
Ikari, Yasuke, ed. 1994. A Study of the Nilamata: Aspects of Hinduism in Ancient
Kashmir. Kyoto: Institute for Research in Humanities, Kyoto University. 
Inden, Ronald. 1978. “Ritual, Authority, and Cyclic Time in Hindu Kingship.”
In J. F. Richards, ed., Kingship and Authority in South Asia, pp. 41–91.
Madison: University of Wisconsin-Madison. Reprint, Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 1998.
———. 1990. Imagining India. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Ingalls, Daniel H. H. 1962. “Cynics and P a$upatas: The Seeking of Dishonor.”
Harvard Theological Review 55, no. 4:281–298. 
Irawati, Karvé. 1953. Kinship Organization in India. Deccan College Monograph
Series, no. 11. Poona: Deccan College Research Institute.
Iyanaga, Nobumi. 1985. “Récits de la soumission de Mahe$vara par Trailokya-
vijaya: d’après les sources chinoises et japonaises.” In Michel Strickmann, ed.,
Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein. MCB 22:633–745.
Jacks, Philip. 1993. The Antiquarian and the Myth of Antiquity: The Origins of
Rome in Renaissance Thought. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press. 
Jain, Beena. 1990. Guild Organization in Northern India (From Earliest Times to
1200 a.d.). Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan. 
Jain, J. C. 1974. “Vidyadharas in the Vasudevahindi.” Journal of the Oriental
Institute of Baroda 24:120–127.
Jamison, Stephanie W. 1996. Sacriﬁced Wife/Sacriﬁcer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and
Hospitality in Ancient India. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Jayaswal, Kashi P. 1934. An Imperial History of India in a Sanskrit Text. With the
Sanskrit text [of the Mañju$rimulakalpa]. Revised by Ven. Rahula
SaNkrityayana. Lahore: Motilal Banarsidass. Reprint, Patna: Eastern Book
House, 1988.
Jefferds, Keith N. 1981. “Vidusaka Versus Fool: A Functional Analysis.” Journal
of South Asian Literature 16:61–73.
Jha, Amal Kumar, ed. 1991. Coinage, Trade and Economy, January 8th–11th, 1991:
Third International Colloquium. Nashik, Maharastra: Indian Institute of
Research in Numismatic Studies. 
Jones, Horace L. 1930. The Geography of Strabo. Leob Classical Library. 8 vols.
London: William Heinemann. 
Jong, J. W. de. 1984. “A New History of Tantric Literature in India.” Acta
Indologica [Naratasan Shinshoji] 6:91–113. 
Kanaoka, Shuyu. 1966. “Kukuraja.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies
15:467–458.
Kaneko, Eiichi. 1982. Ko-Tantora zenshu kaidai mokuroku. Tokyo: Kokusho
Kankokai. 
Kapstein, Matthew T. 2000. The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism: Conversion,
Contestation, and Memory. New York: Oxford University Press.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 476 ---
Karmay, Samten Gyaltsen. 1980. “An Open Letter of Pho-brang Zhi-ba-’od to
the Buddhists in Tibet.” Tibet Journal 5:3–28.
Keegan, John. 1993. A History of Warfare. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Keil, Frank C. 1989. Concepts, Kinds, and Cognitive Development. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. 
Kelley, Donald R. 1988. “The Theory of History.” In Charles B. Schmitt et al.,
eds., The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy, pp. 746–761. Cambridge
and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
King, Richard 1999. Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India and the
“Mystic East.” London and New York: Routledge. 
Kopf, David. 1969. British Orientalism and the Bengal Renaissance: The Dynamics
of Indian Modernization, 1773–1835. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Kuiper, F. B. J. 1979. Va r una and Vidusaka: On the Origin of the Sanskrit Drama .
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Kulke, Hermann. 1978. The Devaraja Cult. Data Paper, no. 108. Ithaca:
Department of Asian Studies, Cornell University. Reprinted as “The
Devaraja Cult: Legitimation and Apotheosis of the Ruler in the Kingdom of
Angkor” in Kulke 1993, pp. 327–381. 
———. 1993. Kings and Cults: State Formation and Legitimation in India and
Southeast Asia. Delhi: Manohar. 
Kulke, Hermann, and Dietmar Rothermund. 1998. A History of India. Rev. ed.
London and New York: Routledge.
Kumar, Dharma, and Tapan Raychaudhuri, eds. 1982. The Cambridge Economic
History of India. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kværne, Per. 1975. “On the Concept of Sahaja in Indian Buddhist Tantric
Literature.” Tememos 11:88–135.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lalou, Marcelle. 1936. “Mañju$rimulakalpa et Taramulakalpa.” Harvard Journal
of Asian Studies 1:327–349. 
——— 1955. “A la Recherche du Vidy adharapitaka: le cycle du Subahupariprccha-
tantra.” In Gadjin M. NAGAO and Josho NOZAWA, eds., Studies in
Indology and Buddhology: Presented in Honour of Professor Susumu Yamaguchi on
the Occasion of His Sixtieth Birthday, pp. 68–72. Kyogo: Hozokan. 
———. 1956. “Four Notes on Vajrapani.” Adyar Library Bulletin 20:287–293. 
Lamotte, Etienne. 1949. “La critique d’interprétation dans le bouddhisme.”
Annuaire de l’Institut de Philologie et d’Histoire Orientales et Slaves 9:341–361.
———. 1944–80. Le traité de la grande vertu de sagesse. Publications de l’Institut
Orientaliste de Louvain. 5 vols. Louvain: Institut Orientaliste. 
———. 1966. “Vajrapani en Inde.” In Mélanges de Sinologie offerts à Monsieur
Paul Demiéville. Bibliothèque de l’Institut des Hautes Études Chinoises, vol.
20, pp. 113–159. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 477 ---
Law, Narendra Nath. 1919. “Ancient Hindu Coronation and Allied
Ceremonials.” IA 48: 84–95. 
Leslie, Julia, ed. 1991. Roles and Rituals for Hindu Women Rutherford, Madison,
and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Lessing, Ferdinand D., and Alex Wayman. 1968. Mkhas Grub Rje’i Fundamentals
of the Buddhist Tantras. Indo-Iranian Monographs, vol. 8. The Hague:
Mouton. 
Lévi, Sylvain. 1915. “Le catalogue géographique des Yak sa dans la Maha-mayuri.”
JA series 11, vol. 5:19–138.
———. 1930. “Un nouveau document sur le bouddhisme de basse époque dans
l’Inde.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 6:418–429.
Lewis, Bernard. 1993. Islam and the West. New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 
Lewis, Todd T. 1993. “Newar-Tibetan Trade and the Domestication of
Simhalasarthabahu Avadana.” History of Religions 33:135–160.
Lienhard, Siegfried. 1985. Die Abenteuer des Kaufmanns Simhala. Eine nepalische
Bilderrolle aus der Sammulung des Museums für Indische Kunst Berlin. Berlin:
Das Museum für Indische Kunst Berlin.
———. 1993. “Avalokite$vara in the Wick of the Night-Lamp.” IIJ 36:93–104. 
Ligeti, Louis, ed. 1978. Proceedings of the Csoma de Körös Memorial Symposium
(Held at Mátrafüred, Hungary 24–30 September 1976). Bibliotheca Orientalis
Hungarica, vol. 23. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó.
Lin, Li-Kouang. 1935. “Punyodaya (Na-T’i), un propagateur du tantrisme en
Chine et au Cambodge à l’époque de Hiuan-tsang.” JA 227:83–100.
Lingat, Robert. 1973. The Classical Law of India. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Litvinsky, B. A., et al., eds. 1996. The Crossroads of Civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750.
History of Civilizations of Central Asia, vol. 3. Paris: UNESCO.
Liu, Xinru. 1988. Ancient India and Ancient China: Trade and Religious Exchanges
A.D. 1–600. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Lopez, Donald, Jr., ed. 1995. Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism Under
Colonialism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lorenzen, David N. 1972. The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas: Two Lost %aivite Sects.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
———. 1978. “Warrior Ascetics in Indian History.” JAOS 98:61–75.
———. 1989. “New Data on the K apalikas.” In Alf Hiltebeitel, ed., Criminal
Gods and Demon Devotees, pp. 231–238. Albany: State University of New York
Press. 
Lüders, Heinrich. 1939. “Die Vidyadharas in der buddhistischen Literatur und
Kunst.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 93:89–104. 
Lutgendorf, Philip. 1991. The Life of a Text: Performing the Ramcaritmanas of
Tulsidas. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 478 ---
———. 2001. “Dining Out at Lake Pampa: The Shabari Episode in Multiple
Ramayanas.” In Paula Richman, ed., Questioning Ramayanas: A South Asian
Tradition, pp. 119–136. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mackerras, Colin 1972. The Uighur Empire According to the T’ang Dynastic
Histories: A Study in Sino-Uighur Relations, 744–840. Columbia: University of
South Carolina Press. 
———. 1990. “The Uighurs.” In Denis Sinor, ed., The Cambridge History of
Early Inner Asia, pp. 317–342. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Mair, Victor H. 1988. Painting and Performance: Chinese Picture Recitation and Its
Indian Genesis. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra. 1971. History of Ancient Bengal. Calcutta: G.
Bharadwaj.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra, and Anant Sadashiv Altekar. 1946. The V akataka-
Gupta Age (Circa 200–550 a.d.). Banaras, Uttar Pradesh: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Mandan, A. P. 1990. The History of the Rastrakutas. New Delhi: Harman. 
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1985. “On the Date of the Mañju $rimulakalpa.” In Michel
Strickmann, ed., Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein. MCB
22:882–894.
Mayer, Robert. 1998. “The Figure of Mahe $vara/Rudra in the rÑiN-ma-pa
Tantric Tradition.” JIABS 21:271–310.
McKay, Alex. 1998. “Kailas-Manasarovar in ‘Classical’ (Hindu) and Colonial
Sources: Asceticism, Power, and Pilgrimage.” In Alex McKay, ed., Pilgrimage
in Tibet, pp. 165–183. Richmond, Surrey, UK: Curzon Press. 
Mehta, Jodh Singh. 1970. Abu to Udaipur: Celestial Simla to City of Sunrise. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass. 
Millar, Susanna. 1974. The Psychology of Play. New York: Jason Aronson.
Miller, David M., and Dorothy C. Wertz. 1976. Hindu Monastic Life: The Monks
and Monasteries of Bhubaneswar. Montreal and London: McGill-Queen’s
University Press. 
Mishra, Vibhuti Bhushan. 1973. Religious Beliefs and Practices of North India
During the Early Mediæval Period. Handbuch der Orientalistik, Zweite
Abteilung: Indien. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Mongia, Padmini, ed. 1996. Contemporary Postcolonial Theory: A Reader. London,
New York, Sydney, and Auckland: Arnold. 
Morinis, E. A. 1984. Pilgrimage in the Hindu Tradition. Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Morrell, John. 1983. Taking Laughter Seriously. Albany: State University of New
York Press.
Mukherjee, P. 1940. The History of Medieval V aishnavism in Orissa.Calcutta: R.
Chatterjee. 
Murphey, Murray G. 1994. Philosophical Foundations of Historical Knowledge.
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 479 ---
Murthy, M. Chidananda. 1987. “Nilapatas—A Relatively Unknown Religious
Sect of Medieval India.” In A. V. Narasimha Murthy and K. V. Ramesh,
eds., Giridhara$ri—Essays on Indology, Dr. G. S. Dikshit Felicitation Volume, pp.
209–216. Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
Namai, Chisho Mamoru. 1997. “On bodhicittabhavana in the Esoteric Buddhist
Tradition.” In Helmut Krasser et al., eds., Tibetan Studies—Proceedings of the
7th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, pp.
657–668. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Nath, Vijay. 2001. Puranas and Acculturation: A Historico-Anthropological
Perspective. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers. 
Nattier, Jan. 1991. Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy of
Decline. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press. 
Newman, John. 1988. “Buddhist Sanskrit in the K alackara Tantra.” JIABS
11:123–140.
Nihom, Max. 1992. “The Goddess with the Severed Head: A Recension of
Sadhanamala 232, 234, and 238 Attributed to the Siddh acarya Virupa.” In A.
W. van den Hoek et al., eds., Ritual, State and History in South Asia: Essays in
Honour of J. C. Heesterman, pp. 222–243. Leiden, New York, and Cologne: E.
J. Brill.
———. 1994. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The
Kuñjarakarnadharmakathana and the Yogatantra. Publications of the De Nobili
Research Library, vol. 21. Vienna: Institute of Indology, University of Vienna. 
Nitti-Dolci, Luigia. 1972. The Prakrita Grammarians. Prabhakara Jha, trans.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Olson, David R., and Nancy Torrance, eds. 1991. Literacy and Orality.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Orlando, Raffaello. 1980. “The Last Will of Amoghavajra.” Annali Istituto
Orientale di Napoli 40:89–113.
Orr, Leslie C. 2000. Donors, Devotees, and Daughters of God: Temple Women in
Medieval Tamilnadu. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Orzech, Charles D. 1989. “Seeing Chen-Yen Buddhism: Traditional Scholarship
and the Vajrayana in China.” History of Religions 29:87–114.
———. 1998. Politics and Transcendent Wisdom: The Scripture for Humane Kings in
the Creation of Chinese Buddhism. University Park: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Parpola, Asko. 1988. “The Coming of the Aryans to Iran and India and the
Cultural and Ethnic Identity of the D asas.” Studia Orientalia (Helsinki)
64:194–302.
Parry, Jonathan P. 1985. “The Aghori Ascetics of Benares.” In Richard Burghart
and Audrey Cantlie, eds., Indian Religion. Collected Papers on South Asia,
no. 7, pp. 51–78. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
———. 1994. Death in Banaras. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 480 ---
Paul, Diana Mary. 1980. The Buddhist Feminine Ideal: Queen %rimala and the
Tathagatagarbha. American Academy of Religion Dissertation Series, no. 30.
Missoula, MT: Scholars Press.
Pfeiffer, Rudolf. 1976. History of Classical Scholarship from 1300 to 1850. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. 
Philips, C. H., ed. 1961. Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon. London: Oxford
University Press. 
Pollock, Sheldon. 1989. “Mimamsa and the Problem of History in Traditional
India.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 109:603–11.
———. 1993. “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power Beyond the
Raj.” In Carol A. Breckenridge and Peter van der Veer, eds., Orientalism and
the Postcolonial Predicament, pp. 76–113. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press. 
———. 1996. “The Sanskirt Cosmopolis, 300–1300 c.e.: Transculturation, Ver-
nacularization, and the Question of Ideology.” In Houben 1996, pp. 197–247. 
———. 1998. “The Cosmopolitan Vernacular.” Journal of Asian Studies 57:6–37.
Possehl, Gregory L. 1990. “An Archaeological Adventurer in Afghanistan:
Charles Masson.” South Asian Studies 6:111–124.
Prasad, Om Prakash. 1989. Decay and Revival of Urban Centres in Medieval South
India (c. a.d. 600–1200). New Delhi: Commonwealth.
Przyluski, Jean. 1923. “Les Vidyaraja: Contribution à l’histoire de la magie dans
les sects mahayanistes.” BEFEO 23:301–318. 
Puri, Baij Nath. 1986. The History of the Gurjara-Pratih aras. 2d rev. and enlarged
ed. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Pye, Michael. 1978. Skilful Means: A Concept in Mahayana Buddhism. London:
Gerald Duckworth. 
Rabe, Michael D. 1997. “The M amallapuram Pra$asti: A Panegyric in Figures.”
Artibus Asiæ 57:189–241. 
Rabil, Albert, ed. 1988. Renaissance Humanism: Foundations, Forms, and Legacy. 3
vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Rastogi, Navjivan. 1987. Introduction to the Tantraloka: A Study in Structure. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Ray, Himanshu Prabha. 1986. Monastery and Guild: Commerce Under the
Satavahanas. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
———. 1994. The Winds of Change: Buddhism and the Maritime Links of Early
South Asia. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Ray, Reginald A. 1994. Buddhist Saints in India: A Study in Buddhist V alues and
Orientations. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Regamey, Constantin. 1971. “Motifs vichnouïtes et $ivaites dans le
Karandavyuha.” In Études tibétaines dédiées à la mémoire de Marcelle Lalou, pp.
411–432. Paris: Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient. 
Reynolds, Susan. 1994. Fiefs and V assals: The Medieval Evidence Reinterpreted.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 481 ---
Richman, Paula, ed. 1991. Many Ramayanas: The Diversity of a Narrative
Tradition in South Asia. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Robinson, James B. 1979. Buddha’s Lions: The Lives of the Eighty-four Siddhas.
Berkeley: Dharma.
Rocher, Ludo. 1986. The Puranas. Vol. 2, part 3: A History of Indian Literature.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Ruegg, David Seyfort. 1964. “Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘substrat
religieux’ indien et tibétain.” JA 252:77–95.
———. 1967. “On a Yoga Treatise in Sanskrit from Qïzïl.” JAOS 87:157–165.
———. 1981. “Deux problèmes d’exégèse et de pratique tantriques.” In Michel
Strickmann, ed., Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein. MCB
20:212–226. 
———. 1989. “Allusiveness and Obliqueness in Buddhist Texts: Samdha,
Samdhi, Samdhya and Abhisamdhi.” In Caillat 1989, pp. 294–328.
Russell, R. V. 1916. The Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India.
Assisted by Rai Bahadur Hira Lal. 4 vols. London: Macmillan. Reprint,
Oosterhout, the Netherlands: Anthropological Publications, 1969.
Sachau, Edward C. 1910. Alberuni’s India—An Account of the Religion,
Philosophy, Literature, Geography, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws and
Astrology of India About A.D. 1030. 2 vols. London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
and Trubner. 
Sakurai, Munenobu. 1996. Indo mikkyogirei kyenkyu. Kyoto: Hozogan.
Salomon, Richard. 1989. “Linguistic Variability in Post-Vedic Sanskrit.” In
Caillat 1989, pp. 275–294.
———. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara: The British Library
Kharosthi Fragments. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Samuel, Geoffrey. 1993. Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies.
Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. %aivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In S. Sutherland et
al., eds., The World’s Religions,pp. 660–704. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
———. 1994. “Vajrayana: Origin and Function.” In Dhammakaya Foundation,
ed., Buddhism into the Year 2000, pp. 87–102. Bangkok and Los Angeles:
Dhammakaya Foundation. 
———. 2001. “History Through Textual Criticism in the Study of %aivism, the
Pañcaratra, and the Buddhist Yoginitantras.” In François Grimal, ed., Les
sources et le temps, pp. 1–47. Pondicherry: École française d’Extrême Orient. 
Saussure, Ferdinand de. 1983. Course in General Linguistics. La Salle, IL: Open
Court.
Sawyer, Dana W. 1993. “The Monastic Structure of Banarsi Dandi Sadhus.”
In Bradley R. Hertel and Cynthia Ann Humes, eds., Living Banaras: Hindu
Religion in Cultural Context, pp. 159–180. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Schaeffer, Kurtis R. 2000. “The Religious Career of Vairocanavajra—A Twelfth-
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 482 ---
Century Indian Buddhist Master from Daksina Ko$ala.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 28, no. 4:361–384. 
Scharfe, Harmut. 1993. Investigations in Kautalya’s Manual of Political Science.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
Schlingloff, Dieter. 1964. Ein Buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch. Sanskrittexte aus den
Turfanfunden, no. 7. 2 vols. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 
Schmidt, Toni. 1958. The Eighty-ﬁve Siddhas. Sino-Swedish Expedition, no. 42.
Stockholm: Statens Ethnograﬁska Museum. 
Schomer, Karine. 1987. “The Doha as a Vehicle of Sant Teachings.” In Karine
Schomer and W. H. McLeod, eds., The Sants: Studies in a Devotional
Tradition of India, pp. 61–90. Berkeley: Berkeley Religious Studies Series. 
Schopen, Gregory. 1977. “Sukhavati as a Generalized Religious Goal in Sanskrit
Mahayana Sutra Literature.” IIJ 19:177–210.
———. 1985. “The BodhigarbhalaNkaralaksa and Vimalosnisa Dharanis in
Indian Inscriptions.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 29:119–149.
———. 1987. “Burial ‘Ad Sanctos’ and the Physical Presence of the Buddha in
Early Indian Buddhism.” Religion 17:193–225.
———. 1990. “The Buddha as an Owner of Property and Permanent Resident
in Medieval Indian Monasteries.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 18:181–217.
———. 1991. “Archæology and Protestant Presuppositions in the Study of
Indian Buddhism.” History of Religions 31:1–23.
———. 1992. “On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in
the Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 20:1–39.
———. 1994. “Doing Business for the Lord: Lending on Interest and Written
Loan Contracts in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya.” JAOS 114:527–554.
———. 1994a. “Ritual Rights and Bones of Contention: More on Monastic
Funerals and Relics in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 22:31–80. 
———. 1996. “The Suppression of Nuns and the Ritual Murder of Their Special
Dead in Two Buddhist Monastic Texts.” Journal of Indian Philosophy
24:563–592.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. 1958. The World as Will and Representation. E. F. J. Payne,
trans. 2 vols. Indian Hills, CO: Falcon’s Wing Press. 
Scott, Joan W. 2001. “Fantasy Echo: History and the Construction of Identity.”
Critical Inquiry 27:284–304.
Shafer, Robert. 1954. Ethnography of Ancient India.Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Shahidullah, M. 1928. Les chants mystiques de Kanha et de Saraha—les Doha-Kosa.
Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Sharma, Har Dutt. 1941. “Hasya as a Rasa in Sanskrit Rhetoric and Literature.”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 22:103–115.
Sharma, Ram Sharan. 1965. Indian Feudalism—c. 300–1200. Calcutta: University
of Calcutta. Reprint, Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1987. 
———. 1987. Urban Decay in India (c. 300–c. 1000). New Delhi: Munshiram
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 483 ---
Manoharlal. 
———. 2001. Early Medieval Indian Society: A Study in Feudalisation. Calcutta:
Orient Longman Limited. 
Sharma, Shanta Rani. 1996. Society and Culture in Rajasthan: c. A.D. 700–900.
Delhi: Pragati.
Shaw, Miranda. 1994. Passionate Enlightenment. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Shorey, Paul. 1933. Plato: The Republic. Leob Classical Library. 2 vols.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Shrimali, Krishna Mohan. 1991. “Cash Nexus on Western Coast, c. a.d.
850–1250: A Study of the %ilaharas.” In Jha 1991, pp. 178–193. 
Shulman, David Dean. 1985. The King and the Clown in South Indian Myth and
Poetry. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Siegel, Lee. 1987. Laughing Matters: Comic Tradition in India. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press. 
Siklós, Bulcsu. 1996. The V ajrabhairava Tantras: Tibetan and Mongolian Versions,
English Translation and Annotations. Buddhica Britannica Series Continua,
no. 7. Tring, UK: Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Simkin, C. G. F. 1968. The Traditional Trade of Asia. London: Oxford University
Press.
Singh, Upinder. 1993. Kings, Brahmanas and Temples in Orissa: An Epigraphic
Study A.D. 300–1147. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 
Sinha, Bindeshwari Prasad. 1977. Dynastic History of Magadha, Circa 450–1200
a.d. New Delhi: Abhinav. 
Sircar, Dinesh Chandra. 1945. “The Maukharis and the Later Guptas.” Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Letters 11:69–74.
———. 1966. Indian Epigraphical Glossary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
———. 1971. Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass. 
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. “Tibetan Homa Rites.” In Staal 1983, pp. 403–417.
———. 1994. “Jyotirmañjari: Abhayakaragupta’s Commentary on Homa Rites.”
Mikkyo bunka kenkyusho kiyo 8:206–236.
———. 1996. “The Samputa-tantra—Sanskrit and Tibetan Versions of Chapter
One.” In Tadeusz Skorupski, ed., The Buddhist Forum, Vol. IV: Seminar Papers
1994–1996, pp. 191–244. London: School of Oriental and African Studies. 
Snellgrove, David L. 1958. “Note on the Adhya$ayasamcodanasutra.” Bulletin of the
School of Oriental and African Studies 21:620–623.
———. 1959. “The Notion of Divine Kingship in Tantric Buddhism.” In La
Regalità Sacra—Contributi al Tema dell’ VIII Congresso Internazionale di Storia
delle Religioni, pp. 204–218. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
———. 1987. Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan
Successors. 2 vols. Boston: Shambhala. 
Staal, Frits, ed. 1983. Agni: The Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar. 2 vols. Berkeley:
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 484 ---
Asian Humanities Press. 
Stanley, John M. 1988. “Gods, Ghosts, and Possession.” In Eleanor Zelliot and
Maxine Berntsen, eds., The Experience of Hinduism: Essays on the Religion in
Maharashtra, pp. 26–59. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Stablein, William George. 1976. “The Mah akalatantra: A Theory of Ritual
Blessings and Tantric Medicine.” Ph.D. diss., Columbia University.
Stearns, Cyrus. 1996. “The Life and Tibetan Legacy of the Indian Mahapandita
Vibhuticandra.” JIABS 19:127–171.
Stein, Burton. 1980. Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India. Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
———. 1991. “The Segmentary State: Interim Reﬂections.” Purusartha 13:217–237. 
Stein, Rolf A. 1995. “La soumission de Rudra et autres contes tantriques.” JA
283:121–160.
Steinkellner, Ernst. 1978. “Remarks on Tantristic Hermeneutics.” In Ligeti 1978,
pp. 445–458.
Strayer, Joseph R. 1965. Feudalism. Princeton: D. van Nostrand. 
Strickmann, Michel. 1983. “Homa in East Asia.” In Staal 1983, pp. 418–455.
———. 1990. “The Consecration Sutra: A Buddhist Book of Spells.” In Robert
E. Buswell, ed., Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, pp. 75–118. Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press. 
———. 1996. Mantras et mandarins: Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine.
Bibliothèque des Sciences humaines. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 2002. Chinese Magical Medicine. Bernard Faure, ed. Stanford: Stanford
University Press. 
Strong, John S. 1992. The Legend and Cult of Upagupta. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Suryavanshi, Bhagwan Singh. 1962. The Abhiras: Their History and Culture. M.S.
University Archaeology and Ancient History Series, no. 6. Baroda: M.S.
University of Baroda.
Sutherland, Gail Hinich. 1991. The Disguises of the Demon: The Development of the
Yaksa in Hinduism and Buddhism.Albany: State University of New York Press.
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro. 1934. An Index to the Lankavatara Sutra. 2d rev. ed.
Kyoto: Sanskrit Buddhist Texts Publishing Society. 
———. 1957. The Tibetan Tripitaka: Peking Edition. Tokyo-Kyoto: Tibetan
Tripitaka Research Institute. 
Tagore, Rabindranath. 1938a. Candalika. In Amiya Chakravarty, ed., A Tagore
Reader, pp. 169–179. New York: Macmillan, 1961. 
———. 1938b. Chandalika Nrtyanatya. Shyamara Devi, trans. Orient Review
(January–February 1956).
Takakusu, Junjiro, and Kaigyoku Watanabe, eds. 1924–34. Taisho shinshu
daizokyo. Tokyo: Taisho issaikyo kankokai. 
Tatz, Mark. 1986. Asanga’s Chapter on Ethics with the Commentary of Tsong-
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 485 ---
Kha-Pa, The Basic Path to Awakening, The Complete Bodhisattva. Lewiston,
NY: Edwin Mellen Press. 
———. 1987. “The Life of the Siddha-Philosopher Maitr igupta.” JAOS
107:695–711.
———. 1988. “Maitri-pa and Ati$a.” In Helga Uebach and Jampa L. Panglung,
eds., Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 4th Seminar of the International
Association for Tibetan Studies, Schloss Hohenkammer—Munich 1985, pp.
473–481. Munich: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Teiser, Stephen F. 1988. The Ghost Festival in Medieval China. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 
Temple, Richard Carnac. 1884–90. Legends of the Punjab. 3 vols. Bombay:
Education Society’s Press. 
Thakur, Vijay Kumar, and Kalpana Jha. 1994. “Towns and Trade in the
Samaraichchakaha: Text and Context.” In N. N. Bhattacharya, ed., Jainism
and Prakrit in Ancient and Medieval India: Essays for Prof. Jagdish Chandra
Jain, pp. 295–324. New Delhi: Manohar. 
Thapar, Romila. 1990. From Lineage to State: Social Formations in the Mid-First
Millennium b.c. in the Ganga Valley. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
———. 1992. Interpreting Early India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
———. 1997. A$oka and the Decline of the Mauryas. 2d rev. ed. Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
Thomas, Werner. 1964. Tocharisches Elementarbuch. 2 vols. Heidelberg: Carl
Winter.
Torrance, Robert M. 1978. The Comic Hero. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Tsuda, Shinichi. 1978. A Critical Tantrism. Memoirs of the Research
Department of the Toyo Bunko, no. 36. Tokyo: Toyo Bunko.
———. 1990. “The Cult of $ma$ana, the Realities of Tantra.” In Teun
Goudriaan, ed., The Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism, pp. 96–108. Leiden,
New York, Copenhagen, and Cologne: E. J. Brill.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1930. “Animadversiones Indicæ.” JASB 26:125–160.
———. 1949. Tibetan Painted Scrolls. Rome: La Libreria Dello Stato. 3 vols.
Reprint, Bangkok: SDI, 1999. 
———. 1958. Minor Buddhist Texts. Serie Orientale Roma, no. 9. 2 vols. Rome:
IsMEO. 
UI, Hakuju, et al., eds. 1934. A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons
(BKah-hgyur and Bstan-hgyur). Sendai: Tôhoku Imperial University.
Varady, Robert Gabriel. 1979. “North Indian Banjaras: Their Evolution as
Transporters.” South Asia (Australia) 2:1–18. 
Vitebsky, Peirs. 1992. Dialogues with the Dead: The Discussion of Mortality Among
the Sora of Eastern India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Voloéinov, V. N. 1973. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. New York and
London: Seminar Press.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 486 ---
Waldschmidt, Ernst. 1981. “Bemerkungen zu einer zentralasiatischen Sanskrit-
Version des Virupa-Avadana.” In K. Bruhn and A. Wezler, eds., Studien zum
Jainismus und Buddhismus. Gedenkscrift für Ludwig Alsdorf, pp. 341–358.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Wallace, Vesna A. 2001. The Inner Kalacakratantra: A Buddhist Tantric View of the
Individual. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 
Walleser, Max. 1922. “The Life of N agarjuna from Tibetan and Chinese
Sources.” Asia Major (Hirth Anniversary volume):421–455. 
Wayman, Alex. 1958. “The Rules of Debate According to AsaNga.” JAOS 78:29–40.
———. 1968. “Concerning Samdha-bhasa/Samdhi-bhasa/Samdhya-bhasa.” In
Mélanges d’indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou , pp. 789–796. Publications
de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, no. 28. Paris: Éditions e. de Boccard. 
———. 1975–76. “The Signiﬁcance of Mantras, from the Veda Down to
Buddhist Tantric Practice.” Indologica Taurinensia 3–4:483–497.
———. 1977. Yoga of the Guhyasamajatantra: The Arcane Lore of Forty Verses.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2001. “Tropes, Typologies, and Turnarounds: A Brief
Genealogy of the Historiography of Tantric Buddhism.” History of Religions
41:223–259.
Weinstein, Stanley. 1987. Buddhism Under the T’ang. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Weiss, Roberto. 1969. The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell. 
White, David Gordon. 1996. The Alchemical Body. Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press.
Wills, C. U. 1919. “The Territorial System of the Rajput Kingdoms of Mediæval
Chhattisgarh.” JASB 15:197–262. 
Wink, André. 1990. Al-Hind: The Making of the Indo-Islamic World. Vol. 1.
Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. Philosophical Investigations. G. E. M. Anscombe,
trans. 3d ed. New York: Macmillan.
Witzel, Michael. 1994. “Kashmiri Manuscripts and Pronunciation.” In I kari
1994, pp. 1–53.
Wright, Arthur F. 1990. Studies in Chinese Buddhism. New Haven and London:
Yale University Press. 
Yazdani, G., ed. 1960. The Early History of the Deccan. 2 vols. London: Oxford
University Press. 
Yamabe, Nobuyoshi. 1999. “ ‘The S utra on the Ocean-Like Samadhi of the
Visualization of the Buddha’: The Interfusion of the Chinese and Indian
Cultures in Central Asia as Reﬂected in a Fifth Century Apocryphal S utra.”
Ph.D. diss., Yale University.
Yoritomi, Motohiro. 1990. Mikkyobutsu no kenkyu. Kyoto: Hozogan.
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 487 ---
personal names
Abhayadatta$ri, 170, 228, 305–11
Abhayakaragupta, 250–52, 267
Abhinavagupta, 10, 179, 206, 280–85
Abou-El-Haj, R. A., 12
Advayavajra, 228
Amoghavajra, 115, 145–46, 198, 204
Ananda, 194
AnaNgayogin, 261–62
Anathapindada, 77
Andrew, B., 358
Aristotle, 22, 281, 284 
Arrian, 63
Aryadeva, 14
AsaNga, 102, 308
A$vaghosa, 304
Atikuta, 118, 124, 145
Ati$a, 200, 306, 317
Baird, W., 386
Bakhtin, M. M., 288–89
Balipada, 312–15
Bana, 38, 42, 69, 89
Barrow, H. W., 95–96
Bharata, 272, 284
Bharati, A., 221
Bhavabhuti, 90, 203, 218, 226
Bhavari, 226
Bhasa, 281
Bhattacharya, B., 255
Bhattacharya, G., 356
Biondo, Flavio, 18–19
Boas, Franz, 9
Boccoccio, Giovanni, 18
Bodhiruci, 118, 125
Bodin, Jean, 19
Brennan, T., 11
Brocciolioni, Poggio, 18
‘Brog-mi (Shakya ye-shes), 378
Broido, M., 257
Bruni, Leonardo, 18
Buddhaghosa, 29
Buddhaghosa, 276
Buddhaguhya, 4, 23, 126, 154–58, 164,
198, 376, 378, 385
Buddhajñanapada, 6, 294, 306, 309–16
Bühnemann, G. 386
Campbell, J. G., 382
Candrakirti (Madhyamika), 100–101, 105
Candrakirti (tantrika), 253–57
Candramala, 239
Carya, 307
Chakrabarty, Dipesh, 11
Chattopadhyaya, B. D., 137, 358
Chenet, F., 381
Cicero, 17, 19
Culapanthaka, 79
Dandin, 121
Dehejia, V., 179–183
Demiéville, P., 88
Denton, L. T., 95
Index

--- PAGE 488 ---
Devahuti, D., 37, 354
Devapala, 55, 87–89
Dharmakirti, 102–5
Dharmapala, 52–55, 126, 139, 311
Dharma$resthi, 78
Dietz, 376
Dignaga, 103–5
Dimock, E. C., 238
Dirlik, Arif, 10, 21
Dombiheruka, 233, 252, 281–83, 304
Drakpa Gyeltsen (Grags-pa rgyal-
mtshan), 327
*Drdhamati, 14
Dreyfus, Georges, 104
D’souza, J., 271
Dudda, Maitrika Queen, 97, 139
Eastman, K., 375
Eckel, M. D., 100
Elwin, V., 232, 393
Etlin, R., 12
Evans, R., 12
Fa-hsien, 161
Falk, N. A., 94
Fischer, D. H., 92
Figuera, D., 23
Fo T’u-teng, 196
Frye, R. N., 81
Fussman, G., 380
Gayadhara, 239
Giebel, R., 375
Gernet, J., 360
Goetz, H., 355
Gopala, 51–52, 86
Granoff, P., 193, 349, 350, 359, 371, 381,
382, 387
Groark, L., 365
Gross, R. L., 207, 238, 396
Goudriaan, T., 388, 390, 405
Guha, A., 390
Guneru, 311–15
Hara, M., 382
Haribhadra, 126, 311, 315
Harisena, 68
Harsa, 26, 38–43, 48, 88, 97, 135, 140,
169, 175–76
Herodotus, 21
Hira Lal, 65
Hodge, S., 376
Hsüan-tsang, 42, 88, 107, 118, 173
Huizinga, Johan, 69
Huntington, S., 94, 356
I-ching, 95, 101, 106–7, 159
Inden, R., 84
Indrabhuti, 5, 148, 233, 242–46, 294, 306,
317–321
Jain, B., 361
Jefferds, K., 281
Jñanamitra, 198, 204, 242–45
Jñanaparama, 267–68
Jung, C. G., 131 
Kalhana, 66, 101, 355
Kamandaka, 25, 64, 130
Kanhapa, 228, 259–60, 275, 281–82, 302,
304, 324 
Karuna$rimitra, 110, 166
Kautilya, 133
Keegan, John, 2, 25, 67–68
Keil, F. C., 120
Kendrup Gelek Pelsangbo (mKhas-
grub dge-legs dpal-bzang-po), 255
Kharavela, 173
Khyungpo Neljor (Khyung po rnal-
’byor), 228
Kielhorn, F., 272–73
King, Richard, 13, 23
Kopf, D., 351
Krsnami$ra, 179
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 489 ---
Kukura, 242–45, 293, 295, 304–5
Kulke, 71, 129–130, 302
Kumarajiva, 124
Kuwayama, S., 209
Laksmikara, 123, 130, 143, 209
Lavapa, 307
Lévi, S., 228
Lhacham Jetsun Pelmo (Lha-lcam rje-
btsun dpal-mo), 306
Linroth, R., 376
Liu, X., 360
Lorenzen, D., 382
Lutgendorf, P., 279
Luhipa, 252
Mackerass, C., 361
Mahaka$yapa, 229
Mahamaudgalyayana, 222
Mahapanthaka, 79
Mahasammata, 132
Mahendrapala, 356
Mahendravikramavarman, 101, 242, 261
Maitripada, 228, 252, 306
Mandan, A., 355
Mañju$rikirti, 199, 324–27
Mañju$rimitra, 113, 126
Manu, 52, 62, 66, 103, 129, 178
Marpa, 306–8, 316
Matrceta, 14, 23, 195–96, 384
Matsunaga, Yukei, 10
Mayer, R., 388
McKay, A., 210, 378
Megasthenes, 63–64
Meister, M., 140
Menander, 23
Miller, D. M. and Wertz, D. C., 95
Morrell, J., 284
Munidatta, 228, 258–62
Murphey, M., 12, 369
Nagabuddhi, 293–94, 304
Nagarjuna, 23, 99–101, 105, 241
Nagarjunapada, 263, 304, 307
Nagasena (Gandharan), 23
Nagtso lotsawa, 316–17
Namai, C., 376
Naropa, 6, 252, 316–17
Nath, V., 393
Newman, J., 270–71, 405
Nihom, M., 406
Ngorchen Kunga Sangpo (Ngor-chen
kun-dga’ bzang-po), 130, 369
Olivelle, P., 221
Padmakara, 196, 304 
Padmavajra, 250–52, 255–57, 267, 292, 304
Parmenides, 100
Patterson, T. C., 12
Petrarcha, Francesco, 16–23, 351–52
Pfeiffer, R., 352
Phadampa Sangye (Pha-dam-pa sangs-
rgyas), 96, 228
Pollock, S., 12, 130, 360, 381, 405
Przyluski, Jean, 8
Pulake$in II, 40–42, 48, 69, 135
Pundarika, 270–71 
Puri, B., 355
Pye, M., 379
Raja$ekhara, 69, 209
Ralo Dorjé Drak (Ra-lo rdo-rje-grags),
308
Ratnakara$anti, 199
Ravikirti, 41–2, 69, 130
Ray, H., 78, 360, 363
Ray, R., 237
Rinchen Sangpo (Rin-chen bzang-po),
196
Ruegg, D. S., 171–72, 206, 270–71, 387,
404
%abaripa, 227–33
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 490 ---
Said, E., 11, 13
%akyamitra, 159–60, 198, 311, 315, 324
%akyaraksita, 164, 210
Salutati, Coluccio, 18
Samudragupta, 68
Samuel, J., 368, 384
Sanderson, A., 10, 171–72, 178, 202–3,
206, 386, 388
%aNkara, 8, 75, 101, 183
%antideva, 145
Saraha, 250–52, 267, 275, 304
Saroruhavajra, 304
%a$aNka, 39–42, 48, 89
Sastri, Hirananda, 94–95
Satyabodhi, 87
Satya$resthi, 78
Saussure, F., 172
Sawyer, D. W., 95
Scharfe, H., 372
Schomer, K., 272
Schopen, G., 132, 352, 366, 380
Schopenhauer, 284–85
Schoterman, J., 217
Schwab, K., 371
Scott, J., 364
Shafer, R., 393
Shama lotsawa (Zha-ma Chos kyi
rgyal-po), 96
Sharma, H. D., 406
Sharma, R. S., 110–11, 135, 308–9, 358, 393
Shaw, M., 363
Siegel, L., 406
Sircar, D. C., 210
Skaff, J., 361
Snellgrove, D., 10, 318, 369, 371, 373
%ri Maha-Liladevi, 245
Strabo, 63–4
Strachen, P., 367
Stein, B., 135, 192
Stein, R., 375
Steinkellner, E., 401
Strickmann, M., 10, 350, 371, 373, 382
%ubhakarasimha, 115, 125, 165
Sukhasiddhi, 307
Teiser, S., 392
Tilopa, 193, 275, 307, 316
Trisong Detsen (Khri-srong lde’u-
btsan), 23, 115, 154–57
Tsuda, S., 410
Tucci, G., 228
Upagupta, 288
Upali, 275
Vairocanavajra, 277
Vajrasana, 306–8
Vakpatiraja, 46, 69, 179, 232
Vasula, 68
Vatsabhatti, 68, 174
Vibhuticandra, 228
Vilasavajra, 198, 236, 311, 368
Vimalamitra, 229
Viravajra, 267
Viraprabha, 307
Virupa, 245, 252, 258–62, 281–88, 304–7,
309, 408
Vitapada, 6, 294, 306, 311–16
Wayman, A., 264
White, D., 172, 381
Williams, J., 73
Wittgenstein, L., 120
Wright, A. F., 384
Wu-hsing, 25, 118
Y amabe, Nobuyoshi, 390
Y amada, I., 132
*Ya$askirtibhadra, 275–76
Ya$odharman, 27, 31, 68
Ya$ovarman, 45–46, 226
Yoritomi, Motohiro, 10, 350
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 491 ---
texts
Abhidharmako$a, 145
Abhidharmasamuccaya, 102–3 
Abhinavabharati, 280–85 
Abhisekanirukti, 199
Adhya$ayasañcodana-sutra, 103
Adipurana, 124
Agnipurana, 123
Akhbar al-sin w-al-Hind, 82
Amoghapa$a, 152
*Ardhapañcamagatha, 293, 330
Ardha$atikaprajñaparamitasutra, 146, 152
Artha$astra, 63–65, 133–37, 174–75, 214,
226, 265
Avadana, 79
Avimaraka, 281
Avantisundarikatha, 176
Bhadracaripranidhanaraja, 159
Bhagavadgita, 63, 191, 193
Bhotasvamidasalekha, 154–55
Bhutadamara-mahatantraraja, 333
Bodhisattvabhumi, 88, 196
Brahmasutrabhasya, 360
Brahmayamala, 216
Brhatkatha$lokasamgraha, 80, 176, 265
Buddhakapalatantrapañjika
Tattvacandrika, 250–52
Buddhakapala-yogini-tantra-raja, 5,
247–52, 255–69, 296
Candamaharosana-tantra, 269
Caryagitiko$a, 227–28, 258–62
Catuhpitha-mahayogini-tantraraja, 265
*Catura$itisiddhapravrtti, 2, 170, 228,
305–7 
Ch’an mi yao fa ching, 124
Chin kang ting ching yü ch’ieh shih pa hui
chih kuei, 145
Cittaguhyadoha, 307
Dakarnava, 239, 269
Dakinibhaginitantra, 206
Dakinijalasamvararahasya, 261
Da$abhumika, 78, 125, 226
dharanipitaka, 124–25, 144
*Dharanisamgraha, 118, 124, 145
Dhyanottara, 157–58, 199
Divyavadana, 241 
dPal u rgyan du tshogs ‘khor byas pa’i dus
su rnal ‘byor pa grub pa thob pa bzhi
bcus rdo rje’i mgur bzhengs pa nyams
kyi man ngag thig le gser gyi phreng
ba, 307
Dvikramatattvabhavana-mukhagama,
306, 313
Dvisandhana, 121
Gandavyuha, 78
Gaüdavaho, 46, 179, 226, 232
Geography, 63–64
GoraksasiddhantasaNgraha, 216
Great Jeweled Tree of Tantric Practice, 223
Grub thob lnga bcu’i rtogs pa brjod pa thig
le ‘od kyi phreng ba, 307
Guhyagarbha, 157–58
Guhyasamaja, 6, 146, 193, 197–98, 217,
236, 239, 242, 253–57, 270, 295, 304,
311–12, 328, 331–33
Guhyasiddhi, 199, 222, 255–56, 292
Gurugranthsahib, 308 
Harsacarita, 89, 97, 140, 175–76, 194, 211 
Hevajra Tantra,6, 209, 233, 239, 240, 248,
250, 263–69, 275, 296, 299, 304, 318
Hevajrasekaprakriya, 300
Indica, 63
I tsu fo ting lun wang ching, 125, 152
Jayarathayamala, 179, 211, 217
Jñanatilaka-tantra, 266–68
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 492 ---
Kathasaritsagara, 175–76
Kalacakra-tantra, 6, 239
Kalika-purana, 206, 209, 211–14, 216,
321
Kamakhya-tantra, 213
Karandavyuha-sutra, 118, 253  
Karpuramañjari, 179
Khasama-tantraraja, 269
Kiratarjuniye, 226
kLong chen chos ‘byung, 156–57
Kosalalamkara, 159 
Krsnayamari-tantra, 169, 231, 239, 269,
295, 304, 316
Krtyakalpataru, 123–24, 209
Kuan fo san mei hai ching, 124
Kuan ting ching, 125–29
Kubjikamatatantra, 217, 308
Kularnava, 320
Laghusamvara, 198, 204
Lam dri ma myed pa dngul sgong dag pa,
307
LaNkavatara-sutra, 125 
Madhyamakavatara, 100
Mahabharata, 62–63, 67, 121, 225 
Mahakala-tantra, 166 
Mahamaya, 304
Mahamayurividyarajñi, 211, 278–79
Mahamudrakanakamala, 307–8
Mahamudratilaka-tantra, 267
Maharatnakuta, 118
Mahasamghika Bhiksuni Vinaya, 92
Mahavairocanabhisambodhitantra, 118,
126, 152, 158, 164, 295
Mahavastu, 125 
mahayoga-tantra, 5, 204, 237–39, 244,
269, 295
Malatimadhava, 90, 176, 203, 218
Manasollasa, 144
Manava Dharma %astra, 62–63, 130, 136,
141
Mañju$rimulakalpa, 1, 52, 75, 90, 130,
141–42, 165, 211, 269–70, 316, 322
Mattavilasaprahasana, 101, 242, 261
Mayajala, 157–58
Mayamata, 140
Milindapañha, 175, 290 
Mulamadhyamakakarika, 99–100
Mulasarvastivada Vinaya, 106–9, 222, 316
Namasamgityaka$avimala, 113
Nanasiddhopade$a, 307
Nan hai chi kuei nei fa chuan, 107
Naradapurana, 130
Natya$astra, 209, 223, 272, 280–85
Nayottara-Sammoha, 205
Nilamatapurana, 355
Nitisara, 25, 64, 79, 136
Pa$upatasutra, 184, 219, 223
Pithadinirnaya, 164–65, 210
Poetics, 281
Potalakastaka, 389
Posteritati, 17
Po ta lar ‘gro ba’i lam yig, 389
Probodhacandrodaya, 179
Pradipodyotana, 253–57
Prajñaparamita-sutras, 8, 145, 195, 241,
242–44, 311
Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atika, 152,
242
Prajñaparamita-naya$atapañca$atkatika,
242
prajñatantra, 312
Pramanavarttika, 206
Prasannapada, 100
Puranas, 72–73, 84–85, 89, 123–24, 129–
30, 151, 186, 219, 239
RajataraNgini, 66, 79
Ramayana, 63, 72, 121, 174–75, 281
Ramcaritmanas, 279
Ratnagunasañcaya-gatha, 195
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 493 ---
Ratnavali, 100
Republic, 133
Rgveda, 8, 123, 214
Rhetoric, 281
rGyud kyi mngon par rtogs pa rin po che’i
ljong shing, 223
rNal ‘byor pa thams cad kyi de kho na nyid
snang ba zhes bya ba grub pa rnams
kyi rdo rje’i mgur, 307
rNying ma rgyud ‘bum, 204 
Rudrayamala, 216
Saddharmapundarika (Lotus Sutra), 162,
246, 254
Saddharmopade$a, 307
Sahajasiddhi, 306
Sahajasiddhipaddhati, 306
Samaraiccakaha, 66
Samdhi-bhasa-tika, 261
Samnyasa-upanisad, 178, 221
Samputa, 265–67
Samvarodaya-tantra, 269, 318, 320
Sandhivyakarana-tantra, 270, 328
%ardulakarnavadana, 84, 98, 194, 232
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-tantra, 5, 146,
197–98, 204, 214, 223–24, 241–44,
265–70, 306, 318–22
Sarvabuddhasamayoga-ganavidhi, 318–20
Sarvadurgatipari$odhana-tantra, 139, 152,
158, 295
Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha, 138, 146,
148, 151–52, 158–59, 213, 243–44
sBa bzhed, 111, 154 
Sham Sher manuscript, 306
Siddhaikaviramahatantra, 65, 295
%iksasamuccaya, 145
Simhavyuha-raja-bodhisattva-pariprccha,
80
Sira$cheda, 205
Skandapurana, 209, 308
%ri-Buddhakapalamahatantrarajatika
Abhayapaddhatih, 250–52
%ri-Buddhakapalatantrapañjika
Jñanavati, 250–52
%ri-Guhyasamajatantra-nidana-
gurupade$ana-vyakhyana, 236
%riparamadya, 146–52
Subahupariprccha, 98, 127, 152, 158, 198,
200, 203–4, 213, 222
Subhasita-Samgraha, 222
Sukusuma-nama-dvikramatattvabhavana-
mukhagama-vrtti 306, 311–13
Susiddhikara 125, 132, 152
Svacchanda-tantra 221
Tantraloka, 10
Taratantra, 216
Ta t’ang hsi yü ch’iu fa kao seng chuan,
109 
Tillopadadohakosa, 193
*Tirthikacandalika, 218 
Uddiyana$riyogayoginisvabhutasambhoga-
$ma$anakalpa, 304–5, 410
Upanisads, 132 
upayatantra, 312
V ajradaka-tantra, 239
V ajramahabhairava, 194, 295
Vajrapadasarasamgrahapañjika, 274–75
V ajrapañjara,193
Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra, 126–27,
148, 152, 222
V ajra$ekhara-mahaguhyayogatantra, 145–
46, 152, 197, 204, 384
V ajravidarana-dharani, 152 
V ajrayanamu.lapattitika-margapradipa,
324–27
Va rnarhavarnastotra, 195–96
vidyadhara-pitaka, 4, 143
Vidyapitha-tantras, 202, 204–6, 216
Vidyottama-mahatantra, 145, 266, 300–3,
331–33 
Vigrahavyavartani, 99
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 494 ---
Vina$ika, 205, 216
Vinaya, 79, 101, 106–10, 122, 146–47, 196
Visnudharmottara-purana, 124, 127
Vyaktabhavanugata-tattva-siddhi, 97
Yogacarabhumi, 102
Yogaratnamala, 264
Yoga Treatise from Qïzïl, 124
Yogavatara, 157–58
Yogini-tantra, 213
yogini-tantras, 5, 197, 202–6, 210, 217,
223–24, 237–39, 244, 248, 264–70,
295–303, 338
general index
Abhidharma scholasticism, 77, 99–105,
241
Abhira tribe, 209
abhiseka, 85, 122–31, 197–200, 294, 302–3
Agastya, 174
Aghoraghanta, 203
Aghori, 95–96, 315
Agni, 175
agnikula, 61
Aihole inscription, 41–42, 69, 130, 135
Aksobhya, 132, 138, 299
alchemy, 187, 196–207, 265–68
Amaravati, 363
Amitabha, 8, 132
androcentric record keeping, 92–98
Anjaneri Plates, 361
anuttarayoga, 198, 312
Apabhram$a, 22, 228, 237, 269–76, 285,
291, 329, 338
apotheosis, 68–70, 127–31, 302
Arbuda 61, 208–9
a$raya-parivrtti, 164–65
Aulikaras, 31
avadhutacarya, 223
Avalokite$vara, 147, 253
ave$a, 129, 188
Baba Balak Nath, 189–90
Baba Kot, 181, 190–91
Baroda Grant, 309
Baul, 238, 272
Bhagalpur plate, 85, 88
Bhairava, 178, 202, 210–13, 216, 219, 240
bhakti, 172–73, 223
Bhaumakaras, 51, 89, 97, 105, 135
Bhilla tribe, 65, 204
Bhitari Stone Pillar Inscription, 68, 359
Bilhari Stone Inscription, 69, 87
bodhicitta, 197
Bodhicittavajra, 253–57
Botad Copperplate Grant, 139
Brahmans, 70–71, 80, 123, 177
Brahmaur, 309–10
Buddha-sainya (Buddha’s army), 194
Buddhist apologia, 13–15, 23, 
Buddhology/Buddhist Studies, 8–9, 11,
29
cakravartin, 4, 121, 141, 294, 330–36
Cambodia, 85, 186, 204
Candellas, 57–61, 226
Candika, 178, 232, 281–83
canon, 144–48, 152–53, 240–50
Central Asia, 3, 14, 26, 44–46, 81–83 
Chalukyas: Eastern, 41, 51, 54–58, 73;
Kalyani, 59–60; Vatapi, 34–50, 59,
69, 90, 130, 136, 177
choma, 206–7, 264–70
Citrasena, 248–52
coded language, 170, 226, 246–70, 291
comedy, 277–90
confusion of castes (varna-samkara), 71,
84, 225
dakini, 96
Denkar (ldan-dkar) Library, 126, 154–57,
243
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 495 ---
dharmabhanakas, 280–81
dharmakaya, 251
doha, 193, 228, 237, 270–72, 275, 307–8,
329
diffusionism, 8–10
Dravidian, 5, 237, 268–69
drinking liquor, 258–62, 289
drugs, 191, 201, 267–68
early medieval India, 2–4, 25–77, 294–95
ekaksara, 216
EkliNgji Inscription, 208–9, 219
Ephthalites, 28–31, 78
epistemology, 102–5
erotics, 68–70, 197–200, 240, 247–52,
295, 318–22
esoteric Buddhism, mature 113–18
festival of the grotesque, 288
feudalism, 28, 71–74, 115–16, 134–44,
308–9
feudalization of divinity, 71–74, 123,
134–44, 294–305, 309
Gaddi tribe, 190, 209, 309
Gahadvalas, 61, 97
ganacakra, 262–69, 294, 308, 318–22,
328–30
Gandhara, 27, 31, 78, 127, 145, 148, 167
GaNgdhar Stone Inscription, 183
ghosts, 187, 203, 211–23, 234
Gohsrawañ Inscription, 87
Gond tribe, 57, 60, 181, 226, 232, 268,
276
Guilds, 64, 77–83, 87, 91
Guptas, 2, 4, 25–33, 37, 75, 77, 111, 134,
139
Gurgi Stone Inscription, 209
Gurjara-Pratiharas, 27, 48–58, 244
hagiography, 154–60
Hanuman, 290
Hathigumpha Cave Inscription, 173–74
Hephaistos, 281
Heruka, 154, 159, 172, 198, 202, 211–14,
295, 316, 329
historiography, 7, 10–30
historical epistemology, 20–21
homa, 65, 123–25, 142–44, 162–63, 203,
301–2, 374
humanism, 16–20, 113; studia
humanitatis, 16; artes historicæ, 15–16
imperialism, 10, 15–16, 20
incrementalism, 118–20
Indology, 2, 13
Islam, 28, 44–46, 48, 81–83, 105
Jalandara, 91, 208–9, 217, 293, 312
JaNguli, 231
Kailasa, 210 
Kalachuris, 34–41, 48, 55–61, 87, 89
Kamakhya, 209, 211–13, 217
Kamandaki, 90, 203
Kanheri, 312–15
Kapalakundala, 203
Kapalika, 5, 90, 170, 177–79, 186, 202–4,
207, 209, 211–19, 224, 226, 244, 248,
261
Karkotas, 44–48
karmas (four tantric), 122, 142–43
Kashmir, 30–33, 41, 44–46, 53, 57, 67, 70,
78, 91, 127–28, 313, 334
Kaula, 5, 177–83, 186, 211, 224
khatvaNga, 202, 212
kingship models, 62–63
Kirata tribe, 211, 226 
Kond tribe, 232, 276
Krodharaja, 295, 319–20
Krsna River Valley, 4, 90–91
ksatra, 132–33
ksatriya, 61, 79, 132–33, 155–57, 216
ksetra, 132–33, 141
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 496 ---
Kubera, 210, 285–88
kula, 132, 138–42, 152, 299–303, 318, 373
Kurkihar bronze hoard, 94
kutagara (palace), 131, 140–41
Later Guptas, 34–39, 43, 46
law, 19–20, 70–71, 78, 142, 151, 165, 176,
197, 322–27
lay teachers, 161
Madhyamaka, 77, 99–101, 218
Mahabodhi, 83, 207, 313, 316
Mahakala, 159, 177
Mahakala pitha, 207, 244
Mahavihara, 77, 105–11
Mahe$vara, 67, 89, 129, 148–52, 197, 202,
207, 214, 228, 240, 246
Maitreya, 8, 125
Maitrikas, 34–44, 97, 105, 139
mandala, 2, 4, 6, 10, 25, 41, 44, 106,
125–44, 163, 202–3, 243–44, 248–57,
293–305, 313, 318–22
mandalacakra, 198
Mandasor Edict, 25, 31, 68, 174
Mandi, 181, 190–91, 309
Manichaeism, 82, 85
Mañjughosa, 313
Mañju$ri, 139, 147, 155–57, 161, 165, 211, 216
Mañjuvajra, 295, 311
mantra, 1–2, 10, 65, 75, 114, 117, 143–44,
163, 249
mantrin, 117, 122, 127, 143–44, 293, 323–25
Mara, 146, 151, 156, 214
MataNga, 232
Maukharis, 34–40, 43
Mauryas, 26–27, 37, 45, 48, 63, 133–34 
metaphor, 113–14, 118–68, 261
Mominabad Inscription, 183
mudravidhi, 198
Muria tribe, 321
Nagasena (medieval literary character),
101
Nairatmya, 113, 245, 283, 297
Nalanda, 83, 87–88, 94–95, 107–11, 154,
159, 166, 315
Nalanda Copperplate Charter, 88
Nathpanthi, 216–17, 272
nidana, 236, 245–46
nilambara, 204, 319
nuns, 90–98
Odiyana 91, 145, 148, 160, 208–10, 226,
243–46, 266–69, 306, 311–15, 334, 374
Old Bengali language, 22, 237, 285, 338
Orientalism, 11–15, 20
Palas, 27, 48, 51–61, 80, 84, 89, 94, 105
Pallavas, 41–43, 49, 54, 90, 101, 177
pan-Indian religious substrate, 171
paronomasia, 121–22, 144
Pa$upata, 5–6, 80, 85–86, 170, 177, 183–86,
205, 218–24, 326–27, Appendix
periodization, 28 
pitha, 164–65, 206–17, 297–99
play, 69–70, 280–90
polythetic category construction, 119–23
postmodernism, 10–12, 23
Potalaka, 209
Prakrit, 29, 46, 66–69, 74, 79, 111, 179,
232, 269–76, 291, 315
Prasat Kantal Dom Inscription, 205
preaching of the tantras, 146–53, 240–50 
proto-tantra, 117, 124, 145
Pulliya-malaya, 208–9
Pusyabhutis, 26, 38–43, 79–80
Rajadhiraja, 4, 106, 114, 118, 121–44, 336
Rastrakutas, 27, 48–59, 60
Ratnagiri, 154, 159, 215, 276
*Ratnalamkara, 245
reception theory, 245
regionalization, 29, 33, 66, 275–77
Rome, 16–21, 28
Rudra, 67, 87, 183
 ⁄ 

--- PAGE 497 ---
%abara, 226–33, 321
sahaja, 227, 245, 297, 329–30
Sakya (Sa-skya-pa), 244
samanta, 72, 86, 129, 133–44, 240, 302, 309
Samantabhadra, 113, 148
samantization of divinity, 71–74, 123,
134–44, 294–305
samaya, 198
sampannakrama, 197–98
Samvara, 154, 159, 202, 209, 214–16, 228,
297–99, 304
Sañci, 93–94, 107, 188, 363
Sanskrit, 6, 22, 29, 68–69, 74, 79, 96,
205, 232, 237–38, 268–69, 315, 338
Sants, 272
sapta matarah, 300–3
sarthavaha, 78
Satyasoma, 261
Saudamini, 203, 218
Sdok Kak Thom Inscription, 204–6
segmentary state, 135–37
Sharbazgarhi Inscription, 65
siddha, 1–6, 76, 91, 96, 114–15, 118, 122,
129, 143–45, 148, 153–54, 160, 165,
169–340
siddhi, 194–201, 203, 233, 261, 300
Siddaikavira, 295
Siyan Stone Slab Inscription, 183
Siyodoni Stone Inscription, 272–73
Sirpur, 275–77
skepticism, 99–101
skill in means (upaya-kau$alya), 23, 88,
161–63, 246
sociolinguistics, 269–77
Somapura, 107, 110, 166
%ri$aila, 203
structuralist assumptions, 24, 172, 308,
350, 369, 373
stupa rituals, 84, 111, 141
Subaltern Studies, 11–12
syncretism, 116
T’ang, 42–43, 81, 115, 146
tantric literature, 143–53, 193–94, 199–
206, 217, 223–24, 236–92, 327–30
temples, 29, 33, 72–3, 140, 158
Trailokyavijaya, 138, 151–52
transgressions, 165, 322–30
tribal peoples, 169–81, 187, 190, 194, 198,
209, 224–34, 299–305, 311, 321–22
Tumburu, 216
utpattikrama, 129
Vairocana, 8, 113, 138, 148–51, 258, 299
vajra, 117, 126, 127, 140–42, 169, 197
Vajradhara, 113, 199, 228, 301, 313, 316
vajrakaya, 283
Vajrapani, 4, 122, 127, 139, 143, 147–52,
197, 202, 204, 207, 211, 240, 242, 244,
249–52, 269, 300–3, 316
vajrapañjara, 140
Vajrasana. See Mahabodhi
Vajrasattva, 148, 197, 243, 256, 276, 319
Vakatakas, 2, 25–27, 30–33
Vardhanas. See Pusyabhutis
Varmans of Kamarupa, 34, 37
varna$rama, 91, 98, 105
Vasistha, 61
vetala, 176–78, 211, 219–21, 234
Vidusaka, 281–89
vidyadhara, 170–72, 176–78, 187–96,
233–34, 242–45, 294, 301–3, 318–32, 383
Vi$vamitra, 175
vows, 165–66, 322–32
warfare, 62–68
yaksa / yaksi (see also Vajrapani), 187,
198, 204, 234, 285–88, 324, 329
yogini temples, 179–83, 191, 234, 295–97
Zahor, 242–45
 ⁄ 
